                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS, AIR AND WATER POLLUTION, AND INFANT
                       MORTALITY IN INDIA

                                          Michael Greenstone
                                             Rema Hanna

                                         Working Paper 17210
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17210


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2011




We thank Samuel Stolper for truly outstanding research assistance. In addition, we thank Joseph Shapiro
and Abigail Friedman for excellent research assistance. Funding from the MIT Energy Initiative is
gratefully acknowledged. The analysis was conducted while Hanna was a fellow at the Science Sustainability
Program at Harvard University. The research reported in this paper was not the result of a for-pay
consulting relationship. Further, neither of the authors nor their respective institutions have a financial
interest in the topic of the paper which might constitute a conflict of interest. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Michael Greenstone and Rema Hanna. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Environmental Regulations, Air and Water Pollution, and Infant Mortality in India
Michael Greenstone and Rema Hanna
NBER Working Paper No. 17210
July 2011
JEL No. H2,O1,Q2,Q5,R5

                                              ABSTRACT

Using the most comprehensive data file ever compiled on air pollution, water pollution, environmental
regulations, and infant mortality from a developing country, the paper examines the effectiveness of
India’s environmental regulations. The air pollution regulations were effective at reducing ambient
concentrations of particulate matter, sulfur dioxide, and nitrogen dioxide. The most successful air
pollution regulation is associated with a modest and statistically insignificant decline in infant mortality.
However, the water pollution regulations had no observable effect. Overall, these results contradict
the conventional wisdom that environmental quality is a deterministic function of income and underscore
the role of institutions and politics.


Michael Greenstone
MIT Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive, E52-359
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
mgreenst@mit.edu

Rema Hanna
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rema_hanna@ksg.harvard.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

There is a paucity of evidence about the efficacy of environmental regulation in developing

countries. However, this question is important for at least two reasons.1 First, "local" pollutant

concentrations are exceedingly high in many developing countries and they impose substantial

health costs, including shortened lives (Chen, Ebenstein, Greenstone, and Li 2011). Thus,

understanding the most efficient ways to reduce local pollution could significantly improve

wellbeing in developing countries. Second, the Copenhagen Accord makes it clear that it is up to

individual countries to devise and enforce the regulations necessary to achieve their national

commitments to combat global warming by reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Since most of

the growth in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions is projected to occur in developing countries,

such as India and China, the planet's wellbeing rests on the ability of these countries to

successfully enact and enforce environmental regulations.

                                                     India provides a compelling setting to explore the efficacy of environmental regulations

in a developing country for several reasons. First, India's population of nearly 1.2 billion

accounts for about 17 percent of the planet's population. Second, the country is experiencing

rapid economic growth of about 6.4 percent annually over the last two decades, which is placing

significant pressure on the environment. For example, Figure 1, Panel A demonstrates that

ambient particulate matter concentrations in India are five times the level of concentrations in the

United States (while China's are seven times the U.S. level) in the most recent years with

comparable data, while Figure 1, Panel B shows that water pollution concentrations in India are

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1
  There is a large literature measuring the impact of environmental regulations on air quality, with many of them
finding that significant regulation-induced reductions in pollution concentrations in the United States. See, for
example, Chay and Greenstone (2003 and 2005), Greenstone (2003), Greenstone (2004), Henderson (1996), Hanna
and Oliva (2010), and so forth. However, given the institutional differences that exist between the United States and
many developing countries, it is not clear that knowledge on what “works” in the United States is necessarily
relevant in other contexts.	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
also higher. Third, India has a surprisingly rich history of environmental regulations that dates

back to the 1970s, providing a rare opportunity to answer these questions with extensive panel

data.2 Finally, India remains below the income levels at which the Environmental Kuznets curve

literature predicts that pollution concentrations turn downward (e.g., Grossman and Krueger,

1995; Shafik and Bandyopadhyay, 1992; Selden and Song, 1994; Stern and Common, 2001;

Copland and Taylor, 2004), implying that it is at a stage of development where economic growth

trumps environmental concerns. Consequently, taking the predictions of these models at face

value, it may be reasonable to expect that most of the environmental policies implemented to

date have been ineffective.

                This paper presents a systematic evaluation of India’s environmental regulations. The

analysis is conducted with a new city-level panel data file for the years 1986-2007 that we

constructed from data on air pollution, water pollution, environmental regulations, and infant

mortality in India. The air pollution data cover about 140 cities, while the water pollution data

comprises information from 424 cities (162 rivers).                                                                                  Neither the government nor other

researchers have ever assembled a city-level panel database of India's anti-pollution laws.

Furthermore, we are unaware of a comparable data set in any other developing country.

Additionally, we believe that this is the first paper to relate infant mortality rates to

environmental regulations in a developing country context.3

                We considered two key air pollution policies—the Supreme Court Action Plans and the

Mandated Catalytic Converters—that centered on stemming both industrial and vehicular
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2
  Previous papers have compiled data sets for a cross-section of cities or a panel for one or two cities. A few notable
papers that focus on a particular city include: Foster and Kumar (2008; 2009), which examines the effect of CNG
policy in Delhi; Takeuchi, Cropper, and Bento (2007), which studies the impact of automobile policies in Mumbai;
Davis (2008), which looks at the effect of driving restrictions on air quality in Mexico; and Hanna and Oliva (2011),
which explores the effects of a refinery closure in Mexico City.
3
  See Chay and Greenstone (2003) for the relationship between infant mortality and the Clean Air Act in the United
States. Burgess, Deschenes, Donaldson, and Greenstone (2011) estimate the relationship between weather extremes
and infant mortality rates using the same infant mortality data used in this paper.


	                                                                                                        3
pollution.4 We also consider the primary water policy, the National River Conservation Plan,

which focused on reducing industrial pollution in the rivers and creating sewage treatment

facilities. These regulations resemble environmental legislation in the United States and Europe,

thereby providing an interesting study of the efficacy of similar regulations across very different

institutional settings.

                                                     The results are mixed: the air regulations have led to improvements in air pollution, while

the water pollution regulations have been ineffective. In the preferred econometric specification

which controls for city fixed effects, year fixed effects and pre-existing trends among adopting

cities, we find that the Supreme Court-mandated Action Plans are associated with declines in

NO2 concentrations; however, we do not observe an effect of the policy on SO2 or PM.

Additionally, the requirement that new automobiles have catalytic converters is associated with

economically large reductions in PM, SO2, and NO2 of 19 percent, 69 percent, and 15 percent,

respectively, five years after its implementation. In contrast, the National River Conservation

Plan, which is the cornerstone of water policy in India, had no impact on the three measures of

water quality we consider.

                                                     In light of these findings, we tested whether the catalytic converter policy was associated

with changes in measures of infant health. The data indicate that a city’s adoption of a policy is

associated with a decline in infant mortality, but this relationship is not statistically significant.

As we discuss below, there are several reasons to interpret the infant mortality results cautiously.

                                                     In sum, our findings shed light on two broader questions. First, the results suggest that

environmental policies can be effective in developing countries, even in cases where income

level falls within the range where the environmental Kuznets curve would predict that
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
4
 We also documented the implementation of other key anti-pollution efforts. However, these policies (such as the
Problem Area Action Plans, and the multiple sulfur requirements for fuel) had insufficient variation in their
implementation across cities and/or time to obtain reliable estimates. 	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4
environmental quality should be decreasing.           Second, the results suggest that bottom-up

environmental policies are more likely to succeed than policies, like the water pollution

regulations that are initiated by political institutions.       Thus, while the results suggest that

developing countries are able to effectively curb pollution, regulations imposed by international

treaties, like those contemplated as part of an effort to confront climate, may have limited

success without widespread political support from within.	  

       The paper proceeds as follows. Section II provides a brief history of environmental

regulation in India and the policies under consideration, while Section III describes our data.

Section IV describes the trends in pollution in India. Section V describes our empirical methods,

and Section VI provides our results. Section VII discusses the results, and Section VIII

concludes.



II. BACKGROUND

India has a relatively extensive set of regulations designed to improve both air and water quality.

Its environmental policies have their roots in the Water Act of 1974 and Air Act of 1981. These

acts created the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and the State Pollution Control Boards

(SPCBs), which are responsible for data collection and policy enforcement, and also developed

detailed procedures for environmental compliance. Following the implementation of these acts,

the CPCB and SPCBs quickly advanced a national environmental monitoring program

(responsible for the rich data underlying our analysis). The Ministry of Environment and Forests

(MoEF), created in its initial form in 1980, was established largely to set the overall policies that

the CPCB and SPCBs were to enforce (Hadden, 1987).




	                                                5
                                                     The Bhopal Disaster of 1984 represented a turning point in the course of Indian

environmental policy.                                                                                                                                                            The government’s treatment of victims of the Union Carbide plant

explosion “led to a re-evaluation of the environmental protection system,” with increased

participation of activist groups, public interest lawyers, and the judiciary in the environmental

space (Meagher 1990). The Supreme Court instigated a wide expansion of fundamental rights of

citizens and there was a steep rise in public interest litigation (Cha, 2005). These developments

led to some of India's first concrete environmental regulations, such as the closures of limestone

quarries and tanneries in Uttar Pradesh in 1985 and 1987, respectively.5

                                                     Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, India continued to adopt a series of policies designed to

counteract the effects of growing environmental damage. The analysis focuses on two key air

pollution policies, the Supreme Court Action Plans and the catalytic converter requirements, and

the primary water pollution policies, the National River Conservation Plan. These policies were

at the forefront of India’s environmental efforts. Importantly, these policies were also phased

into different cities in different years, providing the basis for this paper’s research design.

                                                     The first policy we focus on is the Supreme Court Action Plans. The Action Plans are

part of a broad, ongoing effort to stem the tide of rising pollution in cities identified by the

Supreme Court of India as critically polluted. Measured pollution concentrations are clearly a

key ingredient in the determination of these designations. In 1996, Delhi was the first city order

to develop an action plan, while the most recent action plans were mandated in 2003.6 To date,

17 cities have been given orders to develop action plans.


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
5
  See Rural Litigation and Entitlement Kendra v. State of Uttar Pradesh (Writ Petitions Nos. 8209 and 8821 of
1983), and M.C. Mehta v. Union of India (WP 3727/1985).
6
   As documented in the court orders, the Supreme Court ordered nine more action plans in critically polluted cities
“as per CPCB data” after Delhi. A year later, the Court chose four more cities based on their having pollution levels
at least as high as Delhi’s. Finally, a year later, nine more cities (some repeats) were identified based on Respired
SPM (smaller diameter) levels.


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                     In light of the Supreme Court’s reputation as a driver of environmental reform in India, as

well as the overwhelming approval of Delhi’s CNG bus program as part of its action plan, many

believe that these policies have made significant gains in improving air quality. At least one

round of plans was directed at cities with unacceptable levels of Respired Suspended Particulate

Matter (RSPM), which is a subset of particulate matter (PM) that includes particles of especially

small size.                                                                                   Given the heavy focus on vehicular pollution, it is reasonable to presume that the

plans affected NO2 levels. Finally since SO2 is frequently a co-pollutant, it may be reasonable to

expect the Action Plans to affects its ambient concentrations.

                                                     We then examine a policy that mandated the use of catalytic converters. The fitment of

catalytic converters is a common means of reducing vehicular pollution across the world, due to

the low cost of its end-of-the-pipe technology. In 1995, the Supreme Court required that all new

petrol-fueled cars in the four major metros (Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai) were to be fitted

with converters. In 1998, the policy was extended to 45 other cities. It is plausible that this

regulation could affect all three of our air quality indicators; however, the prediction is strongest

for NO2.7

                                                             Finally, we study the cornerstone of efforts to improve water quality, the National River

Conservation Plan (NRCP). Begun in 1985 under the name Ganga Action Plan (Phase I), the

water pollution control program expanded first to tributaries of the Ganga River, including the

Yamuna, Damodar, and Gomti in 1993. It was later extended in 1995 to the other regulated

rivers under the new name of NRCP. Today, 164 cities on 34 rivers are covered by the NRCP.

The criteria for coverage by the NRCP are vague at best, but many documents on the plan cite
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
7
  Public response to the catalytic converter policy was unfavorable for several reasons: petrol’s lower fuel share
made the scope of the policy somewhat narrower than, for example, the mandate for low-sulfur in diesel fuel;
unleaded fuel, which is known to be a prerequisite for smooth catalytic converter functioning, was at best
inconsistently available until 2000; and selective implementation in only certain cities of India caused leakage of
automobile purchases to other cities not covered by the policy. 	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7
the CPCB Official Water Quality Criteria, which include standards for BOD, DO, FColi, and pH

measurements in surface water. Much of the focus has centered around domestic pollution

control initiatives over the years (Asian Development Bank, 2007).

       The centerpiece of the plan has been and continues to be the Sewage Treatment Plant

(STP). The interception, diversion, and treatment of sewage through piping infrastructure and

treatment plant construction has been coupled with installation of community toilets, crematoria,

and public awareness campaigns to curtail domestic pollution. The NRCP has been panned in

the media for a variety of reasons, including poor cooperation among participating agencies,

imbalanced funding of sites, and inability to keep pace with the growth of sewage output in

India’s cities (Suresh et al, 2007, p. 2). If the policy is found to have had an effect, it may be

expected to be particularly visible in FColi levels, since this is the parameter most correlated

with domestic pollution in the data.



III. DATA

To conduct the analysis, we compiled the most comprehensive city-level panel data file ever

assembled on air pollution concentrations, water pollution concentrations, and environmental

policies in India. We supplemented this data file with a city-level panel data file on infant

mortality rates. This section provides details on each data source.



A. Air Pollution Data

This paper takes advantage of an extensive and growing network of environmental monitoring

stations across India. Starting in 1987, India’s Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) began

compiling readings of Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2), Sulfur Dioxide (SO2), and particulate matter with




	                                               8
diameter less than 100 µm (PM). The data were collected as a part of the National Air Quality

Monitoring Program (NAMP), a program established by the CPCB to help identify, assess, and

prioritize the pollution controls needs in different areas, as well as to help in identifying and

regulating potential hazards and pollution sources.8 Individual State Pollution Control Boards

(SPCBs) are responsible for collecting the pollution readings and sending the data to the CPCB

for checking, compilation, and analysis. The air quality data are from a combination of CPCB

online and print materials for the years 1987-2007.9

                                                     While the CPCB reports that there are currently 342 functional air quality monitoring

stations in 127 Indian cities, there has been much movement and reclassification of these

monitors over the years. In total, our full dataset includes 572 monitors in 140 cities. For some

cities, data is collected in certain, but not all, years.10 In 1987, the first year in our dataset, the

functioning monitors cover 20 cities, while 125 cities are monitored by 2007 (see Appendix

Table 1 for summary statistics of the data, by year). On average, there are 2.3 monitors per city,

with 78 percent of cities including data from more than one monitor in a given year.11 Figure 2

maps the location of the cities with air pollution data in at least one year.

                                                     The three pollutants can be attributed to a variety of sources. PM is regarded by the

CPCB as a general indicator of pollution, receiving key contributions from “fossil fuel burning,

industrial processes and vehicular exhaust.”                                                                                                                                                                                   SO2 emissions, on the other hand, are

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
8
   For a more detailed description of the data collection program, see http://www.cpcb.nic.in/air.php (accessed on
June 25, 2011).
9
  From the CPCB, we obtained monthly pollution readings per city from 1987-2004, and yearly pollution readings
from 2005-2007. The monthly data were averaged to get annual measures.
10
    The CPCB requires that 24 hour samplings be collected twice a week from each monitor for a total of 104
observations per monitor per year. As this goal is not always achieved, 16 or more successful hours of monitoring
are considered representative of a given day’s air quality, and 50 days of monitoring in a year are viewed as
sufficient for data analysis. In some cities, readings are conducted more frequently. For example, readings are
conducted daily in Delhi. This more frequent data is not included in our dataset.
11
    Each monitor is classified as belonging to one of three types of areas: residential (71 percent), industrial (26
percent), or sensitive (2 percent). The rationale for specific locations of monitors is, unfortunately, not known to us
at this time so all monitors with sufficient readings are included in the analysis.


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9
predominantly a byproduct of thermal power generation; globally, 80 percent of sulfur emissions

in 1990 were attributable to fossil fuel use (Smith, Pitcher and Wigley, 2001). NO2 is viewed by

the CPCB as an indicator of vehicular pollution, though it is produced in almost all combustion

reactions.



B. Water Pollution Data

The CPCB also administers water quality monitoring, in cooperation with state pollution control

boards (SPCBs). As of 2008, 1,019 monitoring stations are maintained under the National Water

Monitoring Programme (NWMP), covering rivers and creeks, lakes and ponds, drains and

canals, and groundwater sources. We focus on rivers due to the consistent availability of data on

river quality, the seriousness of pollution problems along the rivers, and, most significantly, the

attention that rivers have received from public policy. We have obtained from the CPCB, in

electronic format, observations from 489 monitors in 424 cities along 162 rivers between the

years 1986 and 2005 (see Appendix Table 1).12 Figure 3 maps the location of the water quality

monitors on India’s major rivers.

                                                     The CPCB collects either monthly or quarterly river data on 28 measures of water

quality, of which nine are classified as “core parameters.” We focus on three of these core

parameters: Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD), Dissolved Oxygen (DO), and Fecal Coliforms

(FColi). We chose these measurements largely because of their presence in CPCB Official Water

Quality Criteria, and also their continual citation in planning, analysis, and commentary, as well

as the consistency of their reporting.13


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
12
 	  From 1986 to 2004, monthly data is available. For 2005, the data is only available yearly.	  
13
     See Water Quality: Criteria and Goals (February 2002); Status of Water Quality in India (April 2006); and the
official CPCB website, http://www.cpcb.nic.in/Water_Quality_Criteria.php. 	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
       These indicators can be briefly summarized as follows. BOD is a commonly-used broad

indicator of water quality that measures the quantity of oxygen required by the decomposition of

organic waste in water. High values are indicative of heavy pollution; however, since water-

borne pollutants can be inorganic as well, BOD cannot be considered a comprehensive measure

of water purity. DO is similar to BOD except that it is inversely proportional to pollution; that is,

lower quantities of dissolved oxygen in water suggest greater pollution because water-borne

waste hinders mixing of water with the surrounding air, as well as hampering oxygen production

from aquatic plant photosynthesis. The third water parameter, FColi, is a count of the number of

coliform bacteria per 100 milliliters (ml) of water. While not directly harmful, these organisms

are associated with animal and human waste and are correlated with the presence of harmful

pathogens. FColi is thus considered to be an indicator of domestic pollution. It is measured as

the most probable number of fecal coliform bacteria per 100 milliliters (ml) of water. Since its

distribution is approximately ln normal, FColi is reported as ln(number of bacteria per 100 ml)

throughout the paper.



C. Regulation Data

India has implemented a variety of environmental initiatives over the last two decades. We have

assembled a dataset that systematically documents changes in policy at the city-year level for the

cities in the air and water pollution datasets. To the best of our knowledge, we believe that a

comparable data set has never been compiled.

       The data were compiled from a variety of sources. We first collected and utilized print

and web documents from the Indian government, including the CPCB, the Department of Road

Transport and Highways, the Ministry of Environment and Forests, and several Indian SPCBs.




	                                               11
Next, we used reports and data from secondary sources, including the World Bank, the Emission

Controls Manufacturers Association, and Urbanrail.net.

                                                     Table 1 summarizes the prevalence of these policies in the data file of city-level air and

water pollution concentrations by year. Columns (1a) and (2a) report the number of cities with

air and water readings, respectively. The remaining columns detail the number of these cities

where each of the studied policies is in force. The subsequent analysis exploits the variation in

the year of enactment of these policies across cities.14



D. Infant Mortality Rate Data

We obtained annual city-level infant mortality data from annual issues of Vital Statistics of India

for the years prior to 1996.15 In subsequent years, city level data are no longer available from a

central source; therefore, we visited the registrar’s office for each of India’s larger states and

collected the necessary documents directly.16 Many births and deaths are not registered in India

and the available evidence suggests that this problem is greater for deaths so the infant mortality

rate is likely downward biased. Although the infant mortality rate from the Vital Statistics data

is about a third of the rate measured from state-level survey measures of infant mortality rates

(i.e., the Sample Registration System), trends in the Vital Statistics and survey data are highly

correlated. Although these data are likely to be noisy, we are unaware of reasons to believe that

the measurement error is correlated with the pollution measures. Notably, Burgess et al. (2011)

find that they are correlated with inter-annual temperature variation.



	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
14
   Appendix Table 2 replicates Table 1 for all cities in India.
15
   We digitized the city-level data from the books. All data were double entered and checked for consistency.
16
   Specifically, we attempted to obtain data in all states except the Northeastern states (which have travel
restrictions) and Jammu-Kashmir. We were able to obtain data from Andhra Pradesh, Chandigarh, Delhi, Goa,
Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan, and West Bengal.


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
E. Additional Variables

We collected city-level, socio-economic variables that are used as controls in the subsequent

analysis.17 First, we obtained district-level data on population and literacy rates from the 1981,

1991, and 2001 Census of India. For non-census years, we linearly interpolated these variables.

Second, we collected district-level expenditure per capita data, which is a proxy for income. The

data are imputed from the survey of household consumer expenditure carried out by India's

National Sample Survey Organization in the years 1987, 1993, and 1999 and are imputed in the

missing years.



IV. TRENDS IN POLLUTION CONCENTRATIONS AND INFANT HEALTH

A. Trends in Mean Pollution Levels over Time

Figure 4 provides a graphical representation of the trends in national air and water quality. Panel

A plots the average air quality measured across cities, by pollutant, from 1987 to 2007; Panel B

graphs water quality measured across city-rivers, by pollutant, from 1986 to 2005. Table 2

provides corresponding sample statistics. Specifically, it provides the average pollution levels

for the full sample, as well as values at the start and end of the sample timeframe.

                                                     Air pollution has fallen. As shown in Panel A, ambient PM concentrations fell quite

steadily over the sample timeframe, from 252.1 µg/m3 in 1987-1990 to 209.5 µg/m3 in 2004-

2007. This represents about a 17 percent reduction in PM. The SO2 trend line is flat until the

late 1990s, and then declines sharply. Comparing the 1987-1990 to 2004-2007 time periods,

mean SO2 decreased from 19.4 to 12.2 µg/m3 (or 37 percent). Finally, NO2 appears more

volatile over the start of the sample period, but then falls after its peak in 1997.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
17
 Consistent city-level data in India is notoriously difficult to obtain. We instead acquired district level data, and
matched cities to their respective districts. 	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13
       While air quality has generally improved over the past twenty years, the trends in water

quality are more mixed. As seen in Panel B of Figure 4, BOD steadily worsens throughout the

late 1980s and early 1990s but then begins to improve starting around 1997. The improvement,

though, did not make up for early losses, as mean BOD worsens by about 19 percent from 3.47

to 4.14 mg/l over the sample period. FColi drops precipitously in the 1990s but rises somewhat

in the 2000s.    The general decrease in FColi is notable, as it suggests that domestic water

pollution may be abating, in spite of the alarmingly fast-paced growth in sewage generation seen

in India (Suresh et al, 2007). Over the sample period, the natural log of the number of fecal

coliform bacteria per 100 ml declined from 6.41 to 5.28. DO declines fairly steadily over time (a

fall in DO indicates worsening water quality) from 7.21 to 7.03 mg/l.



B. Trends in Infant Health

Infant mortality rates are an appealing measure of the effectiveness of environmental regulations,

relative to measures of adult health. This is because it seems reasonable to presume that infant

health will be more responsive to short and medium changes in pollution and the first year of life

is an especially vulnerable one so losses of life expectancy may be large. Since 1987, infant

mortality has fallen sharply in urban India (Panel C of Figure 4). As Panel C of Table 2 shows,

the infant mortality rate fell from 29.6 per 1000 live births in 1987-1990 to 16.7 in 2001-2004. 	  



C. A More Disaggregated Analysis

Is there spatial variation in these trends? To explore this, we next graph the distributions of air

and water quality across cities at the start and end of the sample period. Specifically, we provide

kernel density estimates of air pollutant distributions across Indian cities for 1987-1990 and




	                                               14
2004-2007 in Figure 5A, and similar estimates of water pollutant distributions for 1986-1989 and

2002-2005 in Figure 5B. We then construct similar graphs for infant mortality in Figure 5C.

                                                     Figure 5A shows that not only have the means of PM and SO2 decreased, but their entire

distributions have shifted to the left over the last two decades. The 10th percentiles of PM and

SO2 pollution both declined by about 10 percent from 1987-1990 to 2004-2007. Particularly

striking, however, is the drop in the 90th percentile of ambient SO2 concentration: 38.2 to 23.0

µg/m3, or about 40 percent. Consistent with trends in Figure 2, the distribution of NO2 across

cities does not appear to change much over the sample time frame. In fact, if anything, the

distribution of pollution appears to have worsened, with the 10th percentile rising from 8.5 to

10.4 µg/m3 and the 90th percentile rising from 42.6 to 47.0 µg/m3.

                                                     The changes in the distribution of water quality are more variable over time (Figure 5B).

The distribution of BOD has widened over the last twenty years, with many relatively higher

readings of BOD in the later time period.18 While the 10th percentile of BOD has dropped

slightly, the 90th percentile has increased from 5.78 to 7.85 mg/l between the earlier and more

recent periods. In contrast, the FColi distribution has largely shifted to the left. The relatively

clean cities show tremendous drops in FColi levels, with the 10th percentile value falling from

3.61 to 1.79, while dirtier cities show more modest declines. Lastly, the DO distribution does not

appear to have changed noticeably, with very little difference between the graphs of the earlier

and later periods.

                                                     Figure 5C reveals a marked improvement in infant mortality rates over this period.

Indeed, the kernel density graphs reveal a leftward shift in the distribution of infant mortality

rates.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
18
 The right tail of the 2002-2005 period extends to 100 mg/l. In the figure, it has been truncated at 20 to give a
more detailed picture of the distribution.	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
V. ECONOMETRIC APPROACH

This section describes a two-stage econometric approach for assessing whether India’s

regulatory policies impacted air and water pollution concentrations. The first-stage is an event

study-style equation:

                                                                                                                                                                          1         !!" = ! +                                  !! !!,!" + !! + !! + β!!" + !!"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !


where Yct is one of the six measures of pollution in city c in year t. The city fixed effects, !!   ,

control for all permanent unobserved determinants of pollution across cities, while the inclusion

of the year fixed effects, µt, non-parametrically adjust for national trends in pollution, which is

important in light of the time patterns observed in Figure 2. The equation also includes controls

for per capita consumption and literacy rates (X) in order to adjust for differential rates of growth

across districts. To account for differences in precision due to city size, the estimating equation

is weighted by the district-urban population.19

                                                     The vector Dτ,ct is composed of a separate indicator variable for each of the years before

and after a policy is in force. τ is normalized so that it is equal to zero in the year the relevant

policy is enacted; it ranges from -17 (for 17 years before a policy's adoption in a city) through 12

(for 12 years after its adoption). All τ's are set equal to zero for non-adopting cities; these

observations aid in the identification of the year effects and the β's.                                                                                                                                                                                          In the air pollution

regressions, there are separate Dτ,ct vectors for the Supreme Court Action Plan and catalytic

converter policies, so each policy's impact is conditioned on the other policy's impact.20


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
19
   City-level population figures are not systematically available, so we use population in the urban part of the district
in which the city is located to proxy for city-level population.
20
   The results are qualitatively similar in terms of sign, magnitude, and significance from models that evaluate each
policy separately. 	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
       The sample for equation (1) is based on the availability of data for a particular pollutant

in a city. For adopting cities, a city is included in the sample if it has at least one observation

three years or more before the policy's enactment and four or more years afterward. If a city

does not have any post-adoption observations or did not enact the relevant policy, then that city

is required to have at least two observations for inclusion in the sample.

       The parameters of interest are the στ's, which measure the average annual pollution

concentration in the years before and after a policy's implementation. These estimates are

purged of any permanent differences in pollution concentrations across cities and of national

trends due to the inclusion of the city and year fixed effects. The variation in the timing of the

adoption of the individual policies across cities allows for the separate identification of the στ's

and the year fixed effects.

       In the below, the estimated στ's are plotted against the τ's. These event study graphs

provide an opportunity to visually assess whether the policies are associated with changes in

pollution concentrations. Additionally, they allow for an examination of whether pollution

concentrations in adopting cities were on differential trends. These figures will inform the

choice of the preferred second-stage model.

       The second-stage of the econometric approach formally tests whether the policies are

associated with pollution reductions with three different specifications. In the first, we fit the

following equation:

                               2a           !! = !! + !! 1(!"#$%&)! + !!

where 1(!!"#$%)! is an indicator variable for whether the policy is in force (i.e., τ ≥ 1). Thus, π1

tests for a mean shift in pollution concentrations after the policy's implementation.




	                                               17
       In several cases, the event study figures reveal trends in pollution concentrations that

predate the policy's implementation (even after adjustment for the city and year fixed effects).

Therefore, we also fit the following equation:

                             2b           !! = !! + !! 1(!"#$%&)! + !! τ+!! .	  

This specification includes a control for a linear time trend in event time, τ, to adjust for

differential pre-existing trends in adopting cities.

       Equations (2a) and (2b) test for a mean shift in pollution concentrations after the policy's

implementation. A mean shift may be appropriate for some of the policies that we evaluate. On

the other hand, the full impact of some of the policies may emerge over time as the government

builds the necessary institutions to enforce a policy and as firms and individuals begin to take the

steps necessary to comply with them. For example, an evolving policy impact seems possible

for the Supreme Court Action Plans since they specify actions that polluters must take over

several years.

       To allow for a policy's impact to evolve over time, we also report the results from fitting:

                 2c           !! = !! + !! 1(!"#$%&)! + !! τ + !! (1(!"#$%&)! ×τ) + !! .

From this specification, we report the impact of a policy 5 years after it has been in force as

!! + 5!! .

       There are three remaining estimation issues about equations (2a) through (2c) that bear

noting. First, the sample is chosen so that there is sufficient precision to compare the pre- and

post-adoption periods. Specifically, for two of the policies it is restricted to values of τ for which

there are at least twenty city by year observations to identify the στ's. For the catalytic converter

regressions, the sample therefore covers τ = -7 through τ = 9 and for the National River

Conservation Plan regressions it includes τ = -7 through τ = 10 (see Appendix Table 3). In the



	                                                  18
case of the Supreme Court action plan policies which were implemented more narrowly, the

sample is restricted to values of τ for which there are a minimum of 15 and this leads to a sample

that includes τ = -7 through τ = 3. Second, the standard errors for these second stage equations

are heteroskedastic consistent. Third, the equation is weighted by the inverse of the standard

error associated with the relevant στ to account for differences in precision in the estimation of

these parameters.



VI. RESULTS

A. Air Pollution

Figure 6 presents the event study graphs of the impact of the policies on PM (Panel A), SO2

(Panel B), and NO2 (Panel C). Each graph plots the estimated στ's from equation (1). The year

of the policy's adoption, τ = 0, is demarcated by a vertical dashed line in all figures.

Additionally, pollution concentrations are normalized so that they are equal to zero in τ = -1, and

this is noted with the dashed horizontal line.

         These figures are "hands above the table" summaries of the data in the sense that they

visually report all the data that underlie the subsequent regressions. It is evident that accounting

for differential trends in adopting cities is crucial, because the parallel trends assumption of the

simple difference in differences or means shift model (i.e., equation (2a)) is violated in many

cases.   This is particularly true in the case of the catalytic converter policies which were

implemented in cities where pollution concentrations were worsening. This upward pre-trend in

pollution concentrations is also apparent in the case of the Supreme Court Action Plans (SCAPs)

and NO2. In these instances, equations (2b) and (2c) are more likely to produce valid estimates

of the policies’ impacts. With respect to inferring the impact of the policies, the figures suggest




	                                               19
that the catalytic converter policy was effective at reversing the trend toward increasing pollution

concentrations.

                                                     To test these results more formally, Table 3 reports regression results from the estimation

of separate equations for each pollutant and policy pair. For each pollutant-policy pair, the first

column reports the estimate of π1 from equation (2a), which tests whether στ is on average lower

after the implementation of the policy. The second column reports the estimate of π1 and π2 from

the fitting of equation (2b) in the second column for each pollutant. Here, π1 tests for a policy

impact after adjustment for the trend in pollution levels (π2). The third column reports the results

from equation (2c) that allows for a mean shift and trend break after the policy’s implementation.

It also reports the estimated effect of the policy five years after implementation for the policies,

which is equal to !! + 5!! .

                                                     Reading across Panel A, it is evident that the SCAPs have a mixed record of success.21

There is little evidence of an impact on PM or SO2 concentrations. The available evidence for an

impact comes from the NO2 regressions that control for pre-existing trends. In column (8) the

estimated impact would not be judged statistically significant, while in column (9) it is of a large

magnitude and would be judged marginally significant.

                                                     In contrast, the regressions confirm the visual impression that the catalytic converter

policies were strongly associated with air pollution reductions. In light of the differential pre-

trends in pollution in adopting cities and that the policy's impact will only emerge as the stock of

cars changes, the richest specification (equation (2c)) is likely to be the most reliable.                                                                                                                                      It

indicates that 5 years after the policy was in force, PM, SO2, and NO2 declined by 48.6 µg/m3,

13.4 µg/m3, and 4.5 µg/m3, respectively. The PM and SO2 declines are statistically significant
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
21
  Note that for the Supreme Court Action Plans, the analysis lags the policies by one year. The dates we have
correspond to Court Orders, which mandated submission of Action Plans. However, the Plans were frequently
reviewed by a special committee and only afterwards declared/implemented.


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
when judged by conventional criteria, while the NO2 decline is not. These declines are 19

percent, 69 percent, and 15 percent of the 1987-1990 nationwide mean concentrations,

respectively. These percentage declines are large and this reflects the rapid rates at which

ambient pollution concentrations were increasing before the implementation of the catalytic

converter policy in adopting cities-- put another way, if the pre-trends had continued then

pollution concentrations would have reached levels much higher than those recorded in the 1987-

1990 period.22



B. Effects of Policies on Water Quality

Figure 7 presents event study analyses of the impact of the National River Conservation Plan

(NRCP) on BOD (Panel A), ln(FColi) (Panel B), and DO (Panel C). As in Figure 6, the figures

plot the results from the estimation of equation (1). From the figures, there is little evidence that

the NRCP was effective at reducing pollution concentrations.

                                                     Table 4 provides the corresponding regression analysis and is structured similarly to

Table 3. The evidence in favor of a policy impact is weak. BOD concentrations are lower after

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
22
   There is a tradeoff to in including a greater or smaller number of event years or taus in the second-stage analysis.
The inclusion of a wider range of taus provides a larger sample size, allows for more precise estimation of pre and
post adoption trends. But, at the same time, it moves further away from the event in question so that other
unobserved factors may confound the estimation of the policy effects. Further, it exacerbates the problems
associated with estimating the taus from an unbalanced panel data file of cities. In contrast, including fewer taus
would result in a smaller sample size (and number of cities) to estimate pre and post trends, but it the analysis would
be more narrowly focused around the policy event. Appendix Table 3 reports on the number of city by year
observations that identify the στ's associated with each event year.

We investigated the sensitivity of the results to the number of taus included in the analysis. Specifically, we
estimated models that include a wider range of taus (between [-14,4] for the SCAPs and [-9,9] for the Catalytic
Converters), as well as models that limit the taus to a narrower range (between [-4,4] for the SCAPs and [-5,5] for
the Catalytic Converters), The application of these alternative samples to the preferred specification, equation (2c),
produces results that are qualitatively similar to those in Tables 3 and 4. The SCAP is associated with a large and
significant decline in NO2 with the narrower range. With the wider range, the SCAP continues to be associated with
a decline in NO2 but it no longer would be judged to be statistically significant; however, it is associated with a
statistically significant decline in PM. The pattern of the coefficients for the Catalytic Converters policy is similar to
that of Table 3, regardless of increasing or decreasing the range of taus.



	                                                                                                                                                                                                                         21
the implementation of NRCP, but the decline occurs several years prior to the implementation of

the plan (Panel A).                                                                                                                                                       While NRCP targets domestic pollution, the data fail to reveal an

improvement in FColi concentrations (Panel B), which is the best measure of domestic sourced

water pollution. The results from the fitting of equation (2c) are reported in column (9) and

confirm the perverse visual impression that the NRCP is associated with a worsening in DO

concentrations (recall, lower DO levels indicate higher pollution concentrations).23

                                                     The finding that the NRCP has not been successful is not surprising in light of some

supplementary research into process outcomes. For example, as of March, 2009, 152 out of 165

towns officially covered under NRCP have been approved for Sewage Treatment Plant (STP)

capacity building, but only 82 of those towns have actually built any capacity. Additionally, as

of March, 2009, there has not been any spending of federal or state monies on the NRCP in

fifteen NRCP towns (National River Conservation Directorate, 2009). Furthermore, the Centre

for Science and Environment (CSE) in New Delhi calculates that the 2006 treatment capacity

was only 18.5 percent of the full sewage burden (Suresh et al, 2007, p. 11).



C. Effects of Catalytic Converters on Infant Mortality

The catalytic converter policy is the most strongly related to improvements in air pollution. This

subsection explores whether this policy is associated with improvements in human health, as

measured by infant mortality rates. Specifically, we fit equation (1) and equations (2a) - (2c),

where the infant mortality rate, rather than pollution concentration, is the outcome of interest.

                                                     We note several aspects of this estimation. First, despite a large data collection exercise

to obtain the infant mortality data (including going to each state capital to obtain additional
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
23
   This finding that the NRCP had little impact on the available measures of water pollution is unchanged by
increasing or decreasing the number of event years or taus (i.e., changing the event years to include [-9,12] or to
include [-5,5]) in the second-stage analysis.


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                         22
registry data), there are fewer cities in the sample.24                                                                                                                                                                                           Second, the dependent variable is

constructed as the ratio of infant deaths to births, so we weight equation (1) by the number of

births in the city that year. Third, it is natural to be interested in using the catalytic converter

induced variation to estimate the separate impacts of each of the three forms of air pollution on

infant mortality in a two-stage least squares setting. However, such an approach is invalid in this

setting because, even in the best case where the exclusion restriction is valid, there is a single

instrument for three endogenous variables. Fourth, the infant mortality rate data do not provide

any characteristics of the parents or other covariates, so it is not possible to determine the degree

to which the results are due to shifts in the composition of parents that alter the observed infant

population's health endowment.                                                                                                                                                                                             This issue is a greater challenge in light of the possibly

substantial underreporting of infant births and deaths in these data.

                                                     Figure 8 and Table 5 report the results. In light of the differential pre-existing trend, the

column (3) specification is likely to be the most reliable. It suggests that the catalytic converter

policy is associated with a reduction in the infant mortality rate of 0.86 per 1,000 live births.

However, this estimate is imprecise and is not statistically significant.



VII. DISCUSSION

This paper's analysis is related to at least two key economics questions.                                                                                                                                                                                            First, is there a

deterministic relationship between income and environmental quality? Second, why are some

environmental policies so much more effective than others? The paper's results shed new light

on these questions.


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
24
 When the air pollution sample is restricted to the sample used to estimate the infant mortality equations, the
catalytic converter policy is associated with substantial reductions in PM and SO2 concentrations but not of NO2
concentrations.


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    23
A. Contradicting Predictions from the Environmental Kuznets Curve Literature

The Environmental Kuznets Curve (EKC) predicts greater environmental degradation as income

rises for countries at low incomes levels (Grossman and Krueger, 1995; Bandypadhyay, 1992).

When income levels rise beyond a high enough point, individuals will no longer be willing to

trade off environment quality for economic growth and resources will be available to invest in

enforcing environmental regulation. At this point, economic growth will be correlated with

environmental improvements.

                The range for the turning point varies considerably across empirical studies.                                                                                                                   For

example, Grossman and Kruger (1995) estimate the turning point for SO2 at around $4,000, with

the turning point for most pollutants around or below $8,000.                                                                                                       Similarly, Shafik and

Bandyopadhyay’s (1992) study (which was used in the 1992 World Development Report)

estimated turning points of about $3,000 to $4,000 for local air pollutant concentrations. Using

an updated data set, but following Grossman and Kruger’s econometric specification, Harbaugh,

Levinson, and Wilson (2002) find higher turning points (e.g., for SO2 the turning points range

from $13,000 to $20,000), but the results are not robust to changes in the specification.

Similarly, they find high and varying turning points for PM, ranging from $2,000 to $13,000,

depending on the specification.

                Two of this paper's results contradict the EKC model. First, India’s per capita GDP was

$374 in 1990 when environment regulations became salient there and this is substantially below

the estimated turning point.25 However, this paper demonstrates that that the catalytic converter

mandate was associated with substantial improvements in air quality.

                Second, the EKC model predicts similar trends for local pollutants. However, there are

substantial differences in trends across the various types of air and water pollution. Moreover,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
25
       India’s GDP was obtained from the World Development Indicators.


	                                                                                                       24
the analysis documents that the air pollution policies were effective, while the water pollution

regulations were largely ineffective. These differences in regulatory effectiveness across media

are not predicted by the EKC model.



B. Political Power Matters

                                                     The EKC model fails to capture some of the dominant themes in the data.                                                                                                    This

subsection explores some political economy explanations for the differences in the success of the

air and water regulations.

                                                     The legitimacy to enforce policies appears to be a strong predictor of success.                                                                                              In

particular, the Supreme Court enjoys substantial power within the Indian government and there is

an established history of the Court providing an effective and visible outlet for public activism.

Indeed, the SCAPs, and somewhat more indirectly the catalytic converter policies, resulted from

citizen suits filed in response to high levels of air pollution.26 At least in the case of the catalytic

converter policy, there is substantial qualitative evidence that these policies were enforced

stringently by tying vehicle registrations to installation of a catalytic converter.27 With this

context, it may not be surprising that these two sets of policies were generally successful in

reducing air pollution concentrations.

                                                     In contrast, the central government agencies, such as the CPCB/SPCBs and the Ministry

of Environment and Forestry (MoEF), have a less clear mandate for action and less successful

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
26
   Court Order on April 5th, 2002, Supreme Court of India. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 13029 of 1985. M.C. Mehta vs.
Union of India and Others.
27
   Narain and Bell (2005) write, “In 1995 the Delhi government announced that it would subsidize the installation of
catalytic converters in all two- and three-wheel vehicles to the extent of 1,000 Rs. within the next three years (Indian
Express, January 30, 1995). Furthermore, the Petroleum Ministry banned the registration of new four-wheel cars and
vehicles without catalytic converters in Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, and Calcutta effective April 1, 1995 (Telegraph,
March 13, 1995). This directive was implemented, although it is alleged that some vehicle owners had the
converters removed illegally (court order, February 14, 1996).” Further, Delhi currently has about 20 vehicle
registration outposts.


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                         25
track records of reform across a variety of domains. The NRCP was originally developed and

launched by the MoEF and overseen by a newly-created authority chaired by the Prime Minister

of India. The job of implementation and enforcement was delegated to CPCB/SPCBs and local

departments for public health, development, water, and sewage (Ministry of Environment and

Forests, 2006). The already difficult task of enforcing the NRCP was further complicated by the

fact that the legislation is vague on the question of where the jurisdiction to enforce the policies

lies.28 For example, a former CPCB chairman summed up the problem quite clearly: “When it

comes to doing things, it is not up to the CPCB, even in the area of air pollution.” (Sharma and

Roychowdhury, 1996, p. 128)

                                                     Further, an absence of a clear source of revenues for NRCP activities is likely to have

contributed to the program’s poor record of performance. The sewage plants that are frequently

mandated by the NRCP had mandated cost sharing at various points in time.29 State and local

bodies have been accused of financial mismanagement, including diversion, underutilization, and

incorrect reporting of funds (Ministry of Environment and Forests, 2006).                                                                                                                                                       Overall, the

implementation of the NRCP through agencies that have traditionally not been very powerful,

the jurisdictional opacity around implementation, and a failure to provide a clear source of

revenues to fund clean-up activities mean that the NRCP was never politically empowered to

succeed.30



	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
28
   For example, the Public Accounts Committee Report to Parliament cited in this section (MoEF, 2006) only
mentions the word “enforcement” once in over 100 pages.
29
   From the inception of GAP-Phase I in 1985, the central government was to be responsible for 100 percent of
policy funding. In 1990, it was decided that the cost would be split between central and state administrations. This
division was revoked in 1997, returning the full cost to the Union government. One final change was made in 2001,
allocating 30 percent of the financial burden to states, a third of which was levied on local bodies themselves
(Suresh et al, 2007, p. 3).
30
   For example, a MoEF (2006) report stated that: “The reasons for delay in the implementation of the Ganga Action
Plan Phase-I are: (i) Lack of experience with the State implementing agencies, delay in land acquisition, litigations
and court cases, contractual disputes and diversion of funds by the State Governments. (ii) Poor operation and


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                         26
VI. Conclusion

Using the most comprehensive data file ever compiled on air pollution, water pollution,

environmental regulations, and infant mortality for a developing country, this paper measures the

success of air and water pollution regulations in India.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              The paper finds that air pollution

regulations were very effective at reducing ambient concentrations of particulate matter, sulfur

dioxide, and nitrogen dioxide and a key determinant of the observed improvements in air quality

over the last two decades. In contrast, the results indicate that the National River Conservation

Plan—the cornerstone of India’s water policies—failed to lead to meaningful improvements in

any of the three separate measures of water pollution that we consider.

                                                     There are several broader meanings of these results.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          First, the difference in the

effectiveness of the air and water pollution regulations make it clear that the world is more

complicated and nuanced that is suggested by simple theories, like the Environmental Kuznets

Curve theory. There is substantial room for more modeling in this area.

                                                     Second, the findings demonstrate that environment regulations can be enforced

successfully in countries with relatively low levels of income and weak institutions, which

contradicts widely held perceptions. However, it leaves unanswered the fundamental questions

of the magnitudes of the marginal benefits and costs of regulation-induced emissions reductions

and whether the benefits exceed the costs. There is a virtual complete absence of information on

the costs and benefits.

                                                     Third, the political economy findings may have implications for the development of

successful climate change policy, which will require participation by developing countries,

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
maintenance of the assets created under the 'Ganga Action Plan' Phase–I. (iii) Erratic and poor availability of
electricity for operating assets like pumping stations, sewage treatment plants and electric crematoria.” (p. 3)


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               27
including India and China. Specifically, they suggest that international efforts to reduce

greenhouse gases in developing countries will have limited success if they do not enjoy local

support.



                                      REFERENCES

Asian Development Bank. “Yamuna Action Plan – India,” in Asian Water Development Outlook
2007. Manila, Philippines: Asian Development Bank, 2007.

Burgess, Robin, Olivier Deschenes, Dave Donaldson, and Michael Greenstone. 2011. “Weather
and Death in India: Mechanisms and Implications for Climate Change.” Mimeo.

Cha, J. Mijin. 2005. “A Critical Examination of the Environmental Jurisprudence of the Courts
of India,” Albany Law Environmental Outlook Journal, 10: 197.

Chay, Kenneth and Michael Greenstone. 2003. “Air Quality, Infant Mortality, and the Clean
Air Act of 1970,” Mimeo.

Chay, Kenneth and Michael Greenstone. 2005. “Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from the
Housing Market,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(2).

Chen, Yuyu,, Avraham Ebenstein, Michael Greenstone, and Hongbin Li. 2011. “The Long-Run
Impact of Air Pollution on Life Expectancy: Evidence from China’s Huai River Policy,” Mimeo.

Copeland, Brian and M. Scott Taylor. 2004. Journal of Economic Literature, 42: 7-71.

Davis, Lucas W. 2008. "The Effect of Driving Restrictions on Air Quality in Mexico City."
Journal of Political Economy, 116(1): 38-81.

Foster, Andrew D., and Naresh Kumar. 2008. “Have CNG regulations in Delhi done their job?”
Economic and Political Weekly, 42(51): 48-58.

Foster, Andrew D., and Naresh Kumar. 2009. “Air Quality Interventions and Spatial Dynamics
of Air Pollution in Delhi and its Surroundings.” International Journal of Environment and
Waste, 4(1/2): 85-111.

Greenstone, Michael. 2003. “Estimating Regulation-Induced Substitution: The Effect of the
Clean Air Act on Water and Ground Pollution.” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings, 93(2): 442-448.




	                                           28
Greenstone, Michael. 2004. “Did the Clean Air Act Amendments Cause the Remarkable
Decline in Sulfur Dioxide Concentrations?” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 47.

Grossman, Gene M., and Alan B. Krueger. 1995. “Economic Growth and the Environment.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(2): 353–77.

Hadden, Susan G. 1987. “Statutes and Standards for Pollution Control in India,” Economic and
Political Weekly, 22 (16): 709-711+713-720.

Hanna, Rema, and Paulina Oliva. 2010. "The Impact of Inspections on Plant-Level Air
Emissions." The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 10(1).

Hanna, Rema, and Paulina Oliva. 2011. “The Effect of Pollution on Labor Supply: Evidence
from a Natural Experiment in Mexico City,” Mimeo.

Harbaugh, William, Arik Levinson and David Wilson. 2002. "Reexamining the Empirical
Evidence for an Environmental Kuznets Curve." Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(3):
541-551.

Henderson, J. Vernon. 1996. "Effects of Air Quality Regulation." American Economic Review,
86: 789-813.

Meagher, J. Patrick. 1990. “Environmental Protection and Industries in Developing Countries:
The Case of India Since Bhopal.” The Georgetown International Environmental Law Review,
3(1): 1-53.

Ministry of Environment and Forests. 2006. “26th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha): Ganga Action Plan.” Presented to Lok Sabha on March 17th, 2006. Lok
Sabha Secretariat: New Delhi.

Narain, Urvashi and Ruth Greenspan Bell. 2005. “Who Changed Delhi’s Air? The Roles of the
Court and the Executive in Environmental Policymaking.” Resources for the Future Discussion
Paper.

National River Conservation Directorate. “M.I.S. Report of Programmes Under National River
Conservation Plan, Vol. III.” National River Conservation Directorate, Ministry of Environment
and Forests, Government of India: New Delhi, March, 2009.

Selden, Thomas M., and Daqing Song. 1994. “Environmental Quality and Development: Is
There a Kuznets Curve for Air Pollution?” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Environmental Management, 27(2): 147-162.

Shafik, Nemat and Sushenjit Bandyopadhyay. 1992. “Economic Growth and Environmental
Quality: Time Series and Cross-Country Evidence.” The World Bank Policy Research Working
Paper Series 904.



	                                           29
Sharma, Anju and Anumita Roychowdhury. Slow Murder: The deadly story of vehicular
pollution in India. New Delhi : Centre for Science and Environment, 1996.

Smith, Steven J, Hugh Pitcher and T.M.L Wigley. 2001. “Global and regional anthropogenic
sulfur dioxide emissions” Global and Planetary Change, 29 (1-2): 99–119.

Stern, David and Michael Common. 2001. “Is There an Environmental Kuznets Curve for
Sulfur?” Journal of Environmental Economics and Environmental Management, 41(2): 162-
178.

Suresh, Babu S. V., Bharat L. Seth, Ajit Chak, Vasudha K. Dixit, and Sunita Narain. Sewage
Canal: How to Clean the Yamuna. New Delhi: Centre for Science & Environment, 2007.

Takeuchi, Akie, Maureen Cropper, and Antonio Bento. 2007. “The Impact of Policies to
Control Motor Vehicle Emissions in Mumbai, India.” Journal of Regional Science, 47(1): 27–
46.




	                                         30
               Figure 1: Comparison of Pollution Levels in India, China, and the U.S.
                                  Panel A: Air Pollution Levels




                                      Panel B: Water Pollution Levels




Notes:
1. In Panel A, the air pollution values are calculated from 1990-1995 data. For India, only cities with at least
seven years of data are used. In Panel B, water pollution values for India and the United States are calculated
from 1998-2002 data. For India, only city-rivers with at least seven years of data are used. Pollution values for
China are calculated across six major river systems for the year 1995 and are weighted by number of monitoring
sites within each river system. Fecal coliform data for China were unavailable.
2. "Particulate Matter" refers to all particles with diameter less than 100 μm, except in the case of the United
States, where particle size is limited to diameter less than 50 μm.
3. Units are mg/l for Biochemical Oxygen Demand and Dissolved Oxygen. For Logarithm of Fecal Coliforms,
units are the most probable number of fecal coliform bacteria per 100 ml of water or MPN/100 ml. An increase
in Biochemical Oxygen Demand or Fecal Coliforms signals higher levels of pollution, while an increase in
Dissolved Oxygen signals lower levels of pollution.
4. Indian pollution data (both air and water) were drawn from the Central Pollution Control Board's online and
print sources. Data for the United States (both air and water pollution) were obtained from the United States
Environmental Protection Agency. Air pollution data for China came from the World Bank and China's State
Environmental Protection Agency. Doug Almond graciously provided these data. Chinese water pollution data
come from the World Bank; Avi Ebenstein graciously provided them.
                 Figure 2: Air Quality Monitors Across India




Notes:
1. Dots denote cities with monitoring stations under India's National Ambient Air
Quality Monitoring Programme (NAAQMP).
2. Geographical data are drawn from MIT's Geodata Repository. Monitoring locations
are determined from CPCB and SPCB online sources and Google Maps.

         Figure 3: Water Quality Monitors on India's Major Rivers




Notes:
1. Dots denote cities with monitoring stations under India's National Water Monitoring
Programme (NWMP). Only cities with monitors on major rivers are included, as
geospatial data for smaller rivers is unavailable.
2. Geographical data are drawn from MIT's Geodata Repository. Monitoring locations
are determined from CPCB and SPCB online sources and Google Maps.
                      Table 1: Prevalence of Air and Water Policies
                                  Air                               Water
   Year         All Cities          SCAP            Cat Conv           All Cities         NRCP
                  (1a)               (1b)             (1c)               (2a)              (2b)
    1986            --                --                --                104                0
    1987            20                 0                0                 115                0
    1988            25                 0                0                 191                0
    1989            31                 0                0                 218                0
    1990            44                 0                0                 271                0
    1991            47                 0                0                 267                0
    1992            58                 0                0                 287                0
    1993            65                 0                0                 305               10
    1994            57                 0                0                 316               10
    1995            42                 0                2                 317               38
    1996            68                 0                4                 316               39
    1997            73                 1                4                 326               43
    1998            65                 1               22                 325               43
    1999            74                 1               26                 320               43
    2000            66                 1               24                 303               39
    2001            54                 1               19                 363               43
    2002            63                 1               22                 376               41
    2003            72                11               25                 382               42
    2004            78                15               24                 395               41
    2005            93                16               24                 295               38
    2006           112                16               24                  --               --
    2007           115                16               24                  --               --
Notes:
1. Columns (1a) and (2a) tabulate the total number of cities in each year, while columns (1b),
(1c), and (2b) tabulate the number of cities with the specified policy in place in each year.
2. We subject the full sample to two restrictions before analysis, both of which are applied here.
(1) If there is pollution data from a city after it has enacted a policy, then that city is only
included if it has at least one data point three years or more before policy uptake and four years
or more after policy uptake. (2) If there is no post-policy pollution data in a city (or if that city
never enacted the policy), then that city is only included if it has at least two pollution data
points.
3. In this table, a city is counted if it has any pollution data in that year. A city is only included
in the subsequent regressions if it has pollution data for the specific dependent variable of that
given regression. Thus, the above city counts must be interpreted as maximums in the
regressions. Most city-years have available data for all pollutants studied here.
4. The data were compiled by the authors from Central Pollution Control Board's online
sources, print sources, and interviews.
                                          Figure 4: Trends in Air and Water Quality
                                                    Panel A: Air Pollution




                                                     Panel B: Water Quality




                                                    Panel C: Infant Mortality




Notes:
1. The figures depict annual mean pollution levels. There are no restrictions on the sample. Annual means are first taken across all
monitors within a given city, and then across all cities in a given year.
2. Infant mortality data are restricted to those cities which have at least one air or water pollution measurement in the full sample.
3. Pollution data were drawn from Central Pollution Control Board's online and print sources. Infant mortality data were taken from
the book Vital Statistics of India as well as various state registrar's offices.
                                                          Table 2: Summary Statistics
                                 10th          90th                           10th          90th                          10th          90th
Period            Mean         Percentile    Percentile         Mean        Percentile    Percentile        Mean        Percentile    Percentile
                    (1)           (2)           (3)              (4)           (5)           (6)             (7)           (8)           (9)
Panel A: Air Pollution
                                  PM                                           SO₂                                         NO₂
Full Period        223.3          90.5          378.4            17.3          4.0           35.4            26.8          10.0          48.7
                  (114.0)                                       (15.2)                                      (18.0)
                   1370                                          1344                                        1382

1987-1990          252.1         101.6          384.3            19.4          4.4           38.2            25.5           8.5          42.6
                  (126.4)                                       (13.3)                                      (21.5)
                    120                                          116                                         117

2004-2007          209.5          92.0          366.6           12.2           4.0           23.0            25.6          10.4          47.0
                   (97.1)                                       (8.1)                                       (14.0)
                    420                                          381                                         417

Panel B: Water Quality
                                  BOD                                       Ln(FColi)                                      DO
Full Period         4.2            0.8           7.0             5.4           1.9           9.0              7.1          5.7            8.5
                   (8.0)                                        (2.7)                                        (1.3)
                   5949                                         4986                                         5920

1986-1989            3.5           0.9           5.8             6.4           3.6           9.7              7.2           6.0           8.5
                    (6.9)                                       (2.3)                                        (1.2)
                     644                                         529                                          648

2002-2005           4.1            0.9           7.9             5.3           1.8           9.1              7.0           5.5           8.4
                   (7.9)                                        (2.9)                                        (1.5)
                   1509                                         1340                                         1487

Panel C: Infant Mortality
                                IM Rate
Full Period          23            3             46
                   (22.1)
                    1246

1987-1990            30             5            56
                   (31.5)
                    357

2001-2004            17             3            36
                   (14.1)
                    216
Notes:
1. This table provides summary statistics on air and water quality. Standard deviations are provided below the mean in parantheses.
2. Infant mortality data are restricted to those cities which have at least one air or water pollution measurement in the full sample.
3. Pollution data were drawn from Central Pollution Control Board's online and print sources. Infant mortality data were taken from the book Vital
Statistics of India as well as various state registrar's offices.
    Figure 5A: Kernel Density Graphs of Ambient Air Quality




Notes:
1. The graphs provide the distribution of air pollution for the early (1987-
1990) and later (2004-2007) periods of our sample. They are constructed
using an Epanechnikov kernel function.
2. Units are μg/m³ for all pollutants.
3. The data were drawn from Central Pollution Control Board's online and
print sources.
             Figure 5B: Kernel Density Graphs of Surface Water Quality




Notes:
1. The graphs provide the distribution of water pollution for the early (1986-1989) and later
(2002-2005) periods of our sample. They are constructed using an Epanechnikov kernel
2. Units are mg/l for BOD and DO, and Ln(MPN/100 ml) for FColi.
3. The right tail of the BOD distribution extends to 100 mg/l but is truncated to provide a more
detailed picture of the distribution.
4. The data were drawn from Central Pollution Control Board's online and print sources.
              Figure 5C: Kernel Density Graphs of Infant Mortality




Notes:
1. The graph provides the distribution of infant mortality for the early (1987-1990) and later
(2001-2004) periods of our sample. They are constructed using an Epanechnikov kernel
function.
2. Infant mortality data are restricted to those cities which have at least one air or water
pollution measurement in the full sample.
3. Units of infant mortality rate are Deaths per 1000 Births.
4. The right tail of the IM distrbution extends above 100 but is truncated to provide a more
detailed picture of the distribution.
5. The data were drawn from the book Vital Statistics of India as well as various state
registrar's offices.
                                                  Figure 6. Event Study of Air Pollution Policies
                   Panel A. PM                                        Panel B. SO2                                         Panel C. NO2




Notes: The figures provide a graphical analysis of the effect of the Supreme Court Action Plans and mandated Catalytic Converter policies on air
pollution. The figures plot the estimated στ's against the τ's from the estimation of equation (1). Each pair of graphs within a panel are based on the same
regression. See the text for further details.
                                Table 3. Trend Break Estimates of the Effect of Policy on Air Pollution
                                            PM                                       SO₂                                      NO₂
                            (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)         (5)           (6)            (7)         (8)           (9)
Panel A: Supreme Court Action Plans
Time Trend                                   -3.8         -3.6                        0.2          0.2                        1.2**        1.4**
                                            (2.4)        (2.8)                       (0.1)        (0.1)                       (0.4)        (0.4)
1(Policy)                      -16.2         4.9          7.5            -0.5        -1.5*         -1.4           1.9          -4.4         -1.7
                               (9.4)       (15.8)       (20.6)          (0.4)        (0.7)        (0.9)          (2.0)        (2.7)        (3.1)
1(Policy) * Time Trend                                    -1.5                                     -0.1                                     -1.6
                                                         (7.1)                                    (0.3)                                    (1.1)

5-Year Effect                                            -0.2                                     -1.7                                     -9.8*
p-value                                                  0.99                                     0.21                                     0.06

N                             11             11           11             11           11           11             11           11           11
Panel B: Catalytic Converters
Time Trend                                   -0.3       7.8***                        0.1        2.0***                        -0.3         0.9*
                                            (1.8)        (2.5)                       (0.3)        (0.3)                       (0.3)        (0.4)
1(Policy)                      11.9         14.7          5.6            2.5          1.5          -0.5           2.2          4.5          3.2
                               (8.8)       (17.4)       (12.8)          (1.7)        (3.3)        (1.5)          (1.4)        (2.8)        (2.2)
1(Policy) * Time Trend                                 -10.8***                                  -2.6***                                  -1.5***
                                                         (2.9)                                    (0.3)                                    (0.5)

5-Year Effect                                          -48.6***                                 -13.4***                                   -4.5
p-value                                                  0.04                                     0.00                                     0.25

N                               17           17           17             17           17           17             17           17           17

Equation (2a)                     Y           N           N               Y           N           N               Y             N            N
Equation (2b)                     N           Y           N               N           Y           N               N             Y            N
Equation (2c)                     N           N           Y               N           N           Y               N             N            Y
Notes: This table reports results from the estimation of equations (2a), (2b), and (2c). Panel A reports on the estimated impact of the Supreme
Court Action Plans for PM (columns (1) – (3)), SO2 (columns (4) – (6)), and NO2 (columns (7) – (9)). Panel B reports on the same exercise,
except for the catalytic converter policy. Rows denoted "5-Year Effect" report Π1 + 5Π3, which is an estimate of the effect of the relevant policy 5
years after implementation from equation (2c). The p-value of a hypothesis test for the significance of this linear combination is reported
immediately below the 5-year estimates. Asterisks denote significance at the 90% (*), 95% (**), and 99% (***) levels. See the text for further
details.
                                               Figure 7. Event Study of Water Pollution Policy
                 Panel A. BOD                                    Panel B. Ln(Fcoli)                                   Panel C. DO




Notes: The figures provide a graphical analysis of the effect of the National River Conservation Plan policy on water pollution. The figures plot the
estimated στ's against the τ's from the estimation of equation (1). See the text for further details.
          Table 4. Trend Break Estimates of the Effect of the National River Conservation Policy on Water Pollution
                                           BOD                                    Ln(Fcoli)                                    DO
                               (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)         (5)           (6)            (7)          (8)          (9)
Time Trend                                 -0.12       -0.88**                      0.01          -0.08                       -0.02      0.09***
                                          (0.18)        (0.34)                     (0.04)        (0.08)                      (0.02)       (0.02)
1(NRCP)                       -1.11        -0.06         1.07           -0.08       -0.14         -0.01          0.04         0.19         0.03
                             (0.99)       (1.88)        (1.67)         (0.20)      (0.39)        (0.40)         (0.10)       (0.18)       (0.12)
1(NRCP) * Time Trend                                   0.96**                                     0.11                                   -0.13***
                                                        (0.38)                                   (0.09)                                   (0.03)

5-Year Effect                                           5.87*                                     0.54                                   -0.62***
p-value                                                 0.06                                      0.45                                     0.01

N                              18           18           18              18           18           18             18           18           18

Equation (2a)                   Y            N             N             Y            N            N               Y             N           N
Equation (2b)                   N            Y             N             N            Y            N               N             Y           N
Equation (2c)                   N            N             Y             N            N            Y               N             N           Y
Notes: This table reports estimates of the impact of the National River Conservation Policy on three measures of water pollution from the fitting of
equations (2a), (2b), and (2c). The three measures of water pollution are BOD (columns (1) – (3)), Ln(Fcoli) (columns (4) – (6)), and DO
(columns (7) – (9)). The row denoted "5-Year Effect" reports Π1 + 5Π3, which is an estimate of the effect of the relevant policy 5 years after
implementation from equation (2c). The p-value of a hypothesis test for the significance of this linear combination is reported immediately below
the 5-year estimates. Asterisks denote significance at the 90% (*), 95% (**), and 99% (***) levels. See the text for further details.
     Figure 8. Event Study of Catalytic Converters and Infant Mortality




Notes: The figure provides a graphical analysis of the effect of the Catalytic Converter
policy on the infant mortality rate. The figure plots the estimated στ's against the τ's from
the estimation of equation (1). See the text for further details.
    Table 5. Trend Break Estimates of the Effect of the Catalytic
                Converter Policy on Infant Mortality
                                  (1)               (2)              (3)
Time Trend                                       -0.40**            -0.25
                                                  (0.16)           (0.15)
1(Policy)                         -1.55            1.67            3.49**
                                 (0.97)           (1.53)           (1.49)
1(Policy) * Time Trend                                            -0.87**
                                                                   (0.36)

5-Year Effect                                                      -0.86
p-value                                                             0.61

N                                  16              16              16.00

Equation (2a)                        Y               N                N
Equation (2b)                        N               Y                N
Equation (2c)                        N               N                Y
Notes: This table reports estimates of the impact of the Catalytic Converter
Policy on infant mortality rates from the fitting of equations (2a), (2b), and
(2c). The row denoted "5-Year Effect" reports Π1 + 5Π3, which is an
estimate of the effect of the relevant policy 5 years after implementation
from equation (2c). The p-value of a hypothesis test for the significance of
this linear combination is reported immediately below the 5-year estimates.
Asterisks denote significance at the 90% (*), 95% (**), and 99% (***)
levels. See the text for further details.
                              Appendix Table 1: Summary Statistics, by Year
           Panel A: Air Quality                       Panel B: Water Quality               Panel C: Infant Mortality
Year      PM           SO₂          NO₂            BOD        Ln(Fcoli)       DO                      IMR
          (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)                      (7)
1986       --            --           --            4.0          6.1          7.4                       --
           --            --           --           111          100           110                       --
1987     279.3         21.0         29.3            3.8          6.5          7.2                     35.9
          20            17           18            122          101           119                      87
1988     243.6         18.7         23.2            3.2          6.3          7.2                     30.6
          25            25           25            190          162           195                      87
1989     245.7         18.2         26.2            3.3          6.7          7.2                     28.2
          31            31           31            221          166           224                      87
1990     249.1         19.9         24.9            3.9          6.6          7.2                     24.4
          44            43           43            273          205           275                      96
1991     256.2         20.3         28.8            3.8          5.6          7.2                     26.9
          47            46           45            264          212           268                      80
1992     223.5         20.9         28.5            4.4          6.1          7.2                     26.2
          58            57           57            287          206           286                      76
1993     257.2         22.5         27.9            4.6          5.9          7.3                     25.3
          66            64           63            307          246           308                      79
1994     249.3         22.2         28.5            4.1          5.7          7.3                     22.8
          58            65           65            327          256           324                      78
1995     216.0         22.2         23.3            4.7          5.1          7.1                     21.7
          42            41           43            327          285           327                      79
1996     244.9         21.9         25.9            4.7          4.9          7.2                     22.3
          70            68           68            328          279           326                      58
1997     213.6         23.6         30.0            4.4          4.9          7.1                     19.6
          76            72           72            338          290           335                      59
1998     229.8         21.7         27.7            4.1          4.9          7.1                     18.7
          68            66           66            329          282           334                      58
1999     221.5         22.1         29.1            4.4          4.9          7.1                     18.2
          77            75           75            326          265           324                      55
2000     193.5         16.7         27.8            4.0          4.9          7.1                     18.1
          68            71           71            313          270           311                      52
2001     223.0         14.7         27.3            4.2          5.1          7.1                     17.8
          57            69           70            377          321           367                      63
2002     189.4         13.0         26.7            4.6          5.2          7.1                     15.7
          67            77           77            389          335           380                      61
2003     230.3         11.9         26.5            4.2          5.1          7.0                     17.6
          76            76           76            393          350           382                      62
2004     222.0         11.6         26.1            3.7          5.1          6.9                     14.6
          82            85           85            417          370           417                      30
2005     210.6         12.7         26.7            4.1          5.9          7.1                       --
          97            86           93            310          285           308                       --
2006     202.9         12.0         25.0             --           --           --                       --
          116          104          115              --           --           --                       --
2007     206.7         12.4         24.9             --           --           --                       --
          125          106          124              --           --           --                       --
Notes:
1. The figures depict annual mean pollution levels. There are no restrictions on the sample. Annual means are first taken
across all monitors within a given city, and then across all cities in a given year.
2. Number of city-year observations is reported below the mean in each year.
3. Units are ug/m³ for all air pollutants; mg/l for BOD and DO; Ln(MPN/100 ml) for Fcoli; and Deaths per 1000 Births for
infant mortality.
4. Pollution data were drawn from Central Pollution Control Board's online and print sources. Infant mortality data were
taken from the book Vital Statistics of India as well as various state registrar's offices.
   Appendix Table 2: Pollution Policy Coverage in India
                      Air                    Water
             Supreme Court        Catalytic          National River
   Year       Action Plans       Converters         Conservation Plan
                   (1)              (4)                    (6)
    1986            --               --                    25
    1987            0                 0                    25
    1988            0                 0                    25
    1989            0                 0                    25
    1990            0                 0                    25
    1991            0                 0                    25
    1992            0                 0                    25
    1993            0                 0                    25
    1994            0                 0                    97
    1995            0                 0                   160
    1996            0                 4                   160
    1997            0                 4                   160
    1998            1                 4                   160
    1999            1                49                   160
    2000            1                49                   160
    2001            1                49                   160
    2002            1                49                   160
    2003           12                49                   160
    2004           17                49                   160
    2005           17                49                   160
    2006           17                49                     --
    2007           17                49                     --
Notes:
1. This table describes the incidence of each policy across all of India.
2. Policy data were drawn from a variety of sources that are detailed
in the text.
     Appendix Table 3: Distribution of Air and Water Policies, by
                           Relative Year
                            Air                         Water
  Relative       Supreme Court                                    National River
   Year           Action Plans        Catalytic Converters       Conservation Plan
                       (1)                     (4)                      (6)
     -17                1                       0                        0
     -16                6                       0                        0
     -15                6                       0                        0
     -14               10                       0                        0
     -13               12                       0                        0
     -12               12                       0                        0
     -11               12                       5                        0
     -10               14                       8                        0
      -9               13                      10                       13
      -8               10                      19                       14
      -7               16                      20                       26
      -6               17                      22                       30
      -5               17                      23                       37
      -4               17                      18                       37
      -3               16                      18                       41
      -2               17                      26                       39
      -1               17                      26                       36
       0               17                      20                       42
       1               16                      26                       42
       2               17                      24                       42
       3               17                      19                       39
       4               12                      22                       43
       5                1                      25                       43
       6                1                      24                       43
       7                1                      24                       39
       8                1                      24                       42
       9                1                      24                       39
      10                1                       4                       38
      11                0                       4                       11
      12                0                       4                       11
Notes:
1. This table describes the prevalence of policies in the dataset by year relative to
policy uptake . Thus, a value of '-17' in the first column signifies '17 years before a
policy is implemented'. We use relative year ('tau') as the year variable in event
study regressions and figures.
2. Cities which enact a policy are subjected to the same inclusion rules as in event
study analysis. That is, a city is only included here if it has at least one pollution
data point 3 years or more before policy uptake as well as at least one data point 4
years or more after policy uptake.
3. In this table, a city is counted if it has any pollution data in that year. In
analyses, a city is only used if it has pollution data for the specific dependent
variable in a given regression. Thus, the above city counts must be interpreted as
maximums among our regressions. Most city-years have available data for all
pollutants studied here.
4. Since infant mortality data is only available up to the year 2004, the table above
is not representative for analysis which uses infant mortality as the dependent
variable.
5. Policy data are drawn from a variety of sources detailed in the text.
