NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AMERICAN INCOMES BEFORE AND AFTER THE REVOLUTION
Peter H. Lindert
Jeffrey G. Williamson
Working Paper 17211
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17211
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2011

Our work has been aided greatly by a battalion of scholars and archivists. The list of helpful colleagues
includes Jeremy Atack, Paul Clemens, Paul David, Farley Grubb, Herb Klein, Allan Kulikoff, Bob
Margo, Paul Rhode, Josh Rosenbloom, Carole Shammas, Billy Gordon Smith, Richard Sylla, Sam
Williamson, and especially Tom Weiss. Archival help was supplied by, among others, Jan Kinzer
(Pennsylvania State Archives), Diana McCain (Connecticut Historical Society), Clifford C. Parker
(Chester County Archives), and Marc Thomas (Maryland Historical Society). We thank them, yet
absolve them from any responsibility for the results presented here. We also acknowledge with gratitude
the research assistance of Lety Arroyo-Abad, Julianne Deitch, Sun Go, Patricia Levin, David Nystrom,
Brock Smith, Oscar Mendez Medina, and especially Nick Zolas. The paper has also benefitted from
earlier suggestions by participants at the Warwick–Venice conference, the NBER summer DAE workshop,
the World Economic History Congress (Stellenbosch), the IISH Amsterdam workshop, the EHES
Annual Meetings (Dublin), and seminars at Michigan, the Institute for Research on Poverty at Wisconsin,
AAE Development at Wisconsin, Oxford, London School of Economics, and UC Berkeley. Financial
support was provided by the National Science Foundation through the NBER. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Peter H. Lindert and Jeffrey G. Williamson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

American Incomes before and after the Revolution
Peter H. Lindert and Jeffrey G. Williamson
NBER Working Paper No. 17211
July 2011, Revised February 2013
JEL No. N11,N91,O47,O51
ABSTRACT
Building social tables in the tradition of Gregory King, we develop new estimates suggesting that between
1774 and 1800 American incomes fell in real per capita terms. The colonial South was richer than
the North at the start, but was already beginning to lose its income lead by 1800. We also find that
free American colonists had much more equal incomes than did households in England and Wales.
The colonists also had greater purchasing power than their English counterparts over all of the income
ranks except in the top few percent.
Peter H. Lindert
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
phlindert@ucdavis.edu
Jeffrey G. Williamson
350 South Hamilton Street #1002
Madison, WI 53703
and Harvard University and CEPR
and also NBER
jwilliam@fas.harvard.edu

3
I. Early American Growth and Inequality Debates

American economic historians need fresh information on the income levels that
prevailed at the end of the colonial era and the dawn of independence in order to understand this
country’s growth process and its evolving social structure. This need keeps arising whenever
we try to cast back from today to the late colonial period, or to project ahead from early colonial
years, or to view American incomes in trans-Atlantic perspective.
The debate that tries to back-cast American growth from 1840 has centered around Paul
David’s classic 1967 article on “New Estimates, Controlled Conjectures”, a descriptive label
that should apply to this paper as well. David, Robert Gallman, Thomas Weiss, and others
centered their plausible conjectures on the division of the economy into large sectors, each with
its own labor force and labor productivity growth. All of these competing estimates have been
built up from the output side in the spirit of Simon Kuznets. This paper offers something quite
different, building up estimates from the income side in the form of what have been called
social tables. Until recently, our alternative approach has been hampered by the paucity of data
on the occupations and the sector mix of the labor force before 1840. The early censuses did
not help much with these, except to give indicators that should have affected labor force
participation, such as sex, race, age, region, and urban/rural. Accordingly, we have long
thought that a new attack on the issue of early American growth must feature new information
on American occupations. Even though many household heads were simply called artisans,
merchants, farmers, planters, farm hands, or slaves, it helps considerably to know what labor
force shares they represented, where they lived, their average incomes, and how those incomes
changed over time.1
Economic growth across the colonial era defines more contested territory. Some have
seen only extensive growth: that is, stagnant productivity, with only population growth and land
settlement, and without gains in average living standards. Others have seen evidence of
intensive growth: that is, considerable productivity growth, some emphasizing seventeenthcentury emergence from initial hardship and mortality, and others emphasizing gains across the
middle of the eighteenth century. This debate has also been hampered by lack of knowledge
about labor inputs and occupational structure, and by the roughness of any estimates of
productivity growth within such sectors as agriculture or shipping.2

4
Our interest in American incomes around the time of the Revolution is enhanced by
viewing them from across the Atlantic. Angus Maddison (2007) estimated that it was not until
after the 1870s that the United States caught up with the United Kingdom in real GDP per
capita, though active debate has ensued about the uncertainties of his and others’ estimates.
Maddison’s beliefs need to be reconciled with the fact that North America attracted a significant
net emigration from the Mother Country and that colonial and republican population growth
was much faster here. In the light of current research on the Great Divergence, on the history of
European incomes, and on the continued use of the Maddison world income estimates, we think
the time is ripe to add data from the American side to compare with the new estimates for
Europe.
We can now offer new estimates based on more archival data than were available to
earlier researchers. The harvest is offered as an “open-source” presentation of our detailed data
and procedures on the internet, for both negative and positive reasons. The negative reason is
that many scholars might resist accepting some new estimates based on vulnerable primary data,
wishing to offer their own estimates. The positive reason for open sourcing is the dynamism of
the database itself. The information explosion that has offered us new data will continue to
offer additional data to all scholars in the future. Maximizing the disclosure of our data and
procedures accelerates the opportunities for improving the reliability of the estimates. Hence,
our work is tied to a set of appendices and two downloadable sets of spreadsheet and text files.
One is this Journal’s archived file set, and another is an expanding data set relating to our larger
project on American incomes 1774-1870.3
Our findings confirm some common beliefs about growth and inequality in early
America, yet contradict others, and also introduce some brand new issues. This paper offers a
clearer view of colonial American inequality and how the incomes of different classes compared
with those of their counterparts in the Mother Country. American inequality was much lower in
1774 and 1800 than in England or Wales, especially among free whites. Inequality was also
lower in the Northern colonies than in the United States today. We find higher colonial incomes
in 1774 than did previous scholars, especially higher in the Southern colonies. In 1774, average
colonial incomes seem to have been higher than those in England and Wales, using either
exchange rates or purchasing power parity hints, though American incomes were almost

5
certainly lower in 1800. Our estimates raise new questions about what happened between 1774
and 1800, during the Revolutionary War era and then at the dawn of the Republic.
II. How the Estimates Are Derived4

A. The 1774 Colonial Evidence

Our approach starts by counting people by occupations or social classes, and mustering
evidence about their average incomes. That is, we build national income and product accounts
(NIPA) from the income side. This departs from all recent scholarship on early American
growth, which has built its real income series from the production side, and then used price
indexes to estimate nominal incomes. Historians will recognize our approach as that of building
social tables,5 in the “political arithmetick” tradition spawned by such Englishmen as Sir
William Petty and Gregory King in the seventeenth century. That is indeed our approach here,
as it has been in other publications of ours.6 We are preceded by at least two early American
writers who imitated Petty with their own calculations of what their region was worth –
presumably to guess at its ability to pay taxes and fight wars.7
Fortunately, the archives continue to accumulate early local returns that recorded
people’s occupations, including such social labels as “Esquire” or “widow” in the English
tradition. Reconstructing society from these sources is no easy task, however, and will continue
to be challenging even as the primary data accumulate in the future.
Any social profile of Americans on the eve of the Revolution must start from local
censuses, tax lists, occupational directories, and probates, all supported by the earliest national
population censuses of 1790 and 1800. Fortunately, the recent electronic revolution has made
local enumerations from the late eighteenth century much more accessible. While all records
before 1790 were local, aggregate regional counts can be developed by assuming that
proportions from one documented locality represents those of other localities in the same
region, with the same population density, urbanization level, and qualitative attributes.
Our path to counting early Americans by work status, location, and living arrangement
starts from basic population totals themselves, and then adds early US labor force estimates

6
(themselves constructed from labor participation rates by age-sex-slave/free cells), before
dividing up that labor force by occupation and by household headship status.
Population census counts. The few local censuses from the colonial period are now
collated and referenced in the colonial section of Historical Statistics of the United States, both
in the Bicentennial Edition (1976) and in the Millennial Edition (2006). These offer detail by
sex, race, free/slave status, and rough age distributions for seven colonies; we clone the
demography of the other six missing colonies from these seven.
Labor force participation rates. Next we derive persons in the labor force for each
demographic group defined by place, sex, race, free/slave, and age. Following convention, the
labor force consists of all persons generating products and services sold in significant part (or,
for slaves, demanded in significant part) outside the household.
To convert population into labor force, we use the detailed labor participation rates for
1800 supplied by Thomas Weiss. It seems reasonable to assume there were no behavioral
changes over these twenty-six years in the rates defined in the detailed cell-specific Weiss
estimates, which give separate rates for such cell categories as urban Pennsylvania’s free white
females age 10-15, or rural South Carolina’s male slaves over the age of 10, or small town
Connecticut’s free white males aged 16 and older. However, since these categories changed in
relative importance over time, the regional and national labor participation rates could and did
change between 1774 and 1800.
Recorded occupations. Sketching the social make-up of the labor force requires detailed
occupation counts for different localities. We draw on newly accessible counts for years near
1774, though only for a few places, only for parts of the labor force, and only with the help of
some comparison of occupational mixes over time and space.
Our fresh start on the social structure of America on the eve of the Revolution uses local
tax assessment lists and occupational directories, as reported in Table 1. Such lists allow us to
create the following occupational groups for the free population:
Group 1 = Officials, titled, professionals
Group 2 = Merchants and shopkeepers
Group 3 = Skilled artisans in manufacturing
Group 4 = Skilled in the building trades
Group 5 = Farm operators (renters, sharecroppers, planters, owner-operators)

7
Group 6A = Male menial laborers
Group 6B = Female menial laborers
The new data re-shape the occupational structure of the colonies. For example, relative to Alice
Hanson Jones (1977), our estimates shift a lot of the Middle Colonies’ labor force from
middling farmers to less wealthy craftsmen and laborers, and to males with no stated
occupation.
In the urban South, the 1790 directory for Charleston seems usable, when scaled back to
the estimated Charleston 1774 population. One gets the same occupational patterns by starting
with Alice Hanson Jones’s w weights for a sample drawn from four Southern states. In either
case, one must adjust for the over-representation of absentee landowners and, especially, of
slaveholders. We adjust the Jones weights, guided by some very useful local censuses from
three North Carolina counties in 1779-1782. These enumerate the whole population of free
household heads according to whether they held slaves or real estate or both or neither. We
assume that the same adjustment of weights is required in Charleston as in the rest of the South.
For the rural South, we carried out the same adjustment away from slaveholders and
landowners, giving instead more weight to ordinary farmers. One could wish, of course, for a
broader sampling of the rural South than just the Alice Hanson Jones sampling from four states,
plus our new sampling from the three North Carolina counties. There are other rural Southern
county assessment documents on the internet, but only very few are for dates earlier than 1798,
and none of the lists we have seen record the occupations of the household head.
Unrecorded occupations. Persons with occupations recorded by tax assessment lists or
urban occupational directories fall short of the persons in the labor force. In most cases they
even fail to capture all household heads, the exception being those three counties of rural North
Carolina between 1779 and 1782, for which the listings seemed to have captured all free
household heads.
Not all unlabeled labor force members are equal. Some lack an occupational label
despite a positive amount of assessed wealth. Some lack an occupational label, and are listed as
tax-exempt because they had zero or near-zero wealth. Thus, we distinguish between the
following groups of household heads in the social tables:
Group 7 = free males with positive wealth but no recorded occupation,
Group 8 = free females with positive wealth but no recorded occupation, and

8
Group 9 = free persons recorded as having zero or near-zero wealth and no stated
occupation, and others who are in the labor force but unlisted in local records.
Counting Households. One could avoid measuring household headship if we were
interested only in measuring aggregate national product, since it depends only on who is in the
labor force and their average income. Yet we need the headship rates by occupation to measure
inequality.
Households are the income recipient units used here to measure income inequality, for
both practical and theoretical reasons. Previous investigators have been forced to confront the
simple fact that taxable property, such as real estate, is used by all household members, even if
only one is the owner and taxpayer. The prevailing practice is to measure income inequality
among households, not among individual income earners. In order to compare apples with
apples, we do the same. That’s the practical reason. The theory comes from Simon Kuznets
(1976), who warned against measuring inequality among individual earners and emphasized the
superiority of the household focus. Caring about economic inequality means caring about how
unequally people consume resources over their lifetimes. Even if data constraints force us to
study annual inequality rather than life-cycle inequality, Kuznets pleaded for the measurement
of annual income per household member. The numerator should capture the incomes of all
economically active household members, and the denominator should capture all adultequivalent consumers in the household.
Since the early population censuses usually did not count households, some assumptions
must be invoked to decide who were in fact household heads. Fortunately, historians of early
America have already grappled with this issue. Following the leads of Billy Gordon Smith
(1981, 1984, 1990) and the late Lucy Simler (1990, 2007) in particular, we estimate the number
of household heads from population data from c1774 and c1800 invoking the following
assumptions:
(1) All free white males, 21-up, were household heads, subject to (4) below;
(2) All free white widows with any indication of property ownership or of occupations
were household heads;
(3) One-sixth of the free black population consisted of household heads;8
(4) The number of free white males, 21-up, who were not household heads is matched
by the number of free white females, 18-up, who were household heads, despite not

9
being included in (2) above. That is, we assume that two errors offset each other when
using the white males 21-up as household heads. Hopefully, later studies can make
more headway on the headship rates by gender.
These assumptions have generated the total numbers of households by place – that is, by region
and by urban versus rural.
By subtraction, we derive the number of household heads that are missed by the listedoccupation counts. The shares of heads omitted are often large when the occupational data
come from the tax lists and the urban directories. As estimated in detail elsewhere, the colonial
business directories and the tax lists may have missed more than 30 percent of all households.9
Left uncorrected, such counts would underestimate total income and its inequality, since many
of the unregistered were poor. In contrast, the tax lists from around 1800 are more likely to have
captured something like the full population, or so it appears in our samplings from New York
State property tax rolls that began around 1799, where the number of assessments approximated
the estimated number of households. The same should have been true of the federal direct tax
of 1798, which required a household enumeration subject to external audit.
Still, we have found significant omissions in some tax lists and business directories from
the colonial era. Which groups were most frequently omitted? The literature has advanced the
plausible intuition that the omitted consisted mainly of the tax-excused poor. Yet, there is also
some evidence that many in the middling and rich groups may also have been omitted, or at
least that their wealth was under-assessed. We have used clues from the tax assessments to
divide the household heads of no recorded occupation into Groups 7-9.
Three tough questions need to be answered about those who were in the labor force
(LF), according to the censuses and the Weiss estimates of labor force participation rates, yet
who were not reported as household heads (HHs): First, how many of them were there for each
place defined by region and by urban/rural? Second, what kinds of occupations and earnings
rates did they have? Third, whose households did they live in, and share resources with? Guided
by the censuses, we identify the following groups in the labor force who were not household
heads:
Groups 10 and 11 = Free white males and females, respectively, ages 10-15;
Groups 12 and 13 = Free white males and females, respectively, ages 16-up, but not
household heads;

10
Groups 14 and 15 = Free black males and females, ages10-15;
Group 16 = Free black males ages 16-up, minus free black household heads;
Group 17 = Free black females ages 16-up;
Group 18 = White indentured servants in Maryland, the only colony that labeled them
separately in a census near 1774; and
Group 19 = Slaves ages 10-up (65 percent of whom were assumed not to be household
heads).
Some of these groups contained laborers who were almost surely paid only unskilled wage
rates, while others could have been spread over occupations of higher earnings. Our income
estimations make the following assumptions within each location:
Groups 10, 11, 14, and 15 (free non-HH heads ages 10-15) are allocated to Groups 6A
and 6B, menial or unskilled, by sex;
Groups 12, 13, 16, and 17 (free non-HH heads 16-up) are allocated location-specifically
across Groups 2-6 in the same proportion as are Groups 2-6;
Group 18 Maryland servants are allocated across occupations following Galenson
(1981) and Grubb (1985), occupations that were relatively urban and skilled.10
Group 19, slaves ages 10-up, uses other scholars’ estimates of the amount of their
earnings they were allowed to retain for consumption, specific to region and occupation.
In the South, the rate varied between 41.4 percent for field hands to 52.7 percent for
Charleston labor. Following Claudia Goldin (1976), Richard Wade (1964), Richard
Sutch (1975) and others, we assume that slaves doing non-farm work were artisans,
construction workers, or unskilled (including servants). The non-farm share unskilled is
based on the Charleston 1848 census, while the residual is divided equally between
artisans and construction workers.11
So far, these calculations affect our estimations of both aggregate national income and
income inequality. For inequality purposes, and following Kuznets, we must further decide in
whose households these non-HH head members of the labor force lived. The data are almost
non-existent on this issue. We make the following assumptions about the non-head earners
“imported” into the households of others:
(1) For each region and urban/rural place (e.g. New England big cities or rural South),
the non-heads and their individual earnings are absorbed into the same region and place.

11
(2) For the free population, within each group defined by region and urban/rural, we
assume that the average earning power of each non-HH head imported into free families
is the same for all free persons of that occupation in that place.
(3) Slave non-heads are taken into slave households only, leaving household income the
same as the retained earnings of all slaves.
(4) This same assumption holds for the separately recorded group of Maryland servants,
though the assumption is redundant here because these are one-person households.
These assumptions and the resulting allocations can certainly be challenged. We emphasize one
point about data sources: For each place defined by region and by urban/rural, the aggregate
imports of non-HH heads are driven by the census, the labor participation rates, and by the
household headship rates. The allocation of non-HH heads to households by place is not yet
derived from micro-studies about how households shared earnings, because there are too few
such studies. Nor are the allocations simply assumed, except for the key middle-of-the-road
assumption (2) above.
Labor earnings by occupation, circa 1774. We are able to assign annual incomes to the
most ubiquitous occupations in each location, thanks to the enormous archival gleanings of
Carroll Wright, T.M. Adams, Stanley Lebergott, Jackson Turner Main, Donald Adams,
Winnifred Rothenberg, and a few others.12 Their time-consuming collection of newspaper
quotes and account book entries must be used with care. Some are in the depreciated local
colonial currency, whereas others are in (British) pounds sterling. Fortunately, most sources,
and Main in particular, were careful to say which was which. Some of the earnings are annual,
as for white collar professionals and farmers, but others are monthly, weekly, or daily rates of
pay, requiring assumptions about how many days or months they spent in gainful employment
each year. We believe that for those days or months in which a person did not hold his or her
main stated job, he or she nonetheless filled in with other productive work, like weaving and
farming at home, and some of this output was traded on the market. Thus, our “full-time”
estimates assume that daily or monthly full-time equivalent (FTE) workers performed
productive work of some kind for 313 days a year (excluding only Sundays). This assumption
implies, of course, that we include more non-market work in our income estimates than do other
scholars that include only or mainly market work in their output estimates. However, to imitate
the labor force behavior that other scholars may have assumed in estimating early American

12
GDP, and as sensitivity analysis, we also calculate “part-time” estimates that use fewer labor
days per year.13
We enlarged the concept of labor earnings to include farm operators’ profits, estimated
by Main, plus slaves’ and indentured servants’ retained share of what they earned. As noted
previously, we have called this labor income amalgam “own-labor incomes”.14
Property income in 1774.15 Our property income estimates benefit from Alice Hanson
Jones’s exhaustive and masterly study of America’s wealth in 1774, based on her 919 probate
inventories and supporting documents.16 A key advantage of her data is that they identify the
occupation or social status of most of the people in her colonial sample. We have examined her
data and procedures in great detail, and find no flaws.17 Jones realized that a probate-based
sample ran the risk of overstating average wealth, and understating wealth inequality, because
probate was more likely for the deceased rich than poor. She went to enormous lengths to
adjust for this, ending with what she called w*B estimates that were meant to capture more of
the poor. We have moved in the same direction, using a different procedure. Our greater
weighting of the poorer households was achieved by introducing the new data on occupational
structure described earlier in this section. As it turns out, our estimates imply an even greater
probate-wealth markdown than did her w*B estimates.
Wealth is not property income or total income. Jones confined her income-measurement
efforts to brief conjectures about wealth-income ratios, using twentieth-century aggregate
capital-output ratios borrowed from the macroeconomics literature of the 1970s.18 We have
followed a different route, in order to exploit the wage data just described. Our reading of the
limited evidence on colonial rates of return suggests that, on average, assets probably earned a
net rate of return of 6 percent per annum.19 Later we will quantify the sensitivity of our income
estimates for 1800 to this 6 percent rate of return.
The gross rate of return, which is more appropriate to the calculation of gross national
product for comparison with other studies, equals this net 6 percent plus rates of depreciation
that differed by asset. Following NIPA accounting standards, we have assumed zero
depreciation on financial assets and real estate (positive depreciation offset by rapid capital
gains), 5 percent for servants and slaves, 10 percent for livestock and business equipment, and
zero for net changes in producers’ perishables and crops.20

13
Combining own-labor income and property incomes for 1774. Here we gain from
having invested so much effort in gathering occupation data. Since own-labor incomes and
property incomes are both arranged by occupation, we can combine the two to get their total
incomes. For farmers, the largest occupational group, we can even exploit some of the regional
size distribution of property income data, dividing it into the top 2 percent of farmers, the next
18 percent of farmers, a middling 40 percent, and a bottom 40 percent. This disaggregation
helps us judge the degree of income inequality within each region.21
Households were practically the whole economy. Our calculations offer what NIPA
accountants call total private income of the household sector. The colonial government sector’s
contribution consisted only of the wages and salaries of government employees and military
personnel (already included in our occupations and own-labor earnings). There were no
government corporations in 1774. Nor do we need to worry about the retained earnings of
private corporations, since they amounted to little by the end of the century. The same
assumptions will be made for 1800. When a future paper compares 1774 and 1800 with similar
accounts for 1860-1870, the non-household sector will take a larger share of national income for
the later dates.

B. The 1798-1800 Post-Revolutionary Evidence

Our next benchmark for appraising national income is the census year 1800. On the laborincome side, our procedures for 1800 are roughly the same as those we applied to 1774, though the
data sources are more copious and of higher quality. Table 2 sketches the mixes of sources and
methods for the 1800 estimates. What is distinctive about the estimates for 1798-1800 relates not to
labor incomes but to property incomes. To fund a possible conflict with France, Congress passed the
first direct tax, a one-off tax levied on real estate wealth and on the numbers of slaves.22
The 1798 direct tax returns remain the most useful source available for the property income
side of 1800 national income estimation. True, one might view these returns with some suspicion: Can
we trust the quality of the data extracted by tax collectors from a new nation that had just shed its royal
government partly over tax issues? Such suspicion is indeed warranted, especially given some
evidence that properties had already been under-assessed in tax returns of the previous two decades.23
Before using the 1798 returns, we must identify, and adjust for, their likely biases.

14
In New England and the Middle Colonies, the 1798 direct tax probably under-assessed market
values by something like 15.5 percent, a figure based on a contemporary study of marketed real estate
in Connecticut in that same year.24 We have raised our 1800 property income estimates by this 15.5
percent underassessment in New England and the Middle colonies, and also by the 7 percent rise in
average asset values from 1798 to 1800 suggested by the contemporary Samuel Blodget (1806).
The South might have under-assessed rich households’ realty, and slaves, by even more than
that 15.5 percent underassessment in the North. Appendix 3, in the supplementary materials, lays out
the peculiarities of southern assessment for the 1798 tax, and presents our preferred estimates for the
extent of underassessment. The adjustment for the extra Southern underassessment raises real estate
plus slave wealth values by 30.1 percent for the South Atlantic. This combined with the nationwide
underassessment of real estate by 15.5 percent raises real estate plus slave wealth values by 40.4
percent for the South Atlantic, or 27.7 percent for the whole Eastern seaboard.
Since the 1798 returns covered only real estate and slaves, we had to use the same ratios of
total property/(realty plus slave values) obtained from the 1774 evidence to inflate them to total
property. We apply region-specific ratios to each of the three colonial regions.
There is one other important difference between the data sources on the property side between
1774 and 1798-1800. The 1798 tax returns are very handy in that they were aggregated for us at the
time. But a serious drawback of the 1798 return is that it reports no data on occupation. This means
that we cannot document the occupational distribution of total income for 1800, although we can
document the distribution of own-labor incomes and property incomes separately, as well as the
aggregate value of total income. To survey the resulting estimates, we turn first to the levels and
growth of aggregate income over the quarter-century 1774-1800, and then to the income inequality of
1774 alone.
III. Provisional Conclusions about Income Levels and Growth, 1774-1800
Our estimates of labor and property incomes shed new light on average income in 1774 and
1800, and the growth of income per capita over a quarter century of war, postwar, and national
emergence. The levels and composition of total personal income are shown in Tables 3-6, for the three
regions used by Alice Hanson Jones and for a geographically fixed “nation”, defined as the 13
colonies in 1774 and the easternmost 15 states plus the District of Columbia in 1800. Table 3 can be
used to calculate any of several important ratios, using the denominators in the lower half of the table

15
and the price deflators in the notes to the table. Here we stress two key results. First, in 1774 the
colonial South had about twice the income per free person as that in the Northern colonies, and was
richer on the average even when one rightly counts slaves as persons. Second, these new estimates
imply that real income per capita dropped seriously over that quarter century. The 1774-1800 decline
of about 20 percent looks almost as serious in per capita terms as the 1929-1933 drop into the Great
Depression. If other authors are correct in reporting brisk income gains across the 1790s, then the
Revolutionary disaster and Confederation turmoil could have been America’s greatest income slump
ever, in percentage terms. Let us first scrutinize the levels of income at each date, before searching for
explanations of the implied net decline.
A. The Income Level Estimates for 1774 25
Our estimates suggest that the 13 colonies were richer and more productive in 1774 than other
estimates have implied. The left half of Table 4 underlines the contrast, focusing on the more recent
and more prominent set of competing estimates. Our thirteen-colony current-price (full-time) estimate
of 173.2 million dollars is 26 percent greater than the average of the Jones and McCusker estimates
(136.9 million). Yet our colonial income estimates differ greatly from those of Jones for only one
region. There is little difference for New England or for the Middle Colonies. The main source of the
big difference with Jones arises in the South, for which our income estimate ($98.8 million) is almost
twice that of Jones ($59.2 million).
There are two gaps to confront here: The gap in estimates for the 13 colonies as a whole, and
the gap for the South alone. While there must be error components in any measures of early incomes,
including our own estimates, we offer reasons for believing that the 13-colony gap and the Southern
colonial surprise are not due to errors we have introduced.
For the 13 colonies as a whole, the large gap is not driven by any higher estimate of wealth per
household, since we rely on Alice Hanson Jones’ own work. Supplementing her data with our new
occupation weights, we get a slightly lower net worth per wealth holder than she did. Furthermore,
because we find many fewer households with wealth than her estimated number of “potential wealth
holders”, our aggregate wealth estimate is only about 70 percent of her implied total wealth.26
Our conversion of wealth into property income, as described earlier, involved multiplying
different asset holdings by net and gross rates of return. A reader feeling that our income estimates
seem too large might want to challenge both our net and our gross rates of return as being somewhat

16
high. It seems very unlikely that our 6 percent figure overstates the net rate of return, the opportunity
cost of not having lent at interest. The colonies and the early republic had a legal usury limit of 6
percent that was vigorously supported by law and custom.27 That is, the usury constraint seems to have
checked a strong demand for capital, so that the 6 percent ceiling might very well have been below
market. Could the (illegal, market) rate of interest foregone by holders of directly productive assets
have been higher, say 8 percent? This is a distinct possibility, especially for 1800, for which the
literature suggests even greater capital scarcity than for 1774.28 Table 5 shows the impact of assuming
8 rather than 6 percent. Shifting to the higher rate of return would raise our total income estimates
further above those conjectured by other scholars.
One might also challenge our depreciation assumptions in deriving gross property incomes.
Indeed, some might argue that depreciation should not have been included in the income estimate at
all. If the reader prefers net property income estimates, ones that only include that 6 percent rate of
return on wealth, then she can refer to the 1774 net household income estimate of $162 million shown
in Table 5.29 This net household income estimate would eliminate about half the gap between our
gross income estimate of $173.2 million and the $136.9 million average estimate offered by Jones and
McCusker. That partial convergence might seem comforting, but it should not. The debate over early
American economic growth has consistently used gross national (or domestic) product, not net
national product. We should conform to the same convention for purposes of comparing apples with
apples. Thus our favored 1774 aggregate income estimate remains the gross income figure of $173.2
million shown in Tables 3 through 5.
So much for possible biases in property income. What about our own-labor income estimates
for 1774, supported as they are by new occupation weights, full-time employment assumptions, and
occupation-specific wage rates? Could these have exaggerated labor income for the 13 colonies as a
whole, thus raising our aggregate income estimates above that of previous scholars? The source of the
difference cannot lie with our new occupation shares, which give greater weight to poorer and less
probated whites in the North, since this would serve, once again, to make our estimates lower than
Jones’s, not higher. We also do not think the full-time employment assumption of 313 working days
per year for those hiring out is inappropriate, given the widespread prevalence of home production and
direct non-market consumption in the eighteenth and early nineteenth century. And as we have already
noted, a more conventional set of assumptions about different occupations’ annual work days would
cut our estimated national income by only 4.8 percent.30

17
What did Jones assume about rates of pay for labor, including the earnings retained by slaves?
In fact, she did not make any assumption at all, but took a single leap of faith that we have already
noted: By picking up some capital/output ratios quoted in the aggregate growth literature from the
1970s, she jumped from her impressive and reliable wealth estimates to less reliable total income
guesswork which stands or falls on her assumed aggregate wealth/income ratio (not necessarily the
same as a capital/output ratio). The macro literature offered Jones capital/output ratios ranging from
2.5 to 10 for the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Within this wide range, she said, “I hazard that
ratios of three or three and a half to one may be reasonable”. Yet we find that the 1774 ratio of net
worth (wealth) to national income was only 1.89.31
The strikingly wide gap between Southern and Northern incomes in 1774 has a simpler
explanation. In 1774, unlike 1860 and later, the South had a very different mix of free men's
occupations, with a much higher propertied share and fewer poor. On the eve of the Revolution, the
South was still a frontier with rich productivity in producing exportable tobacco, rice, indigo, and
cotton. We find this contrast between the regional occupation mixes among free household heads in
1774:
among free household heads (%)
New England Middle colonies

Southern colonies

Farm operators

43.9

25.8

72.7

Professions, commerce, crafts

11.0

32.5

14.3

No occupation given, some wealth

16.7

28.7

11.0

Menial laborers + those with zero wealth

28.4

13.0

1.9

Southern farm operators not only had higher average incomes than other farmers, but they
constituted a larger share of households, while low-paying occupations took a lower share among
free Southerners. The advantage of the colonial South should not seem surprising, even without any
gap in wage rates for given occupations. What drove the income gap between regions was not pay
differentials mysteriously unexploited by potential migrants, but rather a mix of Southern
occupations featuring those for which entry required prior accumulation of wealth in a world of
imperfect capital markets.32
Other clues support the belief in a richer colonial South. Alice Hanson Jones’s wealth
estimates had already shown that Southern wealth per wealth holder was 56 percent higher in the

18
South than the average for other colonies. That again stemmed largely from her estimates of the
occupational mix, even before our revisions magnified the contrast. Both her occupational mix and
ours show a remarkable lack of poor Southern whites, defined as those of menial trades or those
having zero assessable wealth. While our occupational calculations for the South have used only
Jones’s estimates plus the finding that there may have been no household heads with zero wealth in
three North Carolina counties, two archival data sets from Virginia in the 1780s again suggest that
there were few demonstrably poor white household heads. Tax returns from 1787 for rural Loudoun
County at the north end of Virginia appear to have covered all white households, yet with very little
evidence of white masses with zero net assets. Similarly, while a special census of the rural town of
Richmond, Virginia in 1782 did reveal some white household heads with menial occupations or the
possibility of zero wealth, their share of white household heads was no higher than in the rural towns
of Chester County Pennsylvania, and lower than the share in rural Massachusetts. More important
than these comparisons within regional hinterlands, or between their respective small towns, was the
inter-regional difference in rural and urban shares. The South was overwhelmingly countryside,
where the poverty share among the free population was lowest. While the percentage of true white
paupers was not zero in the South, it was not as high as in the North.33

B. The Income Level Estimates for 1800
Unlike those for 1774, our 1800 total income estimates are not above those offered by other
scholars. In fact, our estimates, shown on the right-hand side of Table 3, are in the lower half of
several competing estimates for the nation as a whole. Our 1800 totals for the Lower South match
those of Mancall, Rosenbloom, and Weiss (2003), even though we used the income approach and they
used the production approach. It might seem comforting that our 1800 estimates are so close to others.
However, ours would have been a bit higher than most if we had been able to make all the adjustments
that we feel are warranted. We are especially concerned about two such adjustments. One of these can
be quantified but one cannot.
The first potential adjustment is one already mentioned in connection with Table 5: using the
interest rate on public debt as a measure of the opportunity cost of assets, it appears that the net rate of
return on property was higher in 1800 than in 1774, presumably in response to Revolutionary War and
Confederation inflation, financial disruption, and perhaps even productivity advance.34 As we have
noted, if the interest rate tended to be 8 percent in 1800 versus 6 percent in 1774, then the 1774-1800

19
decline in real per capita income would be a bit less, 14 percent, using the “alternative” estimates for
1800 shown in Tables 5 and 6, rather than the bigger decline of 20 percent implied by the baseline
estimates.
The second adjustment relates to an omission from the baseline 1800 estimates. We have no
1800 data, or even guesses, about farm operators’ pure residual profits, as distinct from their asset
returns or the implicit value of their own physical labor. For 1774, we were able to use a few
testimonies unearthed by Main (1965) to guesstimate that the farm profit residual was 18.9 percent of
all farm operators’ income in New England, 21.1 percent in the Middle Atlantic, 34 percent in the
South, and 28.8 percent for the 13 colonies as a whole. We cannot apply these ratios to 1800,
however, since we lack any delineation between farm operators and free farm laborers in the census or
in the Weiss labor force estimates on which we rely.35 Until evidence on this issue emerges, we can
only propose our alternative estimates in Table 6, and repeat that accordingly the nation still
experienced a per capita income decline of maybe 20 percent over the quarter century, though the
decline might have turned out to be a little less than our estimates show had we been able to add
estimates of 1800 farmers’ pure profits in the future.

C. Long-Run Growth Implications
Our estimates imply that between 1774 and 1800 America suffered a serious net decline in per
capita income. We need to conduct some reality checks on these results, both in terms of their longerrun growth implications and in terms of their implications about the turbulence within that quarter
century itself.
How do the estimates fit into accepted narratives about the longer run development of early
America and its regions? Our new higher income estimates for 1774 will, of course, re-open the
debate over growth during the long colonial period. It seems wisest to refrain from commenting on
this part of the debate until our social tables technique has been applied to some benchmark date
earlier in the eighteenth century. However, we note that our higher income per capita estimates for
1774 are consistent with recently documented steep rises in real wages in New England and the
Middle Colonies from the mid-seventeenth century to the Revolution (Allen et al. 2012: Figure 5).
We are more prepared to use our income estimates to assess America’s growth performance up
to 1840. Table 6 supplies our real per capita income growth estimates for each of the three regions, and
for the three combined (the “nation” consisting of the thirteen original colonies), and it does so for

20
1774-1800, 1800-1840, and 1774-1840. For the entire period 1774-1840 real per capita incomes in the
three-region “nation” grew modestly, at 0.6 percent per annum. At such a pre-modern growth rate, it
would have taken 116 years to double income.36 Over those seven decades, the South Atlantic fell
behind the per capita income of the east coast “nation”, while New England and the Middle Atlantic
regions pulled ahead.
Between 1800 and 1840, however, per capita income in the North grew very fast, 2.3-2.4
percent per annum in New England, and 1.6-1.8 percent per annum in the Middle Atlantic, rates that
are consistent with the 5 percent per annum industrial output growth centered in the Northeast (Davis
2004). These rates exceeded those in Western Europe in the late eighteenth century and early
nineteenth. In contrast with fast growth in the Northeast, the figure for the South Atlantic was only
0.5-0.7 percent per annum, which pulls down the “national” average to a still impressive 1.4-1.6
percent per annum.
How do the new per capita income growth rates for 1800-1840 compare with those of other
scholars? Our growth rate for the South Atlantic is 0.51-0.69 per annum, while Mancall, Rosenbloom,
and Weiss estimate something similar for the Lower South, 0.53-0.79 percent. For the US as a whole,
Weiss offered three estimates, ranging between 0.56 and 0.80, far below David’s estimate of 1.12-1.28
percent. Our estimates of 1.39-1.56 are even higher than David’s,37 though including farmers’ residual
profits in 1800 would have lowered our 1800-1840 rates a bit.
Table 6 suggests that this modest pre-modern growth performance was driven by two special
events: Southern decline, and the economic disaster associated with the Revolutionary War and
Confederation turmoil.
The absolute decline of the South Atlantic over the last quarter of the eighteenth century and its
relative decline over the next four decades stand out as a classic example of what has come to be
called reversal of fortune.38 The South Atlantic was already well behind the Northeast and the
national average by 1840, having been well ahead of all other regions in 1774. Supporting reversal of
fortunes in the South is the absence of evidence that the colonial South had any large army of poor
whites in 1774. We note again that the few local colonial censuses and tax records suggest that nearly
all white households around 1774 had positive wealth. Why the reversal of fortune for the South? We
do not yet know what weights to attach to the decline of frontier super-returns, institutional failure, or
exceptionally severe damage incurred in the Revolutionary War.39

21
D. Revolutionary Shocks: Diverted Trade and the Crisis at the Top
What stands out in the longer run perspective is the economic turbulence between our two
benchmark years 1774 and 1800, first with the war years themselves and then with the troubled
Confederation in the 1780s. The last quarter of the eighteenth century found the economy on a rickety
swinging bridge, a metaphor that also describes scholarly attempts to span that gap with numbers from
what has been called a statistical dark age. Like late eighteenth century France, early nineteenth
century Latin America, early twentieth century Russia, and late twentieth century Africa, scholars of
the early United States have had great difficulty bridging the data gap across their revolutionary
upheaval and early nation-building. On the one hand, Thomas Berry (1968, 1988), Louis Johnston and
Samuel Williamson (2010), Richard Sylla (2011) and others have emphasized the strong growth
experienced across the 1790s, perhaps due to the wisdom of Alexander Hamilton and other founding
fathers and/or due to the recovery of foreign markets. Yet, the more we come to accept their sanguine
view of the 1790s, the more we must infer a true economic disaster between 1774 and 1790.
Any study attempting to measure incomes for 1774 and 1800 alone cannot quantify the depth
of any economic depression in between. Yet, we can help guide the search for the magnitude of the
Revolutionary war and post-war depression by posing a question: How deep would the per-capita
income loss have been from 1774 to 1790 if the scholars cited above are right about the growth from
1790 to 1800, and our estimates of the net decline from 1774 to 1800 are also right? This question has
eight numerical conjectures, based on our two estimates for 1800 (“baseline” and “alternative”) times
the four leading series documenting real income per capita growth from 1790 to 1800. The four series
are those by Richard Sutch, Louis Johnston and Samuel Williamson, Thomas Berry, and John
McCusker.40 All eight conjectures imply significant drops in income per capita between 1774 and
1790. Between these two years GDP per capita might have dropped 18 percent, based on Sutch and
our alternative estimate for 1800. The largest estimated drop is 30 percent, based on Berry’s series and
our baseline estimate. The estimates seem to agree with John McCusker and Russell Menard that the
“Colonists paid a high cost for their freedom”, and with Allan Kulikoff that the drop in incomes was
“equal to the early years of the Great Depression”, and with their consensus that recovery was
painfully slow.41
What could have caused such sustained income losses? There is good prima facie evidence that
three related negative shocks could have been large enough to cause the deep depression between 1774
and 1790. The first was the economic destruction of the war itself, as well as the impact of nearly two

22
decades of hyperinflation and a dysfunctional financial system. The second negative shock consisted
of the disruptions of overseas trade during the Revolution and, after 1793, the Napoleonic Wars.42
Available price and trade data show that the colonies, especially in the Lower South, suffered heavy
volume and value losses in trade and shipping as the war deepened, and that they recovered only
slowly and partially across the 1780s. In real per capita terms, New England’s commodity exports rose
by a trivial 1.2 percent between 1768/72 and 1791/92, rose by a modest 9.9 percent in the Middle
Atlantic, but fell by a spectacular 39.1 percent in the Upper South, and by an even bigger 49.7 percent
in the Lower South (Mancall et al. estimate an even larger 67 percent), yielding a decline of 24.4
percent for the thirteen colonies as a whole.43 The most painful of these shocks was the loss of well
over half of all trade with England between 1771 and 1791. In addition, America lost Imperial
bounties like those on the South’s indigo and naval stores, as well as New England’s reversal from
colonial bounties to prohibitive duties on its whale oil exports.
While these negative demand shocks to American commodity exports were very large,
especially for the Lower South, the initial share of exports in regional income was only about 6-7
percent in the early 1770s, according to the Shepherd-Walton export values per capita in 1768-1772
and our 1774 income estimates for the three main regions combined. Thus, it is hard to imagine that
the huge depression of 1774-1790 was entirely “export-led”: A 24-percent trade fall times a 6-7
percent share of income equals no more than a 2 percent fall in income colony-wide. The numbers are
bigger for the South, where exports fell by perhaps 45 percent and the trade share was 7.1 percent,
implying an income loss of more than 3 percent. These calculations only deal with foreign trade
losses; the trade losses would be considerably higher if they included the decline in inter-colonial and
subsequent inter-state trade between 1774 and 1790. Finally, these negative trade shocks created a
move back to subsistence farming, and presumably lower agricultural productivity.
The third major negative shock involved what we call a crisis at the top, and it was felt
primarily in the coastal cities and smaller river towns. This shock was related to the trade losses, but
transcended them and could have caused much greater income losses. America’s urban centers were
severely damaged by British naval attacks, blockades, occupation, and by the eventual departure of
skilled and well-connected loyalists, especially from New York, Charleston, and Savanna. In Richard
Hildreth’s summary, “one large portion of the wealthy men of colonial times had been expatriated, and
another part impoverished”.44

23
The damage to urban economic activity was considerable, and potentially enough to bring
great declines to per capita incomes, even though population kept growing. To identify the extent of
the urban damage, one could start by noting that the combined share of Boston, New York City,
Philadelphia, and Charleston in a growing national population shrank from 5.1 percent in 1774 to
2.7 percent in 1790, recovering only partially to 3.4 percent in 1800. To the extent that urbanization is
a close correlate of levels of economic development, this big fall in the American city population share
certainly confirms what our income estimates document. There is even stronger evidence confirming
an urban crisis: the share of white collar employment was 12.7 percent in 1774, but it fell to 8 percent
in 1800; the ratio of earnings per free worker in urban jobs relative to that of total free workers
dropped from 3.4 to 1.5; and the ratio of white collar earnings per worker to that of total free workers
fell even more, from 5.2 to 1.7. This evidence offers strong support for an urban crisis, and it also
supports the view that America had not yet recovered from the Revolutionary economic disaster even
by 1800.
IV. An Egalitarian Colonial America
Incomes were more equally distributed in colonial America than in other places. Among all
American households, slaves included, Table 7 reports that the richest 1 percent had only 7.1 percent
of total income, and the Gini coefficient was 0.437. Without the slaves, the top 1 percent of free
households had only 6.1 percent of total incomes, and the Gini was 0.400. Compare colonial American
inequality with that of the United States today, where almost 20 percent of total income accrues to the
top 1 percent, and where the Gini coefficient is about 0.5 (Atkinson et al. 2011: Table 5, p. 31). That
colonial America was a more egalitarian place is even more apparent when we compare modern
America with colonial New England (Gini 0.35), the Middle Atlantic (Gini 0.38), and, surprisingly,
the free South (Gini 0.33). 45 Within any American colonial region, free citizens clearly had much
more equal incomes than do today’s Americans.
Free American colonists also had much more equal incomes than did West Europeans at that
time. The average Gini for the four northwest European observations reported in Table 7 is 0.57, or
0.14 higher than the American colonies. Indeed, there was no documented place on the planet that had
a more egalitarian distribution in the late 18th century.46
If people had more equal incomes in America than elsewhere, which kinds of colonists were
better off than their counterparts in Europe? Figure 1 offers an Anglo-American comparison. On the

24
horizontal axis each society is ranked from its poorest to its richest, and on the vertical axis their
average group incomes are displayed in logarithms. It appears that an American colonist of any rank
had a higher income than his or her English counterpart of the same rank until we reach the top
percentile. Indeed, it turns out that even American slaves were above the bottom of the AngloAmerican income ladder, although such comparisons fail to account for loss of freedom, longer hours
worked, and harsher working conditions. As one might sense from Figure 1, colonial households as a
whole had higher incomes than households in England and Wales. If one simply converted from
dollars directly into sterling at the exchange rate of $4.44/£, colonial households averaged £78 each,
versus about £50 per family in England and Wales, converting either the revised version of Massie’s
1759 social table or that of Colquhoun’s 1801-1803. At a first rough comparison, the American
colonists had much higher incomes in 1774, as one might have guessed from the fact that so many
English continued to risk the migration across the Atlantic. Yet the colonists may have temporarily
lost their income lead by 1790. Their wartime depression combined with the slow growth of British
GDP per capita in the last quarter of the eighteenth century, suggests as much.47
Future research needs to pursue the impact of relative purchasing power on such income
comparisons. As is widely recognized, simple exchange rate conversion does not adequately account
for cost of living differences between classes and places. This familiar point has a number of important
applications in the colonial American context, and they deserve emphasis and further investigation.
One is that the cost of a standard consumption bundle probably was lower in New England than it was
either in the Southern colonies or in England and Wales. So say some recent calculations for this era.
If true, then these nominal income contrasts might be somewhat misleading. Perhaps New England -with its cheap fish, corn, beans, rum and molasses -- was not so much poorer than the Southern
colonies as the nominal figures in Table 7 imply. This might also have been true of the Middle
Colonies with its cheap grains (exported to England where they were expensive: Mancall et al. 2008b).
In any case, such adjustments should also deal with the relative cost and quality of housing (Shammas
2007). Perhaps New England wasn’t so much worse off relative to Southerners as our figures suggest,
and perhaps workers in the Middle Atlantic were even better off compared with English workers than
our figures suggest. On the other hand, an upper-class cost of living bundle, including the cost of
music, theater, and servants, must have been lower in London than in the Northern colonies. These
“real inequality” dimensions need to be explored further,48 but we do not expect them to overturn the
inequality contrasts shown here.

25

V. Summary and Agenda
The only way to push back the quantitative frontiers of inequality and living standard history is
to adapt to the data environments of the deep past. In the archeological extreme, that means accepting
skeletal remains and DNA as our main forms of evidence. Even a journey back to the late eighteenth
century must accept an eclectic array of incomplete evidence. One of the most underexploited
frontiers for the early modern era is occupation counting, an approach which allows us to assemble
aggregate incomes and their distribution among social classes. Working on that frontier, we have
emerged with a rich harvest dealing with early American growth and inequality. It appears that the
colonists had higher incomes in 1774 than previously thought. Between 1774 and 1800 American
incomes declined in real per capita terms, so that any rapid growth after 1790 failed to make up for a
very steep decline during wartime and early independence. In addition, we find that free American
colonists had more equal incomes than did households in England and Wales. The colonists also had
greater purchasing power than their English counterparts over all of the income ranks except at the top
one percent, although this income advantage was lost in the fight for Independence.
Regional inequality was also an important feature of the American colonies. Our results
suggest that Southern per capita income was far above the averages for other colonies in 1774, and
that poor whites were much less common than in other colonies. It appears that the colonial South
lacked the large numbers of poor whites that could be counted in Boston, Philadelphia, New York and
lesser coastal towns. In short, our results suggest that mass poverty did not spread among the Southern
white population until the nineteenth century. Surely the late colonial income distribution in the South
needs further research of the sort already done for the Chesapeake.49 In addition, it appears that the
South Atlantic underwent a reversal of fortune between 1774 and 1840, dropping from being the
richest American region to being the poorest. Why?
The research agenda for the future seems clear enough: more data, better ways of using the
data, and new interpretations. We hope to have persuaded the reader just how powerful the social
tables approach can be when data are scarce. Fortunately, they are getting a little less scarce as
archives and the internet keep adding to the supply of usable information on occupations, earnings,
and property income. We hope to have blazed the trail for additional work on early American incomes
and by leaving behind an open-source data description and some provocative initial results.

26

27
Table 1. Main Data Inputs for 1774 Income Estimates
Data sources and adjustments for occupational shares
(A.) Population, labor force Local censuses, labor force participation rates for 1800 supplied by
Thomas Weiss, expanding on his estimates in Weiss (1992).
(B.) Occupations of household heads and of the labor force
New England (CT, MA, ME, NH, RI, VT)
• Big city = Boston
• Boston 1780 shares from Main (1965), backed by Boston 1790
shares from Price (1974) and the downloaded Boston 1800
occupational directory
• 19 lesser cities & rural
• Use the 1771 Massachusetts-Maine tax returns to estimate the
shares of land-owning farmers, non-land-owning farmers, and
others with positive vs. zero realty. Then for the towns, apply the
non-farm, non-big city occupation mix from Lancaster PA 1800 to
lesser cities in 1774, and the Chester County PA rural occupation
mix of non-farmers in 1800 to the rest of New England 1774.
Middle Colonies (NY, NJ, PA, DE)
• Big-city = Phila., NYC
• Philadelphia 1772 occupations from assessment lists
supplied by Billie Gordon Smith*
• 3 NJ lesser cities
• Lancaster Borough PA 1773
• Rural
• Chester County PA 1800, 9 rural townships
South (GA, MD, NC, SC, VA)
• Big City = Charleston**
• Charleston 1790 directory, downloaded. Re-weighted away
from slave holders and land owners, based on assessments for 3
North Carolina counties, 1779-1782
• Rural
• Start with Alice Hanson Jones’s rural w weights from 4 colonies
(MD, VA, NC, SC), and apply the same adjustment as for
Charleston based on 3 NC counties
(C.) Free labor earnings
and farm profits

Secondary literature: J.T. Main, Stanley Lebergott, Carroll
Wright, Bureau of Labor Statistics, T. M. Adams, Donald Adams,
Winnifred Rothenberg, and others.

(D.) Slave retained earnings Slave retained earnings by age and sex could be derived from any
two of these three parameters: free wage rate for same
occupations, expropriation rate, and the slave hire rate (FogelEngerman, for Queen Anne’s County MD 1796-1804). We used
the latter two, cross-checked against the literature on slave
consumption (e.g. Mancall et al. 2001).***
(E.) Property income

Applying a 6% rate of net return plus asset-specific depreciation
to Alice Hanson Jones’s wealth, re-weighted using new
occupational data.

28
Notes to Table 1:
For further details on the derivation of these occupational shares, see the worksheets on LW
occupational weighting in the three regional “Property 1774” Excel files.
* See Smith (1984, 1990), supported by Price (1974) on Philadelphia 1780-1783.
** The earliest Baltimore occupational directory available is for 1799, and the earliest for
Norfolk VA is for 1801. Both are posted on the http://gpih.ucdavis.edu site.
*** See the Excel file “slave earnings retention 1774, 1800”.

Table 2. Main Data Inputs for 1800 Income Estimates
Data sources and adjustments for occupational shares
(A.) Population, labor force
U.S. census, labor force participation rates for 1800 supplied by Thomas Weiss,
expanding on his estimates in Weiss (1992).
(B.) Occupations of household heads and of the labor force
• City directories and tax lists for Baltimore 1799, Boston 1800, Charleston 1800,
Hartford 1799, New York City 1799, Norfolk 1801, Philadelphia 1800;
• Town directories and tax lists for Lancaster PA 1800, Lexington KY 1806, Pittsburgh
1815; and
• Rural tax lists from Burke County GA 1799, Chester County PA 1799-1802.
C.) Free labor earnings and farm profits
Same sources and methods as in Table 1, but we can offer no estimate of farm profits.
(D.) Slave retained earnings
Same sources and methods as in Table 1.
(E.) Property income
The 1798 direct tax on real estates and slaves, via Pitkin (1817) and the Connecticut
State History Museum. See also Soltow (1989), Einhorn (2006). We assumed similar
local ratios of real estate and slave valuations to total property as in 1774.
Note to Table 2: See the details of these data sources and their use in http://gpih.ucdavis.edu

29

Table 3. Estimated American Personal Incomes, 1774 and 1800
New
England

Middle
Atlantic

South
Atlantic

All 13 Colonies
(15 states + DC)

Gross income, millions of current dollars ($4.44/£ sterling)
Circa 1774
FTE free own-labor income
Ditto, part-time (see text)
Slave retained earnings
Gross property income
Gross total income
Ditto, with part-time

31.09
28.16
0.13
4.84
36.06
33.13

28.85
27.26
1.06
8.37
38.28
36.69

62.81
58.27
12.18
23.83
98.81
94.28

122.75
113.70
13.37
37.04
173.16
164.11

Circa 1800
FTE free own-labor income
Ditto, with part-time
Slave retained earnings
Gross property income
Gross total income
Ditto, with part-time

73.65
66.57
0.07
21.39
95.11
88.03

84.20
76.91
2.10
47.83
134.13
126.83

87.77
80.88
37.34
89.77
214.88
208.00

245.62
224.36
39.51
158.99
444.12
422.86

Free labor force 1774
Total labor force 1774
Free population 1774
Total population 1774

Relevant denominators
185,999
156,875
188,230
175,655
657,567
582,134
661,563
613,685

195,938
436,136
719,875
1,101,151

538,812
800,021
1,959,577
2,376,399

Free labor force 1800
Total labor force 1800
Free population 1800
Total population 1800

334,685
335,500
1,231,671
1,233,011

402,504
835,590
1,428,695
2,222,221

1,117,351
1,575,990
4,084,290
4,919,780

380,162
404,900
1,423,924
1,464,548

30
Notes to Table 3:
The estimates exclude Native Americans.
The 1800 estimates currently lack any estimate of farm operators' residual incomes beyond the
implicit value of their farm labor and their property incomes (see text).
The gross property incomes for 1800 are based on middling assumptions about Southern
underassessment in 1798 (see text).
The baseline estimates use the full-time assumptions of 313 days per labor year, in occupations
where the primary earnings data are sub-annual (e.g. daily or monthly wage rates). The
part-time assumptions retain the explicitly annual income estimates for titled and
professionals, for commercial proprietors, for manufacturing trades, servants, slaves, and
household heads of unstated occupations having positive wealth. Part-time work years
for explicit pay are assumed to have been only 280 days for construction workers, farm
operators, and the rural unskilled. For urban unskilled and for household heads with
zero wealth and unstated occupations, we assumed a work year of only 222 days.
Delaware is here included with the Middle Colonies for both years, following Alice Hanson
Jones’s sample design.

31

Table 4. Alternative Estimates of National Income 1774 and 1800,
in current $ and 1840 $ (millions)
1774
current
$m
142.2
131.7
173.2
164.1

1774
1840 $m
152.5
141.6
185.7
176.3

1800
current
$m

1800
1840
$m

Source
GDP: McCusker (2000)
US (orig 13)
Gross inc: Jones (1980)
444.1
305.9 Gross income: LW (2012)
422.8
291.3
“ , part-time: LW (2012)
508.7
350.3 GDP: McCusker (2000)
US (all)
150.3
161.6
515.5
355.5 GDP: Mancall &Weiss (1999)
135-157 145-169
GDP: Gallman (1972)
134.8
145.0
500.1
344.9 GDP: Goldin & Lewis (1980)
132.6
142.6
Narrow GDP: Weiss (1992)
430.9
297.2 Berry (1988)
446.3
307.8 David (1996)
510.4
351.5 GDP: Mancall et al. (2003)
470.7
324.2 Gross income: LW (2012)
448.1
308.7
“ , part-time: LW (2012)
35.5
38.2
Income: Jones (1980)
New Eng.
34.6
37.1
95.1
65.5
Gross income: LW (2012)
36.5
39.3
Income: Jones (1980)
Middle Atl.
39.7
42.6
134.1
92.4
Gross income: LW (2012)
59.2
63.6
Income: Jones (1980)
South Atl.
98.9
106.0
214.9
148.0 Gross income: LW (2012))
22.0
23.7
93.5
64.4
GDP: Mancall et al. (2003)
Lower
94.1
64.8
Gross income: LW (2012)
South Atl.
Notes to Table 4: (1) Gross income, Net income = our baseline estimates of personal
income, gross and net of depreciation. For the “part‐time” variant, see text.
(2) This culled set omits very old estimates, and if a modern source offers more than one
estimate, this set selects the most recent. It also selects the highest in the Jones range, as
recommended by Gallman and Weiss.
(3) John McCusker's (2001) price deflators = 97 for 1774, 151 for 1800 if 1860 = 100, or 93.3
for 1774 and 145.2 for 1800 if 1840 = 100.
(4) The western states included in the LW “US (all)” estimates are KY and TN, plus MS for
labor incomes only.

32

Table 5. Alternative Property Incomes and Total Incomes, 1774 and 1800
$ millions in 1774 (at $4.44/£)
New
Middle
England
Colonies
South
Estimated using 6% net rate of return on all NIPA-type assets and slaves
4.840
8.372
23.830
Gross personal property incomes
3.662
6.534
15.736
Net personal property incomes
36.064
38.281
98.814
Total gross personal incomes
34.886
36.444
90.719
Total net personal incomes
1774

Estimated using 8% net rate of return on all NIPA-type assets and slaves
6.061
10.550
29.075
Gross personal property incomes
4.883
8.712
20.981
Net personal property incomes
37.285
40.459
104.058
Total gross personal incomes
36.106
38.622
95.964
Total net personal incomes

All 13
Colonies
37.042
25.932
173.159
162.049

45.685
34.575
181.802
170.692

$ millions in 1800
New
Middle
All 15 states
England
Atlantic
South
and DC
Baseline estimate, using 6% net rate of return on all NIPA-type assets and slaves
Gross personal property incomes
21.391
47.829
89.772
158.993
Net personal property incomes
16.787
29.346
46.490
92.624
Total gross personal incomes
95.112
134.128
214.880
444.119
Total net personal incomes
90.508
115.645
171.598
377.750
1800

Alternative estimate, using 8% net rate of return on all NIPA-type assets and slaves
Gross personal property incomes
26.987
57.611
105.269
189.867
Net personal property incomes
22.383
39.129
61.987
123.498
Total gross personal incomes
100.707
143.910
230.376
474.994
Total net personal incomes
96.103
125.427
187.094
408.625
Source: The three “Property 1774” Excel files, and the “Property totals 1798‐1800” and
“own labor incomes 1800” files.
Note: These Table 5 estimates use the full‐time estimates of personal income.
Corresponding estimates for part‐time national income can be derived by applying the
part‐time personal gross estimates for both dates here, and deriving the other rows using
the ratios and differences implicit here.

33

Table 6. Real Income per Capita 1774‐1840

Baseline 1774
Baseline 1800
Alternative 1800
Weiss-Easterlin 1840

New
Middle
South
England
Atlantic
Atlantic
Gross personal income per capita (in 1840 prices)
53.68
(73)
64.08
(87)
91.77
49.20
(85)
59.66
(101)
64.46
52.09
(85)
64.02
(102)
69.02
129.28
(118)
120.19
(109)
84.84

Per annum growth 1774-1800 (%)
-0.33
-0.27
-0.12
-0.00
Per annum growth 1800-1840 (%)
using baseline 1800
2.44
1.77
using alternat. 1800
2.30
1.59
Per annum growth 1774-1840 (%)
1.34
0.96
using baseline 1800
using alternat. 1800

All three
regions
(124)
(107)
(107)
(77)

74.02
59.19
63.30
109.89

-1.35
-1.08

-0.86
-0.60

0.69
0.51

1.56
1.39

-0.12

0.60

Notes to Table 6: The figures in parentheses are percentages of the all-three-regions average.
All estimates for 1774 and 1800 use the part-time work year assumption, to conform to
procedures that seem implicit in the Weiss-Easterlin 1840 estimates.
The “baseline” estimates for 1774 and 1800 are the ones using a 6% net rate of return
on assets, whereas the alternative estimates for 1800 use 8%.
As noted in the text, both 1800 estimates omit farm operators’ pure profits for 1800.
The 1840 estimates start with Weiss’s (1992, Table 1.2, page 27) national estimates, and derive
regional relatives from the state-level relatives in Easterlin (1960, pp. 87-98). The three-region
totals are derived from the regional averages.
The South Atlantic excludes DE and FL; the Middle Atlantic includes DE, MD, and DC in
1800.
The price deflator is the McCusker composite price index.

34

Table 7. Inequality in the American Colonies 1774
Region:

All 13
All 13
New
Middle
colonies colonies
England Colonies South
Households:
All
Free only
All
All
All
Gini coefficient:
0.437
0.400
0.354
0.381
0.464
Income shares in % of total income
Top 1% of HHs:
7.1
6.1
3.8
6.4
7.9
Top 5%:
22.2
21.6
11.4
19.3
25.6
Top 10%:
30.8
29.6
20.1
28.3
34.3
Top 20%:
47.3
43.8
35.7
43.8
49.1
Next 40%:
40.3
41.6
52.5
40.1
39.4
Bottom 40%:
12.3
14.6
11.8
16.1
11.4
Household income levels in $ (at $4.44/£ sterling)
Mean:
345
406
278
289
411
Median:
282
377
371
274
322
Top 1% of HHs:
2379
2471
1059
1862
3243
Top 5%:
1272
1754
631
1118
2105
Top 10%:
859
1202
559
818
1410
Top 20%:
776
890
496
634
1011
Next 40%:
369
339
365
290
406
Bottom 40%:
104
230
82
117
118
Western Europe, as a comparison group
Region:
England England
(All households)
& Wales & Wales
Holland
Year:
1759
1802
1732
Gini coefficient:
0.522
0.593
0.610
Income shares in % of total income
Top 1% of HHs:
17.5
14.6
13.7
Top 5%:
35.4
39.2
37.0
Top 10%:
45.1
48.8
50.9
Top 20%:
57.5
63.2
65.8
Next 40%:
30.0
27.8
25.6
Bottom 40%:
12.5
9.0
8.5
Household income levels
Mean:
£
43.4
90.6*
fl.
67.8
Median:
£
25.0
55.0
fl.
35.0
* £106.8 if we count government revenue, the King, and certain
pensioners, listed separately by Colquhoun.

South
Free only
0.328
6.3
21.3
30.8
42.3
35.7
21.9
620
585
3910
2635
1910
1312
694
199

Netherlands
1808
0.563
17.0
39.5
51.3
64.7
22.8
12.5
319.3
150.0

35

Notes to Table 7 and Figure 1:
See the Excel file “American incomes 1774”, where the Lorenz curves and
inequality parameters are derived and compared on the last five worksheets.
The inequality results in Table 7 are based on the full‐time (FTE) measures of
incomes at 313 days per year. Inequality would have been raised only slightly by using
the part‐time work year assumptions described above. For example, using the part‐time
work years would yield a 13‐colony gini coefficient of 0.440 for all households, or 0.408
for free households. Figure 1 is based on the part‐time work years, for better
comparability with English and Dutch inequality.

36
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson. 2002. “Reversal of Fortune:
Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 4 (November): 1231-1294.
Adams, Donald R. 1968. “Wage Rates in the Early National Period: Philadelphia, 1785-1830.”
Journal of Economic History 28, 3 (September): 404-426.
Adams, Donald R. 1970. “Some Evidence on English and American Wage Rates, 1790-1830.”
Journal of Economic History 30, 3 (September): 499-520.
Adams, Donald R. 1982. “The Standard of Living during American Industrialization: Evidence
from the Brandywine Region, 1800-1860.” Journal of Economic History 42, 4
(December): 903-917.
Adams, Donald R. 1986. “Prices and Wages in Maryland, 1750-1850.” Journal of Economic
History 46, 3 (September): 625-645.
Adams, Donald R. 1992. “Prices and Wages in Antebellum America: The West Virginia
Experience.” Journal of Economic History 52, 1 (March): 206-216.
Adams, T.M. 1944. Prices Paid by Vermont Farmers [1790-1940]. Bulletin 507, Burlington,
Vermont: Vermont Agricultural Experiment Station, with Supplement.
Allen, Robert C., Tommy E. Murphy, and Eric B. Schneider. 2012. “The Colonial Origins of
Divergence in the Americas: A Labor Market Approach”. This Journal 72, 4
(December): 863-894 and supplementary materials.
Berry, Thomas S. 1968. Estimated Annual Variations in Gross National Product 1789 to 1909.
Richmond, Va.: The Bostwick Press.
Berry, Thomas S. 1988. Production and Population since 1789: Revised GNP Series in
Constant Dollars. Richmond, Va.: The Bostwick Press.
Blodget, Samuel. 1806. Economica: A Statistical Manual for the United States of America.
Reprint: New York, August Kelley, 1964.
Broadberry, Stephen, Bruce Campbell, Alexander Klein, Mark Overton, and Bas van Leeuwen.
2012. “British Economic Growth, 1270-`870: An Output-Based Approach.” Paper
presented at the World Economic History Congress, Stellenbosch, July.
Carr, Lois G. 2005. “Emigration and the standard of living: the eighteenth‐century
Chesapeake,” in John J. McCusker and Kenneth Morgan (eds.), The Early Modern
Atlantic Economy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 319‐343.
Carr, Lois G., Russell R. Menard and Lorena S. Walsh. 1991. Robert Cole’s World: Agriculture
and Society in Early Maryland (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press).
Carter, Susan et al. (eds.). 2006. The Historical Statistics of the United States: Millennial
Edition. Five volumes. New York: Cambridge University Press.
David, Paul A. 1967. “The Growth of Real Product in the United States before 1840: New
Evidence and Controlled Conjectures”, Journal of Economic History 27, 2 (June): 151197.
David, Paul A. 1996. “Real income and economic welfare growth in the early Republic, or,
another try at getting the American story straight,” Discussion Papers in Economic and
Social History, 5 (Oxford University).
Davis, Joseph H. 2004. “An Annual Index of U.S. Industrial Production, 1790-1915,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 119, 4 (November 2004): 1177-215.

37
Eardley‐Wilmot, John. 1972. Historical View of the Commission for Enquiring into the
Losses, Services, and Claims of the American Loyalists, at the Close of the War
between Great Britain and her Colonies in 1783. London: J. Nichols, Son, and Bentley,
1815. Reprinted, Boston, Gregg Press.
Easterlin, Richard A. 1960. “Interregional Differences in Per Capita Income, Population, and
Total Income, 1840-1950,” in Trends in the American Economy in the Nineteenth
Century. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, for the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Egnal, Marc. 1975. “The Economic Development of the Thirteen Continental Colonies, 1720 to
1775,” William and Mary Quarterly, 3rd series, 32: 191-222.
Einhorn, Robin. 2006. American Taxation, American Slavery. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Fogel, Robert W. and Stanley L. Engerman. 1976, updated 2006. “Slave Sales and Appraisals,
1775-1865” and “Slave Hires and Appraisals, 1775-1865.” [Computer file].
ICPSR07421-v3. Rochester, NY: University of Rochester [producer], 1976. Ann Arbor,
MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, 2006-10-11. doi:
10.3886/ICPSR07421.
Gallman, Robert E. 1982. “Influences on the Distribution of Landholdings in Early Colonial
North Carolina,” Journal of Economic History 42, 3 (September): 549-575.
Gallman, Robert E. 1992. “American Economic Growth before the Civil War: The Testimony
of the Capital Stock Estimates,” in Robert E. Gallman and John Joseph Wallis (eds.),
American Economic Growth and Standards of Living before the Civil War. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, pp. 79-120.
Gallman, Robert E. 1999. “Can We Build National Accounts for the Colonial Period of
American History?” The William and Mary Quarterly, Third Series, 56, 1 (January): 2330.
Global Price and Income History Group. (On-going). Downloadable data on incomes and prices
1200-1950. http://gpih.ucdavis.edu .
Goldin, Claudia. 1976. Urban Slavery in the American South 1820‐1860: A Quantitative
History. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Goldin, Claudia and Frank D. Lewis. 1980. “The role of exports in American economic growth
during the Napoleonic Wars, 1793-1807,” Explorations in Economic History 17, 1
(January): 6-25.
Hildreth, Richard, 1849. The History of the United States of America, from the Discovery of
the Continent to the Organization of Government under the Federal Constitution.
Three volumes. New York, Harper & brothers.
Hoffman, Philip T., David Jacks, Patricia Levin, and Peter H. Lindert. 2002. “Real Inequality in
Western Europe since 1500,” Journal of Economic History 62, 2 (June): 322-355.
Homer, Sidney and Richard Sylla. 1991. A History of Interest Rates. New Brunswick: Rutgers
University Press.
Hoppit, Julian. 1996. “Political Arithmetic in Eighteenth-Century England”. Economic History
Review 49, 3 (August): 516-540.
Irwin, Douglas and Richard Sylla (eds.). 2011. Founding Choices: American Economic Policy
in the 1790s. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the NBER.
Jasanoff, Maya. 2011. Liberty’s Exiles: American Loyalists in the Revolutionary World. New
York: A.A. Knopf.

38
Johnston, Louis D. and Samuel H. Williamson. 2010. “What was the U.S. GDP then?”
MeasuringWorth at http://www.measuringworth.org/usgdp/.
Johnston, Louis D. and Samuel H. Williamson. n.d. “Appendix: New Estimates of GDP, 1790
to present,” unpublished.
Jones, Alice Hanson. 1977. American Colonial Wealth. Three volumes. New York: Arno Press.
Jones, Alice Hanson. 1980. Wealth of a Nation to Be. New York: Columbia University Press.
Kulikoff, Allan. 1986. Tobacco and Slaves: The Development of Southern Cultures in the
Chesapeake 1680–1800. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Kulikoff, Allan. 2000. From British Peasants to Colonial American Farmers. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press.
Kulikoff, Allan. 2005. “The Economic Crisis of the Revolutionary Era,” paper presented at the
Annual Conference of the Program in Early America Economy and Society, October.
Kuznets, Simon. 1976. “Demographic Aspects of the Size Distribution of Income: An Exploratory
Essay,” Economic Development and Cultural Change 25 (October): 1-94.
Lebergott, Stanley. 1964. Manpower in Economic Growth: The American Record Since 1800.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lindert, Peter H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1982. “Revising England’s Social Tables, 16881812,” Explorations in Economic History 19, 4 (October): 385-408.
Lindert, Peter H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1983. “Reinterpreting Britain's Social Tables,
1688‐1913,” Explorations in Economic History 20, 1 (January): 94‐109.
Lindert, Peter H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2012. “American Incomes 1774-1860”. NBER
Working Paper 18396 (September).
Lindert, Peter H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2013. “American Incomes before and after the
Revolution”. NBER Working Paper 17211 (July 2011), revised January 2013.
Maddison, Angus. 2007. www.ggdc.net/maddison/Historical .../horizontal-file_03-2007.
Main, Jackson Turner. 1965. The Social Structure of Revolutionary America. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Mancall, Peter C. 1991. Valley of Opportunity: Economic Culture along the Upper
Susquehanna, 1700-1800. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Mancall, Peter C., Joshua L. Rosenbloom, and Thomas Weiss. 2001. “Slave Prices and the
South Carolina Economy, 1722‐1809.” Journal of Economic History 61:3
(September): 616‐639.
Mancall, Peter C., Joshua L. Rosenbloom, and Thomas Weiss. 2003. “Conjectural Estimates of
Economic Growth in the Lower South, 1720 to 1800,” in William Sundstrom and
Timothy Guinnane (eds.), History Matters: Economic Growth, Technology, and
Population (Stanford, Cal.: Stanford University Press), pp. 389-424.
Mancall, Peter C., Joshua L. Rosenbloom, and Thomas Weiss. 2008a. “Exports and the
Economy of the Lower South Region, 1720-1770,” Research in Economic History 25: 168.
Mancall, Peter C., Joshua L. Rosenbloom, and Thomas Weiss. 2008b. “The Role of Exports in
the Economy of Colonial North America: New Estimates for the Middle Colonies,”
NBER Working Paper 14334, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
Mass. (September).
Mancall, Peter C. and Thomas Weiss. 1999. “Was Economic Growth Likely in Colonial British
North America?” Journal of Economic History 59: 17-40.

39
McCusker, John J. 2000. “Estimating Early American Gross Domestic Product,” Historical
Methods 33, 3 (Summer): 155-159.
McCusker, John. 2001. How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Commodity Price Index
for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States. Second
Edition. Worcester, MA: American Antiquarian Society.
McCusker, John J. 2006. “Colonial Statistics,” in Susan G. Carter, Michael Haines, Alan
Olmstead, Richard Sutch, and Gavin Wright (eds.), Historical Statistics of the United
States: Earliest Times to the present. Millennial Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, Chapter Eg, pp. 5-627 to 5-650.
McCusker, John J. and Russell Menard. 1985. The Economy of British America, 1607-1789.
Chapel Hill, N.C.: University of North Carolina Press.
Milanovic, Branko, Peter H. Lindert, and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2011. “Pre-Industrial
Inequality”. Economic Journal 121 (March): 255–272.
Price, Jacob M. 1974. “Economic Function and the Growth of American Port Towns in the
Eighteenth Century,” Perspectives in American History 8: 121-186.
Pitkin, Timothy. 1817. A statistical view of the commerce of the United States of America: its
connection with agriculture and manufactures: and an account of the public debt,
revenues, and expenditures of the United States. With a brief review of the trade,
agriculture, and manufactures of the colonies, previous to their independence.
Accompanied with tables, illustrative of the principles and objects of the work. Second
edition. New York: James Eastburn & Co.
Rothenberg, Winifred B. 1985. “The Emergence of a Capital Market in Rural Massachusetts,
1730-1838”. Journal of Economic History 45, 4 (December): 781-808.
Shammas, Carole. 2007. “The Housing Stock of the Early United States: Refinement Meets
Migration”. William and Mary Quarterly 64, 3 (July): 549-590.
Shepherd, James F. and Gary M. Walton. 1976. “Economic Change after the American
Revolution: Prewar and Postwar Comparisons of Maritime Shipping and Trade.”
Explorations in Economic History 13, 4 (November): 397-422.
Simler, Lucy. 1990. “The Landless Worker: An Index of Economic and Social Change in
Chester County Pennsylvania, 1750-1820”. The Pennsylvania Magazine of History and
Biography 114, 2 (April): 163-199.
Simler, Lucy. 2007. “’She Came to Work’: The Female Labor Force in Chester County, 17501820”. Early American Studies 5, 2: 427-453.
Smith, Billy Gordon. 1981. “The Material Lives of Laboring Philadelphians, 1750 to 1800”.
William and Mary Quarterly, Third Series, 38, 2 (April): 164-202.
Smith, Billy Gordon. 1984. “Inequality in Colonial Philadelphia: A Note on Its Nature and
Growth.” William and Mary Quarterly 3rd series 41, 4 (October): 629-645.
Smith, Billy Gordon. 1990. The “Lower Sort”: Philadelphia’s Laboring People, 1750-1800.
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Soltow, Lee. 1989. Distribution of Wealth and Income in the United States in 1798. Pittsburgh:
Pittsburgh University Press.
Stiverson, Gregory. A. 1977. Poverty in a Land of Plenty: Tenancy in Eighteenth‐Century
Maryland. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Sutch, Richard. 1975. “The treatment received by American slaves: A critical review of the
evidence presented in Time on the Cross,” Explorations in Economic History 12
(October): 335-438.

40
Sylla, Richard E. 2011. “Financial Foundations: Public Credit, the National Bank, and
Securities Markets,” in Douglas A. Irwin and Richard E. Sylla (eds.), Founding
Choices: American Economic Policy in the 1790s. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, pp. 59-88, esp. pp. 81-83.
United States Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1929. The History of Wages in the United States from
Colonial Times to 1928. Washington: Government Printing Office.
United States Census Office, First Census 1790, Virginia. 1976. Heads of families at the first
census of the United States taken in the year 1790; records of the State enumerations:
1782-1785. Virginia. Baltimore: Genealogical Publishing Co.
United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 1976. Historical Statistics of the
United States: Colonial Times to 1970. Bicentennial Edition. Washington: Government
Printing Office.
Wade, Richard D. 1964. Slavery in the Cities. New York: Oxford University Press.
Walsh, Lorena S. 2010. Motives of Honor, Pleasure, & Profit: Plantation Management in the
Colonial Chesapeake, 1607-1763. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Warden, Gerard B. 1976. “Inequality and Instability in Eighteenth-Century Boston: A
Reappraisal.” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 6: 585-620.
Weiss, Thomas. 1992. “U.S. Labor Force Estimates and Economic Growth, 1800-1860,” in
Robert E. Gallman and John J. Wallis (eds.), American Economic Growth and Standards
of Living before the Civil War. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 19-78.
Weiss, Thomas. 1993. “Long-term Changes in U.S. Agricultural Output per Worker, 18001900.” Economic History Review 46, 2 (May): 324-341.
Weiss, Thomas. 1994. “Economic Growth before 1860: Revised Conjectures.” In Thomas
Weiss and Donald Schaefer (eds.), American Economic Development in Historical
Perspective. Stanford, Stanford University Press, pp. 11-27.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. 1977. “Strategic Wage Goods, Prices and Inequality,” American
Economic Review 66, 1 (March): 29‐41.
Wright, Carroll D. 1885. “Historical Review of Wages and Prices 1752-1860,” from the
Sixteenth Annual Report of the Massachusetts Bureau of Statistics of Labor, Boston:
Wright & Potter.

41

42
ENDNOTES TO MAIN TEXT
1

The debate over growth rates from 1790 or 1800 to 1840 is well represented by David (1967,

1996), Gallman (1992, 1999), and Weiss (1992, 1993, 1994).
2

See, for example, Egnal (1975), Kulikoff (1986), McCusker and Menard (1985), Carr et al.

(1991), Mancall and Weiss (1999), and McCusker (2000), and the sources cited there.
3

See the four Appendices included with this revision, and the “Excel files” in the folder

“American incomes 1774-1870” at http://gpih.ucdavis.edu.
4

Underpinning this section are the supplementary materials, both Appendices and “Excel

files”, cited in the preceding footnote.
5

Economists will recognize some similarity between our social tables and social

accounting matrices.
6

See Lindert and Williamson (1982, 1983), and Milanovic, Lindert, and Williamson (2011).

7

One of these imaginative efforts was constructed by colonial Governor James Glen of South

Carolina in 1751 (cited in McCusker 2006) and one by Samuel Blodget (1806: p. 99). They
appear to have been readers of the English political arithmeticians, whose writings accelerated
with the growing needs to finance wars. On the rise of the quantification culture in lateeighteenth-century England, see Hoppit (1996).
8

The one-sixth assumption is supported by the somewhat distant 1820 census, the earliest

census to give an age distribution for free blacks. As of 1820, 24.3 percent of free blacks
consisted of likely household heads, using the same assumptions as for free whites. We believe
that the headship rate was probably lower in 1774, both because children were a higher
population share of whites and slaves and because fewer free black adults would have been able
to establish separate households then. Hence, we choose 16.7 percent, or 1/6, as the headship
rate for 1774. For an elaboration, see the file “Estimated mix of occupations 1774 by region” at
http://gpih.ucdavis.edu, within the folder “American incomes 1774-1870”.
9

See Excel file “Occs 1774 by region”, worksheet (2), and the worksheets on LW weighting in

the three regional “Property 1774” files.
10

See Excel file “own-labor incomes 1774”, worksheet (3).

11

See Excel file “own-labor incomes 1774”, worksheet (4), and the file “Slave LF 1800”.

43

12

See the Excel file “Wage data c1774” in the supplementary materials. The main sources are:

Jackson T. Main, Social Structure (1965); Stanley Lebergott Manpower (1964); Carroll Wright
(1885); the many articles of Donald Adams (1968, 1970, 1982, 1986, 1992); T. M. Adams
(1944); BLS (1929); and Winnifred Rothenberg (1985).
13

The shares of the 313‐day full year that seem most plausible as a conventional “part

time” measure of work for pay outside the home are:
1.00 (100% of 313 days) for those households with the head employed in the
professions, commerce, and skilled manufacturing artisanal jobs, and for slave
households;
0.89 (280 days) for households with the head employed in construction trades,
rural unskilled workers, and (to understate total annual days a bit) farm‐operator
households; and
0.71 (222 days) for households headed by free urban unskilled laborers and zero‐
wealth household heads of unknown occupation.
This “sensitivity analysis” range is certainly wide enough to cover such estimates for
England: 1760 and 1771 averaged 278 days; and 1800 280 days (Broadberry et al. 2012, Table
12). For 1774, these part‐time assumptions yield the following ratios of part‐time to full‐
time total incomes (labor plus property):
New

4 Middle

Thirteen

England

Colonies

South

Colonies

Free households

0.918

0.957

0.948

0.943

All households

0.919

0.958

0.954

0.948

These ratios imply that the difference between “full‐time” and “part‐time” estimates would
not come close to explaining the gap between our income estimates and those of others for
1774 (Tables 3 and 4 below). On the length of the work year, see the Excel file “Wage data
1774,” worksheet (7) on “1774 FTE work”.

44

14

See the Excel file “Own‐labor incomes 1774”.

15

Appendix 3 describes our estimation of property incomes from Alice Hanson Jones’s

wealth estimates for 1774 and, for 1800, the Direct Tax of 1798.
16

See Jones (1977, 1980) and her ISPCR data file 7329 at the Inter‐University Consortium

for Political and Social Research at the University of Michigan.
17

In a set of side experiments, we tried to replicate Jones’s A*-weighted estimates using her

own data and her own procedures. In no case did we achieve exact replication, and for one
regional wealth total, we were off by 4 percent. We could not find the source of this
discrepancy, but suspect that she had to take some shortcuts in the pre-spreadsheet era that we
have not understood. Despite the discrepancy, we feel confident of both her estimates and ours.
See the Excel files “Property 1774” for each region.
18

See in particular Jones (1980, pp. 61ff).

19

There are only meager data on interest rates, i.e. the net opportunity cost of holding real

capital. For estimates near the 1774 benchmark, see Homer and Sylla (1991, pp. 276-279).
Near the 1800 benchmark, federal government bonds had a market yield of 6.94 percent per
annum, while New England municipals yielded 6.13 percent (Homer and Sylla 1991, p. 286).
Winifred Rothenberg (1985, p. 790) notes that 6 percent was the “Lawful Interest” stipulated by
colonial law, but that “beginning in 1785, interest rates began to climb to 7, 8, and 9 percent”.
In personal communication, Farley Grubb notes late colonial evidence that could argue for
either a 5 percent or a 6 percent rate on government borrowing.
20

The use of a zero rate on changes in producer perishables and crops adheres to one reader’s

objection to our initial assumption that all probated stocks of such perishables were used up in a
year, thus adding a 94 percent depreciation rate to the 6 percent interest forgone. Our initial
assumption added slightly to the gross national income estimates for 1774, though of course it
added nothing to the net national income.
21

How we combined different kinds of incomes, both for household heads and their

dependents, and for the derivation of the final inequality estimates for 1774, see the Excel
file “American incomes 1774” in the supplementary materials online.
22

The best introduction to the quantitative dimensions of the 1798 direct tax returns is still that

of Lee Soltow (1989). For the underlying political history, see Einhorn (2009).

45

23

Warned in advance by Gerard Warden’s (1976) investigation of the Massachusetts 1771 tax

rolls, we found implausibly low assessments not only on those rolls but also in the Philadelphia
1772 returns supplied to us by Billy Gordon Smith and in the 1786 New York City returns
supplied to us by Herbert Klein. We found those tax rolls useful for identifying occupational
coverage, including occupations revealed by the presence or absence of each asset type, but not
for the assessed values themselves.
24

Lee Soltow (1989, pp. 37, 256-257) cites correspondence he found in the Oliver Wolcott

papers showing that for 518 Connecticut properties sold in 1798, the average ratio of USassessed value to market value was 0.845.
25

This section draws on additional evidence reported in Appendix 4.

26

In this passage, “wealth” means household net worth. See the three Excel files on regional

property incomes for 1774.
27

See Homer and Sylla (1991) p. 271 and passim.

28

See the interest rate literature cited in endnote 19 above.

29

The markdown from gross to net personal income is not so different in these estimates from

the comparable markdowns in the US economy today. There are various accounting ratios
available for comparison with the 85% share of net personal income in gross personal income in
1774 (Table 5). As of 2009, that same concept would be 78.3% of gross personal income if one
omitted personal transfer receipts, or 87.3% if the net transfers were included in the numerator
(US Census Bureau 2011: Table 672), for an average of about 83%.
30

That is, using the part-time work years defined in endnote 13 above would reduce our 1774

national income from $173.23 million to $164.11 million, still 20.4 percent above the
McCusker-Jones average.
31

Jones’s conjectural range was given in her Wealth of a Nation to Be (1980), p. 62. Robert

Gallman and Thomas Weiss have preferred her top wealth-income ratio, 3.5 to one, and that is
used in Table 3’s display of her estimates. Decomposing our aggregate 13-colony wealthincome ratio of 1.89 into regional wealth/income ratios for 1774, we estimated the ratio at 0.96
for New England, 1.80 for the Middle Colonies, and 2.25 for the South.
32

Table A4.1 of Appendix 4 supports this point with an exercise in accounting for income

differences between regions. Of the 107 percent gap between average free household

46

income in the South ($705) and the Middle Colonies ($340), most would be accounted for
by giving the South the occupational mix of the Middle Colonies, and only a small share
would be due to differences in average rates of pay for given occupations.
33

See Appendix 4 for evidence from Virginia in the 1780s, and for commentary on the

inequality literature for the Chesapeake.
34

See Homer and Sylla (1991, pp. 274-296).

35

Lucy Simler’s detailed study of Chester County, Pennsylvania found that farm operators’

families supplied 60 percent of farm labor in 1799, with the rest being variations on hired farm
labor. For 1774, she implied 67 percent. See Simler (1990, p. 197, Table 3). Yet we cannot
extrapolate from Chester County to the whole nation, and doing so would still leave this
paragraph’s other reasons for not trying to estimate farmers’ pure profit share for 1800.
36

As Douglas Irwin and Richard Sylla remind us in the introduction to their Founding Choices,

growth is considered modern if per capita income growth reaches 1 percent per annum or more
for long stretches of time (2011: p. 4).
Labor productivity grew a bit faster, perhaps 0.58 percent per annum. Demography
explains the difference between this and the per capita rate of 0.38. The “relevant
denominators” panel of Table 2 confirms that the labor (free and slave combined) participation
rate fell from 0.337 in 1774 to 0.320 in 1800. The change was caused by a slight decline in the
share of free males over 16 years of age in the North, and a slight decline in the population
share of slaves, who were compelled to have much higher labor force participation rates.
37

Mancall, Rosenbloom, and Weiss (2003), Weiss (1992: Table 1.2, p. 27), and David (1967,

Table 8). See the excellent survey on growth estimates for early America by Sylla (2011: pp.
81-83).
38

The recent empirical growth literature has come to call this a reversal of fortune, as in

Acemoglu et al. (2002).
39

Our estimates exaggerate the extent to which the relative Southern decline had already

occurred by 1800. The exaggeration arises from data limitations forcing us to use some
identical occupation‐specific pay rates for all regions. This was true of town‐and‐rural
white‐collar occupations, urban manufacturing artisans, and the unskilled. Better data
would reveal that more of the Southern decline came later than the 1800 benchmark.

47

40

See Series Ca11, Series Ca16, and Series Ca17 in the Historical Statistics of the United States

2006, and McCusker (2000).
41

See McCusker and Menard (1985, p. 374) and Kulikoff (2005, p. 27). For more detail on the

many forms of wartime economic destruction and disruption, with emphasis on the countryside,
see Mancall (1991, pp. 130-159) and Kulikoff (2000, pp. 256-280).
42

As Shepherd and Walton (1976) have noted, the loss of trade in the 1780s was domestic as

well as overseas, because the loose Confederation that preceded federal union briefly allowed
the new states to tax interstate trade. We concentrate here, however, on the larger and longer
shocks to trade with Britain and its possessions.
43

Shepherd and Walton (1976: especially Table 5 and the surrounding text). The Mancall et al.

(2008, Table 1) estimate for the Lower South refers to the twenty years 1770-1790.
44

Hildreth’s summary (1849, vol. III, pp. 465-466) is cited by McCusker and Menard (1985, p.

365).
An estimated 60,000 free persons (3.1 percent of the free population) and 15,000 slaves
(3.6 percent of the slave population) had left as of the early 1790s (Jasanoff 2011, pp. 351-358).
The losses to the American economy were presumably much greater than the losses that the
departing loyalists experienced themselves. A high estimate of loyalist claims presented to His
Majesty for losses in American rebellion came to $1,053,024 at the $4.44 exchange rate, or
about 0.6% of the 1774 income of the 13 colonies (Eardley-Wilmot 1815, reprinted 1972,
Appendix VIII). Of course, this ignores the human capital that the new republic lost.
45

It might seem impossible that the free populations in each region could have a Gini less

than that for the total (e.g. 0.33, 0.35, and 0.38, all less than 0.40), but recall that there was
also great regional inequality between all three.
46

C.f. the estimates in Milanovic et al. (2011).

47

For revisions of the social tables of Massie and Colquhoun, see Lindert and Williamson

“Revising” (1982) and “Reinterpreting” (1983). On British growth, see Broadberry et al.
(2012, especially Table 10).
48

For the specific contrast of consumer prices between New England and other regions, see the

file “Massachusetts vs. England and WV” at http:// gpih.ucdavis.edu, and also Allen, Murphy,
and Schneider (2012, Table 3). Unfortunately, these two sources do not offer the price evidence

48

we need for the more export-oriented South. On the more general subtlety about class- and
place-specific costs of living, see Williamson (1977) and Hoffman et al. (2002). England’s
lower interest rates may also have implied a lower user cost of capital than in the colonies.
49

See, for example, Stiverson (1977), Kulikoff (1986), Carr et al. (1991), and Walsh (2010).

See also Robert Gallman’s (1982) study of Perquimans County, North Carolina.

49

Appendix 1
Population, labor force, and occupations
Excel and Word file sources: All Excel files and data referenced in this Appendix can be found in two
internet archives. The unchanging set underlying the estimates in the text are downloadable from the
“supplementary materials” folder at the Journal of Economic History’s internet site. A growing set of
files for our larger project on America’s First Century: Growth and Inequality 1774-1870 are available in
http://gpih.ucdavis.edu (click on the folder “American incomes 1774-1870”). The references to Excel
files in this Appendix are to the versions archived by the Journal of Economic History.
Background
To construct the social tables, we estimate population by age, gender, slave/free status, rural/urban
residence, and region. Indigenous native populations are excluded throughout. The three regions for the
1774 “original 13” include: New England = New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Rhode
Island; Middle Atlantic = Middle Colonies = New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Delaware; and
South = South Atlantic = Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia. The 1800
“original 13” consists of the same regions, but with Maine, Vermont, and the District of Columbia
identified separately in the original data. Second, we estimate the distribution of that population between
urban (big city = Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and Charleston; lesser towns = other places with
populations over 2,500; and a rural residual. Third, the urban and rural populations are assigned
occupations by gender and slave/free status.
1774 and 1800 population by age, gender, slave/free, region, and urban/rural:
1774 Source: The colonial censuses in Historical Statistics, Millennial Edition (Carter et al. 2006). Some
colonies have less evidence on the age/gender breakdown than others, in which case for missing evidence
we “clone” by assuming that the age/gender distribution of the most similar contiguous colony applies.
Excel file “Labor force 1774 by colony”, worksheet (1)”.
1800 Source: The US censuses of 1800 in Michael R. Haines (the Inter-university Consortium for
Political and Social Research), Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States,
1790-2000 [Computer file]. ICPSR02896-v2. Hamilton, NY: Colgate University/Ann Arbor: MI: ICPSR
[producers], 2004. Ann Arbor, MI: ICPSR [distributor], 2005‐04‐29. We divided the populations into
over‐ and under‐16 age groups by sex, race, and region in Excel files “LF 1800 free & slave (Weiss)”
and “Slave LF 1800.xlsx”.
The urban/rural decomposition for 1800 by state (and big city from the rest) is taken from the census as
reported in ICPSR 2896 by Michael Haines (Computer File Compilation of the 1800 Census
Compendium). The 1800 data are reported in Excel file “Urban data”. For 1774, the urban/rural
decomposition is based on Price (1974: Appendix B, pp. 176‐7). The 1774 data are reported in Excel
file “LF 1774‐1790 regions and sectors”. These sources allowed us to separate out the 1774 big city

50
populations (Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and Charleston) from the rest of the 1774 urban population
by colony.
1774 and 1800 labor force participation:
Labor participation rates by category are not published in official sources until well into the nineteenth
century. For 1774, we use estimated rates for 1800 supplied by Thomas Weiss by personal
correspondence. How they were constructed can be found in his “U.S. Labor Force Estimates and
Economic Growth, 1800-1860” (1992). See Excel file “Labor force 1774 by colony”, worksheet (2). We
applied these to the population breakdowns to generate labor force numbers by age, sex, slave/free status,
rural/urban residence, and region. See the Excel file “LF 1774-1790 regions and sectors”. For the labor
force in 1800, see our presentation of estimates made available by Tom Weiss in “LF 1800 free & slave
(Weiss)”, and regional rearrangement of the slave labor force in the file “Slave LF 1800”.
Household headship rates 1774 and 1800:
Following the leads of Billy Gordon Smith (1981, 1984, 1990), and the late Lucy Simler (1990, 2007) in
particular, we estimate the number of household heads from population data for c1774 invoking the
following assumptions:
For free whites, we use the number of free white males 21 and older as a proxy for the number of free
white household heads. This implicitly assumes a net cancelation of two opposing errors: the failure to
include female household heads other than the few (usually widows) identified in the data, versus the
inclusion of free adult white males who were non-heads in somebody else's household.
For free non-whites in the North, we assume that 1/6 of that total free non-white population were
household heads. It appears unlikely that many free non-whites in the slave South were household heads
of the sort that would be considered such by the recorders of population censuses or tax assessments. The
assumption made in this case is that 1/10 of them were heads of households defined as separate economic
units. Thus we use a headship rate of 1/10 for free non-whites in Maryland, Delaware, and colonies/states
further South.
For 1800, we pursued aggregate labor incomes and aggregate property incomes separately, for each state.
Since the property returns are aggregate data not allowing a breakdown by occupation, we had to abandon
the hope of calculating inequality of total incomes from occupational social tables for 1800. This meant
there was no need to try to extract numbers of households. Rather, the labor income estimates use
members of the labor force, and the property tax totals rest on returns from residences, rather than
households.
For 1774, see Excel file “Labor force 1774 by colony”, worksheet (2). The corresponding estimates
for 1800 can be found in Excel file “LF 1800 free & slave (Weiss)”.

Occupational Distribution of the Labor Force in 1774:

51
There are 99 occupational codes in our 1774 database (see Excel file “Occ codes, Lindert-Williamson”),
but lack of data detail forced us to aggregate the occupational categories into the broader occupational
groups described in Section II.A of the article’s text.
Our occupational allocations vary from region to region, and by residential sector (big city, lesser
city, and rural). For a region-by-region explanation of the LW occupational weights, see Appendix 3,
which contrasts our weights to those of Alice Hanson Jones in the context of estimating the distribution of
property income. We continue here with the occupational source materials by residential sector within
each region.
The big city occupational allocations are based on the following: “Big cities c1774 by occ” and “Big
cities 1800 by occ”. These draw on our demographically adjusted counts in business directories, tax lists
and probates for Baltimore 1790, Boston 1771, several places around 1780 (using Main 1965), Charleston
1774 (Jones 1977) and 1790, New York City 1786 and 1799, Philadelphia 1772 (data underlying Smith
1984, 1990), and Philadelphia 1774 and 1780-83 (data reported in Price 1974). As noted in the text, the
Charleston 1774 occupational mix from Alice Hanson Jones was adjusted based on tax assessments for
three rural North Carolina counties 1779-1782 (see Excel file “NC 3 counties 1779-82”). See the
corresponding files at the gpih.ucdavis.edu site.
For lesser cities and small towns, the occupational distributions for New England are based on the
following: 1765-1788 “frontier towns and subsistence communities”, “more commercial towns with
access to markets”, and “lesser urban centers” (Main 1965); and small towns in Lancaster County (PA)
1800 plus the Chester County (PA) c1774 rural non-farm mix (Simler 1990, 2007; Marietta 1995). For
towns in the Middle Colonies, the occupational mix is based on that in Lancaster Borough 1773. Since the
town population numbers in the South are very small, we use the rural non-farm mix (see below) for the
region’s few lesser cities and small towns. See the Excel file “Small town occ dists 1774, c1800”.
The rural non-farm labor force shares are for 1790 and they are given for that date by region in the Excel
file “LF 1774-1790 regions sectors.xls”. The New England rural non-farm occupation mix was assumed
to be the same as in lesser cities (above). For the Middle Colonies rural non-farm occupation mix, we
used eight rural townships in Chester County (PA) 1800 (Simler 1990, 2007; Marietta 1995). See the
Excel file “Rural Chester Co 8 towns 1799-1802”. For the South, we use Alice Hanson Jones’ (1977)
rural w weights from four colonies (MD, VA, NC, SC), applying the same adjustment already applied to
Charleston (above) by using three NC rural counties.
Occupational Distribution of the Labor Force in 1800:
We grouped the labor force data according to the same 99 occupational codes as for 1774 (again see
Excel file “Occ codes, Lindert-Williamson”). However, a scarcity of data detail forced us to aggregate the
urban and rural non-farm categories into the same ones described for 1774, for each urban/rural group:
the free non-farm big city group, the free non-farm lesser cities and small town group, and the free rural
non-farm group. Farms have only farm laborers, some of whom are family members of the heads’
household, some of whom are operators, and some of whom are owner-operators.

52

The lesser city and small town occupational distributions for 1800 are based on the following: directories
and tax lists from Hartford (CT) 1799, Lancaster Borough (PA) 1800, and Lexington (KY) 1806. See
Excel file “Small town occ dists 1774, c1800” for a more detailed discussion and the data.
The rural non‐farm labor force share for 1800 is based on Weiss (1992: Tables 1A.1, 1A.7, 1A.9)
(see Excel file “LF 1800 free & slave (Weiss)”). Its occupational distribution, like that for 1774, is
based on tax lists from eight Chester County (PA) rural townships, reported in Marietta (1995) and
supported by Simler (1990, 2007). Again see Excel file “Rural Chester Co 8 towns 1799-1802.xls”).

53

Appendix 2
Labor Earnings
Excel and Word file sources: As introduced in Appendix 1, the relevant Excel and Word files can be
found in two places: The main unchanging (“frozen”) set underlying the estimates in this article are
downloadable from the “supplementary materials” folder at the Journal Economic History’s internet site
and others appear in http://gpih.ucdavis.edu.
Background:
To construct the social tables, Appendix 1 documented how we estimated the 1774 and 1800 labor force
by gender, slave/free, location, and, most importantly, occupation. This Appendix reports the estimation
of average annual (labor) incomes for the work force within these cells. For those receiving annual
salaries, the only adjustment is to add in-kind payments where relevant (e.g. ministers with rent free
housing). For those receiving monthly and weekly salaries, there are two adjustments to be made: first,
the addition of the value of home or market work done during off season (e.g. female teachers working as
domestics or manufacturing operatives when school was out; farm laborers working their own plots or
spinning and weaving when not hired for wage work); and second, their in-kind income while working at
their main job (e.g. female teachers living with families of students when school is in session; farm
laborers living with farm families when hired as farm laborers). For those receiving daily wages, the
adjustments involve estimates of days worked per year and perhaps more modest in-kind payment, such
as the noon meal and some grog.
Nominal wages and annual salaries by occupation, c1774 and c1800:
The next major task is to combine the occupational information described in the text and Appendix 1 and
rates of labor earnings. Using the procedures and sources described in the rest of this appendix, we have
gathered the pay rates into the multi-worksheet Excel files “Wage data 1774” and “Wage data 1800”.
These are then combined with the number of persons engaged in each occupation in the files “Own-labor
incomes 1774” and “Own-labor incomes 1800”.
Big-city wage and salary rates: The observations for big cities c1774 draw on occupation-specific data
from Boston, New York City, Baltimore, Philadelphia, and Charleston, and our sources are Adams
(1968), Blodget (1806), Bureau of Labor Statistics (1929), Main (1965), Wright (1885), and others. The
occupations covered include: unskilled = male common labor, female common labor, female domestic,
mariner; building trades = bricklayer, carpenter, caulker, house wright, joiner, painter, ship carpenter,
rigger, sawyer, and helpers; artisan = general artisan, glass shearer, tailor, weaver, wool comber, female
spinner; annual salaried white collar = academy usher, minister, attorney, clerk for merchant, clerk for
court, doctor, foreman, government official, head master, lawyer, professor, small manufacturer, school
master, surgeon, treasurer and others. The income of those hired monthly was augmented by in-kind
board. (See below for magnitudes and discussion). For more detail, again see “Own-labor incomes 1774”.
For 1800 the pay-rate observations come from the same cities plus Norfolk and Washington D.C. Our
main sources are Adams (1968, 1970, 1986), Blodget (1806), Bureau of Labor Statistics (1929),
Lebergott (1964), and Wright (1885). The data are much richer for 1800 than 1774. Female unskilled =
female common labor, female domestic, housemaid, laundress, and cleaning woman. Male unskilled =
male common labor, boatman, seaman, able-bodied seaman, ship’s cook, ship’s boy and shoe factory
operative. Building trades = bricklayer, carpenter, caulker, house wright, joiner, mason, painter, plasterer,
ship builder, ship carpenter, ship joiner, rigger, sawyer, whitewasher and helpers. Artisan = general

54
artisan, baker, tailor, weaver, and shoe factory worker. Annual salaried white collar = academy usher,
minister, attorney, clerk for merchant, clerk for court, doctor, female nurse, foreman, government official,
head master, lawyer, professor, small manufacturer, school master, millwright, surgeon, ship captain
(Asian, European, and coastal trades), mate (Asian, European, and coastal trades), male teacher, female
teacher, treasurer and others. For those hired monthly, their nominal income was augmented by in-kind
payments. (See below for magnitudes and discussion). For more detail, see the Excel file “Wage data
1800”.
Small-town wage and salary rates: For 1774, we collected the small town wage observations by colony,
although data gaps often require that we “clone” estimates from contiguous colonies. For example, there
are no small town artisan observations for New England, so we used the small town unskilled observation
times the big city (artisan/unskilled) ratio = 1.536 x 122.59 = 188.30, a figure that seems consistent with
Main's statement that 188.70 was average for artisans in cities and towns. Similarly, there are no lawyer
observations for NH, so we used CT; there are no common labor observations for RI, so we use MA;
there are no school master observations for PA, so we use MD; there are no lawyer observations for NY,
so we use PA; there are no common labor observations for GA, so we use NC; there are no school master
observations for VA, so we use MD; there are no minister observations for SC, so we use GA; and so on.
The main sources are Bureau of Labor Statistics (1929), Main (1965), and Wright (1885).
For 1800, the small-town occupational wage data are better than for 1774. Relying mainly on Lebergott
(1964), we can document wages for common labor, female domestics, male teachers, female teachers, and
ministers. To estimate the rest (especially the building trades and artisans), we apply Carey’s Rule. Henry
Carey (cited in Adams 1970: p. 505), writing in the early 1830s about the 1820s, observed that monthly
contract wages in principal cities were 10-11 dollars (to which must be added in-kind value of boarding,
also high), but farther away and in small towns, they dropped to 8, or 76% of the big cities. This is
consistent with the common labor data above: female earnings were 75% of big cities, while male
earnings were 77% (if boatmen and woodcutters -- not small town activities -- are excluded).
Rural non-farm: While guided by Main (1965) and what we know about small towns (see above), the
evidence for rural non-farm occupations is the thinnest for our 1774 wage sources. See the rural non-farm
worksheet in “Wage data 1774”. For 1800, relying mainly on Lebergott (1964), we can document rural
non-farm wages for gardeners, wood cutters, boatmen, bargemen, canal laborers, common labor, miners,
doctors, female domestics, maids, male teachers, female teachers, female spinners, and ministers. To
estimate the rest (especially the building trades), we apply Carey’s Rule (see above) by assuming that
rural non-farm wages were 60% of the big cities. See Worksheet (4) on rural non-farm in the Excel file
“Wage data 1800.”
Farm laborers’ wage rates: Monthly nominal wages for the three regions are taken mainly from Donald
Adams (1968, 1982, 1986), T.M. Adams (1944), Main (1965), and Wright (1885). For more detail, see
the farm labor worksheets of “Wage data 1774” and “Wage data 1800”.
1774 and 1800 In-Kind payments:
For detail on what follows, see the “in-kind” worksheets of the same two wage files just cited: “Wage
data 1774” and “Wage data 1800.”
Both for farm labor and for non-farm low-skilled labor, a large share of total income was paid in kind,
especially with lodging and/or food or drink. According to Lebergott (1964: p. 257) “the most common
method of wage payment in agriculture was monthly, with board included.” More explicitly, it appears
that the $/month quotes refer to cash payments. While board (and sometimes lodging and whiskey) was
included, it was not typically assessed by value, or quoted in the value of the total payment. Furthermore,
the monthly quotes were an average for the year across all seasons (Lebergott 1964: p. 258). Rothenberg

55
(1992: p. 122) agrees: “Since as a rule contract workers lived with the farm family, it was understood that
they received part of their (total = cash + in-kind) wages in room, board, washing, mending” and other
items while day farm workers “found” themselves. The problem with aggregating the in-kind (or
“found”) evidence is that we are rarely told what was included in the contract. Adams (1968: p. 409;
1982: p. 907) lists board, lodging, washing, mending, clothing, fuel, candles, borrowing the employer's
horse and so on. Yet, the contracts typically refer only to “board” or to that and “lodging”. How to make
the limited board definition (food) comparable to the broad definition (food, lodging etc)? First, since
domestics, farm workers and seamen all lived with their employers or on ship, they were clearly receiving
“board” which also covered rent (and grog for seamen), at a minimum. We therefore augment nominal
wages of those occupations by board + rent accordingly. Where necessary to split “board” into food and
rent, we use two working class budget studies from the period: Matthew Carey in 1833 (Adams 1968: p.
412) reported food, fuel, clothing and rent shares of total budget, and the distribution between rent and
food was .182 and .818, respectively; the figures for Brandywine manufacturing operatives (Adams 1982:
p. 915) was similar, .211 and .799 respectively. Finally, Lebergott's (1964) survey of canal workers' day
wages includes one meal and whiskey (for such “hard” work), as did Washington, D.C. construction
contracts.
Our survey of in-kind/cash payment ratio magnitudes used to augment our 1774 and 1800 cash income
payments for farm labor is based on Adams (1982, 1992), Henry Carey (1835), Matthew Carey (1833),
Earle and Hoffman (1980), and Larkin (1988). The average was 0.493, applied to both 1774 and 1800.
Data are also available on in-kind payments for other (i.e., non-farm) contract labor: Our sources report
the in-kind share of nominal cash payments for female domestics (0.618), ship captains and mates
(0.300), seamen (0.516), miners (0.250), navy surgeons (0.300), Methodist preachers (3.250),
manufacturing operatives (0.474), and many others.
Days worked per year, 1774 and 1800
No earnings issue is more poorly documented, and more hotly debated, than the days worked per year
estimate. Lucy Simler (1990) has this to say about Chester County (PA) farm and rural non-farm labor in
the early 19th century: “[A]s the demand for labor increased, employers frequently set wages by the month
or by the year at monthly rates reflecting seasonal demand. It was assumed that the individual hired would
work daily, sun up to sun down (Sundays excepted). At settlement, wages for days lost due to weather or
for personal reasons were deducted at the rate set for the particular month of the absence” (p, 178). In
addition, she says: “Except during periods of recession, workers were probably able to find as much work
as they wanted. Year-round work did not necessarily mean working at one job or for one employer.
Artisans and workers moved with considerable freedom from one job to another, and over the working
year they made personal decisions as to the allocation of their time and income. Hosea Rigg, for example,
was free to weave for others as long as he gave priority to Richard Barnard's work. Many gave up a day's
wages to visit their friends or relatives. They planted their gardens, hoed their corn, brought in hay for
their cows ...” (p. 180).
Thus, full time work for farm and common labor was 365 days minus 52 Sundays = 313, or 26 days per
month. But time off due to poor weather was no small matter, at least for farm laborers, miners, boatmen,
seamen, lumbermen, canal laborers, dock workers, workers in the building trades, and other outdoor
work. Main (1965) suggested that workdays of New England farm labor should be scaled down from 313
to 227. But Main was referring to days hired out, and thus his figure would ignore unpaid labor on their
small plot or spinning, weaving and other manufactures work at home, some of which was sold (Tryon
1917). In the text, we have explored the impact of various assumptions on our income estimates, using
the mixture of 222, 280, or 313 annual work days, depending on the occupational group.

56
Slave maintenance and retained earnings, c1774 and c1800
Another large component of total labor earnings was the part of their marginal product that slaves were
able to retain. Here our estimates must work back toward the eighteenth century from the eve of the Civil
War.
The 1849-1859 slave maintenance estimates. In their Time on the Cross, Robert Fogel and Stanley
Engerman (1974 I: 5-6) claimed slaves retained 90% of what they produced. That figure, and its
subsequent revision, applied to 1859, six decades after 1800, and almost a century after 1774. This fact is
important for any 1774 or 1800 estimate. Further research reduced the Fogel and Engerman 90% estimate
to about 50%: “Current estimates suggest that the typical slave received only about fifty percent of the
extra output that he or she produced” (Wahl 2008). In addition to that by Richard Sutch (1975), the best
critical assessment, confirming the 50% figure, seems to be that of Richard Vedder (1975). Vedder first
defined the expropriation rate (ER, following Fogel and Engerman) as the value of the marginal product
of the slave (or earnings, w) less his or her actual payment or subsistence maintenance (s) divided by the
value of the marginal product of the slave, or [w – s]/w = ER. Vedder (1975: p. 455) estimates ER to have
ranged between 43.2% and 72.2%, for an average of 57.7% (implying a slave retention rate of 42.3%),
well above the more benign Fogel and Engerman 10% ER rate (implying a 90% retention rate). In another
study, Vedder reports a 1859 ER figure of 66.7% and a 1849 ER figure of 48%, concluding that the
“observed rising rate of slave exploitation over time … reflects rising marginal productivity [of slaves]
and a constant [subsistence]” (Vedder 1975: p. 456). This implies that the slave value marginal product
rose across the decade 1849-1859 at 4.6% per annum. As we shall see, this huge rate was much lower
earlier in the century, but the rate was already impressive in the first half of the century.
The best recent work on slave productivity growth is by Alan Olmstead and Paul Rhode (2010: Table 1,
p. 37) who estimate that cotton bales per slave worker in the Old South grew at 1.57% per annum 18001860. Old South is defined as Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia (ibid.: p. 4), the
relevant region for our 1774 and 1800 estimates. This may overstate average slave productivity growth,
since the plantations became more specialization in cotton over time (ibid.: p. 5). Still, even as late as
1880, cotton made up only 16 % of improved acres in the South (with corn 31%: other crops being barley,
buckwheat, oats, rye, wheat, hay, tobacco, Irish potatoes, sweet potatoes, rice, and hops). Thus, what
about a broader crop-based index? Paul Rhode offers such an index (communication August 22, 2010)
based on cotton, tobacco, sugar, molasses, and rice 1800-1860, and it grows at 2.3% per annum for All
South (Old plus New South). Applying the same discount to the slower-growing Old South that Olmstead
and Rhode report for cotton productivity growth (2010: Table 1, p. 37: 2.44% per annum All South and
1.57% per annum for Old South, or 0.643 discount) implies 1.48% per annum over the six decades. Thus,
1.5% seems like a fair estimate. Cruder but confirming evidence of fast slave productivity growth can be
found in earlier work by Conrad and Meyer (1958), Whartenby (1977) and Lebergott (1984).
Assuming an 1859 ER of 57.7%, constant subsistence, and slave productivity growth of 1.5% per annum,
then the 1800 ER would have to have been negative! Since we know it was not, subsistence must have
grown considerably over the six decades from much lower levels in 1800. A recent survey (Mancall,
Rosenbloom, and Weiss 2010: hereafter MRW) offers confirming evidence on these slave consumption
growth rates: slave subsistence per capita grew at 0.65% per annum over the 18th century. Perhaps much
the same was true 1800-1860.
Estimating 1800 slave consumption directly. Alternatively, we can try to estimate slave consumption in
1800 directly. For this exercise, we lean heavily on MRW. Their findings can be summarized by these
quotes: “In the nineteenth century, the value of a slave’s diet equaled about 75 percent that of a free
person. The information we have found for the colonial period would put the relative value anywhere
between 20 percent and 75 percent.” (MRW p. 399) “In estimating the diet of a slave, we assume that its
value increased from around 50 percent of a colonist’s diet in 1700 to 75 percent in 1800.” (MRW p. 399.

57
See also fn 37, p. 417) Note that the latter statement interpolates to a share of 67 percent in 1774. Note
also that MRW are referring to the value of food (diet or subsistence), and not to non-food consumption
like shelter, fuel, clothes and extras which would have loomed much larger in the free laborer’s budget.
When all is said and done, it appears that the slave retention rate in 1800 ranged between 23 and 31%,
well below the 50% that the literature has estimated for 1849-1859. Some of the difference can be
attributed to the fact that our 1800 estimate tries to cover all consumption, not just diet, but even so the
1800 estimates are well below those of the late antebellum era. They are also below the 1796-1804 slave
rental data explored next, estimates based on better evidence and thus which we prefer.
The percent of slave earnings retained 1796-1804 for those hired out. A lessee renting a slave should
theoretically pay a rental charge (hire rate per year) such that it plus the upkeep of the slave (the
responsibility of the lessee) should be the marginal cost of using the slave. This marginal cost should, in
turn, add up to the slave’s marginal product. If so, there is a definitional relationship between the rental
price (R) and the exploitation rate (ER). Let the value of the slave’s marginal product be w, let s be the
slave’s consumption, and define ER = [w-s]/w. Logically, R = [w-s], so given an estimate of the slave’s
product and consumption, we can infer both the exploitation rate R/[R+s], and the retention rate 1 –
(R/[R+s]). We assume that, given skills and occupations, slaves and free labor were close if not perfect
substitutes, such that these African-Americans would have received the earnings of free labor had they
been free, an assumption supported by qualitative evidence reported by Goldin (1976: pp. 28-30).
An ICPSR file (constructed by Fogel and Engerman) reports the following average annual hire rates in
Queen Anne’s County (Maryland) 1796-1804 for 207 slaves, and we combine these with the consumption
per slave estimates reported above. These hires were for farm work ($):
Annual Hire Rental
Rural Maryland
All slaves hired
All male slaves hired
All male “fellows”

28.44
29.62
39.42

Annual Subsistence (1-ER in parentheses)
Lower South: farm
Middle Colonies: farm
45.18(61.4)
45.18(60.4)
45.18(54.3)

43.64(60.5)
43.64(59.6)
43.64(52.5)

These slave retention rates (52.5% to 61.4%) are a bit higher than those the post-TOC literature has
estimated for 1849-1859 (around 50%), with averages of 58.7% for the Lower South and 57.5% for the
Middle Colonies (or Mid Atlantic).
Bottom line: Assumed slave retention rates for 1774 and 1800. We take the farm retention rate averages
from above, and an estimated rural-urban cost-of-living gradient (see “Slave earnings retention 1774,
1800.doc”), to get the eight estimated slave retained earnings shares for 1800 (farm, rural non-farm, small
town, and big city within both the Lower South and the North). We assume the same shares for 1774:

Average: farm
Rural non-farm
Small town
Big city

Lower South
41.4
44.3
47.5
52.7

North
40.1
43.9
47.1
52.3

58

Appendix 3
Property Income Estimation for 1774 and 1798-1800
The incomes from property can be estimated for any historical period for which the
archives yield information on stocks of wealth and the rates of annual return from that
wealth. To measure the kinds of property incomes that would enter in the definition used
in national income and product accounts (NIPA). Rates of return should be applied only
to NIPA-type assets, and these typically exclude consumer durables and cash.
Estimates discussed in this appendix, and in the corresponding parts of the main text,
come from calculations reported in Excel and Word files in the same locations described
for Appendices 1 and 2. Its three regional files for 1774 are large, and its worksheets on
occupational mix contain material supporting the occupational estimates already
described in Appendix 1.
The 1774 property estimates
Fortunately, we have the landmark published study by Alice Hanson Jones (1977, 1980)
and the ICPSR file of the individuals in her sample. Far from just presenting a set of 919
probated individuals, Jones used them to describe a carefully weighted slice of society.
She fashioned the set of weights from her reading of the literature on occupations and
from census-based shares for different groups defined by age range, sex, race, and place.
The only dimensions on which we have reason to revise her weights relate to
occupations, poverty status, and asset ownership. Since 1980, the internet and
spreadsheet technology have given us data she could not incorporate into her own work.
We can now draw on additional local tax lists, censuses, and city directories, to get a
clearer picture of the occupational mix and of the shares of household heads that lacked
occupational labels and/or were too poor to be taxable. Table 1 in the article describes
some of the sources we have added to the Jones mix.1
The new Lindert-Williamson (LW) counts of occupations and household headship depart
from Jones’s estimates in all three regions. Our mapping of New England occupations
began with data on Boston’s occupational directories, helped by Jacob Price (1974).
These omitted many Boston household heads. We then turned to the giant 1771 tax return
1

The work on occupational and household mixes was developed simultaneously for the task of
estimating property incomes and the task of estimating labor earnings. Scholars particularly
interested in the occupational mix should therefore study the detail in occupational mix
worksheets of the three regional files on “Property 1774”, and should also consult Appendix 1.

59

for Massachusetts, including Maine (ICPSR 07734). Warned by Gerard Warden’s (1976)
article, we distrusted the assessed valuations given in this return. Rather we extracted
only two occupational clues: Whether this person was assessed for any wealth at all, and
whether this person was a farm operator. Farm operator status was revealed by the union
of several asset clues: at least 25 bushels of grain produced, or at least 11 cows or swine,
or at least 11 acres of hay land or meadow. Then, for non-Boston New England, we
applied the non-farm, non-big city occupation mix from Lancaster PA 1800 to lesser New
England towns in 1774, and the Chester County PA rural occupation mix of non-farmers
in 1800 to the rest of New England 1774. Next, we noted the share of households that the
1771 returns implied had zero wealth. Finally, we added the estimated number of
households missed by the 1771 tax lists altogether. (The numbers with zero wealth might
be a bit too large, understating the property income of the poorer New England groups.)
See the Excel file “Property 1774, New Eng”.

For the Middle Colonies, we used the mix of sources described in Appendix 1, i.e. census
materials, Billy Gordon Smith’s detailed coverage of Philadelphia, Lancaster for small
towns, and rural Chester County for the countryside. Our resulting mix differs from that
of Alice Hanson Jones in ways that have raised inequality and lowered aggregate income.
Given information that became conveniently available only after 1980, we derive a noncity mix of occupations that shifts households away from middling farmers to less
wealthy craftsmen, laborers, and males with no given occupation. See the Excel file
“Property 1774, MidCols”, worksheets (5) and (6).
Aggregating occupations and property is particularly complicated for the Middle
Colonies because of sampling constraints imposed on Alice Jones’s probate research. She
could collect only 23 probates for New York. This forced her to synthesize New York by
giving only 1/10 weight to these 23 cases, and borrowing the rest of the wealth
distribution from patterns revealed in her other three Middle Colonies (NJ, PA, DE) and
the wealth distribution from New England. We inherit her difficulties here, and our
combining New York with the other three Middle Colonies was a laborious task. See
“Property 1774, MidCols”, worksheets (5) – (10).
A further complication for comparisons of 1774 with nineteenth-century benchmarks was
Jones’s decision to put Delaware into the Middle Colonies instead of putting it in the
South Atlantic, where it belongs in all later census aggregations by region. Our files
present alternative regional results for 1800, with Delaware first in one region and then in
another.
In the South in 1774, we again find that today’s information set allows us to make several
adjustments to Jones’s weighting scheme. First, the available census clues suggest that
she gave Charleston too much weight as a share of the South: her 4.9% Charleston share

60

should have been only 2.6%. Second, her probate sample gave greater weight to the
wealthier classes, even after she tried to adjust for this with her w*B weights. From tax
rolls in three North Carolina counties, we find lower shares of those owning land and/or
slaves than in her probates. We have adjusted her weights accordingly, causing a
reduction in average property income for the South. See the Excel file “Property 1774
South”, worksheet (3).
Rates of return for 1774:
Deriving estimates of property incomes from data on property asset values requires
knowing the rate of return defined as = current income/asset value. While the net rate of
return might be inferred from the historical rates on alternate assets, such as bonds, a
more difficult task is to choose depreciation rates (alias capital consumption allowance)
on different assets, for the purpose of deriving gross incomes and gross domestic product.
Here "income" is restricted to that which would appear in the National Income and
Product Accounts. We have very little historical information on depreciation rates.
Table A3.1, which immediately follows, presents out best guesses for 1774.
Table A3.1. Assumed rates of annual income, as % of wealth value, by asset type
Interest + Depreciation = Gross rate
Financial Assets
6
Servants and Slaves
6
Producers' Durables
6
Producers' Perishables
6
Business Inventory
6
Liabilities
0
Real Estate (assume capital gains =
depreciation cost)
6
Livestock
6
Equipment, Business
6
Crops
6

0
5
10
0
0
0

6
11
16
6
6
0

0
10
10
0

6
16
16
6

The 1800 property estimates:
Some features of the 1800 estimation process correspond to the 1774 procedures. The
net rate of return is the same – a baseline 6%, with an alternative 8% rate considered in
the article’s text. The procedures for estimating occupational shares remain the same, as
already described in Appendix 1.
The 1800 property structure must, however, be estimated from a wholly different
database. Gone is the support of Alice Jones’s careful probate study. In its place are
aggregate figures on real estate and slaveholding wealth from that unique Direct Tax of

61

1798. The main archival source is a microfilm of "Statements of the 1st Direct Tax of the
United States from Valuations by the Commissions of States (1798) prepared by Daniel
Sheldon, Esq. for Oliver Wolcott,"2 supplemented by summary returns in Pitkin (1817)
and analyzed in detail in Soltow (1989) and Einhorn (2006, pp. 189-195).
We have re-scaled the 1798 assessments in several ways (as shown in Excel file
“Property totals 1798-1800”, worksheets (3) – (5)). We converted to 1800 values of real
estate by using Blodgett’s seven-percent realty markup between those dates. Then we
adjusted for the 8.45% underassessment of realty revealed by a 1799 study.
The most important adjustment in the 1798-1800 property estimates is one for dealing
with the extent to which Southern slaveholders and owners of highly valuable real estate
were able to understate their wealth, evading a higher rate of taxation.
We have three clues about the degree of Southern underassessment. Two of these relate to
slaves and do not affect our income estimates. The third relates to real estate, and it does affect
our income estimates.
The first clue arises from slave counts. The tax return of 1798 reported only 86,840 slaves of
taxable age 12-50 and 323,905 slaves overall. These numbers are much too low and also imply
an implausibly low working-age share for the slave population (0.268). Indeed, only two years
later the 1800 census reported 513,905 slaves aged 10-up and 835,490 slaves overall. Even the
1790 census reported far more slaves than were revealed in the 1798 tax returns. Fortunately,
we were able to reject the 1798 tax-return slave counts in favor of the 1800 census, combined
with the Fogel-Engerman (1976, updated 2006) sample values for the rental incomes derived by
slaveholders.3
A second clue supporting underassessment in the South lies with the overall tax valuation of
slaves, rather than just their numbers. According to Timothy Pitkin’s (1817) summary of the
1798 returns, slave taxes were only 21 percent of all reported realty plus slave taxes in the South
Atlantic, while in 1774 slave values were 58.1 percent of all slave plus realty value in that
region. Either the market value of slaves relative to the value of real estate dropped
spectacularly, or slaveholders gained a considerable tax break relative to other owners of real
estate. It seems clear to us that the fifty-cent tax per slave reported to be 12-50 years old was
based on an undercount of those slaves.4 To repeat, our estimates of slaveholder incomes are not

We obtained our copy from Diana McCain of the library of the Connecticut Historical Society
Museum (CHSM). The original microfilm on file with the CHSM was apparently assembled by
E. James Ferguson of Queens College, Flushing, New York on October 3, 1969.

2

3

See the Excel file “Property totals 1798-1800”.
The ad valorem tax rate as a share of the Fogel-Engerman slave values (1976, updated
2006) resembles the share of slaves that were reported. This again suggests that the
undercount of slaves was the main mechanism for understatement of Southern taxable
wealth. The slave undercount was common to all states in 1798, though over 60% of the

4

62

influenced by the undercount since ours are based on the market value of slaves rather than on
the tax assessor’s value for slaves. We have raised the slave undercount issue only to add
credibility to the wealth adjustment discussed next.
In contrast with the first two clues, the third underassessment clue does have implications for
our southern property income estimates. The South Atlantic (here excluding Delaware) paid
38.1 percent of the eastern US realty tax in 1798. This share was tied by law to the South
Atlantic share of the free population of the eastern states in 1800 (35 percent). But note the
comparison of this 38.1 percent with the region’s 57.7 percent share of the thirteen colonies’
real estate wealth in the probate valuations for 1774.
There are two possible explanations for the discrepancy. The first possibility is that the South
could have under-assessed its 57.7 percent share of the market-based value of all realty in the 13
colonies, reporting only 38.1 percent. This heavy-evasion assumption would imply that we
should mark up greatly South Atlantic real estate values in 1798-1800, from a South/North
assessment ratio of 38.1/61.9 = 0.62 to a market ratio of 57.7/42.3 = 1.36.5 The opposite
possibility is that Southern realty was truly worth only 38.1 percent of total market value,
implying that its relative real estate values must have crashed in the Revolutionary war and
postwar years.
Neither extreme seems persuasive. The second, or no-underassessment, assumption
would have to disregard the three clues implying that the South differentially underassessed realty and slaves. The heavy-evasion assumption strains belief by implying that
the South Atlantic suffered such enormous relative war and postwar losses. The true
underassessment differential probably lies between these two extremes. We therefore
settle on a middle-evasion assumption. That is, we assume that the North had the 15.5
percent underassessment of real estate demonstrated in the 1799 Connecticut market
study, and that the South had the same 15.5 percent underassessment plus half of the
possible extra underassessment.

1800-census slaves were reported in Connecticut, New York, and Pennsylvania, whereas
less than 40% were reported in New Jersey, Kentucky, and Tennessee.
5 The algebra of adjustment to reported South Atlantic realty is as follows. We observe
the ratio of total assessed values, South to North (As/An) = 0.381/0.619. Under the highevasion assumption, the regional ratio of true market values (Rs/Rn) = 0.577/0.423.
Within the regions, the relationships of assessed to market value are As = (1-Us) Rs, or
An = (1-Un) Rn, where the U’s are the shares of underassessment. The 1799 market
value study suggested that Un = 0.155 in the North. These values imply that the market
value of Southern real estate Rs = 2.6226 times As, so that the underassessment rate Us =
0.619. (Just by coincidence, this matches the Northern share of assessments, given
above.)
When Tables 3 and 4 introduce estimates of nominal income based on our
middle-evasion assumption, one can add $9.547 million to get the result obtainable from
the high-evasion assumption for 1800, or subtract the same amount for the no-extraevasion result.

63

Finally, as noted in the main text, the absence of data on property other than real estate
and slaves forced us to use the same ratios of total property/(realty plus slave values)
obtained from the 1774 evidence to inflate them to total property. We have applied
region-specific ratios to each of the three colonial regions (Property totals 1798-1800”,
worksheet (5)).

The 1774 total-income estimates, and the summary social table

The property incomes for 1774 were then merged with the own-labor incomes,
both those of the free and the retained incomes of slaves. The greatest single
complication in this income-merging process was the assignment of the labor income of
free non-household heads to the households headed by other persons, as explained in the
text and in Appendices 1 and 2. For the details of the final merger, see the file
“American incomes detail 1774” in the supplementary materials. Its results are
condensed and summarized in the file “American social table 1774”.
Again, the same merging of labor and property incomes could not be done for
1798-1800, since the 1798 property returns did not offer any breakdown by occupational
classes.

64
Appendix 4
The Richer Colonial South: More Evidence
This appendix adds two kinds of exhibits. The first amplifies the main text’s point
that the income advantage of the colonial South took the form of a different
occupational mix, rather than a pay advantage for given occupations. The second
adds two new data displays for the Upper South.
Accounting for income gaps between regions
The text says that the striking income gaps in favor of the South in 1774 were not
due to income differences for given occupations. Rather they were due to
differences in property per household and occupational mix, the latter due to
differences that related to the capital cost of getting established in the rural south.
Appendix Table A4.1 below quantifies this point, accounting for the differences in
average incomes for the households of the South versus the four Middle Colonies
(NY, NJ, PA, and DE). The inter‐regional gap to be “explained” in accounting terms
was wide: $705 per free Southern household versus $340 per free household the
Middle Colonies, or $461 versus $329, respectively, if slave households were
included.
Comparing the populations of free households alone, as in the upper panel of Table
A4.1 confirms that hypothetically giving the Middle Colonies the pay rates of the
South would raise free incomes only by 13 percent (from $340 to $385), far short of
the 107 percent gaps we observe. The rest (the implicit 87%) would be explained
by the remaining differences in occupational mix. If instead the Middle Colonists had
kept their incomes for each occupation but had adopted the Southern occupational
mix, Middle Colonies’ average free incomes would have jumped to $578, a gain of 70
percent, crediting pay differences with only 30 percent of the observed gap. (The 13
percent and the 70 percent do not add to 100 percent, because they come from
different hypothetical experiments.)
A similar result obtains from projecting the changes in free occupations or pay onto
the whole population of households, including slaves. As shown in the lower half of
Appendix Table A4.1, the importance of occupational mix looks more extreme.
Letting the South keep its occupational income rates, but converting Southern
planters into Middle Colony craftsmen and the like, would yield a hypothetical
income average that is even lower than in the actual Middle Colonies, because these
transformed free Southerners would still be keeping their slaves.
Further evidence on the Upper South
As noted in the text, our estimates of the income structure for the South are based
on an occupational structure that adjusts Alice Hanson Jones’s structure only by

65
using data from three rural North Carolina counties 1779‐1782. This raises the
possibility that we have under‐represented the upper South (MD plus VA, including
the future DC and WV), or roughly the Chesapeake. We therefore need to add what
we can about this region. As it turns out, doing so does not overturn the point that
poor whites were a much smaller share of the colonial Southern free population
than they were to become in the antebellum nineteenth century.
Scholars have offered abundant evidence of inequality in the rural colonial
Chesapeake. This might seem to contradict our article’s emphasis on the lack of
poverty among white households. We find little contradiction, however, because
their “poverty” threshold appears to have been higher in that literature than in the
literature on poverty in Philadelphia, New York City, Boston and the Northern
countryside. For example, the title of Gregory Stiverson’s Poverty in a Land of Plenty:
Tenancy in Eighteenth‐Century Maryland (1977) reveals a half‐empty, half‐full glass.
As the title implies, his poverty population consisted of tenant farm operators rather
than hired hands or the unemployed. One symptom of their poverty was “the
inability of tenants to acquire extrafamilial laborers” (p. 138). While that might
bespeak poverty among tenant farmers, it could also reflect a scarcity of free or
indentured white labor for hire. Indeed, of the completely landless tenants, 26
percent paid enough to own at least one slave (pp. 146‐147). Their poverty appears
to have been less deep than that of the paupers in Philadelphia or Boston. Similarly,
in Allan Kulikoff’s (1986, Chapter 4) careful treatment of inequality in the colonial
Chesapeake the featured bottom group consisted of tenant farm operators with
modest, but positive, wealth.
Loudoun County Virginia 1787. We can set boundaries on the poverty share among
free whites in the colonial Upper South by drawing on a special tax return for
Loudoun County Virginia in 1787 (Schreiner‐Yantis and Love 1987, pp. 23‐69). In
that year, the number of free households might have been 2,718 if we use our
consistent demographic estimate of the household population – 2,702 free white
males 21 and older, plus one‐tenth of the free nonwhite population = 16 ‐‐ and
assume that the county grew as fast between 1787 and 1790 as all Virginia grew
between 1780 and 1790. It turns out that the number of households listed in the
assessments, 2,879, roughly matches the total number of free households, as was
the case in those three North Carolina counties used in our estimates. Note that this
near‐equality is unlike the greater shares of un‐assessed persons in the urban North
and rural Massachusetts.
Of those listed in the tax assessments, what share could have been poor enough to
avoid being taxed, or “tithed” in the source records? We begin with the easiest part
of the evidence: fully 82.1 percent of free household heads were deemed taxable,
and were tithed. Most of the remaining 18 percent of free household heads resident
in the county probably also had significant assets. To judge how many of them did,
and how many were truly too poor to have assessable assets, we have to wade a bit
into the details of the 1787 Loudoun County return. Aside from that 82 percent
clearly taxed, here are the other groups to consider:

66

Group 1: Female heads of free households, or 3.8 percent of all free household heads.
The law excused them from the tax, and most of them were explicitly listed as “not
tithable”. Yet virtually all (96 %) of those explicitly listed as “not tithable” were
listed as having slaves and/or livestock, and thus probably not poor.
Group 2: Tenant household heads not having the same surname as the property
owner listed just above them. These were the remaining 14.3 percent of the
estimated number of free households. No property detail is listed for them. This
14.3 percent is our main suspect as a group of households of whom some could have
been truly poor.
Beyond those we judge from the archival record to have been local household, here
are two other groups that one might wish to consider as possibly local and poor,
even though we have not considered them local households:
Group 3: white male household heads 21 and older who were explicitly listed as “not
tithable”. These amounted to 2.1 percent of our count of free households. Yet for
two reasons they may not have been poor locals. First, many were excused from the
tax either because they were residents of other counties owning property in
Loudoun County, and thus not local household heads. Others were excused because
they held a special profession, such as “clergyman, constable, governor, or
professor.” Such sub‐groups were presumably not poor. Second, again, as noted for
female household heads, virtually all of these were listed as having slaves and/or
livestock.
Group 4: Persons of the same family name listed right under the assessed person,
with no asset detail for these family members. We consider these not to be
household heads, and thus do not consider them as separate households to be
labeled poor or not.
From the Loudoun tax return, we conclude that only a small share could have been
poor. It would have consisted of some unknown part of Group 2’s 14.3 percent of all
households. Even if all these were poor, the poverty share would be lower among
free Loudoun County whites than among residents of Northern colonies.
The Richmond census of 1782. Another glimpse into the chances of being free and
poor in the colonial South comes from that special census of the rural town of
Richmond Virginia in 1782, as mentioned in the article’s text. In that year of its
becoming the new state capital, the town had a population of only 972, of which 409
were slaves. Fortunately, the census included occupations and information on
ownership of land, slaves, and other assets, helping us decide which households
could have been poor.
Appendix Table A4.2 shows that the maximum share of free household heads
that could have been poor was 21.3 percent, or just 9.8 percent among white males.

67
Not all of the 21.3 percent would have been poor, and the true poverty share in
Richmond would probably not have exceed that in the eight towns of rural Chester
County, Pennsylvania in 1799‐1802, as shown in the lower panel of Table A4.2. Of
the nearly half of Chester County household heads without a recorded occupation,
41 percent, or 19.4 percent of the total households, were what Lucy Simler called
“freemen and inmates”, whom she considered “landless wage earners.” Though we
don't know what share of these 19.4 percent were poor or had zero wealth, either in
Richmond or in Chester County, the poverty share among free residents of small
towns would not have been higher in the upper south than in the Middle Colonies.
And given the near absence of poor free whites in the Lower South, versus the
widespread poverty in New England, the additional evidence supports the view that
poverty was less prevalent in the South than in the North, as of 1774.

68
Table A4.1. Accounting for the higher colonial Southern incomes in 1774
Result:
In 1774, unlike 1860 and later, the South had a very different mix of free men's
occupations, with a much higher propertied share and fewer unskilled.
Differences in occupation‐specific incomes explain very little of the South's
high average incomes.

Free households
“Actual” Middle Colonies
“Actual” South
Synthetic free South, using the
free Middle Colonists' ‐‐
mix of occupations
mix of average incomes
All households, including slaves and servants
“Actual” Middle Colonies
“Actual” South
Synthetic South, using the
free Middle Colonists' ‐‐
mix of occupations
mix of average incomes

Average $ incomes from
Own labor
Property
231
109
449
256

All sources
340
705

288
321

97
257

385
578

226
312

103
149

329
461

218
237

56
150

275
387

Notes:
Calculations based on the file “American Incomes 1774” at http://gpih.ucdavis.edu
“Mix of occupations” combines the Middle Colonies' counts of free household heads
with the South's occupation‐specific average incomes.
“Mix of average incomes” combines Middle Colonies' occupation‐specific average
incomes with the South's counts of the occupations of free household heads.
No synthetic changes were made in the numbers of the retained earnings
of slaves and servants.

69
Table A4.2. Household Heads, Richmond Virginia in 1782
(A.) By sex and race

White males
White females
Free mulatto males
Free mulatto females
Sum

Heads that could
have been low‐
All household
status and/or
heads
zero wealth

Percentages

122
14
3
2
141

12
13
3
2
30

9.8
92.9
100.0
100.0
21.3

(B.) occupational shares
(percentages)
Group 1 = Official & professional
Group 2 = Merchant & shopkeepers
Group 3 = Manufacturing and mining
Group 4 = Construction trades
Group 5 = Agric, forestry, fisheries
Group 6 = Laborers & menial
Group 7 = Males, no stated occ’n
Group 8 = Women with no occ'n

Richmond
Virginia, 1782
12.1
31.9
20.6
8.5
0.7
5.7
12.1
8.5
100.0

Chester Co., PA
1799‐1802
1.0
4.3
15.9
4.6
19.9
5.5
47.3
1.5
100.0

Source: U.S Census Office … Virginia (1976), pp. 111‐119.

70

References for Appendices 1-4
Adams, Donald R. 1968. “Wage Rates in the Early National Period: Philadelphia, 1785-1830.”
Journal of Economic History 28, 3 (September): 404-426.
Adams, Donald R. 1970. “Some Evidence on English and American Wage Rates, 1790-1830.”
Journal of Economic History 30, 3 (September): 499-520.
Adams, Donald R. 1982. “The Standard of Living during American Industrialization: Evidence
from the Brandywine Region, 1800-1860.” Journal of Economic History 42, 4
(December): 903-917.
Adams, Donald R. 1986. “Prices and Wages in Maryland, 1750-1850.” Journal of Economic
History 46, 3 (September): 625-645.
Adams, Donald R. 1992. “Prices and Wages in Antebellum America: The West Virginia
Experience.” Journal of Economic History 52, 1 (March): 206-216.
Adams, T.M. 1944. Prices Paid by Vermont Farmers [1790-1940]. Bulletin 507, Burlington,
Vermont: Vermont Agricultural Experiment Station, with Supplement.
Blodget, Samuel. 1806. Economica: A Statistical Manual for the United States of America.
Reprint: New York, August Kelley, 1964.
Carey, Henry. 1835. Essay on the Rate of Wages. New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1965 ed.
Carey, Matthew.1833. Appeal to the Wealthy of the Land. Philadelphia: L. Johnson.
Carter, Susan et al. (eds.). 2006. The Historical Statistics of the United States: Millennial Edition.
Five volumes. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Conrad, Alfred H. and John R. Meyer. 1958. “The Economics of Slavery in the Ante Bellum
South,” Journal of Political Economy 66 (April): 95-130.
Earle, Carville and Ronald Hoffman. 1980. “The Foundation of the Modern Economy:
Agriculture and the Costs of Labor in the United States and England, 1800-60,”
American Historical Review 85 (December): 1055-1094.
Einhorn, Robin. 2006. American Taxation, American Slavery. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Fogel, Robert William and Stanley L. Engerman. 1974. Time on the Cross: The Economics of
American Negro Slavery. Boston: Little, Brown and Co.
Fogel, Robert William and Stanley L. Engerman. 1974. Time on the Cross: Evidence and
Methods-A Supplement. Boston: Little, Brown and Co.
Goldin, Claudia Goldin. 1976. Urban Slavery in the American South 1820-1860: A Quantitative
History. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Jones, Alice Hanson. 1977. American Colonial Wealth. Three volumes. New York: Arno Press.
Jones, Alice Hanson. 1980. Wealth of a Nation to Be. New York: Columbia University Press.
Kulikoff, Allan. 1986. Tobacco and Slaves: The Development of Southern Cultures in the
Chesapeake 1680–1800. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Larkin, Jack. 1988. The Reshaping of Everyday Life, 1790-1840. New York: HarperCollins.
Lebergott, Stanley. 1964. Manpower in Economic Growth: The American Record Since 1800.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lebergott, Stanley. 1984. The Americans: An Economic Record. New York: Norton.
Main, Jackson Turner. 1965. The Social Structure of Revolutionary America. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Mancall, Peter C., Joshua L. Rosenbloom, and Thomas Weiss. 2003. “Conjectural Estimates of
Economic Growth in the Lower South, 1720 to 1800,” in William Sundstrom and
Timothy Guinnane (eds.), History Matters: Economic Growth, Technology, and
Population (Stanford, Cal.: Stanford University Press), pp. 389-424.

71
Marietta, Jack D. 1995. “The Distribution of Wealth in Eighteenth-Century America: Nine
Chester County Tax Lists, 1693-1799”. Pennsylvania History 62, 4 (Fall): 532-545.
Olmstead, Alan and Paul Rhode. 2010. “Productivity Growth and Regional Dynamics of
Antebellum Southern Development,” in P. Rhode, J. Rosenbloom, and D. Weiman (eds.),
Economic Evolution and Revolution (Stanford: Stanford University Press).
Pitkin, Timothy. 1817. A statistical view of the commerce of the United States of America: its
connection with agriculture and manufactures: and an account of the public debt,
revenues, and expenditures of the United States. With a brief review of the trade,
agriculture, and manufactures of the colonies, previous to their independence.
Accompanied with tables, illustrative of the principles and objects of the work. Second
edition. New York: James Eastburn & Co.
Price, Jacob M. 1974. “Economic Function and the Growth of American Port Towns in the
Eighteenth Century,” Perspectives in American History 8: 121-186.
Rothenberg, Winifred. 1992. From market-places to market economy: the transformation of rural
Massachusetts, 1750-1850. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Schreiner-Yantis, Netti and Florene Speakman Love. 1987. The Personal Property Tax Lists for
the Year 1787 for Loudoun County, Virginia. Springfield VA: Genealogical Books in
Print. From the California State Library copy.
Simler, Lucy. 1990. “The Landless Worker: An Index of Economic and Social Change in Chester
County Pennsylvania, 1750-1820”. The Pennsylvania Magazine of History and
Biography 114, 2 (April): 163-199.
Simler, Lucy. 2007. “’She Came to Work’: The Female Labor Force in Chester County, 17501820”. Early American Studies 5, 2: 427-453.
Smith, Billy Gordon. 1981. “The Material Lives of Laboring Philadelphians, 1750 to 1800”.
William and Mary Quarterly, Third Series, 38, 2 (April): 164-202.
Smith, Billy Gordon. 1984. “Inequality in Colonial Philadelphia: A Note on Its Nature and
Growth.” William and Mary Quarterly 3rd series 41, 4 (October): 629-645.
Smith, Billy Gordon. 1990. The “Lower Sort”: Philadelphia’s Laboring People, 1750-1800.
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Soltow, Lee. 1989. Distribution of Wealth and Income in the United States in 1798. Pittsburgh:
Pittsburgh University Press.
Stiverson, Gregory. A. 1977. Poverty in a Land of Plenty: Tenancy in Eighteenth‐Century
Maryland. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Sutch, Richard. 1975. “The treatment received by American slaves: A critical review of the
evidence presented in Time on the Cross,” Explorations in Economic History 12
(October): 335-438.
Tryon, Rolla M. 1917. Household Manufactures in the United States. New York, A. M.
Kelley, reprint 1966.
United States Bureau of Labor Statistics (1929), The History of Wages in the United States from
Colonial Times to 1928. Washington: Government Printing Office.
United States Census Office, First Census 1790, Virginia. 1976. Heads of families at the first
census of the United States taken in the year 1790; records of the State enumerations:
1782-1785. Virginia. Baltimore: Genealogical Publishing Co.
Vedder, Richard. 1975. “The Slave Exploitation (Expropriation) Rate,” Explorations in
Economic History 12 (October): 453-7
Wahl, Jenny. 2008. “Slavery in the United States.” EH.Net Encyclopedia, edited by Robert
Whaples. March 26, 2008. http://eh.net/encyclopedia/article/whal.slavery.us
Warden, Gerard B. 1976. “Inequality and Instability in Eighteenth-Century Boston: A
Reappraisal.” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 6: 585-620.

72
Weiss, Thomas. 1992. “U.S. Labor Force Estimates and Economic Growth, 1800-1860,” in
Robert E. Gallman and John J. Wallis (eds.), American Economic Growth and Standards
of Living before the Civil War (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 19-78.
Whaples, Robert. 1995. “Where Is There Consensus Among American Economic Historians? The
Results of a Survey on Forty Propositions,” Journal of Economic History 55, 1 (March):
139-154.
Whartenby, F.G. 1977. Land and Labor Productivity in United States Cotton Production, 18001840. New York: Arno Press.
Wright, Carroll D. (1885), “Historical Review of Wages and Prices 1752-1860,” from the
Sixteenth Annual Report of the Massachusetts Bureau of Statistics of Labor. Boston:
Wright & Potter.

