                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   FUTURE SKILL SHORTAGES IN THE U.S. ECONOMY?

                                         David Neumark
                                         Hans P. Johnson
                                       Marisol Cuellar Mejia

                                       Working Paper 17213
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17213


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2011




Neumark is Chancellor’s Professor of Economics at UCI, Research Associate at the NBER, and Research
Fellow at IZA. Johnson is a Senior Fellow at the Public Policy Institute of California (PPIC). Cuellar
Mejia is Policy Associate at PPIC. We are grateful to Ian Salas for outstanding research assistance,
and to Peer Ederer, Nicole Smith, Jeff Strohl, Andrew Sum, and two anonymous reviewers for helpful
comments, This paper was prepared for the European Commission Joint Research Centre’s “Catch
the Train: Skills, Education and Jobs” conference, Brussels, June 2011. More details on some of the
material presented in this paper are available in an earlier working paper (Neumark et al., 2011). The
research was supported by the Gates Foundation and the AARP Foundation. The views expressed
are the authors’, and do not reflect the views of PPIC or the AARP or Gates Foundations. The views
expressed are the authors’, and do not reflect the views of PPIC, the AARP, the Gates Foundations,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by David Neumark, Hans P. Johnson, and Marisol Cuellar Mejia. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Future Skill Shortages in the U.S. Economy?
David Neumark, Hans P. Johnson, and Marisol Cuellar Mejia
NBER Working Paper No. 17213
July 2011, Revised August 2012
JEL No. J11,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

The impending retirement of the baby boom cohort represents the first time in the history of the United
States that such a large and well-educated group of workers will exit the labor force. This could imply
skill shortages in the U.S. economy. We develop near-term labor force projections of the educational
demands on the workforce and the supply of workers by education to assess the potential for skill imbalances
to emerge. Based on our formal projections, we see little likelihood of skill shortages emerging by
the end of this decade. More tentatively, though, skill shortages are more likely as all of the baby
boomers retire in later years, and skill shortages are more likely in the near-term in states with large
and growing immigrant populations.


David Neumark                                        Marisol Cuellar Mejia
Department of Economics                              Public Policy Institute of California
University of California at Irvine                   500 Washington St., Suite 600
3151 Social Science Plaza                            San Francisco, CA 94111
Irvine, CA 92697                                     cuellar@ppic.org
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu

Hans P. Johnson
Public Policy Institute of California
500 Washington St., Suite 600
San Francisco, CA 94111
johnson@ppic.org
I. Introduction

        The impending retirement of the baby boom cohort could pose dramatic challenges for the U.S.

labor force. The boomers – adults born between 1946 and 1964 – are large in number. Based on 2008

American Community Survey (ACS) data, boomers made up 34 percent of all adults in the United States,

and 38 percent of all workers. Boomers are also relatively well-educated. Many came into adulthood just

as the nation was rapidly expanding postsecondary educational opportunities in relatively low-cost public

institutions, and higher education was further stimulated by the GI bill and the Vietnam War draft for men

(Card and Lemieux, 2001; Bound and Turner, 2002), and increasing labor market opportunities for

women stemming from declining discrimination, changing attitudes, and contraceptive technology

(Goldin and Katz, 2002). As a result, whereas in earlier decades younger workers replacing older

workers were much more educated, the baby boomers are nearly as educated as current younger cohorts

(Figure 1). Thus, the retirement of the baby boomers will slow the growth of skill levels in the

workforce, which, depending on projected increases in demand for skill, could imply skill shortages.

        In this paper we develop and analyze projections of educational demands and supplies in the

labor market during the initial years of the baby boomers’ retirements, focusing on the potential for skill

(i.e., education) imbalances to emerge between workforce needs and supplies. The projections are fairly

short-term – extending only through 2018 – because the analysis relies on Bureau of Labor Statistics

(BLS) occupational projections that extended only through that year when this research was done.

However, we also use our results plus what we know about the baby boomers and the cohorts that follow

to draw implications for projections for the longer-term – specifically the period over which nearly all

baby boomers will retire.

        These kinds of projections are important for policymakers, as skill shortages can prove costly to

the economy. If there is unmet demand for skilled workers then there are foregone opportunities for the

creation of high-wage jobs. In addition, imbalances between the skills demanded by employers and the

skills supplied by workers lead to skill mismatch in the economy, which can have adverse

macroeconomic consequences – raising the rate of unemployment the economy can sustain without



                                                     1
causing inflation (e.g., Nickell, 1998). Moreover, policy responses to address skill shortages are likely to

take effect only slowly. For example, increased capacity at community colleges to help meet future skill

demands can only be built up over time (and would probably prove less effective if rushed).

         Our primary conclusion is that the U.S. economy will generate rising demand for highly-educated

workers, but that in the near term this rising demand will by and large be met by rising education levels

among the U.S. population. Thus, the United States as a whole does not seem to be in peril of a

substantial workforce skills gap, at least through 2018. However, numerous states with large and

growing, and less-educated, immigrant populations appear more likely to face significant imbalances.

And over the longer-term, as more baby boomers retire, there is greater risk of substantial skill shortages.

II. Educational/Skill Demands in 2018

Projected occupational changes

         Our starting point is BLS projections of employment growth by occupation extending to 2018

(Woods, 2009; Lacey and Wright, 2009).1 These estimates and projections were obtained from the

occupational employment and worker characteristics data published by the Employment Projections

Program at the Bureau of Labor Statistics.2 The BLS data contain job counts for 2008 with projections

for 2018 at the six-digit Standard Occupational Classification (SOC) level. After aggregating occupation

categories at the level of 22 two-digit occupations, we calculated the BLS projected change in

occupational demand over the designated period.

         Figure 2 shows the occupation categories ranked by their growth rates between 2008 and 2018,

while also showing the size of the occupation in each year. Health care and computer science

occupations, although small, have the highest projected rates of employment growth. Agricultural and

production occupations are the only occupations projected to decline between 2008 and 2018.




1
  These projections are also done by industry. However, since our goal is to project skill demands and supplies, and
the BLS skill requirements on which we rely for some of the projections of demand are based on occupations, we
focus on the occupational projections. In addition, occupations are typically thought about as distinguished by skill,
whereas industries can include workers of many skills.
2
  See U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2009). Military and institutionalized populations are excluded.

                                                          2
Approaches to demand projections by skill/education

         The BLS occupational projections, coupled with information on skill or education requirements

by occupation (discussed below), are the basis of our projected demands for skill. We construct these by

assigning education requirements to workers within occupations, and then combine these assignments

with the BLS occupational projections to forecast education requirements.

         We consider two approaches. The first approach relies on the BLS occupational projections

(Lacey and Wright, 2009), coupled with BLS’s classifications of training requirements for occupations,

ranging from short-term on-the-job training to a doctoral degree. We convert the education/training

variables the BLS uses into measures defined solely in terms of degree attainment.

         The second approach assumes that empirically-observed employment practices are a good

measure of workforce skills needs, but also recognizes that the educational requirements of occupations

can change over time. Thus, in this approach we account for changes over time in the educational

distribution within occupation categories by applying trended estimates of the degree attainment shares

within an occupational category based on data from the 2000 Decennial Census and 2008 ACS.

Specifically, using data from the Census of Population and the ACS for workers aged 16 and over, we

calculated compound average annual growth rates between 2000 and 2008 for degree attainment and

occupation categories at the two-digit SOC level.3 We use data encompassing the entire age range of the

workforce because the BLS occupational projections are not restricted by age, and instead cover the entire

workforce. We applied the education growth rates within occupations to the 2008 ACS by degree


3
  The within-occupation changes in education could be forecasted from longer-term past trends. However, the
nature of technology that likely drives these changes can differ over time, with some research suggesting that it can
change quite quickly (Autor et al., 2006). Thus, we think that longer-term changes in education within occupations
could be misleading.
    Another potential issue is whether the results are sensitive to using the trends that end in the first full year of the
Great Recession (which began in the fourth quarter of 2007); that is, are the trends from 2000-2008 appropriate for
the longer time horizon for which we construct our demand projections? To examine this, we computed the
correlation between the 2000-2008 and 2000-2010 trends in education within occupations. The correlation was high
(0.88). Reflecting this high correlation, when we recomputed our main demand projections (in Table 5, discussed
below) using the trends through 2010, the results were very similar. The conclusions were similar if we used trends
calculated to end in 2007, before the labor market impacts of the Great Recession set in. The only difference in that
case was the distribution of skill demands between high school or less and some college, with the trends through
2007 implying greater relative demand for the high school or less group. More generally, we are unaware of
evidence suggesting that educational attainment within occupations is very sensitive to the business cycle.

                                                             3
attainment and occupation category to arrive at estimated levels of workers by education level in each

occupation in 2018. Then we applied the projected shares by degree attainment and occupation category

to the 2018 BLS projections to give us employment levels by occupation comparable to those projected

by the BLS.4

Other issues in the projections

         The BLS reports skill requirements for the occupations for which they do projections.5 Their

occupational forecasts distinguish between job openings due to growth and job openings due to

replacement needs (Lacey and Wright, 2009). Projected job openings can create an impression of very

large demands for unskilled workers. For the purpose of assessing future workforce skill requirements,

this is misleading because low-skilled workers move from job to job and from occupation to occupation

at high rates. Assuming that employers anticipate this, they will project fewer high-skilled job openings

than low-skilled job openings to staff the same number of jobs at each skill level. But filling those jobs

requires one worker of each type.6 We project demands for workers, since we are ultimately interested in

assessing how well the supplies of workers by skill level will meet the demands.

         The BLS skill requirements pertain to the most common skills required to perform a given

occupation. For each occupation, the BLS identifies the “most significant source of education and

training category,” combining education and training measures into a single category, based on degree

attainment data from the ACS, skills information from the Occupational Information Network (O*NET),

and other qualitative information from occupational experts (Lacey and Wright, 2009). Some categories

only identify “work-related training” while not specifying education (e.g., “short-term on-the-job

training”). However, postsecondary degree requirements take precedence over work-related training if

4
  Both approaches are based on the perspective that the educational requirements of workers in particular
occupations imply that workers with less education would be less productive in these occupations, consistent with
the human capital model but not a pure signaling model.
5
  Very recent work by BLS updates and attempts to improve on the measurement of skill requirements by
occupation. See http://www.bls.gov/emp/ep_finaledtrain.htm (accessed August 9, 2012).
6
  See U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2010a). As an example, Table 3 in Lacey and Wright (2009) shows that
between 2008 and 2018, BLS projects that 38.5 percent of all job openings will be in occupations at the lowest skill
level (with short-term on-the-job training required), but that these low-skilled jobs will account for only 7.7 percent
of the projected net change in employment. At the other end of the educational spectrum, 23 percent of all projected
job openings will be in occupations that require at least a Bachelor’s degree, but these high-skilled jobs account for
77.5 percent of the projected net change in employment.

                                                          4
the degree is generally required, even though additional skills or experience are needed to become fully

qualified (Lacey and Wright, 2009, p. 89), implying that formal education above a high school degree is

not required in those occupations that BLS identifies as requiring no more than work-related training.

         Because we also measure skill requirements based on the observed educational distribution using

data from the ACS, we need comparable categories of skills across the two data sources. Because the

ACS uses solely degree attainment, we convert the BLS education/training variables into measures of

pure degree attainment. We assign each grouping from the BLS into a new education category based on

the implied level of education required for these occupations, assuming that occupations requiring only

on-the-job training are occupations that require a high school degree or less. The top panel of Table 1

shows how we map BLS skill categories into education categories, and the bottom panel shows how we

map ACS education categories into comparable categories.

         We focus on educational requirements in terms of the levels of education, rather than the

academic content of degrees, for two reasons. First, the projections on which we base our analysis can be

converted into the levels of education but not to the academic content. And second, although we have

data sources and methods to predict levels of degree attainment in the future, it is much more difficult to

project the fields in which academic degrees will be achieved. Therefore, our findings do not necessarily

speak to shortages in particular fields at the same level of education.

         Finally, we are interested in comparing the demands for and supplies of skilled workers, but the

BLS projections are for positions, which can differ from the number of people needed to fill these jobs if

people hold multiple jobs. We adjust the projected occupation “counts” from the BLS to turn them into

projections for the number of people required to perform these jobs, using Current Population Survey

(CPS) data on multiple jobholding by education category.7 The conversion from positions to people

results in an employment count, for 2008, of 146 million employed people. It closely matches BLS’ own

published employment results from the labor force statistics in the CPS, which are developed
7
  We use the January Supplement from the Current Population Survey for 2006 through 2008. In doing these
adjustments, we treat multiple job holders as having two jobs, and do not distinguish those with three (or more) jobs.
Based on the Current Population Survey (CPS) data, 7.9 percent of multiple job holders have three or more jobs, so
ignoring this has negligible effects. The self-employed are treated symmetrically in these calculations; they are
included in the BLS projections (2009) and are covered in the CPS multiple jobholding question.

                                                          5
independently from the occupational employment projections.8 Since the moonlighting rate tends to

increase with education, occupations requiring more education and training have a larger difference

between the level of occupational employment and the number of people holding those occupations.

Projections of skill requirements

        Table 2 shows the projections of skill requirements based on BLS projections of employment

growth by occupation and the assignment of skill requirements to these occupations. Panel A is based on

“positions,” and is obtained directly from BLS projections without modification. Panel B shows our

projections of workers filling those jobs, mapping the skill requirements into the education categories

described in Table 1. The projections indicate that the greatest increases in demand are in occupations

that will require some postsecondary education. Despite this faster rate of growth, the BLS projections

suggest that the vast majority of jobs have been and will continue to be in occupations that do not require

formal postsecondary education. In 2018, 68.3 percent of all workers are projected to be in jobs that only

require a high school degree or less, a slight decline from 69.7 percent in 2008.

        Table 3 reports our alternative estimates and projections of employment by degree attainment,

based on observed degree attainment in the Decennial Census and ACS. The data reveal quite different

patterns than those based on the BLS skill requirements, both in terms of the skill requirements of jobs

currently held in the U.S. economy, and for projections of skill requirements for occupational changes to

2018. In 2008, only 37.5 percent of workers in the United States had a high school degree or less,

whereas the BLS occupational requirements suggest that two of every three jobs required a high school

degree or less. While both the BLS- and Census/ACS-based projections suggest that occupations with

higher degree requirements will have the most rapid rate of growth, the differences in projected rates of

growth are large. The Census/ACS-based projections indicate almost no change in the demand for

workers with a high school degree or less, increasing by fewer than 200,000 workers between 2008 and

2018, while the BLS-based projections estimate an increase of close to 8 million for the same education


8
  The BLS published employed population for 2008 is 145.4 million. See the following table from the “Labor Force
Statistics from the Current Population Survey,”
ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/lf/aa2008/pdf/cpsaat8.pdf (accessed April 11, 2010).

                                                       6
group.9 In contrast, the Census/ACS-based projections call for rapid growth in demand for workers with

Associate’s degrees, Bachelor’s degrees, and Doctorates.

         The projected percentage increase in demand for workers with Associate’s degrees is particularly

high. This projection is in large part driven by BLS projections of fast growth in occupations with high

shares of workers with an AA degree (such as health care practitioners and computer science, for which

the shares with AA degrees in 2008 ACS data are 22.7% and 10.5%, respectively). We also find evidence

in the recent past that the estimated earnings premium for AA degrees has increased. Using 2000 Census

data and 2008 ACS data,10 the premium for an AA degree relative to high school or less increased from

.274 (.001 standard error) to .290 (.002), a 6 percent increase in 8 years. In contrast, the some college

“premium” fell slightly, and the Bachelor’s premium was essentially flat (increasing by only .002).

Assessment of BLS skill requirements

         The preceding analysis makes clear that we get very different projections of skill demands using

observed levels of and trends in education by occupation versus the BLS skill requirements, which raises

the question of which method better captures demand for more highly-skilled workers. One way to ask

whether much higher degree attainment levels as reported in the ACS reflect skill demands is to examine

the education-related wage premia within occupations. If there are positive returns to education levels

above those indicated as the skill requirement for an occupation in the BLS data – and especially if these

wage premia are similar to those in other occupations – then relying on the BLS skill requirements likely

substantially understates projected skill demands.

         To answer this question, we use 2008 ACS data to estimate, for each two-digit occupation, a

regression of log earnings on a set of dummy variables corresponding to each education category beyond

9
  We have noted that there is some ambiguity in how to classify educational requirements in occupations where the
BLS indicates training or work experience as the most significant requirement. We experimented with upgrading
the occupations in the “long-term on-the-job training” category from “high school diploma or less” to “some
college,” based on inspection of the occupations in this category, which suggested that some college or classroom
education might in fact be required in these occupations. (In contrast, this seemed unlikely for occupations in the
three non-education skill requirements classifications.) This upgrading of skill requirements did little to reduce the
difference between skill demands based on observed education in the Census/ACS and education or skill
requirements from the BLS. In particular, with this upgrading, the projected percentage of workers in jobs requiring
only a high school degree or less in 2018 falls from 68.3 percent to 61.3 percent, still a large difference from the 34
percent implied by the Census/ACS data.
10
   The specification is described in the notes to Table 4, discussed below.

                                                           7
the lowest omitted group, as well as the usual earnings function controls (marital status, age and its

square, region, race, ethnicity, and sex) and dummy variables for three-digit occupations. The regression

estimated for each occupation, omitting individual subscripts, is:




         In this equation w is the wage, SkR is a set of dummies for required educational levels, and SkNR for

non-required educational levels, based on the BLS skill requirements. The set of dummies in each of

these subsets (indexed by k and j) varies by occupation.

         Based on these regressions, we examine whether the economic returns to education levels above

the highest education required for the occupation (according to the BLS) are smaller than for occupations

where these education levels are required. We also test, statistically, the sharper hypothesis that the

returns to these higher “unnecessary” levels of education are zero – or that the γ’s for an occupation are

equal to the β for the highest required education level. As long as the returns to “unnecessary” education

are greater than zero, there is reason to believe that the education is to some extent required, even if it is

not as important as for occupations where it is required.11

         The results are reported in Table 4. The grey shading highlights the educational levels in each

occupation that are above those “required,” according to the BLS.12 The estimated returns to a Bachelor’s

degree are lower in the occupations that do not require that much education. However, for nearly every

occupational grouping, wage returns are higher for more highly-educated workers even when BLS does

not categorize the higher level of education as required. For example, in the first panel, for management

occupations, the estimated coefficients for Master’s, professional, and doctoral degrees are all above the

estimated coefficient for a Bachelor’s degree, which is the BLS required level. For the joint test of the

significance of the education coefficients for above-required levels, for every occupational grouping we

11
   This approach follows the research literature on “over-education” in which the standard human capital earnings
function is augmented by measures of how much an individual is over-educated relative to the education level in his
or her job (see Hartog, 2000). One problem with this approach that biases the results toward finding lower returns to
education above the typical level in the job is that those who have more education than the norm may have lower
innate ability (which is why they need more education to be employed in that job) than those with less education.
There is some evidence consistent with this conjecture (Chevalier, 2003; McGuinness and Bennett, 2007).
12
   We used the highest degree requirement at the six-digit occupation level within the two-digit occupation grouping.

                                                         8
reject the hypothesis that there are no returns to education levels above those that the BLS states are

required. Finally, we find evidence of substantial representation of workers above the required BLS

education category (Neumark et al., 2011, Table 5), indicating that these results are not driven by a

handful of workers with education above the required level according to the BLS, and that employers are

willing to hire workers at those higher educational levels and pay them the market premium, which they

would have no incentive to do unless the more-educated workers were in fact more productive.

         One caveat is that there are occupations that require high levels of skill but not much education.

For occupations such as these our approach is likely less reliable. Note, however, that there is not a clear

bias in one direction or the other. That is, one should not assume that just because some occupations have

a fairly high degree of “non-educational” skill requirements, we should project particularly fast-growing

demands for workers in those occupations (making shortages more likely, all else being the same).

Moreover, in some of the occupations that BLS identifies as requiring long-term on-the-job training (but

no college education), we find substantial shares of workers with at least some college. For example,

BLS data suggest that 52 percent of law enforcement workers need long-term training, and we find that

78 percent of these workers have attended at least some college. This suggests that in some occupations,

college vocational courses (including those in community college programs that lead to certificates) might

substitute for long-term training.

III. Population and Educational Degree Attainment Levels of the U.S. Workforce in 2018

        Our projections of skill demands based on BLS occupational projections, and within-occupation

levels of education and trends in the Census/ACS data, suggest negligible increases in demand for

workers without postsecondary training, and substantial increases for those with such education. The next

question is whether the skills of the U.S. workforce will keep up with or instead tend to fall behind the

changing skill demands of the economy. To answer this question, we develop new population and labor

force projections that include educational degree attainment. Note that these population supply

projections are not based on occupations or specific fields of study. Thus, we are able to compare these




                                                      9
projections with our forecasts of workforce demands by degree attainment, but cannot project the supply

of workers to specific occupations.

        The U.S. Census Bureau provides population projections by race, ethnicity, sex, and age.

However, Census does not project population by degree attainment, which is an essential input for our

study. Nor does Census project population by nativity (U.S.-born and foreign-born). Nativity is strongly

associated with degree attainment, even within ethnic groups,13 and therefore is essential for developing

degree attainment projections. Thus, to produce degree attainment projections, we first develop a new set

of population projections that includes nativity as well as race, ethnicity, sex, and age. We constrain our

overall projections to be consistent with population projections produced by the Census Bureau, so our

projections do not differ from the Bureau’s in terms of the overall size of the projected population, but

rather only in composition.

        Our population projections are derived from a standard cohort component model in which the

population is aged across time using age, ethnicity, sex, and nativity cohorts. We consider six race/ethnic

groups. For each cohort, historical trends are used to generate future fertility, mortality, and migration

rates. Our projections of these rates are, in the aggregate (that is, combining both the U.S.-born and

foreign-born groups), very similar to those used by the Census Bureau in its “middle series” projections

(Hollmann et al., 2000) and in its latest projections (U.S. Census Bureau, 2008). In general, they show

declining rates of mortality, mostly stable fertility rates at near replacement levels, and slight increases in

international migration.

        These fertility, mortality, and migration assumptions lead to modest increases in the population of

the United States, with annual growth rates just below one percent and absolute annual changes of about

three million. By 2018, the U.S. population should reach about 335 million residents, up from 304

million in 2008. The composition of the United States will continue to change in three notable ways:

first, the nation is becoming more ethnically diverse; by 2018 the share of the population that is non-

Hispanic white will decline to about 60 percent with notable increases in the share of Hispanics and

13
  For example, in 2008 ACS data, the share with less than a high school education is 28.1% among native-born
Hispanics, vs. 51.6% for immigrants. And the corresponding numbers with some college are 44% and 24.3%.

                                                       10
Asians. Second, and corresponding to the increase in diversity, the foreign-born population is growing

more rapidly than the U.S.-born population; by 2018, 17 percent of all U.S. residents will be foreign-born,

up from 13 percent in 2000, with children born to immigrants representing a sizable source of the U.S.-

born growth. And third, the population will continue to age, with the population in prime working ages

growing more slowly than the overall population, and the number of seniors growing more rapidly.

Population projections by educational degree attainment

           Degree attainment distributions are projected based on the continuation of historic trends for each

of our population cohorts, and are identified separately by race/ethnicity, sex, age group, and nativity.

Applying these projected degree attainment distributions to our population projections yields projected

population counts by degree attainment. Our base year for the projections is 2008, with educational

distributions derived from the American Community Survey, and we use 2000 Decennial Census data to

estimate trends in degree attainment. We develop projections for eight educational categories (Doctorate,

professional degree, Master’s degree, Bachelor’s degree, Associate’s degree, some college, high school

graduate, and less than a high school graduate) but combine the latter two categories in most of our

reporting to be consistent with the BLS education skills categories.

           We employ three methods for developing the education projections, using a cohort approach or a

period approach depending on the age group. For adults ages 30 to 80 in 2008, we use a dynamic cohort

approach. We follow cohorts across time so that degree attainment in 2018 is based on 2008 levels for

the cohort, with adjustments made based on changes in degree attainment observed for similarly-aged

cohorts from 2000 to 2008. This assumes that life-cycle patterns of educational acquisition trump period-

specific effects. Specifically, letting p denote the proportion of adults in an education category, and

letting ed, a, e, s, and n denote education category, age group, race/ethnicity, sex, and nativity, we use:



           This approach allows continuing improvements in degree attainment across age-specific cohorts,

and the acquisition of more education by older workers.14 For example, the degree attainment distribution


14
     The multiplication by 1.25 accounts for the different lengths of the time periods covered.

                                                            11
of people aged 40-44 in 2018 is based on the distribution of people aged 30-34 in 2008, plus changes

between 2000 and 2008 in the distribution that were observed for people aged 40 to 44 in in 2008.

        For younger cohorts, those under age 30, we have to use a somewhat different method, since

degree attainment levels change so dramatically as people age from childhood and across young adult

ages. Instead, historic patterns of change in degree attainment for the age group are allowed to continue

at the same pace. Using the same notation as above, our projections are based on:



which assumes that for each of our population subgroups under age 30, changes in degree attainment

observed for an age group from 2000 to 2008 will continue from 2008 to 2018.

        Finally, for adults ages 80 and over we use a cohort approach but do not allow for any changes in

degree attainment. Again using the same notation as above, our projection is simply:



        Our education projections show a continuation of recent and modest gains. Among the

population ages 25 to 64, the share projected to have at least a Bachelor’s degree continues to increase,

from 27 percent in 2000 to 29 percent in 2008 to 31 percent in 2018 (Figure 3). Although strong growth

in less-educated immigrant populations is expected to continue, a substantial share of immigrants are

college graduates. Strong intergenerational progress for immigrants and notable increases in degree

attainment for U.S.-born groups more than counteract the demographic shifts towards groups that

historically have relatively low levels of degree attainment. And not all the demographic shifts have a

dampening effect on degree attainment. Although relatively small in number, Asians are the best-

educated population group in the United States,15 and are projected to continue to experience strong rates

of population growth (Neumark et al., 2011, Table 6). Finally, we note that young adults in their late 20s

and early 30s have higher degree attainment levels in 2008 than in 2000. We project that this trend will

continue to 2018, leading to greater overall gains in degree attainment.16


15
  This is true of both U.S.-born and foreign-born Asians.
16
  Our projections of educational attainment levels are not directly comparable to those produced by the National
Center for Education Statistics (NCES, 2009). NCES projects the number of degrees awarded each year. It does not

                                                      12
         To predict the potential supply of workers ages 16 and over in 2018, we apply labor force

participation rates to our population projections, based on 2008 ACS data for each population and

education subgroup,17 yielding labor force projections by degree attainment for each subgroup.18 Because

labor force participation rates are greater for more highly-educated people, the degree attainment levels of

the workforce are slightly higher than those of the entire population, even controlling for age.

IV. Demands versus Supplies

Key findings

         Table 5 compares the demand and supply projections. The supply shares by degree attainment

are based on our population projections adjusted for labor force participation, and the demand shares are

based on our alternative demand projections. For 2008, these shares are applied to published BLS data on

the labor force and employed persons ages 16 and over.19 Therefore, the difference between supply and

demand in 2008 reflects unemployment. That is, the supply represents all workers in the labor force (both

those employed and unemployed), while demand represents employed workers. Because unemployment

rates are higher for the less educated,20 these supply versus demand comparisons might be viewed as

overstating supply relative to demand for the low-education groups. For 2018, we calculate the supply

shares by degree attainment using the population projections described in Section III. We calculate

demand shares by degree attainment using the methods described in Section II.

         The primary finding is that our projections do not provide evidence of a large impending shortage

of skilled workers in the United States through 2018. For the most part, our projections of the supply of


project the number of degrees lost to the workforce through retirement or death, nor does it consider the role of
international migration.
17
   Alexander et al. (2010) suggest inaccuracies in the ACS data for the labor force participation of adults ages 65 and
over, but for our projections, which include workers across all age groups, any such inaccuracies should be
inconsequential.
18
   We also experimented with allowing for increases in labor force participation rates for each of the groups (defined
by age, education, sex, nativity, and race/ethnicity), projecting changes from 2008 to 2018 based on observed
changes over the 2000-2008 period. However, this had only negligible effects on the projected supplies by skill.
19
   Labor force and employment figures for individuals ages 16 and over are from BLS, “Labor Force Statistics from
the Current Population Survey,” ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/lf/aa2008/pdf/cpsaat8.pdf (accessed April 11,
2010).
20
   In the 2008 ACS data, for example, unemployment rates of workers with a high school degree or less are more
than twice as high as for workers who have attended some college or have an Associate’s degree (9.1 percent
compared to 4.4 percent) and are more than three times as high as the unemployment rates for workers who have at
least a Bachelor’s degree (2.8 percent).

                                                          13
workers match up quite well with the demand for workers, as evidenced by the similar shares by

educational degree. We do see projected shortages for people with an Associate’s degree, and the

projections point to some excess supply of less-educated workers (those with some college or a high

school degree or less) who might possibly be “bumped up” to fill the demand for workers with

Associate’s degrees. We also see projected shortages for workers with a Doctorate, but this is our

smallest education group and it is probably the least precisely projected.

        Our comparisons are based on projected total labor force supply of workers, and do not include

forecasts of unemployment. Projecting unemployment is tenuous at best, but certainly we would expect

some level of unemployment in the future. If we adjust the 2018 supply projections for unemployment

rates by education category as observed in 2008, then we would observe a shortage of almost 800,000

workers with an Associate’s degree or higher.21

        For purposes of comparison, the far right column of Table 5 shows demand estimates and

projections based on the BLS skill requirements. The BLS-based demand projections imply that the

supply of more highly-educated workers has, and will continue to, far outweigh the demand for such

workers; thus, one certainly gets no more evidence of skill shortages from using the BLS data. If the BLS

numbers are correct, we might expect to see higher unemployment and greater underemployment of more

highly-educated workers in the United States. As noted earlier, we do not find evidence of this kind of

underemployment based on earnings data. Similarly, labor force participation rates are higher and

unemployment rates are lower for more highly-educated workers.

Important factors underlying the projections

        Our finding of no large overall skill shortage, as measured by degree attainment, rests on three

key factors. First, we project that young adults will continue to experience improvements in degree

attainment compared to the cohorts that preceded them. Specifically, we project that young adults in their

late 20s and 30s in 2018 will be better educated than adults of the same ages in 2000 or 2008.


21
   Of course, it is not clear what unemployment rates we should consider. For example, our 2018 projection of the
supply and demand for workers with a Bachelor’s degree implies an unemployment rate of 3.1% for those workers
in 2018; this is similar to the observed unemployment rate of 3.3% for such workers in 2008.

                                                        14
         Second, we project continued upgrading of degree attainment levels of older workers. Our

projections and analyses of historic trends in degree attainment allow us to identify the extent to which

middle-aged workers have continued to acquire new skills. In the synthetic cohort approach, we examine

changes in degree attainment reported by adults identified by birth cohort and population subgroup. We

project these trends from 2008 to 2018 based on patterns of change observed from 2000 to 2008. Because

mortality rates are not high for adults under age 60 and international migration rates are relatively low for

middle-aged adults, we feel comfortable that our synthetic cohorts reflect true longitudinal changes.

Based on our cohort analyses, among adults ages 40 to 64 in 2018 (ages 30 to 54 in 2008), we project that

almost 1.2 million will have earned a Bachelor’s degree between 2008 and 2018, and an additional 1.2

million will have earned a Master’s degree.22 Although these increases represent only a small share of the

104.9 million adults in this age range in 2018, they represent a substantial share of the net increase in the

supply of workers with these degrees.

         Enrollment in school among non-traditional-aged students is consistent with this educational

upgrading. Although school enrollment declines with age, there is non-negligible enrollment at older

ages. Based on ACS data, among those ages 30 to 34 from 2006 through 2008, 5 percent are in

undergraduate programs (including community colleges) and 3 percent are in graduate programs.23 For

adults in their late 50s, fewer than 1 percent are in such programs.24

         Moreover, the projected upgrading is consistent with recent historical experience. Skill

upgrading from 2000 to 2008 also occurred. For example, the actual increases in those with Bachelor’s

degrees and Master’s degrees from 2000 to 2008 were 0.6 and 1.1 million (based on Census and ACS

data). We would also expect the upgrading to be concentrated among younger people with more years to

accrue the benefits. The projections reflect this. For example, the projected increase in Bachelor’s

degrees is 513,000 for 40-44 year-olds, declining monotonically across five-year age groups to 44,000 for


22
   The figures only go through age 64 because there is minimal upgrading at ages 65 and over.
23
   These figures are based on a restricted sample that only considers enrollment for adults in schooling that is above
their current level of educational attainment. They are slightly higher if we include adults enrolled in schooling that
is at or below their current level of education, but the patterns remain the same.
24
   The number of students enrolled is much larger than the number that eventually earns a degree. Other research
shows that older students take longer and are less likely to earn a degree than younger students (Scott et al., 2006).

                                                          15
60-64 year-olds. The corresponding numbers for Master’s degrees are 493,000 and 28,000 (also

declining monotonically).

         The third important factor underlying the projections is the greater labor force participation of

highly-educated older adults relative to those with less education. And because better-educated cohorts

are entering older adult age groups, our projected overall labor force participation rates among older

individuals are even higher in 2018 than they were in recent years (2006 through 2008). Data on older

cohorts from the Decennial Census and ACS support these projections. Moreover, retirement rates,

which increased notably from 1970 to 1980 and remained near those levels for several decades, have

recently declined and for many older age groups are now lower than they were even in 1970.25

Skill shortages in the longer term?

         One reason we might not see evidence of a large impending skill shortage is that our projection

horizon is too short. Our projections extend to 2018, but the majority of boomers (two of every three)

will be younger than age 65 in 2018. Extending the projections to 2030 would much more fully capture

the labor market implications of the aging baby boomers

         We can offer some reasoned speculation about the potential for skill shortages in the longer term.

The key consideration is the retirement of large numbers of relatively well-educated boomers. In 2018,

the oldest boomers will be 72 years old and most of them will be retired. However, the youngest boomers

will only be 54 years old and most of them will be working. By 2030, all of the boomers will have

reached retirement ages, with the youngest boomers being 66 years old and the oldest reaching 84 years

old. As noted earlier, over time there has been dramatic growth in the number of older adults with a

Bachelor’s degree but only modest growth in the number of younger adults with the same education. This

has important implications for the future supply of highly-educated workers. In 1990 highly-educated

older adults – who were to retire over the next 20 years – were relatively few in number. Replacing those

retirees was not a difficult task given their small numbers. Indeed, the cohort of well-educated younger

25
  This decrease in retirement rates is consistent with other recent work pointing to modest increases in labor force
participation of older individuals. In particular, Toossi (2009) suggests that a number of factors, including good
health, the cost of health insurance, the shift from defined benefit to defined contribution pensions, and changes in
Social Security, should all engender a shift toward increased labor force participation.

                                                          16
adults that would replace these retirees was more than two times the size of the retiring cohort (comparing

25- to 44-year-olds in 1990 with 45- to 64-year-olds in that year). But this pattern has changed. By 2008,

the number of older well-educated adults set to retire over the next 20 years had more than doubled, and

was almost as large as the younger adult cohorts set to replace them in the labor force (Figure 1).

        We expect that projections to 2030 would show a continuation of current patterns, with greater

rates of growth in industries and occupations that employ highly-educated workers and rising education

demands within industries and occupations, consistent with the long-standing trend in the United States of

moving towards a more highly-skilled economy. This will likely be reinforced as the aging of the boomer

cohorts drives up the demand for health care, in which occupational skill requirements are quite high.

Combined with the demographic supply forecasts to 2030, it is likely, then, that general skill shortages

would be more evident in projections extended to 2030.

Skill shortages in some states?

        Although we do not find evidence of substantial pending skill shortages nationwide to 2018,

many states could experience shortages of highly-educated workers even in this time frame. As shown in

Table 6, older adults nearing retirement ages are notably better educated than young adults in around 20

states, including three of the nation’s four most populous states: California, Texas, and Florida. As these

older adults exit the labor force and enter retirement they will be replaced by younger cohorts with less

education. And because these older cohorts are large in size, the absolute changes will be large as well.

        In some of the states that face potential skill shortages the key driver is the changing demographic

composition of the state. Large and growing populations of Hispanics, a group that historically has

relatively low levels of educational attainment, are entering the labor force in greater numbers in these

states, and they are replacing older, better-educated, mostly non-Hispanic cohorts that are reaching

retirement ages. States that fit this profile include California, Texas, Florida, Arizona, Colorado, New

Mexico, and Nevada.

        As Table 6 shows, many states also have increasing Asian populations, which are relatively

highly educated. But the increases in the Asian share are generally much smaller, in large part because



                                                     17
the base is so much lower. Thus, the lower education of Hispanics combined with their more pronounced

growth implies that some states with growing Hispanic populations may face substantial skill shortages,

even if the proportion of Asians in the state population is also rising.26

         The importance of rising shares of Hispanics in the population is illustrated by a simple exercise.

In Table 7 we develop new estimates of the supply of workers for the nation, but substitute California’s

projected ethnic composition in 2018 for that of the entire United States. In other words, we ask the

question, would there be a national skill shortage if the country were to have California’s projected

demographic mix?27 The answer is yes; we find a deficit of 3.1 million workers with an Associate’s

degree or higher, and an even larger surplus of workers with a high school degree or less. Note that this

occurs despite an increase in the share of the population that is Asian.

V. Conflicting Evidence

Alternative projections

         In a recent study, Carnevale et al. (2010) examine the same time horizon we do, but reach a very

different conclusion, specifically: “By 2018, the postsecondary system will have produced 3 million

fewer college graduates than demanded by the labor market” (p. 16). This contrasts markedly with our

projections (Table 5) of a shortfall of 356,000 workers with Associate’s degrees, an excess of 1 million

workers with Bachelor’s degrees, and an excess of 679,000 workers with more-advanced degrees, or, on

net, excess supply of those with an Associate’s degree or higher of 1.3 million workers.28

         Carnevale et al. report projections of both total educational demand by occupation and

educational demand for job openings, although they base their main conclusions on the latter. We, on the

other hand, project total educational demand by occupation. At the same time, if we put their projected

total educational demands up against our supply forecasts, we reach a conclusion similar to theirs – that

   A large and growing immigrant share is not the only potential source of skill shortages in the future. For example,
26

in states such as Hawaii, Oregon, and Washington, college enrollment rates of high school graduates are quite low,
while there have been inflows of more-educated older migrants.
27
   That is, we project California’s population by race, ethnicity, and nativity using the same methods as for the
national projections described earlier. We then scale these up to the U.S. population, and then we project supply of
workers by education by applying the national education and labor force participation figures by race, ethnicity, and
nativity to these population projections.
28
   Note that Carnevale et al. group as college graduates those with an Associate’s degree or higher; so this final
number is the most comparable one.

                                                         18
there will be shortage of more than 3 million workers with Associate’s degrees or better by

2018. Specifically, Carnevale et al. project a total demand for workers with Associate’s degree or better

of 44.6% by 2018, which is 4.9 percentage points higher than our projected supply of workers with this

level of qualification (39.7%), implying a shortage of about 3.4 million workers. Thus, either using job

openings or total jobs for their educational demand projections the conclusion is the same, so we can

examine the two projections for total educational demand to try to understand why they are so different.

           In brief, the difference is due to two factors.29 The first is the use of CPS data, rather than the

Decennial Census and ACS data we use, coupled with some oddities in the CPS data that make the

projections very sensitive to the base year used. The second is the failure to use the same data source to

capture both sides of the labor market. The CPS data show a higher share with college degrees at a point

in time, and faster growth rates in these shares over time, both of which affect the projected demand for

workers with college degrees. The difference in the distribution at a point in time is likely because of the

different education questions in the two surveys, which lead more people in the CPS get coded as having

an Associate’s degree because some CPS respondents treat occupational or vocational certificates as

Associate’s degrees. Moreover, for reasons that are less clear, from 2000 to 2008 the CPS data show

faster growth in the share of Associate’s degrees or better, driven by much faster growth rates in the

shares with Bachelor’s degrees or higher. Given that both the CPS baseline and growth rates lead to

higher demand for more-educated workers, relying on the CPS data results in much higher projected

demand for more-educated workers, and these two differences in the CPS data account for the difference

in the demand-side projections.

           The alternative data sources track educational trends much more closely through 2007. We

therefore redid the demand-side forecasts using data from 2000-2007 (rather than 2000-2008) to estimate

the within-occupation trends in education. The projections using the ACS/Census data are very close to

our original projections with regard to college degrees, although the high school degree or less versus

some college distribution differs. In contrast, the projections using the CPS data are quite sensitive to the


29
     The detailed analysis on which this summary is based is provided in our working paper (Neumark et al., 2011).

                                                          19
particular year used to estimate the within-occupation education trends. Moreover, once we use a

different ending year (and it clear from inspection of the data that using 2005 or 2006 would yield similar

results), the difference in demand-side projections using the CPS versus the Census and ACS is solely

attributable to the different baseline educational distribution in the CPS, which we have called into

question because of how occupational and vocational programs likely get coded.

        The second factor is that the Carnevale et al. projections use data for the supply-side projections

that are not connected to the data used for the demand-side projections. Differences between supply and

demand could emerge simply because the data sources are incompatible. Using the CPS on both sides of

the market should help resolve these issues. To assess this, we replicated the supply and demand

projections as described earlier, but using CPS data on both sides of the market. Doing this, we end up

with a shortage of 668,000 skilled workers by 2018, which is much closer to the 1.3 million oversupply of

skilled workers that we project using Census/ACS data (Table 5). Thus, Carnevale et al.’s (2010)

projection of large skill shortages in the near term appears to be unfounded.

Criticism of using education to measure skill requirements

        Harrington and Sum (2010a, 2010b, forthcoming) strongly criticize the strategy (which both we

and Carnevale et al. follow) of using observed educational distributions to project skill demands, and

instead defend the BLS skill requirements that, as we showed in Table 5, imply a vast oversupply of

educated workers. Consistent with that vast oversupply, in their view the fundamental skills problem is

that many college workers are in jobs that do not require college degrees, which Harrington and Sum refer

to as “mal-employment,” defined as “inability of a college graduate to find a job that effectively uses the

knowledge, skills and abilities acquired in college …” (Harrington and Sum, 2010a).

        To make their case, Harrington and Sum (forthcoming) first classify occupations as belonging to

the “college labor market” (CLM) based on the share of workers in the occupation with a college

degree.30 Given this classification, they estimate (using 2006-2008 ACS data) a standard log earnings

regression for 22-64 year-olds that estimates the economic returns to each type of degree (Associate’s,

30
   They provided us with an appendix listing the occupations they classify as CLM occupations. This list includes
all occupations with 2-digit SOCs from 11 to 27, plus a small subset of occupations in the remaining SOCs.

                                                        20
Bachelor’s, or advanced), but which distinguishes between those who – according to their classification –

are in jobs that do and do not require a college degree. They find (their Table 5) large returns for those in

jobs that do require a college degree: 47.1% for an Associate’s degree (relative to high school graduates),

63.1% for a Bachelor’s degree, and 79.9% for a more-advanced degree. In contrast, for the “mal-

employed,” the corresponding returns are a paltry 9.9%, 14.5%, and 18.9%, suggesting that the economic

return to these degrees for those who they classify as mal-employed are less than one-quarter as large as

those not mal-employed. These estimates are shown in column (1) of Table 8.31

         This evidence is likely suspect. It is directly at odds with the findings reported in Table 4, which

show substantial economic returns to higher educational degrees in occupations where, according to the

BLS skill requirements, those degrees were not required. The inconsistency arises because Harrington

and Sum’s regressions exclude occupation dummy variables. Excluding occupational controls implies

that the Harrington and Sum’s low estimated education premia for mal-employed workers likely reflect

omitted occupation effects. Most important, the education-“mal-employment” interaction would be

biased downward if, as seems plausible, conditional on education, “mal-employed” workers are

concentrated in lower-paying occupations.32

         To test this explanation, we first replicated Harrington and Sum’s results using ACS data for

2008. As reported in column (2) of Table 8, the estimates were nearly the same. Second, we restricted

the specification to only include interactions of the “mal-employed” indicator with Bachelor’s and more-

advanced degrees, dropping the interaction with “less than high school,” “some college,” and

“Associate’s degree,” as it does not make sense to think of someone without a Bachelor’s degree in a job



31
   Instead of showing the separate returns for those in jobs that do and do not require a college degree, we show, in
the lower panel, the implied interactions between degree held and whether an individual is not in what they call the
college labor market – or education-“mal-employment” interactions – which measure the difference between the two
groups. The 9.9% return to an Associate’s degree for those mal-employed, for example, comes from subtracting
0.372 from 0.471.
32
   For example, Harrington and Sum (2010a, forthcoming) tell the “story” of bartenders (for which a college degree
is likely not required) and compensation and benefits managers (for which it is). The question is not whether
bartenders earn less than compensation and benefits managers, but whether the return to education within the
bartender occupation is much less than the return within the compensation and benefits manager occupation, which
is answered by including occupation dummy variables. Note, by the way, that our occupation-by-occupation
regressions in Table 4 parallel the inclusion of dummy variables for each occupation.

                                                         21
that does not require a Bachelor’s degree as “mal-employed,” based on Harrington and Sum’s

definition.33 The estimates of this more-restricted specification, in column (3), are very similar.

        Column (4) shows that the exclusion of occupation dummy variables from the specifications

drives Harrington and Sum’s results. In column (3), where occupation dummy variables are excluded, the

estimated returns to college degrees when they are beyond a job’s “required” education level (according

to BLS) are significantly lower, with 50.3 percentage points, or 75%, of the 66.9% earnings premium for

a Bachelor’s degree evaporating. However, when the occupation dummy variables are included, the

difference is much smaller; although the earnings premium for a Bachelor’s degree in jobs not in their

“college labor market” is lower by a statistically significant amount (12.7%), this is a much smaller

differential – especially in absolute terms. The same is true for more-advanced degrees.34

        There is additional evidence that the specifications without the occupation dummy variables are

uninformative about “mal-employment.” In particular, note that in columns (1) and (2) there are also

large negative estimates of the interactions between “less than high school” and “some college” and being

in a job that does not require a college degree – of roughly the same magnitude as the estimates for

Associate’s and Bachelor’s degrees. Clearly these estimates should not be interpreted as “mal-

employment” of those without a college degree. Instead, what these similar estimates for those who

cannot be mal-employed indicate is that the occupations with fewer college-educated workers are simply

lower-paying occupations. In addition, notice that the economic returns Harrington and Sum report for

those who are not mal-employed are extraordinarily high. If we look at the standard labor economics

literature on the returns to schooling, the consensus estimate of the return to a year of education is about

8-9%, implying 16-18% for an Associate’s degree, 32-36% for a Bachelor’s degree, etc. In contrast, their

estimates (cited above) were 47%, 63%, and 80%. Again, this reflects the omission of occupation

controls, coupled with the fact that more-educated people work in higher-paying occupations.




33
   Moreover, if one did want to include these interactions, there would be no reason to exclude the interaction with
the dummy variable for high school degree.
34
   As reported in Neumark et al. (2011), we reached the same – and in fact stronger – conclusions when we redid the
same type of estimation using another “expert” analysis of education requirements, based on the O*NET.

                                                        22
VI. Conclusions and Implications

         Our analysis does not point to national-level evidence of substantial shortages of skilled workers

over the near-term. Nonetheless, there are potential benefits to efforts to improve educational outcomes

and increase worker skills. First, over the longer term, as more of the baby boomers retire, skill

imbalances are more likely as long as demands for skilled workers continue their long-term secular

increase, because, unlike past retirements, the baby boomers will not be replaced by larger cohorts with

much higher education levels. Second, there is suggestive evidence that some states – in particular those

with greater representation and expected population growth from less-educated demographic groups –

could face some skill shortages. Barriers to migration, including moving costs, could prevent those

shortages from being resolved.35 Third, our research focuses on the supplies of and demands for workers

classified by educational degrees, and it is possible and in fact likely that shortages will emerge in specific

skilled occupations. And finally, policymakers have some degree of choice over how to respond to

potential imbalances between demands for skilled workers and supplies of skilled workers.

Improvements in worker skills and increases in educational attainment could help maintain and spur the

creation of higher-paying jobs, which has numerous potential benefits for individual citizens and the

economy as whole.

         Future research should expand on the issues we have considered – state-specific shortages and

migration and other responses; particular occupations and education fields that might be in short supply;

and perhaps most important, exploring longer-term projections. This would help to better understand the

possible large-scale skill shortages that could emerge despite our findings at present. Our research

identified substantial upgrading of skills of middle-aged and even older workers. More research could be

done to identify determinants for participation in such educational upgrading, to see what the effects are

in terms of labor force outcomes, and to locate where this upgrading is occurring institutionally. We




35
   An analysis of California’s projected skill shortages suggests that interstate migration flows are not likely to fully
eliminate the shortages. High housing costs in California are another kind of migration cost. The size of the
projected shortage for California would require unprecedented in-migration to the state (Johnson and Reed, 2007).

                                                           23
strongly suspect that more systematic study of how community colleges can better enable workers to

make investments in skills to meet changing workforce demands would be particularly useful.

        We also caution that our approach took the BLS projections as an accurate prediction of where

the U.S. economy is headed in terms of the mix of occupations. Our analyses based on the 2008

distribution of occupations shows substantial differences between the American Community Survey and

the BLS. For example, managerial occupations and legal service occupations seem to be substantially

underrepresented in the BLS 2008 occupational employment numbers relative to the ACS. Both of these

occupational categories disproportionately employ highly-educated workers. In contrast, the BLS

estimates for 2008 show greater numbers of workers in food preparation and serving occupations, jobs

that tend to require relatively low levels of education. Future research should resolve these differences

and could lead to alternative occupational projections.

        More generally, there are clear sources of uncertainty in any forecasts, and our context is no

exception. We have discussed some sources of disagreement about future skill needs and supplies. There

are also issues of the statistical precision of forecasts that have not been incorporated into our analysis.

Finally, policy changes – perhaps most importantly with regard to health care or Social Security – could

substantially affect labor supply decisions of the baby boomers, in turn affecting the supply of skilled

workers available to employers.




                                                      24
                                              References

Alexander, J. Trent, Michael Davern, and Betsey Stevenson. 2010. “Inaccurate Age and Sex Data in the
Census PUMS Files: Evidence and Implications.” NBER Working Paper No. 15703, Cambridge, MA:
NBER.

Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2006. “The Polarization of the U.S. Labor
Market.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 96, No. 2, May, pp. 189-94.

Bound, John, and Sarah Turner. 2002. “Going to War and Going to College: Did World War II and the
G.I. Bill Increase Educational Attainment for Returning Veterans.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 20,
No. 4, pp. 784-815

Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. “Going to College to Avoid the Draft: The Unintended Legacy
of the Vietnam War.” Papers and Proceedings of the Hundred Thirteenth Annual Meeting of the
American Economic Association. The American Economic Review, Vol. 91, No. 2, May, pp. 97-102.

Carnevale, Anthony P., Nicole Smith, and Jeff Strohl. 2010. Help Wanted: Projections of Jobs and
Education Requirements Through 2018. Washington, DC: Center on Education and the Workforce,
Georgetown University.

Chevalier, Arnaud. 2003. “Measuring Over-Education.” Economica, Vol. 70, No. 279, August, pp. 509-
31.

Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2002. “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Women’s
Career and Marriage Decisions.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 110, No. 4, pp. 730-70.

Harrington, Paul E., and Andrew M. Sum. 2010a. “College Labor Shortages in 2018?” New England
Journal of Higher Education, November. http://www.nebhe.org/thejournal/college-labor-shortages-in-
2018/.

Harrington, Paul E., and Andrew M. Sum. 2010b. “College Labor Shortages in 2018? Part Deux.” New
England Journal of Higher Education, December. http://www.nebhe.org/thejournal/college-labor-
shortages-in-2018-part-two/.

Harrington, Paul E., and Andrew M. Sum. “Recent Projections of Labor Shortages Through 2018: From
Great Recession to Labor Shortages? A Critical Look at the Evidence.” Forthcoming in Monthly Labor
Review.

Hartog, Joop. 2000. “Over-Education and Earnings: Where Are We, Where Should We Go?” Economics
of Education Review, Vol. 19, pp. 131-47.

Hollmann, Frederick W., Tammany J. Mulder, and Jeffrey E. Kallan. 2000. Methodology and
Assumptions for the Population Projections of the United States: 1999 to 2100. Population Division
Working Paper No. 38. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.

Johnson, Hans P. and Deborah Reed. 2007. Can California Import Enough College Graduates to Meet
Workforce Needs? Public Policy Institute of California, San Francisco CA.

Lacey, T. Alan, and Benjamin Wright. 2009. “Occupational Employment Projections to 2018.” Monthly
Labor Review, Vol. 132, No. 11, November, pp. 82-123.
McGuinness, Séamus, and Jessica Bennett. 2007. “Overeducation in the Graduate Labor Market: A
Quantile Regression Approach.” Economics of Education Review, Vol. 26, pp. 521-31.

National Center on Education Statistics. 2009. “Projections of Education Statistics to 2018.”
http://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2009062 (accessed May 11, 2011).

Neumark, David, Hans Johnson, and Marisol Cuellar Mejia. 2011. “Future Skill Shortages in the U.S.
Economy?” NBER Working Paper 17213.

Nickell, Stephen. 1998. “Unemployment: Questions and Some Answers.” The Economic Journal, Vol.
108, No. 448, May, pp. 802-816.

Scott, Marc, Thomas Bailey, and Greg Kienzl. 2006. “Relative Success? Determinants of College
Graduation Rates in Public and Private Colleges in the U.S.” Research in Higher Education, Vol. 47 No.
3, May, pp. 249-279.

Toossi, Mitra. 2009. “Labor Force Projections to 2018: Older Workers Staying More Active.” Monthly
Labor Review, Vol. 132, No. 11, November, pp. 30-51.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2008. “Household Data Annual Averages.”
ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/lf/aa2008/pdf/cpsaat8.pdf (accessed October 29, 2010). Table 8,
“Ëmployed and Unemployed Full- and Part-Time Workers by Age, Sex, Race, and Hispanic or Latino
Ethnicity.”

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Employment Projections Program. 2009. “Occupational Employment and
Job Openings Data, 2008-18, and Worker Characteristics, 2008.” Employment Projections Table 1.6.
http://www.bls.gov/emp/ep_table_106.htm (accessed October 28, 2010).

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. March 11, 2010a. “Estimating Occupational Replacement Needs.”
http://www.bls.gov/emp/ep_replacements.htm (accessed October 29, 2010).

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2010b. “Occupational Employment and Job Openings Data, 2008-18, and
Worker Characteristics, 2008.” http://www.bls.gov/emp/ep_table_106.pdf (accessed April 5, 2011).

U.S. Census Bureau, 2008. Methodology Statement for the 2008 National Projections, United States
Population Projections by Age, Sex, Race, and Hispanic Origin: July 1, 2000-2050. Washington, DC.

Woods, Rose A. 2009. “Industry and Output Employment Projections to 2018.” Monthly Labor Review,
Vol. 132, No. 11, November, pp. 82-123.
 Figure 1: Number of Adults with At Least a Bachelor’s Degree by Age Group
                  (25-44 and 45-64), 1990, 2000, and 2008
                                          30

                                          25
                  Population (millions)
                                          20

                                          15                                                                                                    25-44
                                                                                                                                                45-64
                                          10

                                           5

                                           0
                                                         1990                              2000                         2008

  Based on Decennial Census for 1990 and 2000, and the American Community Survey for
  2008.




                                          Figure 2: BLS Occupational Employment Projections 2008 and 2018
                                          30                                            2008
                                               2.6                                      Employment
                                          25                                            2018
                                                     2.0 2.0                            Employment
                                                               1.9
  Employment (millions)




                                          20                         1.8
                                                                           1.6
                                                                                 1.5
                                                                                       1.4 1.4
                                                                                                 1.2 1.2 1.2
                                          15
                                                                                                               1.0
                                                                                                                     0.8 0.8
                                                                                                                               0.7 0.7
                                                                                                                                         0.6
                                          10                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                     0.4

                                           5                                                                                                               -0.1
                                                                                                                                                               -0.4
                                           0




Ranked by projected average annual growth. Projections are from U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics,
Employment Projections Program (2009).
       Figure 3: Educational Degree Attainment of U.S. Adults Ages 25 to 64, 2000, 2008 and
                                             2018
                      45%
                                                                                          2000    2008    2018
                      40%

                      35%
Share of Population




                      30%

                      25%

                      20%

                      15%

                      10%

                      5%

                      0%
                            High school    Some     Associate's Bachelor's   Master's   Professional Doctorate
                              or less     college    degree      degree      degree       degree

Based on 2000 Decennial Census, 2008 ACS, and projections described in the text.
 Table 1: Assignment of BLS Occupational Skills and ACS Educational Attainment Groups to
                                 Common Educational Categories
BLS Skill Category                                  New Category
Short-term on-the-job training                      High school degree or less
Moderate-term on-the-job training                   High school degree or less
Long-term on-the-job training                       High school degree or less
Work experience in a related occupation             High school degree or less
Postsecondary vocational award                      Some college
Associate’s degree                                  Associate’s degree
Bachelor’s degree                                   Bachelor’s degree
Bachelor’s or higher degree, plus work experience   Bachelor’s degree
First professional degree                                     Professional degree beyond bachelor’s
Master’s degree                                               Master’s degree
Doctorate                                                     Doctorate
ACS Education Category                                        New Category
Less than high school                                         High school degree or less
High school graduate or GED                                   High school degree or less
Some college                                                  Some college
Associate’s degree                                            Associate’s degree
Bachelor’s degree                                             Bachelor’s degree
Master’s degree                                               Master’s degree
Professional degree beyond bachelor’s                         Professional degree beyond bachelor’s
Doctorate                                                     Doctorate
Based on reclassification of BLS skill categories and ACS education categories.
                 Table 2: Skill Requirements Based on BLS Occupation Projections, 2008 and 2018
                                                       Occupational Employment
                                                                                        Jobs (thousands)                     Distribution
                                                                                                 Absolute     Percent
     BLS Education/ Skills Category          New Education Category          2008       2018      change      change      2008       2018
 Long-term on-the-job training              High school diploma or less     10,815     11,621       806        7.5%      7.2%       7.0%
 Moderate-term on-the-job training          High school diploma or less     24,569     26,531      1,963       8.0%      16.3%      16.0%
 Short-term on-the-job training             High school diploma or less     54,396     58,593      4,197       7.7%      36.0%      35.3%
 Work experience in a related occupation    High school diploma or less     14,517     15,697      1,180       8.1%      9.6%       9.4%
 Postsecondary vocational award             Some college                    8,787      9,952       1,164      13.2%      5.8%       6.0%
 Associate degree                           Associate degree                6,129      7,297       1,168      19.1%      4.1%       4.4%
 Bachelor's degree                          Bachelor's degree               18,584     21,669      3,085      16.6%      12.3%      13.0%
 Bachelor's or higher degree, plus work     Bachelor's degree               6,519      7,068        550        8.4%      4.3%       4.3%
 experience
 Master's degree                            Master's degree                 2,531      2,995       464        18.3%      1.7%        1.8%
 First professional degree                  First professional degree       2,001      2,354       353        17.6%      1.3%        1.4%
 Doctoral degree                            Doctoral degree                 2,085      2,430       345        16.6%      1.4%        1.5%
 Total                                                                     150,932    166,206     15,274      10.1%     100.0%      100.0%
                                                           Demand for workers
                                                                                        Workers (thousands)                 Distribution
                                              Fraction of individuals                              Absolute    Percent
        New Education Category               holding more than 1 job            2008       2018    change      change      2008      2018
 High school diploma or less                           2.5%                   101,752 109,699         7,947      7.8%     69.7%     68.3%
 Some college                                          4.6%                    8,401      9,514       1,113     13.2%     5.8%      5.9%
 Associate's degree                                    5.5%                    5,809      6,916       1,107     19.1%     4.0%      4.3%
 Bachelor's degree                                     5.4%                    23,816     27,265      3,449     14.5%     16.3%     17.0%
 Master's degree                                       7.1%                    2,363      2,797        433      18.3%     1.6%      1.7%
 Professional degree beyond                            5.2%                    1,902      2,237        335      17.6%     1.3%      1.4%
 Doctorate                                             6.3%                    1,961      2,286        325      16.6%     1.3%      1.4%
 Total                                                                        146,005 160,714        14,709     10.1% 100.0% 100.0%
Top panel corresponds to Table 3 in Lacey and Wright (2009). Bottom panel is based on our re-categorization of the BLS
education/training categories and on authors' calculations of multiple job holders based on the CPS January Supplement, 2006-2008.


               Table 3: Alternative Projections of Educational Degree Attainment Requirements Based on
                                             ACS/Decennial Census Trends
                                                                 Workers (thousands)                     Distribution
                                                                            Absolute     Percent
                     Education Category                 2008    2018         change      change         2008         2018
                 1    High school degree or less      54,539   54,701          162        0.3%         37.5%        34.0%
                 2    Some college                    35,182   39,560         4,378       12.4%        24.2%        24.6%
                 3    Associate’s degree              12,144   15,879         3,735       30.8%        8.4%         9.9%
                 4    Bachelor’s degree               28,038   32,822         4,784       17.1%        19.3%        20.4%
                 5    Master’s degree                 10,614   12,608         1,994       18.8%        7.3%         7.8%
                 6    Professional degree
                                                       3,059    2,816         -243        -7.9%        2.1%         1.8%
                      beyond bachelor’s
                 7    Doctorate                        1,786    2,326          541        30.3%        1.2%         1.4%
                      All education categories       145,362 160,713         15,351       10.6%       100.0%       100.0%
              Total workers in 2008 is from U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2008). Shares in 2008 are calculated from the
              2008 ACS. Total workers in 2018 is the same calculation as above; 2018 education shares are calculated
              from dynamic forecasts described in text.
Table 4: Estimated Returns to Schooling, Above and Below the Maximum BLS Required Skill Category,
                                                2008
                                                            Coefficients Relative to Lowest Category
                                                                      (High School or Less)                                  Joint Test
                                         Some     Associate’s     Bachelor’s       Master’s    Professional
     Occupation Descriptions            College    Degree           Degree          Degree        Degree      Doctorate   P-value   D.o.F.
 Management occupations                  0.146       0.159          0.434          0.614           0.683        0.780     0.0000          3
                                        (0.006)     (0.008)        (0.005)        (0.006)        (0.014)       (0.014)
 Business and financial operations       0.114       0.094          0.372          0.589           0.612        0.672     0.0000          3
 occupations                            (0.009)     (0.011)        (0.008)        (0.010)        (0.020)       (0.030)
 Computer and mathematical               0.102       0.075          0.292          0.401           0.397        0.473       na        na
 science occupations                    (0.012)     (0.013)        (0.011)        (0.012)        (0.031)       (0.022)
 Architecture and engineering            0.061       0.085          0.253          0.386           0.310        0.491     0.0000          3
 occupations                            (0.011)     (0.012)        (0.010)        (0.012)        (0.026)       (0.020)
 Life, physical, and social science      0.039       0.053          0.191          0.275           0.315        0.410       na        na
 occupations                            (0.025)     (0.029)        (0.021)        (0.023)        (0.033)       (0.023)
 Community and social services           0.054       0.079          0.196          0.383           0.412        0.445     0.0139          2
 occupations                            (0.014)     (0.017)        (0.012)        (0.013)        (0.023)       (0.024)
 Legal occupations                       0.059       0.066          0.177          0.304           0.510        0.440       na        na
                                        (0.030)     (0.033)        (0.029)        (0.041)        (0.034)       (0.042)
 Education, training, and library        0.024       0.064          0.335          0.542           0.623        0.827       na        na
 occupations                            (0.009)     (0.011)        (0.008)        (0.008)        (0.014)       (0.011)
 Arts, design, entertainment, sports,    0.129       0.129          0.304          0.388           0.484        0.451     0.0000          3
 and media occupations                  (0.020)     (0.023)        (0.018)        (0.023)        (0.057)       (0.055)
 Health care practitioners and           0.061       0.157          0.246          0.338           0.838        0.668       na        na
 technical occupations                  (0.010)     (0.010)        (0.010)        (0.012)        (0.011)       (0.015)
 Health care support occupations         0.068       0.121          0.152          0.342           0.575        0.506     0.0000          4
                                        (0.008)     (0.012)        (0.014)        (0.030)        (0.037)       (0.067)
 Protective service occupations          0.146       0.202          0.303          0.470           0.405        0.616     0.0000          4
                                        (0.008)     (0.010)        (0.009)        (0.017)        (0.043)       (0.062)
 Food preparation and serving            0.071       0.177          0.202          0.240           0.070        0.411     0.0000          6
 related occupations                    (0.007)     (0.013)        (0.012)        (0.034)        (0.074)       (0.131)
 Building and grounds cleaning and       0.089       0.100          0.105          0.245           0.119        0.248     0.0000          6
 maintenance occupations                (0.008)     (0.014)        (0.014)        (0.039)        (0.065)       (0.191)
 Personal care and service               0.082       0.138          0.274          0.270           0.241        0.424     0.0000          5
 occupations                            (0.011)     (0.017)        (0.014)        (0.031)        (0.069)       (0.153)
 Sales and related occupations           0.123       0.140          0.429          0.606           0.615        0.609     0.0000          3
                                        (0.005)     (0.008)        (0.006)        (0.011)        (0.028)       (0.044)
 Office and administrative support       0.084       0.107          0.229          0.366           0.327        0.476     0.0000          4
 occupations                            (0.003)     (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.008)        (0.023)       (0.035)
 Farming, fishing, and forestry          0.074       0.188          0.261          0.416           0.095        0.791     0.0000          6
 occupations                            (0.022)     (0.039)        (0.032)        (0.096)        (0.184)       (0.231)
 Construction and extraction             0.101       0.155          0.118          0.116           0.195        0.181     0.0000          6
 occupations                            (0.006)     (0.010)        (0.011)        (0.029)        (0.055)       (0.109)
 Installation, maintenance, and          0.108       0.162          0.162          0.249          -0.102        0.144      0.0054         2
 Repair occupations                     (0.006)     (0.008)        (0.011)        (0.027)        (0.068)       (0.121)
 Production occupations                  0.125       0.164          0.232          0.352           0.196        0.431     0.0000          5
                                        (0.004)     (0.007)        (0.008)        (0.018)        (0.045)       (0.058)
 Transportation and material             0.073       0.062          0.100          0.170          -0.069        0.034     0.0043          1
 moving occupations                     (0.005)     (0.010)        (0.010)        (0.024)        (0.062)       (0.100)
Standard errors are shown in parentheses. Grey cells represent the education categories above the highest BLS category
required for the occupation category (at the six-digit level). Occupation categories for which the entire range is shaded grey
indicate that high school or less is the highest required BLS category. Each row reports the estimated coefficients on dummy
variables for the indicated schooling categories, using 2008 ACS data. The dependent variable is log earnings, and the
regressions are estimated for full-time (30 or more hours) and full-year (40 or more weeks) workers. The regression includes
controls for race, ethnicity, sex, age and its square, three-digit occupation dummy variables, and decennial census region.
The test statistic reported is the p-value (and d.o.f.) for the test of no returns to education levels higher than BLS requirement,
for the subset of higher education levels with point estimates larger than estimated return to BLS-required education level.
  Table 5: Estimated and Projected Supply and Demand for Workers by Degree Attainment, 2008 and 2018
                                    2008 Supply and Demand for Education by Education Category
                                                     Workers (thousands)                      Shares             BLS
 Education Category                            Supply      Demand         Diff    Supply     Demand     Diff   Demand
   High school or less                          60,013       54,539      5,474    38.9%        37.5%    1.4%    69.7%
   Some college                                 36,852       35,182      1,670    23.9%        24.2%   -0.3%     5.8%
   Associate’s degree                           12,657       12,144       512      8.2%         8.4%   -0.2%     4.0%
   Bachelor’s degree                            28,987       28,038       949     18.8%        19.3%   -0.5%    16.3%
   Master’s degree                              10,853       10,614       240      7.0%         7.3%   -0.3%     1.6%
   Professional degree                           3,109        3,059        49      2.0%         2.1%   -0.1%     1.3%
   Doctorate                                     1,815        1,786        29      1.2%         1.2%   -0.1%     1.3%
   All education categories                    154,286      145,362      8,924    100.0%      100.0%    0.0%   100.0%
                              2018 Supply and Demand Projections for Education by Education Category
                                                     Workers (thousands)                      Shares             BLS
 Education Category                            Supply      Demand         Diff    Supply     Demand     Diff   Demand
   High school or less                          59,626       54,701      4,925    35.0%        34.0%    0.9%    68.3%
   Some college                                 43,173       39,560      3,613    25.3%        24.6%    0.7%     5.9%
   Associate’s degree                           15,523       15,879      -356      9.1%         9.9%   -0.8%     4.3%
   Bachelor’s degree                            33,827       32,822      1,005    19.8%        20.4%   -0.6%    17.0%
   Master’s degree                              13,161       12,608       553      7.7%         7.8%   -0.1%     1.7%
   Professional degree                           3,024        2,816       208      1.8%         1.8%    0.0%     1.4%
   Doctorate                                     2,245        2,326       -81      1.3%         1.4%   -0.1%     1.4%
   All education categories                    170,579      160,713      9,866    100.0%      100.0%    0.0%   100.0%
Supply and demand shares by educational attainment for 2008 are from the 2008 American Community Survey, these shares are
applied to published BLS total labor force and employed persons aged 16 and over. Supply and demand projections are
described in the text. The last column in both panels is from BLS Employment Projections 2008-2018.
                     Table 6: Percentage of Adults with a Bachelor’s Degree or Above by State, 2008
                                  Percent with a Bachelor’s Degree or Above
                         (Age 25-34 ‒ Age 55-64),                                          % Latino in State       % Asian in State
         State                     Sorted              Total Latinos           Asian        2000        2010        2000        2010
                                      (1)               (2)        (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)
New Mexico                         -11.4%               26%        14%          53%          42%         46%          1%          1%
Alaska                              -8.9%               28%        23%          24%           4%         6%           4%          6%
Utah                                -8.5%               30%        12%          39%           9%         13%          2%          3%
Hawaii                              -7.2%               32%        19%          32%           7%         9%          50%         49%
Arizona                             -7.0%               26%        10%          54%          25%         30%          2%          3%
Colorado                            -6.1%               38%        13%          48%          17%         21%          2%          3%
Wyoming                             -6.0%               23%         6%          32%           6%         9%           1%          1%
Oregon                              -4.5%               30%        12%          48%           8%         12%          3%          4%
Montana                             -4.2%               30%        22%          55%           2%         3%           1%          1%
California                          -4.5%               31%        11%          51%          32%         38%         11%         13%
Nevada                              -5.3%               23%         9%          38%          20%         27%          5%          8%
Maine                               -4.4%               25%        21%          20%           1%         1%           1%          1%
Washington                          -3.6%               32%        11%          47%           7%         11%          6%          8%
Texas                               -3.8%               27%        12%          56%          32%         38%          3%          4%
Florida                             -3.4%               28%        23%          45%          17%         22%          2%          2%
Idaho                               -2.9%               26%         8%          44%           8%         11%          1%          1%
Vermont                             -3.0%               35%        21%          42%           1%         1%           1%          1%
Georgia                             -2.2%               30%        13%          52%           5%         9%           2%          3%
New Hampshire                       -1.8%               36%        36%          67%           2%         3%           1%          2%
South Dakota                        -2.5%               27%        29%          66%           1%         3%           1%          1%
Oklahoma                            -0.9%               24%        11%          45%           5%         9%           1%          2%
Virginia                            -0.8%               36%        24%          58%           5%         8%           4%          6%
Arkansas                            -0.5%               21%        10%          38%           3%         6%           1%          1%
Louisiana                           -0.3%               22%        18%          37%           2%         4%           1%          2%
South Carolina                      -0.5%               26%        11%          48%           2%         5%           1%          1%
Mississippi                         -0.1%               21%         9%          46%           1%         3%           1%          1%
Kansas                              0.4%                32%        14%          58%           7%         11%          2%          2%
Alabama                             0.2%                24%        13%          52%           2%         4%           1%          1%
Rhode Island                        0.8%                33%        14%          51%           9%         12%          2%          3%
Delaware                            0.7%                29%        15%          65%           5%         8%           2%          3%
Nebraska                            0.7%                31%         8%          38%           6%         9%           1%          2%
Tennessee                           1.2%                25%        11%          53%           2%         5%           1%          1%
North Carolina                      2.0%                28%        14%          53%           5%         8%           1%          2%
Maryland                            1.5%                38%        20%          65%           4%         8%           4%          6%
Missouri                            2.0%                28%        19%          50%           2%         4%           1%          2%
West Virginia                       1.8%                19%        29%          68%           1%         1%           1%          1%
Wisconsin                           2.4%                28%        12%          46%           4%         6%           2%          2%
Michigan                            1.8%                27%        17%          63%           3%         4%           2%          2%
Kentucky                            2.4%                21%        11%          53%           1%         3%           1%          1%
Indiana                             1.7%                25%        10%          58%           4%         6%           1%          2%
Ohio                                2.9%                27%        20%          66%           2%         3%           1%          2%
Connecticut                         3.0%                39%        16%          65%           9%         13%          2%          4%
New Jersey                          3.3%                38%        17%          70%          13%         18%          6%          8%
Illinois                            4.0%                33%        12%          65%          12%         16%          3%          5%
North Dakota                        4.6%                29%         0%          20%           1%         2%           1%          1%
Minnesota                           4.8%                35%        18%          42%           3%         5%           3%          4%
Pennsylvania                        6.0%                29%        14%          55%           3%         6%           2%          3%
Iowa                                6.5%                27%        12%          53%           3%         5%           1%          2%
New York                            6.7%                35%        16%          48%          15%         18%          5%          7%
Massachusetts                       8.4%                42%        17%          60%           7%         10%          4%          5%
District of Columbia                16.8%               52%        29%          80%           8%         9%           3%          4%
“Asian” includes Pacific Islanders. Columns (1)-(4) are calculated from 2008 ACS data for the population aged 25 to 64. Columns (5)-
(8) are from 2000 and 2010 Decennial Census and are calculated for total population of any age. States are sorted in order of entries in
column (1).
      Table 7: Education Supplies and Demands if the United States had California’s Projected
                                     Ethnic Distribution, 2018
                                               Workers (thousands)                Share
 Education Category                       Supply    Demand        Diff   Supply   Demand    Diff
 High school degree or less                67,589     54,701    12,888    39.6%    34.0%    5.6%
 Some college                              39,643     39,560        83    23.2%    24.6%   -1.4%
 Associate’s degree                        13,946     15,879    -1,933     8.2%    9.9%    -1.7%
 Bachelor’s degree                         32,430     32,822      -392    19.0%    20.4%   -1.4%
 Master’s degree                           12,018     12,608      -590     7.0%    7.8%    -0.8%
 Professional degree                        2,794     2,816        -22     1.6%    1.8%    -0.1%
 Doctorate                                  2,159     2,326       -168     1.3%    1.4%    -0.2%
 All education categories                 170,579    160,713     9,866   100.0%   100.0%     na
Based on projections described in text.
  Table 8: Estimated Returns to Degrees Above Required Degrees, 2008
Estimates                     H&S results               Replication of H&S
                                 (1)              (2)           (3)            (4)
Required education:
Less than high school            0.102           0.163          -0.268        -0.151
                                                (0.008)        (0.003)       (0.003)
Some college                      0.373          0.432          0.183          0.070
                                                (0.003)        (0.002)       (0.002)
Associate’s degree                0.471          0.525          0.322          0.113
                                                (0.004)        (0.003)       (0.003)
Bachelor’s degree                 0.631          0.671          0.669          0.272
                                                (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.003)
Master’s degree or better         0.799          0.841          0.838          0.474
                                                (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.003)
Interactions with:                   In job that does not require college degree
Less than high school            -0.425          -0.476           …             …
                                                (0.008)
Some college                     -0.343          -0.366           …             …
                                                (0.003)
Associate’s degree               -0.372          -0.380           …             …
                                                (0.005)
Bachelor’s degree                -0.486          -0.504         -0.503        -0.127
                                                (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.004)
Master’s degree or better        -0.610          -0.609         -0.608        -0.297
                                                (0.007)        (0.007)       (0.007)
Occ. dummies included:             No              No             No            Yes
          N                    3,869,456       1,147,081     1,147,081      1,147,081
Column (1) is from Harrington and Sum (forthcoming, Table 5), using 2006-2008 ACS
data. Estimates in other columns are from 2008 ACS data. Sample restricted to non-
enrolled 22- to 64-year-old workers with annual earnings greater than $1,000 and less
than $200,000. Other controls include: age, age squared, male, native-born, black,
Hispanic, Asian, and other race. The BLS classification is based on Table 1.6 of the
BLS’ Employment Projections Program (EPP) Tables (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics,
2010b). The occupation dummy variables are defined at the finest level of occupational
detail available in the ACS; in most cases, this is at the six-digit SOC level (the
exceptions are when several occupations were bundled together in the ACS). Sample
sizes are slightly lower in columns (5) to (8) because some occupations had missing
education requirements in the BLS classifications.
