                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE "OUT OF AFRICA" HYPOTHESIS, HUMAN GENETIC DIVERSITY, AND
                  COMPARATIVE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

                                           Quamrul Ashraf
                                            Oded Galor

                                        Working Paper 17216
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17216


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2011




This work was supported by NSF grant SES-0921573. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Quamrul Ashraf and Oded Galor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The "Out of Africa" Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diversity, and Comparative Economic Development
Quamrul Ashraf and Oded Galor
NBER Working Paper No. 17216
July 2011
JEL No. N10,N30,N50,O11,O50,Z10

                                               ABSTRACT

This research argues that deep-rooted factors, determined tens of thousands of years ago, had a significant
effect on the course of economic development from the dawn of human civilization to the contemporary
era. It advances and empirically establishes the hypothesis that, in the course of the exodus of Homo
sapiens out of Africa, variation in migratory distance from the cradle of humankind to various settlements
across the globe affected genetic diversity and has had a long-lasting effect on the pattern of comparative
economic development that is not captured by geographical, institutional, and cultural factors. In particular,
the level of genetic diversity within a society is found to have a hump-shaped effect on development
outcomes in both the pre-colonial and the modern era, reflecting the trade-off between the beneficial
and the detrimental effects of diversity on productivity. While the intermediate level of genetic diversity
prevalent among Asian and European populations has been conducive for development, the high degree
of diversity among African populations and the low degree of diversity among Native American populations
have been a detrimental force in the development of these regions.


Quamrul Ashraf
Williams College
Department of Economics
24 Hopkins Hall Drive
Williamstown, MA 01267
Quamrul.H.Ashraf@williams.edu

Oded Galor
Department of Economics
Brown University
Box B
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
oded_galor@brown.edu
1    Introduction
Existing theories of comparative development highlight a variety of proximate and ultimate factors
underlying some of the vast inequities in living standards across the globe. The importance of
geographical, cultural and institutional factors, human capital formation, ethnic, linguistic, and
religious fractionalization, colonialism and globalization has been at the center of a debate regarding
the origins of the di¤erential timing of transitions from stagnation to growth and the remarkable
transformation of the world income distribution in the last two centuries. While theoretical and
empirical research has typically focused on the e¤ects of such factors in giving rise to and sustaining
the Great Divergence in income per capita in the pre-industrial era, attention has recently been
drawn towards some deep-rooted factors that have been argued to a¤ect the course of comparative
economic development.
    This paper argues that deep-rooted factors, determined tens of thousands of years ago, have had
a signi…cant e¤ect on the course of economic development from the dawn of human civilization to
the contemporary era. It advances and empirically establishes the hypothesis that, in the course
of the exodus of Homo sapiens out of Africa, variation in migratory distance from the cradle of
humankind in East Africa to various settlements across the globe a¤ected genetic diversity and has
had a long-lasting hump-shaped e¤ect on the pattern of comparative economic development that is
not captured by geographical, institutional, and cultural factors.
    Consistent with the predictions of the theory, the empirical analysis …nds that the level of genetic
diversity within a society has a hump-shaped e¤ect on development outcomes in the pre-colonial as
well as in the modern era, re‡ecting the trade-o¤ between the bene…cial and the detrimental e¤ects
of diversity on productivity. While the intermediate level of genetic diversity prevalent among the
Asian and European populations has been conducive for development, the high degree of diversity
among African populations and the low degree of diversity among Native American populations have
been a detrimental force in the development of these regions. This paper thus highlights one of the
deepest channels in comparative development, pertaining not to factors associated with the dawn
of complex agricultural societies as in Diamond’s (1997) in‡uential hypothesis, but to conditions
innately related to the very dawn of mankind itself.
    The hypothesis rests upon two fundamental building blocks. First, migratory distance from the
cradle of humankind in East Africa had an adverse e¤ect on the degree of genetic diversity within
ancient indigenous settlements across the globe. Following the prevailing hypothesis, commonly
known as the serial-founder e¤ ect, it is postulated that, in the course of human expansion over
planet Earth, as subgroups of the populations of parental colonies left to establish new settlements
further away, they carried with them only a subset of the overall genetic diversity of their parental
colonies. Indeed, as depicted in Figure 1, migratory distance from East Africa has an adverse e¤ect
on genetic diversity in the 53 ethnic groups across the globe that constitute the Human Genome
Diversity Cell Line Panel.
    Second, there exists an optimal level of diversity for economic development, re‡ecting the interplay
between the con‡icting e¤ects of diversity on the development process. The adverse e¤ect pertains
to the detrimental impact of diversity on the e¢ ciency of the aggregate production process of



                                                   1
       Figure 1: Expected Heterozygosity and Migratory Distance in the HGDP-CEPH Sample


an economy.        Heterogeneity increases the likelihood of mis-coordination and distrust, reducing
cooperation and disrupting the socioeconomic order.                     Greater population diversity is therefore
associated with the social cost of a lower total factor productivity, which inhibits the ability of
society to operate e¢ ciently with respect to its production possibility frontier.
       The bene…cial e¤ect of diversity, on the other hand, concerns the positive role of diversity in
the expansion of society’s production possibility frontier. A wider spectrum of traits is more likely
to be complementary to the development and successful implementation of advanced technological
paradigms.1 Greater heterogeneity therefore fosters the ability of a society to incorporate more
sophisticated and e¢ cient modes of production, expanding the economy’s production possibility
frontier and conferring the bene…ts of increased total factor productivity.
       Higher diversity in a society’s population can therefore have con‡icting e¤ects on the level of
its total factor productivity. Aggregate productivity is enhanced on the one hand by an increased
capacity for technological advancement, while simultaneously diminished on the other by reduced
cooperation and e¢ ciency.2 However, if the bene…cial e¤ects of population diversity dominate at
lower levels of diversity and the detrimental e¤ects dominate at higher levels (i.e., if there are
diminishing marginal returns to both diversity and homogeneity), the theory would predict an
inverted-U relationship between genetic diversity and development outcomes over the course of the
   1
     The following two mechanisms further illustrate this argument. First, in an economy where the labor force
is characterized by genetic heterogeneity in a wide array of traits, to the extent that some of these traits lead
to specialization in task-oriented activities, higher diversity will increase productivity for society as a whole, given
complementarities across di¤erent tasks. Second, in an environment in which only individuals with su¢ ciently high
levels of cognitive abilities can contribute to technological innovation, greater variance in the distribution of these traits
across the population will lead to higher productivity.
   2
     The underlying hypothesis about the costs and bene…ts of genetic diversity is consistent with experimental evidence
from the …eld of evolutionary biology, reported in Appendix H, based on species that are both amenable to laboratory
experimentation and display a relatively high degree of social behavior in nature. In addition, the hypothesis is
consistent with evidence provided by social scientists on the costs and bene…ts associated with intra-population
heterogeneity, primarily in the context of ethnic diversity, as reviewed by Alesina and La Ferrara (2005).



                                                              2
development process.
   In estimating the impact on economic development of migratory distance from East Africa
via its e¤ect on genetic diversity, this research overcomes limitations and potential concerns that
are presented by the existing data on genetic diversity across the globe (i.e., measurement error,
data limitations, and potential endogeneity). Population geneticists typically measure the extent of
diversity in genetic material across individuals within a given population (such as an ethnic group)
using an index called expected heterozygosity. Like most other measures of diversity, this index may
be interpreted simply as the probability that two individuals, selected at random from the relevant
population, are genetically di¤erent from one another. Speci…cally, the expected heterozygosity
measure for a given population is constructed by geneticists using sample data on allelic frequencies,
i.e., the frequency with which a “gene variant” or allele (e.g., the brown vs. blue variant for the eye
color gene) occurs in the population sample. Given allelic frequencies for a particular gene or DNA
locus, it is possible to compute a gene-speci…c heterozygosity statistic (i.e., the probability that two
randomly selected individuals di¤er with respect to the gene in question), which when averaged over
multiple genes or DNA loci yields the overall expected heterozygosity for the relevant population.
   The most reliable and consistent data for genetic diversity among indigenous populations across
the globe consists, however, of only 53 ethnic groups from the Human Genome Diversity Cell Line
Panel. According to anthropologists, these groups are not only historically native to their current
geographical location but have also been isolated from genetic ‡ows from other ethnic groups.
Empirical evidence provided by population geneticists (e.g., Ramachandran et al., 2005) for these
53 ethnic groups suggest that, indeed, migratory distance from East Africa has an adverse linear
e¤ect on genetic diversity as depicted in Figure 1. Migratory distance from East Africa for each
of the 53 ethnic groups was computed using the great circle (or geodesic) distances from Addis
Ababa (Ethiopia) to the contemporary geographic coordinates of these ethnic groups, subject to …ve
obligatory intermediate waypoints (i.e., Cairo (Egypt), Istanbul (Turkey), Phnom Penh (Cambodia),
Anadyr (Russia) and Prince Rupert (Canada)), that capture paleontological and genetic evidence
on prehistorical human migration patterns.
   Nonetheless, while the existing data on genetic diversity pertain only to ethnic groups, data for
examining comparative development are typically available at the country level. Moreover, many
national populations today are composed of multiple ethnicities, some of which may not be indigenous
to their current geographical locations. This raises two complex tasks. First, one needs to construct
of a measure of genetic diversity for national populations, based on genetic diversity data at the
ethnic group level, accounting for diversity not only within each component group but for diversity
due to di¤erences between ethnic groups as well. Second, it is necessary to account for the potential
inducement for members of distinct ethnic groups to relocate to relatively more lucrative geographical
locations.
   To tackle these di¢ culties, this study adopts two distinct strategies. The …rst restricts attention
to development outcomes in the pre-colonial era when, arguably, regional populations were indigenous
to their current geographical location and largely homogenous in terms of their ethnic compositions,
with the presence of multiple indigenous ethnicities in a given region having a negligible e¤ect on the
diversity of the regional population. The second, more complex strategy involves the construction of


                                                   3
an index of genetic diversity for contemporary national populations that accounts for the expected
heterozygosity within each sub-national group as well as the additional component of diversity at the
country level that arises from the genetic distances between its pre-colonial ancestral populations.
The examination of comparative development under this second strategy would have to additionally
account for the potential inducement for members of distinct ethnic groups to relocate to relatively
more lucrative geographical locations.
       The examination of comparative development in the pre-colonial era, when societies were in
their agricultural stage of development, requires the interpretation of outcomes from a Malthusian
equilibrium point of view. Improvements in the technological environment during the Malthusian
epoch generated only temporary gains in income per capita, eventually leading to a larger, but
not richer, population (Ashraf and Galor, 2010). Thus the relevant variable gauging comparative
economic development during this era is population density as opposed to income per capita. In
light of this argument, this study employs cross-country historical data on population density as the
outcome variable of interest in the historical analysis and examines the hypothesized e¤ect of human
genetic diversity within societies on their population densities in the year 1500 CE.3
       Using data on genetic diversity observed at the ethnic group level, the historical analysis reveals,
consistently with the proposed hypothesis, a highly signi…cant hump-shaped e¤ect of genetic diversity
on log population density in the year 1500 CE. In particular, accounting for the in‡uence of the
timing of the Neolithic Revolution, the natural productivity of land for agriculture, as well as other
geographical characteristics that may a¤ect population density in the pre-industrial era, the estimated
linear and quadratic coe¢ cients associated with genetic diversity imply that a 1 percentage point
increase in diversity for the least diverse society in the regression sample would raise its population
density by 58%, whereas a 1 percentage point decrease in diversity for the most diverse society
would raise its population density by 23%. Despite the statistical signi…cance and robustness of
these e¤ects, however, the analysis is subsequently expanded upon to lend further credence to these
…ndings by alleviating concerns regarding sample size limitations and potential endogeneity bias.
       The issue of data limitations encountered by the analysis stems from the fact that diversity
data at the ethnic group level currently spans only a modest subset of the sample of countries
for which historical population estimates are available. The potential endogeneity issue, on the
other hand, arises from the possibility that genetic diversity within populations could partly re‡ect
historical processes such as interregional migrations that were, in turn, determined by historical
patterns of comparative development.              Furthermore, the direction of the potential endogeneity
bias is a priori ambiguous. For example, while historically better developed regions may have
been attractive destinations to potential migrants, serving to increase genetic diversity in relatively
wealthier societies, the more advanced technologies in these societies may also have conferred the
necessary military prowess to prevent or minimize foreign invasions, thereby reducing the likelihood
   3
    Admittedly, historical data on population density is a- icted by measurement error. However, while measurement
error in explanatory variables leads to attenuation bias in OLS estimators, mismeasurement of the dependent variable
in an OLS regression, as a result of yielding larger standard errors for coe¢ cient estimates, leads to rejecting the null
when it is in fact true. As such, if OLS coe¢ cients are precisely estimated, then con…dence that the true coe¢ cients
are indeed di¤erent from zero rises even in the presence of measurement error in the dependent variable.




                                                            4
of greater genetic diversity in their populations.4
       In surmounting the aforementioned data limitations and potential endogeneity issues, this re-
search appeals to the “out of Africa” theory regarding the origins of Homo sapiens. According to
this well-established hypothesis, the human species, having evolved to its modern form in East Africa
some 150,000 years ago, thereafter embarked on populating the entire globe in a stepwise migration
process beginning about 70,000–90,000 BP.5 Using archeological data combined with mitochondrial
and Y-chromosomal DNA analysis to identify the most recent common ancestors of contemporary
human populations, geneticists are able to not only o¤er evidence supporting the origin of humans
in East Africa but also trace the prehistorical migration routes of the subsequent human expansion
into the rest of the world. In addition, population geneticists studying human genetic diversity have
argued that the contemporary distribution of diversity across populations should re‡ect a serial-
founder e¤ect originating in East Africa. Accordingly, since the populating of the world occurred in
a series of stages where subgroups left initial colonies to create new colonies further away, carrying
with them only a portion of the overall genetic diversity of their parental colonies, contemporary
genetic diversity in human populations should be expected to decrease with increasing distance along
prehistorical migratory paths from East Africa.6 Indeed, several studies in population genetics (e.g.,
Prugnolle et al., 2005; Ramachandran et al., 2005; Wang et al., 2007) have found strong empirical
evidence in support of this prediction.
       The present study exploits the explanatory power of migratory distance from East Africa for
genetic diversity within ethnic groups in order to overcome the data limitations and potential
endogeneity issues encountered by the initial analysis discussed above. In particular, the strong
ability of prehistorical migratory distance from East Africa in explaining observed genetic diversity
permits the analysis to generate predicted values of genetic diversity using migratory distance for
countries for which diversity data are currently unavailable. This enables a subsequent analysis to
estimate the e¤ects of genetic diversity, as predicted by migratory distance from East Africa, in a
much larger sample of countries. Moreover, given the obvious exogeneity of migratory distance from
East Africa with respect to development outcomes in the Common Era, the use of migratory distance
   4
      The history of world civilization is abound with examples of both phenomena. The “Barbarian Invasions” of the
Western Roman Empire in the Early Middle Ages is a classic example of historical population di¤usion occurring along
a prosperity gradient, whereas the The Great Wall of China, built and expanded over centuries to minimize invasions
by nomadic tribes, serves (literally) as a landmark instance of the latter phenomenon.
    5
      An alternative to this “recent African origin” (RAO) model is the “multiregional evolution accompanied by gene
‡ow” hypothesis, according to which early modern hominids evolved independently in di¤erent regions of the world
and thereafter exchanged genetic material with each other through migrations, ultimately giving rise to a relatively
uniform dispersion of modern Homo sapiens throughout the globe. However, in light of surmounting genetic and
paleontological evidence against it, the multiregional hypothesis has by now almost completely lost ground to the RAO
model of modern human origins (Stringer and Andrews, 1988).
    6
      In addition, population geneticists argue that the reduced genetic diversity associated with the founder e¤ect is
due not only to the subset sampling of alleles from parental colonies but also to a stronger force of “genetic drift” that
operates on the new colonies over time. Genetic drift arises from the fundamental tendency of the frequency of any
allele in an inbreeding population to vary randomly across generations as a result of random statistical sampling errors
alone (i.e., the chance production of a few more or less progeny carrying the relevant allele). Thus, given the inherent
“memoryless” (Markovian) property of allelic frequencies across generations as well as the absence of mutation and
natural selection, the process ultimately leads to either a 0% or a 100% representation of the allele in the population
(Gri¢ ths et al., 2000). Moreover, since random sampling errors are more prevalent in circumstances where the law
of large numbers is less applicable, genetic drift is more pronounced in smaller populations, thereby allowing this
phenomenon to play a signi…cant role in the founder e¤ect.



                                                            5
to project genetic diversity alleviates concerns regarding the potential endogeneity between observed
genetic diversity and economic development.
       The main results from the historical analysis, employing predicted genetic diversity in the ex-
tended sample of countries, indicate that, controlling for the in‡uence of land productivity, the timing
of the Neolithic Revolution, and continental …xed e¤ects, a 1 percentage point increase in diversity
for the most homogenous society in the sample would raise its population density in 1500 CE by
36%, whereas a 1 percentage point decrease in diversity for the most diverse society would raise its
population density by 29%. Further, a 1 percentage point change in diversity in either direction at
the predicted optimum of 0.683 would lower population density by 1.5%.7
       Moving to the contemporary period, the analysis, as discussed earlier, constructs an index of
genetic diversity at the country level that not only incorporates the expected heterozygosities of
the pre-Columbian ancestral populations of contemporary sub-national groups, as predicted by the
migratory distances of the ancestral populations from East Africa, but also incorporates the pairwise
genetic distances between these ancestral populations, as predicted by their pairwise migratory
distances. Indeed, the serial-founder e¤ect studied by population geneticists not only predicts that
expected heterozygosity declines with increasing distance along migratory paths from East Africa, but
also that the genetic distance between any two populations will be larger the greater the migratory
distance between them.
       The baseline results from the contemporary analysis indicate that the genetic diversity of con-
temporary national populations has an economically and statistically signi…cant hump-shaped e¤ect
on income per capita. This hump-shaped impact of diversity on income per capita is robust to conti-
nental …xed e¤ects, and to controls for ethnic fractionalization and various measures of institutional
quality, including social infrastructure, an index gauging the extent of democracy, constraints on
the power of chief executives, legal origins, major religion shares, and the share of the population
of European descent, as well as to controls for years of schooling, disease environments, and other
geographical factors that have received attention in the literature on cross-country comparative
development.
       The direct e¤ect of genetic diversity on contemporary income per capita, once institutional,
cultural, and geographical factors are accounted for, indicates that: (i) increasing the diversity of
the most homogenous country in the sample (Bolivia) by 1 percentage point would raise its income
per capita in the year 2000 CE by 39%, (ii) decreasing the diversity of the most diverse country
in the sample (Ethiopia) by 1 percentage point would raise its income per capita by 21%, (iii) a 1
percentage point change in genetic diversity (in either direction) at the optimum level of 0.721 (that
most closely resembles the diversity level of the U.S.) would lower income per capita by 1.9%, (iv)
increasing Bolivia’s diversity to the optimum level prevalent in the U.S. would increase Bolivia’s per
capita income by a factor of 4.7, closing the income gap between the U.S. and Bolivia from 12:1
   7
     Consistent with the predictions of the proposed hypothesis, the robustness analysis in Appendix A demonstrates
that the non-monotonic e¤ect of genetic diversity on development outcomes is prevalent in earlier historical periods
as well. Moreover, genetic diversity explains between 15% and 42% of the cross-country variation in log population
density, depending on the historical period examined and the control variables included in the regression speci…cation.
Indeed, the impact of genetic diversity is robust to various regression speci…cations such as the inclusion of controls
for the spatial in‡uence of regional technological frontiers via trade and the di¤usion of technologies, and controls for
microgeographic factors gauging terrain quality and proximity to waterways.


                                                           6
to 2.5:1, and (v) decreasing Ethiopia’s diversity to the optimum level of the U.S. would increase
Ethiopia’s per capita income by a factor of 1.7 and, thus, close the income gap between the U.S. and
Ethiopia from 47:1 to 27:1.
        Reassuringly, the highly signi…cant and stable hump-shaped e¤ect of genetic diversity on income
per capita in the year 2000 CE is not an artifact of post-colonial migrations towards prosperous
countries and the concomitant increase in ethnic diversity in these economies. The hump-shaped
e¤ect of genetic diversity remains highly signi…cant and the optimal diversity estimate remains
virtually intact if the regression sample is restricted to (a) non-OECD economies (i.e., economies
that were less attractive to migrants), (b) non Neo-European countries (i.e., excluding the U.S.,
Canada, New Zealand and Australia), (c) non-Latin American countries, (d) non Sub-Saharan
African countries, and perhaps most importantly (e) to countries whose indigenous population is
larger than 97% of the entire population (i.e., under conditions that virtually eliminate the role of
migration in the creation of diversity).
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 brie‡y reviews some related
literature. Section 3 presents a basic model that predicts a hump-shaped e¤ect of diversity on
economic development. Section 4 covers the historical analysis, discussing the empirical strategy as
well as the relevant data and data sources before presenting the empirical …ndings. Section 5 does
the same for the contemporary analysis, and, …nally, Section 6 concludes.


2        Related Literature
The existing literature on comparative development has emphasized a variety of factors underlying
some of the vast di¤erences in living standards across the globe. The in‡uence of geography, for
instance, has been stressed from a historical perspective by Jones (1981), Diamond (1997), and
Pomeranz (2000), and is highlighted empirically by Gallup et al. (1999) and Olsson and Hibbs
(2005), amongst others. Institutions, on the other hand, are given historical precedence by North and
Thomas (1973), Mokyr (1990), and Greif (1993), and are emphasized empirically by Hall and Jones
(1999), La Porta et al. (1999), Rodrik et al. (2004), and Acemoglu et al. (2005). In related strands
of the literature on institutions, Engerman and Sokolo¤ (2000) and Acemoglu et al. (2005) have
stressed the role of colonialism, while the e¤ects of ethno-linguistic fractionalization are examined
by Easterly and Levine (1997), Alesina et al. (2003), and others. Meanwhile, the historical impact
of sociocultural factors has been highlighted by Weber (1905) and Landes (1998), with empirical
support coming from Barro and McCleary (2003), Tabellini (2008), as well as Guiso et al. (2009).
Finally, the importance of human capital formation has been underlined in uni…ed growth theory
(e.g., Galor, 2010), and has been demonstrated empirically by Glaeser et al. (2004).8
        This research is the …rst to argue that the variation in prehistorical migratory distance from the
cradle of humankind to various settlements across the globe has had a persistent e¤ect on the process
of development and on the contemporary variation in income per capita across the globe. The paper
is also unique in its attempt to establish the role of genetic (rather than ethnic) diversity within
    8
        See also Dalgaard and Strulik (2010).




                                                      7
a society as a signi…cant determinant of its development path and, thus, its comparative economic
performance across space and time.
       The employment of data and empirical results from the …eld of population genetics places this
research in the neighborhood of a recent insightful paper in the economic literature by Spolaore
and Wacziarg (2009) who have appealed to data on genetic distance between human populations
to proxy for the e¤ect of sociocultural di¤erences between societies on the di¤usion of economic
development.9 Speci…cally, the authors argue that genetic distance between populations, which
captures their divergence in biological and cultural characteristics over time, has been a barrier to
the horizontal di¤usion of technological innovations across populations. They show that Fst genetic
distance, a measure that re‡ects the time elapsed since two populations shared a common ancestor,
confers a statistically signi…cant positive e¤ect on both historical and contemporary pairwise income
di¤erences. In contrast, the genetic diversity metric within populations exploited by this paper
facilitates the analysis of the e¤ect of the variation in traits across individuals within a society on its
development process.
       Unlike Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009) where genetic distance between populations diminishes the
rate of technological di¤usion and reduces productivity, the hypothesis advanced and tested in this
paper suggests that genetic diversity within a population confers both social costs, in the form of
lower social capital arising from di¤erences amongst individual members, and social bene…ts in the
form of diversity-driven knowledge accumulation. Hence, the overall e¤ect of genetic diversity on
developmental outcomes would be hump-shaped, rather than monotonically negative. The results
of the empirical analysis conducted in this study suggest that the previously unexamined bene…cial
e¤ect of genetic di¤erences is indeed a signi…cant factor in the overall in‡uence of the genetic channel
on comparative development.
       The examination of the e¤ects of genetic diversity along with the in‡uence of the timing of
agricultural transitions also places this paper in an emerging strand of the literature that has
focused on empirically testing Diamond’s (1997) assertion regarding the long-standing impact of
the Neolithic Revolution.10        Diamond (1997) has stressed the role of biogeographical factors in
determining the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, which conferred a developmental head-start
to societies that experienced an earlier transition from primitive hunting and gathering techniques
to the more technologically advanced agricultural mode of production. According to this hypothesis,
the luck of being dealt a favorable hand thousands of years ago with respect to biogeographic
endowments, particularly exogenous factors contributing to the emergence of agriculture and facili-
tating the subsequent di¤usion of agricultural techniques, is the single most important driving force
behind the divergent development paths of societies throughout history that ultimately led to the
contemporary global di¤erences in standards of living. Speci…cally, an earlier transition to agriculture
   9
     See also Desmet et al. (2006) who demonstrate a strong correlation between genetic and cultural distances among
European populations to argue that genetic distance can be employed as an appropriate proxy to study the e¤ect of
cultural distance on the formation of new political borders in Europe. In addition, Guiso et al. (2009), employ data
on genetic distance between European populations as an instrument for measures of trust to estimate its e¤ect on the
volume of bilateral trade and foreign direct investment.
  10
     The studies by Olsson and Hibbs (2005) and Putterman (2008) have provided empirical support for the Diamond
hypothesis in that the timing of the Neolithic revolution has a¤ected the contemporary variation in income per capita
across the globe.



                                                         8
due to favorable environmental conditions gave some societies an early advantage by conferring the
bene…ts of a production technology that generated resource surpluses and enabled the rise of a
non-food-producing class whose members were crucial for the development of written language and
science, and for the formation of cities, technology-based military powers and nation states. The
early technological dominance of these societies subsequently persisted throughout history, being
further sustained by the subjugation of less-developed societies through exploitative geopolitical and
historical processes such as colonization.
    While the long-standing in‡uence of the Neolithic Revolution on comparative development re-
mains a compelling argument, this research demonstrates that, contrary to Diamond’s (1997) uni-
causal hypothesis, the composition of human populations with respect to their genetic diversity has
been an signi…cant and persistent factor that a¤ected the course of economic development from the
dawn of human civilization to the present. In estimating the economic impact of human genetic
diversity while controlling for the channel emphasized by Diamond (1997), the current research
additionally establishes the historical signi…cance of the timing of agricultural transitions for pre-
colonial population density, which, as already argued, is the relevant variable capturing comparative
economic development during the Malthusian epoch of stagnation in income per capita.11


3     Diversity and Productivity: A Basic Model
Consider an economy where the level of productivity is a¤ected by the degree of genetic diversity in
society. Speci…cally, genetic diversity generates con‡icting e¤ects on productivity. A wider spectrum
of traits is complementary to the adoption or implementation of new technologies. It enhances
knowledge creation and fosters technological progress, thereby expanding the economy’s production
possibility frontier. However, a wider spectrum of traits also reduces the likelihood of cooperative or
trustful behavior, generating ine¢ ciencies in the operation of the economy relative to its production
possibility frontier.
    Suppose that the degree of genetic diversity, ! 2 [0; 1], has a positive but diminishing e¤ect
on the level of technology that is available for production. Speci…cally, the level of technology, A,
and thus the economy’s production possibility frontier, is determined by a vector of institutional,
geographical, and human capital factors, z, as well as by the degree of diversity, !.12

                                                     A = A(z; !),                                                     (1)
   11
      Note that, although the genetic diversity channel raised in this study is conceptually independent of the timing
of the agricultural transition, an additional genetic channel that interacts with the time elapsed since the Neolithic
Revolution has been examined by Galor and Moav (2002, 2007). These studies argue that the Neolithic transition
triggered an evolutionary process resulting in the natural selection of certain genetic traits (such as preference for
higher quality children and greater longevity) that are complementary to economic development, thereby implying a
ceteris paribus positive relationship between the timing of the agricultural transition and the representation of such
traits in the population. Indeed, the empirical evidence recently uncovered by Galor and Moav (2007) is consistent
with this theoretical prediction. Thus, while the signi…cant reduced-form e¤ect of the Neolithic Revolution observed
in this study may be associated with the Diamond hypothesis, it could also be partly capturing the in‡uence of this
additional genetic channel. See also Lagerlöf (2007) for a complementary evolutionary theory regarding the dynamics
of human body mass in the process of economic development.
   12
      Several mechanisms could generate this reduced form relationship. Suppose that the labor force is characterized
by heterogeneity in equally productive traits, each of which permit individuals to perform complementary specialized
tasks. The quantity of trait i in the population is xi and it is distributed uniformly over the interval [0; !]. The level


                                                            9
where A(z; !) > 0, A! (z; !) > 0, and A!! (z; !) < 0 for all ! 2 [0; 1], and lim!                           !0 A! (z; !)   =1
and lim!    !1 A! (z; !)   = 0.
    Suppose further that the position of the economy relative to its production possibly frontier is
adversely a¤ected by the degree of genetic diversity. In particular, a fraction, !, of the economy’s
potential productivity, A(z; !), is lost due to lack of cooperation and resultant ine¢ ciencies in the
production process.
    Output per worker is therefore determined by the level of employment of factors of production,
x, the level of productivity, A(z; !), and the degree of ine¢ ciency in production,                          2 (0; 1).


                                           y = (1            !)A(z; !)f (x)                  y(!),                         (2)

where x is a vector of factor inputs per worker, and ! is the extent of erosion in productivity due
to ine¢ ciencies in the production process.13 Hence, as follows from (2), y(!) is a strictly concave
hump-shaped function of !. Speci…cally,

                                y 0 (!) = [(1         !)A! (z; !)                  A(z; !)]f (x);


                                y 00 (!) = [(1         !)A!! (z; !)                2 A! (z; !)]f (x) < 0;                  (3)


                                lim!          0 (!)                                          0 (!)
                                       !0 y           > 0;    and              lim!   !1 y           < 0.

    Thus, as depicted in Figure 2, there exists an intermediate level of diversity, ! 2 (0; 1), that
maximizes the level of output per worker. In particular, ! satis…es

                                           (1          ! )A! (z; ! ) = A(z; ! ).                                           (4)


4     The Historical Analysis
4.1     Data and Empirical Strategy
This section discusses the data and empirical strategy employed to examine the impact of genetic
diversity on comparative development in the pre-colonial era.

4.1.1     Dependent Variable: Historical Population Density

As argued previously, the relevant variable re‡ecting comparative development across countries in
the pre-colonial Malthusian era is population density. The empirical examination of the proposed
of productivity is therefore,                                 Z       !
                                                A(z; !) = z               xi di;       2 (0; 1).
                                                                  0
Hence, an increase in the spectrum of traits, !, (holding the aggregate supply of productive traits constant) will increase
productivity at a decreasing rate. Alternatively, if there exists a hierarchy of traits and only traits above the cut-o¤
  2 (0; !) contribute to productivity, then an increase in the spectrum of traits, !, could increase productivity at a
decreasing rate.
  13
     If degree of ine¢ ciency is (!), the results of the model would remain intact as long as the contribution of
homogeneity for e¢ ciency is diminishing (i.e., as long as (!) is non-decreasing and weakly convex in !).



                                                                          10
                       y(ω)




                              0                   ω*                             1        ω

                   Figure 2: The Hump-Shaped E¤ect of Diversity on Development


genetic hypothesis therefore aims to employ cross-country variation in observed genetic diversity
and in that predicted by migratory distance from East Africa to explain cross-country variation in
historical population density. Data on historical population density are obtained from McEvedy
and Jones (1978) who provide …gures at the country level, i.e., for regions de…ned by contemporary
national borders, over the period 400 BCE–1975 CE.14 However, given the greater unreliability (and
less availability in terms of observations) of population data for earlier historical periods, the baseline
regression speci…cation adopts population density in 1500 CE as the preferred outcome variable to
examine. The analysis in Appendix A additionally examines population density in 1000 CE and 1
CE to demonstrate the robustness of the genetic channel for earlier time periods.

4.1.2    Independent Variable: Genetic Diversity

The most reliable and consistent data for genetic diversity among indigenous populations across the
globe consists of 53 ethnic groups from the Human Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel, compiled
by the Human Genome Diversity Project-Centre d’Etudes du Polymorphisme Humain (HGDP-
CEPH).15 According to anthropologists, these 53 ethnic groups are not only historically native
to their current geographical location but have also been isolated from genetic ‡ows from other
ethnic groups. Population geneticists typically measure the extent of diversity in genetic material
across individuals within a given population (such as an ethnic group) using an index called expected
heterozygosity. Like most other measures of diversity, this index may be interpreted simply as the
probability that two individuals, selected at random from the relevant population, are genetically
di¤erent from one another. Speci…cally, the expected heterozygosity measure for a given population
is constructed by geneticists using sample data on allelic frequencies, i.e., the frequency with which a
  14
    The reader is referred to Appendix F for additional details.
  15
    For a more detailed description of the HGDP-CEPH Human Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel data set, the
interested reader is referred to Cann et al. (2002). A broad overview of the Human Genome Diversity Project is given
by Cavalli-Sforza (2005). The 53 ethnic groups are listed in Appendix E.


                                                        11
“gene variant”or allele occurs in the population sample. Given allelic frequencies for a particular gene
or DNA locus, it is possible to compute a gene-speci…c heterozygosity statistic (i.e., the probability
that two randomly selected individuals di¤er with respect to a given gene), which when averaged over
multiple genes or DNA loci yields the overall expected heterozygosity for the relevant population.
       Consider a single gene or locus l with k observed variants or alleles in the population and let pi
denote the frequency of the i-th allele. Then, the expected heterozygosity of the population with
                     l , is:
respect to locus l, Hexp
                                                               k
                                                               X
                                                 l
                                                Hexp   =1            p2i .                                         (5)
                                                               i=1

       Given allelic frequencies for each of m di¤erent genes or loci, the average across these loci then
yields an aggregate expected heterozygosity measure of overall genetic diversity, Hexp , as:

                                                               m     k
                                                           1 XXl

                                            Hexp = 1             p2i ,                                             (6)
                                                           m
                                                               l=1 i=1

where kl is the number of observed variants in locus l.
       Empirical evidence uncovered by Ramachandran et al. (2005) for the 53 ethnic groups from the
Human Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel suggests that migratory distance from East Africa has an
adverse linear e¤ect on genetic diversity.16 They interpret this …nding as providing support for a
serial-founder e¤ect originating in East Africa, re‡ecting a process where the populating of the world
occurred in a series of discrete steps involving subgroups leaving initial settlements to establish new
settlements further away and carrying with them only a subset of the overall genetic diversity of
their parental colonies.
       In estimating the migratory distance from East Africa for each of the 53 ethnic groups in their
data set, Ramachandran et al. (2005) calculate great circle (or geodesic) distances using Addis
Ababa (Ethiopia) as the point of common origin and the contemporary geographic coordinates of the
sampled groups as the destinations. Moreover, these distance estimates incorporate …ve obligatory
intermediate waypoints, used to more accurately capture paleontological and genetic evidence on
prehistorical human migration patterns that are consistent with the widely-held hypothesis that,
in the course of their exodus from Africa, humans did not cross large bodies of water. The inter-
mediate waypoints, depicted on the world map in Figure 3 along with the spatial distribution of
the ethnic groups from the HGDP-CEPH sample, are: Cairo (Egypt), Istanbul (Turkey), Phnom
Penh (Cambodia), Anadyr (Russia) and Prince Rupert (Canada). For instance, as illustrated in
Figure 3, the migration path from Addis Ababa to the Papuan ethnic group in modern-day New
Guinea makes use of Cairo and Phnom Penh whereas that to the Karitiana population in Brazil
incorporates Cairo, Anadyr and Prince Rupert as intermediate waypoints.17 The migratory distance
  16
      Ramachandran et al. (2005) compute expected heterozygosity (i.e., genetic diversity) for these 53 ethnic groups
from allelic frequencies associated with 783 chromosomal loci.
   17
      Based on mitochondrial DNA analysis, some recent studies (e.g., Macaulay et al., 2005) have proposed a southern
exit route out of Africa whereby the initial exodus into Asia occurred not via the Levant but across the mouth of the
Red Sea (between modern-day Djibouti and Yemen), thereafter taking a “beachcombing”path along the southern coast
of the Arabian Peninsula to India and onward into Southeast Asia. Moreover, a subsequent northern o¤shoot from the
Persian Gulf region ultimately lead to the settlement of the Near East and Europe. This scenario therefore suggests the



                                                          12
      Figure 3: The 53 HGDP-CEPH Ethnic Groups and Migratory Paths from East Africa


between endpoints (i.e., Addis Ababa and the location of a group) is therefore the sum of the great
circle distances between these endpoints and the waypoint(s) in the path connecting them, and the
distance(s) between waypoints if two or more such points are required.
    The empirical analysis of Ramachandran et al. (2005) establishes migratory distance from East
Africa as a strong negative predictor of genetic diversity at the ethnic group level. Based on the
R-squared of their regression, migratory distance alone explains almost 86% of the cross-group
variation in within-group diversity.18 In addition, the estimated OLS coe¢ cient is highly statistically
signi…cant, possessing a t-statistic = -9.770 (P-value < 10             4 ),   and suggests that predicted expected
heterozygosity falls by 0.076 percentage points for every 10,000 km increase in migratory distance
from Addis Ababa.19 This is the relationship depicted earlier on the scatter plot in Figure 1.
    The present study exploits the explanatory power of migratory distance from East Africa for the
cross-sectional variation in ethnic group expected heterozygosity in order to advance the empirical
analysis of the e¤ect of diversity on development in two dimensions. First, given the potential
endogeneity between observed genetic diversity and economic development as discussed earlier, the
use of genetic diversity values predicted by migratory distance from East Africa alleviates concerns
use of Sana’a (Yemen) and Bandar Abbas (Iran) as intermediate waypoints instead of Cairo. Adopting this alternative
route for computing migratory distances, however, does not signi…cantly alter the main results presented in Section
4.2.
   18
      These results are similar to those uncovered in an independent study by Prugnolle et al. (2005) that employs a
subset of the HGDP-CEPH sample encompassing 51 ethnic groups whose expected heterozygosities are calculated from
allelic frequencies for 377 loci. Despite their somewhat smaller sample at both the ethnic group and DNA analysis
levels, Prugnolle et al. (2005) …nd that migratory distance from East Africa explains 85% of the variation in genetic
diversity. On the other hand, using an expanded data set comprised of the 53 HGDP-CEPH ethnic groups and an
additional 24 Native American populations, Wang et al. (2007) …nd that migratory distance explains a more modest
74% of the variation in genetic diversity, based on allelic frequencies for 678 loci. The authors attribute their somewhat
weaker results to the fact that the additional Native American ethnic groups in their augmented sample were historically
subjected to a high degree of gene ‡ow from foreign populations (i.e., European colonizers), which obscured the genetic
legacy of a serial-founder e¤ect in these groups.
   19
      This e¤ect corresponds to roughly one-third of the full (worldwide) range of expected heterozygosity values observed
across the HGDP-CEPH sample of ethnic groups.


                                                           13
regarding endogeneity bias. Speci…cally, the identifying assumption being employed here is that
distances along prehistorical human migration routes from Africa have no direct e¤ect on economic
development during the Common Era. Second, the strong capacity of migratory distance in predicting
genetic diversity implies that the empirical analysis of the genetic hypothesis proposed in this study
need not be restricted to the 53 HGDP-CEPH ethnic groups that span only 21 countries, especially
since data on the outcome variable of interest (i.e., population density in the year 1500 CE) are
available for a much larger set of countries.
    To further elaborate, the current analysis tests the proposed genetic hypothesis both using
observed genetic diversity in a limited sample of 21 countries, spanned by the 53 ethnic groups
in the HGDP-CEPH data set, and using genetic diversity predicted by migratory distance from
East Africa in an extended sample of 145 countries. In the 21-country sample, genetic diversity
and migratory distance are aggregated up to the country level by averaging across the set of ethnic
groups located within a given country.20 For the extended sample, however, the distance calculation
methodology of Ramachandran et al. (2005) is adopted to …rst construct migratory distance from
East Africa for each country, using Addis Ababa as the origin and the country’s modern capital city
as the destination along with the aforementioned waypoints for restricting the migration route to
landmasses as much as possible.21 This constructed distance variable is then applied to obtain a
predicted value of genetic diversity for each country based on the coe¢ cient on migratory distance
in Ramachandran et al.’s (2005) regression across the 53 HGDP-CEPH ethnic groups. Hence, it is
this predicted genetic diversity at the country level that is employed as the explanatory variable of
interest in the extended sample of countries.22
   20
      A population-weighted averaging method is infeasible in this case due to the current unavailability of population
…gures for the HGDP-CEPH ethnic groups.
   21
      Clearly, there is some amount of measurement error that is introduced by following this methodology since actual
migration paths are only approximated due to the use of …ve major intercontinental waypoints. For instance, using this
general method to calculate the migratory distance to Iceland, which was settled in the 9th century CE by a Norwegian
population, fails to capture Oslo as an additional case-speci…c waypoint. The overall sparsity of historical evidence,
however, regarding the actual source of initial settlements in many regions makes a more re…ned analysis infeasible.
Nonetheless, it is credibly postulated that the absence of case-speci…c waypoints from the analysis does not introduce
signi…cant mismeasurement at the global scale. The same argument applies in defense of using modern capital cities
as destination points for the migratory paths, although historical evidence suggests that, at least for many cases in the
“Old World”, modern capitals were also some of the major centers of urbanization throughout the Common Era (see,
e.g., Bairoch, 1988; McEvedy and Jones, 1978).
   22
      As argued by Pagan (1984) and Murphy and Topel (1985), the OLS estimator for this two-step estimation method
yields consistent estimates of the coe¢ cients in the second stage regression, but inconsistent estimates of their standard
errors as it fails to account for the presence of a generated regressor. This inadvertently causes naive statistical inferences
to be biased in favor of rejecting the null hypothesis. To surmount this issue, the current study employs a two-step
bootstrapping algorithm to compute the standard errors in all regressions that use the extended sample containing
predicted genetic diversity at the country level. The bootstrap estimates of the standard errors are constructed in the
following manner. A random sample with replacement is drawn from the HGDP-CEPH sample of 53 ethnic groups. The
…rst stage regression is estimated on this random sample and the corresponding OLS coe¢ cient on migratory distance
is used to compute predicted genetic diversity in the extended sample of countries. The second stage regression is
then estimated on a random sample with replacement drawn from the extended cross-country sample and the OLS
coe¢ cients are stored. This process of two-step bootstrap sampling and least squares estimation is repeated 1,000
times. The standard deviations in the sample of 1,000 observations of coe¢ cient estimates from the second stage
regression are thus the bootstrap standard errors of the point estimates of these coe¢ cients.




                                                              14
4.1.3      Control Variables: Neolithic Transition Timing and Land Productivity

Diamond’s (1997) hypothesis has identi…ed the timing of the Neolithic Revolution as a proximate
determinant of economic development, designating initial geographic and biogeographic conditions
that governed the emergence and adoption of agricultural practices in prehistorical hunter-gatherer
societies as the ultimate determinants in this channel. Some of these geographic and biogeographic
factors, highlighted in the empirical analysis of Olsson and Hibbs (2005), include the size of the
continent or landmass, the orientation of the major continental axis, type of climate, and the number
of prehistorical plant and animal species amenable for domestication.23
       The current analysis controls for the ultimate and proximate determinants of development in
the Diamond channel using cross-country data on the aforementioned geographic and biogeographic
variables as well as on the timing of the Neolithic Revolution.24 However, given the empirical
link between the ultimate and proximate factors in Diamond’s hypothesis, the baseline speci…cation
focuses on the timing of the Neolithic transition to agriculture as the relevant control variable for
this channel. The results from an extended speci…cation that incorporates initial geographic and
biogeographic factors as controls are presented in Appendix A to demonstrate robustness.
       The focus of the historical analysis on economic development in the pre-colonial Malthusian
era also necessitates controls for the natural productivity of land for agriculture. Given that in a
Malthusian environment resource surpluses are primarily channeled into population growth with per
capita incomes largely remaining at or near subsistence, regions characterized by natural factors
generating higher agricultural crop yields should, ceteris paribus, also exhibit higher population
densities (Ashraf and Galor, 2010).25 If diversity in a society in‡uences its development through total
factor productivity (comprised of both social capital and technological know-how), then controlling
for the natural productivity of land would constitute a more accurate test of the e¤ect of diversity
on the Malthusian development outcome –i.e., population density.
       In controlling for the agricultural productivity of land, this study employs measurements of three
geographic variables at the country level including (i) the percentage of arable land, (ii) absolute
latitude, and (iii) an index gauging the overall suitability of land for agriculture based on ecological
indicators of climate suitability for cultivation, such as growing degree days and the ratio of actual
to potential evapotranspiration, as well as ecological indicators of soil suitability for cultivation, such
as soil carbon density and soil pH.26
  23
      See also Weisdorf (2005).
  24
      The data source for the aforementioned geographic and biogeographic controls is Olsson and Hibbs (2005) whereas
that for the timing of the Neolithic Revolution is Putterman (2008). See Appendix F for the de…nitions and sources of
all primary and control variables employed by the analysis.
   25
      It is important to note, in addition, that the type of land productivity being considered here is largely independent of
initial geographic and biogeographic endowments in the Diamond channel and, thus, somewhat orthogonal to the timing
of agricultural transitions as well. This holds due to the independence of natural factors conducive to domesticated
species from those that were bene…cial for the wild ancestors of eventual domesticates. As argued by Diamond (2002),
while agriculture originated in regions of the world to which the most valuable domesticable wild plant and animal
species were native, other regions proved more fertile and climatically favorable once the di¤usion of agricultural
practices brought the domesticated varieties to them.
   26
      The data for these variables are obtained from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators, the CIA’s World
Factbook, and Michalopoulos (2008) respectively. The country-level aggregate data on the land suitability index from
Michalopoulos (2008) are, in turn, based on more disaggregated geospatial data on this index from the ecological study
of Ramankutty et al. (2002). See Appendix F for additional details.



                                                             15
4.1.4      The Baseline Regression Speci…cations

In light of the proposed genetic diversity hypothesis as well as the roles of the Neolithic transition
timing and land productivity channels in agricultural development, the following speci…cation is
adopted to examine the in‡uence of observed genetic diversity on economic development in the
limited sample of 21 countries:

                                                        2                      0              0
                   ln Pit =    0t   +   1t Gi   +   2t Gi   +   3t ln Ti   +   4t ln Xi   +   5t ln   i   + "it ,    (7)

where Pit is the population density of country i in a given year t, Gi is the average genetic diversity
of the subset of HGDP-CEPH ethnic groups that are located in country i, Ti is the time in years
elapsed since country i’s transition to agriculture, Xi is a vector of land productivity controls,                   i   is
a vector of continental dummies, and "it is a country-year speci…c disturbance                             term.27
       Moreover, considering the remarkably strong predictive power of migratory distance from East
Africa for genetic diversity, the baseline regression speci…cation employed to test the proposed genetic
channel in the extended cross-country sample is given by:

                   ln Pit =         +     ^ +
                                        1t Gi
                                                       ^2
                                                    2t Gi   +   3t ln Ti   +   0              0
                               0t                                              4t ln Xi   +   5t ln   i   + "it ,    (8)

      ^ i is the genetic diversity predicted by migratory distance from East Africa for country i
where G
using the methodology discussed in Section 4.1.2. Indeed, it is this regression speci…cation that is
estimated to obtain the main empirical …ndings.28
       Before proceeding, it is important to note that the regression speci…cations in (7) and (8)
above constitute reduced-form empirical analyses of the genetic diversity channel in Malthusian
economic development. Speci…cally, according to the proposed hypothesis, genetic diversity has a
non-monotonic impact on society’s level of development through two opposing e¤ects on the level
of its total factor productivity: a detrimental e¤ect on social capital and a bene…cial e¤ect on the
knowledge frontier. However, given the absence of measurements for the proximate determinants
of development in the genetic diversity channel, a more discriminatory test of the hypothesis is
infeasible. Nonetheless, the results to follow are entirely consistent with the theoretical prediction
that, in the presence of diminishing marginal e¤ects of genetic diversity on total factor productivity in
  27
     The fact that economic development has been historically clustered in certain regions of the world raises concerns
that these disturbances could be non-spherical in nature, thereby confounding statistical inferences based on the OLS
estimator. In particular, the disturbance terms may exhibit spatial autocorrelation, i.e., Cov["i ; "j ] > 0, within a
certain threshold of distance from each observation. Keeping this possibility in mind, the limited sample analyses
presented in the text are repeated in Appendix D, where the standard errors of the point estimates are corrected for
spatial autocorrelation across disturbance terms, following the methodology of Conley (1999).
  28
     Tables G.1–G.2 in Appendix G present the descriptive statistics of the limited 21-country sample employed in
estimating equation (7) while Tables G.3–G.4 present those of the extended 145-country sample used to estimate
equation (8). As reported therein, the …nite-sample moments of the explanatory variables in the limited and extended
cross-country samples are remarkably similar. Speci…cally, the range of values for predicted genetic diversity in the
extended sample falls within the range of values for observed diversity in the limited sample. This is particularly
reassuring because it demonstrates that the methodology used to generate the predicted genetic diversity variable did
not project values beyond what is actually observed, indicating that the HGDP-CEPH collection of ethnic groups is
indeed a representative sample for the worldwide variation in within-country genetic diversity. Moreover, the fact that
the …nite-sample moments of log population density in 1500 CE are not signi…cantly di¤erent between the limited and
extended cross-country samples foreshadows the encouraging similarity of the regression results that are obtained under
observed and predicted values of genetic diversity.


                                                                16
a Malthusian economy, the overall reduced-form e¤ect of genetic diversity on cross-country population
density should be hump-shaped –i.e., that             1t   > 0 and   2t   < 0. Moreover, as will become evident, the
unconditional hump-shaped relationship between genetic diversity and development outcomes does
not di¤er signi…cantly between the adopted quadratic and alternative non-parametric speci…cations.

4.2      Empirical Findings
This section presents the results from empirically investigating the relationship between genetic
diversity and log population density in the pre-colonial Malthusian era. Results for observed diversity
in the limited 21-country sample are examined in Section 4.2.1. Section 4.2.2 discusses the baseline
results associated with examining the e¤ect of predicted diversity on log population density in 1500
CE in the extended sample of 145 countries. The robustness of the diversity channel with respect to
alternative concepts of distance, including the aerial distance from East Africa as well as migratory
distances from several “placebo” points of origin across the globe, are presented in Section 4.2.3.
       The analysis is subsequently expanded upon in Appendix A to demonstrate the robustness of the
diversity channel with respect to (i) explaining comparative development in earlier historical periods,
speci…cally log population density in 1000 CE and 1 CE, (ii) the technology di¤usion hypothesis that
postulates a bene…cial e¤ect on development arising from spatial proximity to regional technological
frontiers, (iii) controls for microgeographic factors including the degree of variation in terrain and
access to waterways, and …nally, (iv) controls for the exogenous geographic and biogeographic factors
favoring an earlier onset of agriculture in the Diamond channel.

4.2.1      Results from the Limited Sample

The initial investigation of the proposed genetic diversity hypothesis using the limited sample of
countries is of fundamental importance for the subsequent empirical analyses, performed using the
extended sample, in three critical dimensions. First, since the limited sample contains observed
values of genetic diversity whereas the extended sample comprises values predicted by migratory
distance from East Africa, similarity in the results obtained from the two samples would lend
credence to the main empirical …ndings associated with predicted genetic diversity in the extended
sample of countries. Second, the fact that migratory distance from East Africa and observed genetic
diversity are not perfectly correlated with each other makes it possible to test, using the limited
sample of countries, the assertion that migratory distance a¤ects economic development through
genetic diversity only and is, therefore, appropriate for generating predicted genetic diversity in the
extended sample of countries.29 Finally, having veri…ed the above assertion, the limited sample
  29
    The fact that migratory distance from East Africa may be correlated with other potential geographical determinants
of genetic diversity, particularly factors like the dispersion of land suitability for agriculture and the dispersion of
elevation that have been shown to give rise to ethnic diversity (Michalopoulos, 2008), raises the possibility that migratory
distance may not be the only source of exogenous variation in genetic diversity. However, Table D.1 in Appendix D
indicates that these other factors have little or no explanatory power for the cross-country variation in actual genetic
diversity beyond that accounted for by migratory distance via the serial-founder e¤ect. Speci…cally, the OLS coe¢ cient
as well as the partial R-squared associated with migratory distance remain both quantitatively and qualitatively
robust when the regression is augmented with these geographical controls, all of which are statistically insigni…cant
in explaining genetic diversity. The reader is referred to Appendix F for detailed de…nitions of the additional control
variables used by the analysis in Table D.1.



                                                             17
                 Table 1: Observed Diversity and Economic Development in 1500 CE

                                                 (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)            (5)
                                           Dependent Variable is Log Population Density in 1500 CE
             Observed Diversity           413.504***                               225.440***     203.814*
                                          (97.320)                                 (73.781)       (97.637)
             Observed Diversity Sqr.      -302.647***                              -161.158**     -145.717*
                                          (73.344)                                 (56.155)       (80.414)
             Log Transition Timing                        2.396***                 1.214***       1.135
                                                          (0.272)                  (0.373)        (0.658)
             Log % of Arable Land                                      0.730**     0.516***       0.545*
                                                                       (0.281)     (0.165)        (0.262)
             Log Absolute Latitude                                     0.145       -0.162         -0.129
                                                                       (0.178)     (0.130)        (0.174)
             Log Land Suitability                                      0.734*      0.571*         0.587
                                                                       (0.381)     (0.294)        (0.328)

             Optimal Diversity            0.683***                                 0.699***       0.699***
                                          (0.008)                                  (0.015)        (0.055)
             Continent Dummies            No              No           No          No             Yes
             Observations                 21              21           21          21             21
             R-squared                    0.42            0.54         0.57        0.89           0.90
             Note: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
             *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.


permits an instrumental variables regression analysis of the proposed hypothesis with migratory
distance employed as an instrument for genetic diversity. This then constitutes a more direct and
accurate test of the genetic diversity channel given possible concerns regarding the endogeneity
between genetic diversity and economic development. As will become evident, the results obtained
from the limited sample are reassuring on all three aforementioned fronts.

Explaining Comparative Development in 1500 CE. Table 1 presents the limited sample
results from regressions explaining log population density in 1500 CE.30 In particular, a number of
speci…cations comprising di¤erent subsets of the explanatory variables in equation (3) are estimated
to examine the independent and combined e¤ects of the genetic diversity, transition timing, and land
productivity channels.
       Consistent with the predictions of the proposed diversity hypothesis, Column 1 reveals the
unconditional cross-country hump-shaped relationship between genetic diversity and log population
density in 1500 CE. Speci…cally, the estimated linear and quadratic coe¢ cients, both statistically
signi…cant at the 1% level, imply that a 1 percentage point increase in genetic diversity for the
most homogenous society in the regression sample would raise its population density in 1500 CE by
114%, whereas a 1 percentage point decrease in diversity for the most diverse society would raise its
population density by 64%. In addition, the coe¢ cients also indicate that a 1 percentage point change
in diversity in either direction at the predicted optimum of 0.683 would lower population density
by 3%.31 Furthermore, based on the R-squared coe¢ cient of the regression, the genetic diversity
  30
     Corresponding to Tables 1 and 2 in the text, Tables D.2 and D.3 in Appendix D present results with standard
errors and 2SLS point estimates corrected for spatial autocorrelation across observations.
  31
     The magnitude of these e¤ects can be derived directly from the estimated linear and quadratic coe¢ cients associated
with genetic diversity. Speci…cally, letting ^ 1 and ^ 2 denote the estimated coe¢ cients on genetic diversity and genetic
diversity square, equation (7) can be used to show that the proportional e¤ect on population density of a G change



                                                           18
Figure 4: Observed Genetic Diversity and Population Density in 1500 CE – The Unconditional
Relationship


channel appears to explain 42% of the variation in log population density in 1500 CE across the
limited sample of countries. The quadratic relationship implied by the OLS coe¢ cients reported in
Column 1 is depicted together with a non-parametric local polynomial regression line on the scatter
plot in Figure 4.32 Reassuringly, as illustrated therein, the estimated quadratic falls within the 95%
con…dence interval band of the non-parametric relationship.33
    The unconditional e¤ects of the Neolithic transition timing and land productivity channels are
reported in Columns 2 and 3 respectively. In line with the Diamond hypothesis, a 1% increase
in the number of years elapsed since the transition to agriculture increases population density in
1500 CE by 2.4%, an e¤ect that is also signi…cant at the 1% level. Similarly, consistent with the
predictions of the land productivity channel, population density in 1500 CE possesses statistically
signi…cant positive elasticities with respect to both the percentage of arable land as well as the index
gauging the suitability of land for agriculture. Moreover, the agricultural transition timing and
land productivity channels independently explain 54% and 57% of the limited cross-country sample
variation in log population density in 1500 CE.
    Column 4 presents the results obtained from exploiting the combined explanatory power of all
three channels for log population density in the year 1500 CE. Not surprisingly, given the small sample
size as well as the pairwise correlations between covariates reported in Table G.2 in Appendix G, the
in diversity at the speci…ed level G is given by: P=P = expf G( ^ 1 + 2 ^ 2 G + G G)g 1.
  32
     The non-parametric regression lines depicted in Figures 4, 5, and 7 are all estimated using local 2nd-degree
polynomial smoothing with a Gaussian kernel function and a kernel bandwidth of 0.06. Corresponding to these …gures
in the text, Figures C.1, C.2, and C.4 in Appendix C compare, in each case, the quadratic …t with a restricted cubic
spline regression, estimated using three equally-spaced knots on the relevant domain of genetic diversity values. These
appendix …gures indicate that, in each case, the quadratic …t falls within the 95% con…dence interval band of the cubic
spline regression, as it does with respect to the corresponding non-parametric relationship.
  33
     For consistency with Figure 1, which depicts the negative e¤ect of increasing migratory distance from East Africa
on genetic diversity, the horizontal axes in Figures 4–8 represent genetic homogeneity (i.e., 1 minus genetic diversity)
so as to re‡ect increasing as opposed to decreasing migratory distance from East Africa.



                                                          19
estimated conditional e¤ects are sizeably reduced in magnitude in comparison to their unconditional
estimates presented in earlier columns. Nonetheless, the OLS coe¢ cients associated with all channels
retain their expected signs and continue to remain highly statistically signi…cant. To interpret the
conditional e¤ects of the genetic diversity channel, the estimated linear and quadratic coe¢ cients
associated with genetic diversity imply that, accounting for the in‡uence of the transition timing and
land productivity channels, a 1 percentage point increase in genetic diversity for the most homogenous
society in the regression sample would raise its population density in 1500 CE by 58%, whereas a 1
percentage point decrease in diversity for the most diverse society would raise its population density
by 23%. Further, a 1 percentage point change in diversity in either direction at the predicted
optimum of 0.699 would lower population density by 1.6%. Additionally, by exploiting the combined
explanatory power of all three channels, the estimated model explains an impressive 89% of the
limited sample cross-country variation in log population density.
       Finally, the results from estimating the regression model in equation (3) are reported in Column
5, which indicates that the results from previous columns were not simply re‡ecting the possible
in‡uence of some unobserved continent-speci…c attributes. In spite of the sample size limitations
and the smaller variability of covariates within continents in comparison to that across continents,
genetic diversity continues to exert signi…cant in‡uence in a manner consistent with theoretical
predictions. Reassuringly, the estimated average within-continent e¤ects of the diversity channel are
very similar to the cross-continent e¤ects reported in Column 4 and the implied optimal level of
diversity remains intact, lending credence to the assertion that these e¤ects are indeed due to genetic
diversity as opposed to unobserved continental characteristics.34
       To summarize, the limited sample results presented in Table 1 demonstrate that genetic diversity
has a statistically signi…cant hump-shaped relationship with log population density in the year 1500
CE. The analysis, however, also reveals signi…cant e¤ects associated with the Neolithic transition tim-
ing and land productivity channels. Indeed, the non-monotonic e¤ect of diversity on log population
density prevails under controls for these other explanatory channels, and remains remarkably stable
in magnitude regardless of whether the cross-country variations exploited by the analysis are within
or across continents. While, given the obvious limitations of the sample employed, these results may
initially appear to be more illustrative rather than conclusive, they are in fact reassuringly similar
to those obtained in the extended sample of countries, as will become evident in Section 4.2.2 below.
This similarity provides further assurance regarding the validity of the inferences made with the
main empirical …ndings that are associated with predicted as opposed to observed values of genetic
diversity.
  34
    Despite controls for continental dummies, the fact that (i) the hump-shaped relationship between genetic diversity
and economic development appears to be, in part, identi…ed by a relatively smaller number of observations from the
Americas on the backward-bending side of the relationship, coupled with the fact that (ii) equations (7)–(9) a priori
impose a quadratic relationship between genetic diversity and economic development, could potentially raise concerns
that the empirical models being estimated in this paper are misspeci…ed in that the true relationship between diversity
and development is logarithmic rather than quadratic in nature. If the relationship is indeed logarithmic then, upon
re-estimating the baseline speci…cations using logged diversity and the square of logged diversity, one should not expect
the latter quadratic term to survive in the regressions. Table D.4 in Appendix D presents the results from such an
analysis, demonstrating that empirical model misspeci…cation need not be a source of concern. In particular, the results
indicate that the baseline …ndings from both the limited- and extended-sample variants of the historical analysis, as
well as those from the contemporary analysis, are qualitatively unaltered when quadratic speci…cations using logged
genetic diversity are employed to examine the impact of diversity on development.


                                                           20
Establishing the Exogeneity of Migratory Distance. As already mentioned, the fact that
the limited cross-country sample comprises observed genetic diversity, which is strongly but not
perfectly correlated with migratory distance from East Africa, permits a formal examination of
whether migratory distance in‡uences population density solely via the serial-founder e¤ect on genetic
diversity. This is a particularly important test since, if migratory distance from East Africa actually
a¤ects economic development either directly or via some other unobserved channels, then the main
empirical analysis conducted using predicted values of diversity would be attributing this latent
in‡uence to the genetic diversity channel.35
       To implement the aforementioned test, the current analysis examines a speci…cation that includes
migratory distance from East Africa rather than genetic diversity to explain the cross-country
variation in log population density in 1500 CE. The associated results are then compared with those
obtained from estimating an alternative speci…cation including both migratory distance and genetic
diversity as covariates. Unless migratory distance and genetic diversity are ultimate and proximate
determinants within the same channel, then genetic diversity, when included in the regression, should
not capture most of the explanatory power otherwise attributed to migratory distance. However,
while Column 1 of Table 2 reveals a highly statistically signi…cant unconditional hump-shaped e¤ect
of migratory distance from East Africa on log population density, this e¤ect not only becomes
insigni…cant but also drops considerably in magnitude once genetic diversity is accounted for in
Column 2. Further, although the linear and quadratic coe¢ cients associated with the e¤ect of genetic
diversity, conditional on migratory distance from East Africa, are admittedly somewhat weaker in
magnitude when compared to their unconditional estimates in Table 1, they continue to remain
statistically signi…cant at conventional levels of signi…cance.
       The results of the “horse race” regression in Column 2 are perhaps even more striking given
the prior that genetic diversity, as opposed to migratory distance, is likely to be a- icted by larger
measurement errors. Nevertheless, since migratory distance is measured as the sum of aerial distances
between intercontinental waypoints, it may also be viewed as a noisy proxy of the distance along
actual migration routes taken by prehistorical humans during their exodus out of Africa. In order to
test whether genetic diversity survives a “horse race”with a less noisy measure of migratory distance
from East Africa, Columns 3–4 repeat the preceding analysis using migratory distance based on
the index of human mobility employed previously by Ashraf et al. (2010). This index captures the
average distance from Addis Ababa to the HGDP ethnic groups located within a given country, along
“optimal”land-restricted routes that minimize the time cost of movement on the surface of the Earth
in the absence of steam-powered transportation technologies. The index thus accounts for natural
impediments to human mobility, including various meteorological and topographical conditions, and
incorporates information on the time cost of travelling under such conditions. Reassuringly, as
  35
    Figures C.6(a)–C.6(c) in Appendix C illustrate that, unlike the signi…cant impact of migratory distance from East
Africa on genetic diversity, migratory distance has no systematic relationship with a number of observed physiological
characteristics of populations, including average skin re‡ectance, average height, and average weight, conditional on
geographical factors such as the intensity of ultraviolet exposure, absolute latitude, the percentage of arable land, the
shares of land in tropical and temperate zones, elevation, access to waterways, and continental …xed e¤ects. Since
the physiological characteristics examined in Figures C.6(a)–C.6(c) represent their averages for contemporary national
populations, the migratory distance measure is adjusted to account for the modern ethnic compositions of these
populations resulting from cross-country migrations in the post-Columbian era.



                                                           21
        Table 2: Migratory Distance from East Africa and Economic Development in 1500 CE

                                   (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)               (5)            (6)
                                   OLS            OLS            OLS            OLS              2SLS           2SLS
                                            Dependent Variable is Log Population Density in 1500 CE
  Observed Diversity                          255.219**                    361.421**        285.190***      243.110***
                                              (100.586)                    (121.429)        (88.064)        (63.880)
  Observed Diversity Sqr.                     -209.808**                   -268.514***      -206.576***     -179.581***
                                              (73.814)                     (87.342)         (66.852)        (52.038)
  Migratory Distance            0.505***      0.070
                                (0.148)       (0.184)
  Migratory Distance Sqr.       -0.023***     -0.014
                                (0.006)       (0.009)
  Mobility Index                                              0.353**      0.051
                                                              (0.127)      (0.154)
  Mobility Index Sqr.                                         -0.012***    -0.003
                                                              (0.004)      (0.006)
  Log Transition Timing                                                                     1.014***        1.119**
                                                                                            (0.361)         (0.487)
  Log % of Arable Land                                                                      0.608***        0.634***
                                                                                            (0.188)         (0.211)
  Log Absolute Latitude                                                                     -0.209*         -0.133
                                                                                            (0.121)         (0.127)
  Log Land Suitability                                                                      0.494**         0.549**
                                                                                            (0.233)         (0.253)

  Continent Dummies          No               No              No           No               No              Yes
  Observations               21               21              18           18               21              21
  R-squared                  0.34             0.46            0.30         0.43             –               –
  P-value for:
    Joint Sig. of Diversity and its Sqr.      0.023                        0.027
    Joint Sig. of Distance and its Sqr.       0.235
    Joint Sig. of Mobility and its Sqr.                                    0.905
  Note: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
  *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.


revealed in Columns 3–4, while distance from East Africa based on the mobility index possesses
a signi…cant hump-shaped correlation with log population density, this unconditional relationship
virtually disappears once genetic diversity is accounted for by the analysis, lending further support
to the claim that distance along prehistorical human migration routes from East Africa confers an
e¤ect on development outcomes through genetic diversity alone.36
       The analysis now turns to address concerns regarding the fact that diversity and economic
development may be endogenously determined. In particular, Column 5 presents the results from
estimating the preferred regression speci…cation, with genetic diversity instrumented by migratory
  36
    The di¤erence in the number of observations between Columns 1–2 (21 obs.) and Columns 3–4 (18 obs.) arises
due to the fact that the mobility index cannot be calculated for countries that can only be accessed from Addis Ababa
by crossing at least one body of water. Restricting the sample used in Columns 1–2 to that in Columns 3–4 does not
qualitatively alter the …ndings. In addition, the unavailability of the mobility index measure for several countries (due to
the aforementioned strict land-accessibility constraint) makes this measure less suitable, in comparison to the baseline
migratory distance measure of Ramachandran et al. (2005), to predict genetic diversity in the extended cross-country
sample. Nevertheless, Table D.5 in Appendix D demonstrates that the main …ndings from both the extended-sample
historical analysis and the contemporary analysis remain qualitatively robust to using genetic diversity predicted by
the more sophisticated mobility index, rather than by the baseline, waypoints-restricted migratory distance measure
of Ramachandran et al. (2005).




                                                            22
                 Table 3: Predicted Diversity and Economic Development in 1500 CE

                                      (1)          (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)
                                            Dependent Variable is Log Population Density in 1500 CE
 Predicted Diversity           250.986***                   213.537***       203.017***      195.416***      199.727**
                               (66.314)                     (61.739)         (60.085)        (55.916)        (80.281)
 Predicted Diversity Sqr.      -177.399***                  -152.107***      -141.980***     -137.977***     -146.167***
                               (48.847)                     (45.414)         (44.157)        (40.773)        (56.251)
 Log Transition Timing                          1.287***    1.047***                         1.160***        1.235***
                                                (0.170)     (0.188)                          (0.143)         (0.243)
 Log % of Arable Land                                                        0.523***        0.401***        0.393***
                                                                             (0.117)         (0.096)         (0.103)
 Log Absolute Latitude                                                       -0.167*         -0.342***       -0.417***
                                                                             (0.093)         (0.096)         (0.124)
 Log Land Suitability                                                        0.189           0.305***        0.257***
                                                                             (0.124)         (0.094)         (0.096)

 Optimal Diversity             0.707***                     0.702***         0.715***        0.708***        0.683***
                               (0.021)                      (0.025)          (0.110)         (0.051)         (0.110)
 Continent Dummies             No               No          No               No              No              Yes
 Observations                  145              145         145              145             145             145
 R-squared                     0.22             0.26        0.38             0.50            0.67            0.69
 Note: Bootstrapped standard errors, accounting for the use of generated regressors, are reported in parentheses.
 *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.


distance.37 The results from a similar analysis that also accounts for continental …xed e¤ects are
reported in Column 6. Interestingly, in comparison to their OLS counterparts in Table 1, the esti-
mated 2SLS coe¢ cients associated with the diversity channel remain relatively stable in magnitude,
suggesting that the potential endogeneity between genetic diversity and economic development need
not be a source of concern, conditional on controls for the transition timing and land productivity
channels. Overall, the results uncovered here provide support for the inferences made with predicted
genetic diversity in the main empirical analysis to follow.

4.2.2    The Baseline Results from the Extended Sample

This section establishes the hump-shaped impact of genetic diversity, predicted by migratory distance
from East Africa, on log population density in 1500 CE, using the extended sample of 145 countries.
To reveal the independent and combined e¤ects of the genetic diversity, transition timing, and
land productivity channels, Table 3 presents the results from estimating a number of speci…cations
spanning relevant subsets of the explanatory variables in equation (8).
    The unconditional hump-shaped relationship between genetic diversity and log population density
in 1500 CE is reported in Column 1. In particular, the estimated linear and quadratic coe¢ cients,
both statistically signi…cant at the 1% level, imply that a 1 percentage point increase in genetic
diversity for the least diverse society in the regression sample would raise its population density by
   37
      Speci…cally, since the empirical speci…cation is quadratic in the endogenous regressor, it is necessary to instrument
for both genetic diversity and its squared term in order for the system to be exactly identi…ed. Thus, following
Wooldridge (2010, pp. 267–268), the strategy adopted introduces a zeroth-stage to the analysis where genetic diversity
is …rst regressed on migratory distance and all the second-stage controls to obtain predicted values of diversity. The
predicted genetic diversity from the zeroth-stage is squared and this squared term is then used as an excluded instrument
in the second stage along with migratory distance. The zeroth- and …rst-stage results of the 2SLS regressions reported
in Columns 5 and 6 of Table 2 are collected in Table D.6 in Appendix D.



                                                            23
Figure 5: Predicted Genetic Diversity and Population Density in 1500 CE – The Unconditional
Relationship


59%, whereas a 1 percentage point decrease in genetic diversity for the most diverse society would
raise its population density by 25%.38 Further, population density in 1500 CE is unconditionally
predicted by the regression to be maximized at an expected heterozygosity value of about 0.707,
which roughly corresponds to that predicted for southern China by migratory distance from East
Africa. Indeed, a 1 percentage point change in genetic diversity in either direction at the predicted
optimum lowers population density by 1.8%. Moreover, based on the R-squared of the regression,
the cross-country variation in genetic diversity alone explains 22% of the cross-country variation in
population density. The quadratic relationship implied by the OLS coe¢ cients reported in Column
1 is depicted together with a non-parametric local polynomial regression line on the scatter plot in
Figure 5. As before, the estimated quadratic falls within the 95% con…dence interval band of the
non-parametric relationship and, moreover, approximates the non-parametric regression line rather
well.
    Column 2 reports the unconditional e¤ect of the timing of the agricultural transition on popula-
tion density in 1500 CE. In line with the Diamond hypothesis, a 1% increase in the number of years
elapsed since the Neolithic transition to agriculture is associated with a 1.3% increase in population
density, an e¤ect that is also statistically signi…cant at the 1% level. Furthermore, 26% of the cross-
country variation in population density is explained by the cross-country variation in the timing of
the agricultural transition alone. Perhaps unsurprisingly, as foreshadowed by the sample correlations
in Table G.4 in Appendix G, the unconditional e¤ects of both the genetic diversity and agricultural
transition timing channels are somewhat weakened in magnitude once they are simultaneously taken
into account in Column 3, which reduces the omitted variable bias a- icting the coe¢ cient estimates
   38
      Following the earlier discussion regarding the expected heterozygosity index, these e¤ects are therefore associated
with a 0.01 change in the probability that two randomly selected individuals from a given population are genetically
di¤erent from one another. See Footnote 31 for details on how these e¤ects may be computed based on the estimated
linear and quadratic coe¢ cients associated with genetic diversity.



                                                           24
reported in earlier columns. The coe¢ cients on both channels, however, retain their expected signs
and continue to remain statistically signi…cant at the 1% level with the combined cross-country
variation in genetic diversity and transition timing explaining 38% of the cross-country variation in
population density.
       The results of examining the combined explanatory power of the genetic diversity and land
productivity channels are reported in Column 4.39 Once again, given the sample correlations, the
linear and quadratic coe¢ cients associated with genetic diversity are naturally somewhat weaker
when compared to their unconditional estimates of Column 1. More importantly, the coe¢ cients
remain highly statistically signi…cant and also rather stable in magnitude relative to those estimated
while controlling for the timing of the Neolithic transition. In addition, the overall signi…cance of
the land productivity channel is also con…rmed, particularly by the estimated coe¢ cients on the
log percentage of arable land and log absolute latitude variables, which indeed appear to possess
their expected signs.40 Nonetheless, these estimates continue to re‡ect some amount of omitted
variable bias resulting from the exclusion of the transition timing channel. For instance, the fact
that log agricultural transition timing has a sample correlation of 0.28 with genetic diversity and
one of 0.32 with log absolute latitude implies that the estimated e¤ects of these variables on log
population density in Column 4 may be partially capturing the latent in‡uence of the excluded
Neolithic transition timing channel.
       Column 5 presents the results from exploiting the explanatory power of all three identi…ed
channels for log population density in 1500 CE. In line with the theoretical predictions of each
hypothesis, the coe¢ cient estimates possess their expected signs and are all statistically signi…cant
at the 1% level. Moreover, in comparison to their estimates in Columns 3 and 4, the linear and
quadratic coe¢ cients associated with the diversity channel remain largely stable. In particular, the
estimated coe¢ cients of interest imply that, controlling for the in‡uence of land productivity and
the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, a 1 percentage point increase in genetic diversity for the least
diverse society in the sample would raise its population density in 1500 CE by 44%, whereas a 1
percentage point decrease in diversity for the most diverse society would raise its population density
by 18%. Further, population density in 1500 CE is predicted to be maximized at an expected
heterozygosity value of 0.708, where a 1 percentage point change in diversity in either direction
would lower population density by 1.4%. Overall, based on the R-squared of the regression, the
cross-country variations in genetic diversity, agricultural transition timing, and land productivity
together explain 67% of the cross-country variation in population density in 1500 CE.
       Finally, Column 6 reports the results from estimating the baseline regression model, speci…ed
in equation (8), which allows the analysis to capture unobserved continent-speci…c attributes that
could potentially have an in‡uence on population density. Despite the more modest cross-country
  39
     The cross-country variation in genetic diversity and in variables capturing the productivity of land for agriculture
together explain 50% of the cross-country variation in population density.
  40
     To interpret the coe¢ cients associated with the land productivity channel, a 1% increase in the fraction of arable
land and in absolute latitude corresponds, respectively, to a 0.5% increase and a 0.2% decrease in population density.
While this latter e¤ect may seem unintuitive, given the positive relationship between absolute latitude and contemporary
income per capita, it accurately re‡ects the fact that agricultural productivity in the past has typically been higher
at latitudinal bands closer to the equator. In addition, this …nding is also consistent with the “reversal of fortune”
hypothesis documented by Acemoglu et al. (2005).



                                                          25
Figure 6: Predicted Genetic Diversity and Population Density in 1500 CE – Conditional on
Transition Timing, Land Productivity, and Continental Fixed E¤ects


variation in genetic diversity within continents as opposed to that across continents, the coe¢ cients
associated with diversity remain rather stable, increasing slightly in magnitude with the inclusion of
continental dummies, although the statistical signi…cance of the linear coe¢ cient drops to the 5%
level.41 Speci…cally, the coe¢ cients associated with the diversity channel indicate that, controlling
for the in‡uence of land productivity, the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, and continental …xed
e¤ects, a 1 percentage point increase in diversity for the most homogenous society in the sample
would raise its population density in 1500 CE by 36%, whereas a 1 percentage point decrease in
diversity for the most diverse society would raise its population density by 29%. In addition, a 1
percentage point change in genetic diversity in either direction at the predicted optimum diversity
level of 0.683, which roughly corresponds to that predicted for Japan by migratory distance from
East Africa, would lower population density by 1.5%. Reassuringly, the optimal level of predicted
diversity in the extended sample is quite similar to that obtained for observed diversity in the limited
21-country sample.
   41
      Table D.7 in Appendix D demonstrates that the baseline …ndings for genetic diversity from both the limited- and
extended-sample variants of the historical analysis, as well as those from the contemporary analysis, remain qualitatively
intact under alternative regression speci…cations that control for some of the individual ecological components of the
land suitability index, including temperature, precipitation, and soil fertility, in lieu of the baseline control for the
overall suitability of land for cultivation.
   In addition, consistent with the fact that the baseline control for the timing of the Neolithic Revolution should be
expected to capture the contemporaneous e¤ect of the mode of subsistence on population density in the pre-colonial
Malthusian era, Table D.8 establishes that augmenting the baseline speci…cations for examining population density
in the years 1500 CE and 1000 CE with an explicit control for the mode of subsistence, while diminishing somewhat
the explanatory power of the transition timing channel, does not a¤ect the main …ndings for genetic diversity. Note
that, given underlying data availability constraints on constructing a proxy for the mode of subsistence prevalent in
the year 1500 CE, coupled with the fact that cross-country subsistence patterns in 1000 CE should be expected to be
highly correlated with those existing in 1500 CE, the analysis in Table D.8 controls only for the mode of subsistence
prevalent in the year 1000 CE in augmented regressions explaining population density in both time periods. For detailed
de…nitions of additional control variables used by the robustness analyses in Tables D.7 and D.8, the interested reader
is referred to Appendix F.



                                                           26
    To place the worldwide e¤ect of the diversity channel into perspective, the coe¢ cients reported in
Column 6 imply that increasing the expected heterozygosity of the most homogenous native South
American populations by 11.1 percentage points to the predicted optimum would have raised their
population density in 1500 CE by a factor of 6.07. On the other hand, decreasing the expected
heterozygosity of the most heterogenous East African populations by 9.1 percentage points to the
optimum would have raised their population density by a factor of 3.36. The hump-shaped e¤ect of
genetic diversity on log population density in 1500 CE, conditional on the timing of the Neolithic,
land productivity, and continental …xed e¤ects, is depicted on the scatter plot in Figure 6.42
    To summarize the results reported in Table 3, genetic diversity as predicted by migratory distance
from East Africa is found to have a highly statistically signi…cant non-monotonic e¤ect on population
density in 1500 CE. This …nding is entirely consistent with the theoretical prediction of the proposed
genetic diversity channel that comprises both an adverse e¤ect of diversity on Malthusian economic
development, via diminished social capital, and a favorable e¤ect arising from increased technological
creativity. The analysis also con…rms the signi…cant bene…cial e¤ects of an earlier Neolithic transition
to agriculture as well as geographical factors conducive to higher agricultural yields. Nevertheless,
controlling for these additional explanatory channels hardly a¤ects the hump-shaped relationship
between genetic diversity and population density, a …nding that remains robust to the inclusion of
continental dummies as well.

4.2.3     Robustness to Aerial Distance and Migratory Distances from “Placebo” Points
          of Origin Across the Globe

The results from the limited sample analysis discussed earlier demonstrate that the cross-country
variation in migratory distance from East Africa has a signi…cant non-monotonic in‡uence on com-
parative development in 1500 CE and that this impact runs exclusively via the serial-founder e¤ect on
genetic diversity. This …nding, however, does not preclude the possibility that alternative measures
of distance, potentially correlated with migratory distance from East Africa, may also explain
the historical cross-country variation in economic development in a similar non-monotonic fashion.
Indeed, if this is the case, then the role previously ascribed to the “out of Africa” migration of
Homo sapiens as a deep determinant of comparative development becomes suspect, undermining
the credibility of the proposed genetic diversity channel. Nonetheless, alternative distances, as will
become evident, do not impart any signi…cant in‡uence, similar to that associated with migratory
distance from East Africa, on log population density in 1500 CE.
    The current analysis compares regression results obtained using migratory distance from Addis
Ababa in the baseline speci…cation with those obtained under several alternative concepts of distance.
The alternative concepts of distance considered by the analysis include the aerial or “as the crow
  42
     Figure 6 is an “augmented component plus residual” plot and not the typical “added variable” plot of residuals
against residuals. In particular, the vertical axis in this …gure represents the component of observed log population
density that is predicted by genetic homogeneity and its square plus the residuals from the regression. The horizontal
axis, on the other hand, simply represents genetic homogeneity rather than the residuals obtained from regressing
homogeneity on the covariates. This methodology permits the illustration of the overall non-monotonic e¤ect of the
genetic channel in one scatter plot. Plots depicting the partial regression lines associated with the …rst-order and second-
order e¤ects of genetic homogeneity on log population density in 1500 CE are presented in Figures C.3(a)–C.3(b) in
Appendix C.


                                                            27
                                Table 4: Robustness to Alternative Distances

                                               (1)             (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)
            Distance from:              Addis Ababa     Addis Ababa      London        Tokyo      Mexico City

                                          Dependent Variable is Log Population Density in 1500 CE
            Migratory Distance          0.138**                        -0.040        0.052        -0.063
                                        (0.061)                        (0.063)       (0.145)      (0.099)
            Migratory Distance Sqr.     -0.008***                      -0.002        -0.006       0.005
                                        (0.002)                        (0.002)       (0.007)      (0.004)
            Aerial Distance                             -0.008
                                                        (0.106)
            Aerial Distance Sqr.                        -0.005
                                                        (0.006)
            Log Transition Timing       1.160***        1.158***       1.003***      1.047***     1.619***
                                        (0.144)         (0.138)        (0.164)       (0.225)      (0.277)
            Log % of Arable Land        0.401***        0.488***       0.357***      0.532***     0.493***
                                        (0.091)         (0.102)        (0.092)       (0.089)      (0.094)
            Log Absolute Latitude       -0.342***       -0.263***      -0.358***     -0.334***    -0.239***
                                        (0.091)         (0.097)        (0.112)       (0.099)      (0.083)
            Log Land Suitability        0.305***        0.254**        0.344***      0.178**      0.261***
                                        (0.091)         (0.102)        (0.092)       (0.080)      (0.092)

            Observations                145             145            145           145          145
            R-squared                   0.67            0.59           0.67          0.59         0.63
            Note: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
            *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.


‡ies” distance from Addis Ababa as well as migratory distances from “placebo” points of origin in
other continents across the globe, namely London, Tokyo, and Mexico City, computed using the same
waypoints employed in constructing migratory distance from Addis Ababa.43 As revealed in Table
G.4 in Appendix G, with the exception of migratory distance from Tokyo, these other distances
are rather strongly correlated with migratory distance from Addis Ababa. Despite some of these
high correlations, however, the results presented in Table 4 indicate that migratory distance from
Addis Ababa is the only concept of distance that confers a signi…cant non-monotonic e¤ect on log
population density.
       Speci…cally, consistent with the proposed diversity hypothesis, Column 1 reveals a highly sta-
tistically signi…cant hump-shaped relationship between migratory distance from Addis Ababa and
log population density in 1500 CE, conditional on controls for the Neolithic transition timing and
land productivity channels. In contrast, the linear and quadratic e¤ects of aerial distance from
Addis Ababa, reported in Column 2, are not statistically di¤erent from zero at conventional levels of
signi…cance. Similarly, as shown in Columns 3–5, the migratory distances from “placebo” points of
origin do not impart any statistically discernible e¤ect, linear or otherwise, on log population density
in the year 1500 CE.
       These results strengthen the assertion that conditions innately related to the prehistorical migra-
tion of humans out of Africa have had a lasting impact on comparative development. Given the high
correlations between migratory distance from Addis Ababa and some of these alternative distance
  43
     The choice of these alternative points of origin do not re‡ect any systematic selection process, other than the
criterion that they belong to di¤erent continents in order to demonstrate, at a global scale, the neutrality of migratory
distance from locations outside of East Africa. Indeed, other points of origin in Europe, Asia and the Americas yield
qualitatively similar results.



                                                           28
concepts, the fact that these other distances fail to reveal any signi…cant e¤ects makes the argument
in favor of the “out of Africa” hypothesis even stronger. Together with earlier …ndings establishing
migratory distance from Addis Ababa and genetic diversity as ultimate and proximate determinants
in the same channel, the …ndings from these “placebo”tests of distance lend further credence to the
proposed diversity hypothesis.


5         The Contemporary Analysis
5.1        Data and Empirical Strategy
This section discusses the data and empirical strategy employed to examine the impact of genetic
diversity on contemporary comparative development.

5.1.1        The Index of Contemporary National Population Diversity

The construction of the index of genetic diversity for contemporary national populations is partly
based on their ethnic compositions resulting from population ‡ows amongst countries in the post-
Columbian era. Speci…cally, given the genetic diversity of the ancestral populations of the source
countries, data on post-Columbian population ‡ows can be used to construct a weighted average
expected heterozygosity measure for the national population of each country in the contemporary
period.44 This measure alone, however, would not capture the full extent of genetic diversity in
contemporary national populations as it would fail to account for the diversity arising from di¤erences
between sub-national ethnic groups.
         To additionally incorporate the between-group component of diversity in contemporary national
populations, the index makes use of the concept of Fst genetic distance from …eld of population
genetics. Details regarding the construction of this ancestry-adjusted measure of genetic diversity,
that also accounts for the diversity arising from di¤erences between sub-national ethnic groups, are
presented in Appendix B.
         Reassuringly, the ancestry-adjusted measure of genetic diversity dominates the unadjusted mea-
sure in predicting economic development in the contemporary period. In line with the diversity
hypothesis, Column 1 in Table 5 reveals a signi…cant unconditional hump-shaped relationship between
the adjusted measure of diversity and income per capita in the year 2000 CE. This relationship is
depicted together with a non-parametric local polynomial regression line on the scatter plot in Figure
7. As in the historical analysis, the estimated quadratic …t falls within the 95% con…dence interval
band of the non-parametric relationship.
         Column 2 establishes that the unconditional quadratic relationship from Column 1 remains
qualitatively intact when conditioned for the impact of continent …xed e¤ects.                     As revealed in
Columns 3 and 4, however, while the unadjusted measure also possesses a signi…cant unconditional
hump-shaped relationship with income per capita across countries, the relationship disappears once
the regression is augmented to account for continental dummies. Moreover, examining jointly the
    44
    The data on ethnic compositions are obtained from the World Migration Matrix, 1500–2000 of Putterman and
Weil (2010) who compile, for each country in their data set, the share of the country’s population in 2000 CE that is
descended from the population of every other country in 1500 CE.


                                                         29
                               Table 5: Adjusted versus Unadjusted Diversity

                                        (1)                (2)                  (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
                                               Dependent Variable is Log Income Per Capita in 2000 CE
  Predicted Diversity              556.439***         254.906***                                           533.983***          387.314**
    (Ancestry Adjusted)            (129.697)          (88.619)                                             (164.216)           (188.300)
  Predicted Diversity Sqr.         -397.224***        -176.907***                                          -377.365***         -273.925**
    (Ancestry Adjusted)            (90.784)           (62.730)                                             (117.645)           (136.442)
  Predicted Diversity                                                    140.903***         10.152         1.670               -64.226
    (Unadjusted)                                                         (51.614)           (52.732)       (69.101)            (81.419)
  Predicted Diversity Sqr.                                               -107.686***        -7.418         -4.057              51.016
    (Unadjusted)                                                         (38.133)           (38.000)       (52.990)            (64.295)

  Continent Dummies         No             Yes                           No                 Yes            No                  Yes
  Observations              143            143                           143                143            143                 143
  R-squared                 0.13           0.47                          0.08               0.45           0.14                0.48
  P-value for:
    Joint Sig. of Adjusted Diversity and its Sqr.                                                          0.009               0.038
    Joint Sig. of Unadjusted Diversity and its Sqr.                                                        0.399               0.741
  Note: Bootstrapped standard errors, accounting for the use of generated regressors, are reported in parentheses.
  *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.


explanatory powers of the ancestry-adjusted and unadjusted measures of genetic diversity for income
per capita, Columns 5 and 6 demonstrate the superior relative performance of the adjusted measure,
regardless of whether continent …xed e¤ects are accounted for by the analysis, lending further
credence ex post to the methodology employed in constructing the index of contemporary population
diversity.45

5.1.2      The Empirical Model

Maintaining symmetry with the earlier historical analysis, a regression speci…cation similar to that
employed for the historical regressions is adopted initially to examine the contemporary impact
of genetic diversity along with the transition timing and land productivity channels. The current
speci…cation, however, is further augmented with controls for institutional, cultural, and additional
geographical factors that have received attention in the literature. This permits the examination of
the direct impact of the diversity channel, as opposed to its overall impact that additionally captures
indirect e¤ects potentially correlated with these other determinants.
       Formally, the following speci…cation is adopted as a baseline to examine the direct in‡uence of
contemporary population diversity on the modern world income distribution:

                 ln yi =   0   +       ^ +
                                     1 Gi
                                                 ^2
                                               2 Gi   +    3 ln Ti   +   0
                                                                         4 ln Xi      +   0
                                                                                          5 ln    i   +   6 ln    i   +   i,               (9)
  45
    Table D.9 in Appendix D establishes that migratory distance from Addis Ababa, adjusted to re‡ect the weighted
average of migratory distances of the pre-Columbian ancestral populations of a country today, is the only distance
concept that confers a signi…cant hump-shaped e¤ect on income per capita in 2000 CE. As shown in the table, the
other distance concepts, including (i) the unadjusted measure of migratory distance from Addis Ababa (used in the
historical analysis), (ii) the aerial distance from Addis Ababa, and (iii) the ancestry-adjusted aerial distance from
Addis Ababa, do not confer any systematic non-monotonic e¤ect on income per capita in 2000 CE, given that the
ancestry-adjusted migratory distance measure is accounted for by the regression.




                                                                 30
Figure 7: Adjusted Genetic Diversity and Income Per Capita in 2000 CE – The Unconditional
Relationship

                                                                    ^ i is the index of contemporary
where yi is the income per capita of country i in the year 2000 CE; G
population diversity for country i, as discussed above; Ti and Xi are the Neolithic transition timing
and land productivity controls for country i;             i   is a vector of institutional and cultural controls for
country i;    i   is a vector of additional geographical controls for country i; and, …nally,              i   is a country
speci…c disturbance      term.46

5.2     Empirical Findings
5.2.1     Results for Comparative Development

The empirical …ndings indicate that the highly signi…cant hump-shaped e¤ect of genetic diversity
on macroeconomic outcomes in the pre-industrial period is present in the contemporary period as
well. Furthermore, the persistent hump-shaped impact of genetic diversity on the pattern of com-
parative economic development is a direct e¤ect that is not captured by contemporary geographical,
institutional, and cultural factors.47
  46
      The data on income per capita are from the Penn World Table, version 6.2. The institutional and cultural controls
include the social infrastructure index of Hall and Jones (1999), the share of the population of European descent based
on the World Migration Matrix, 1500–2000 of Putterman and Weil (2010), legal origin dummies and the shares of
the population a¢ liated with major world religions from the data set of La Porta et al. (1999), as well as the ethnic
fractionalization index of Alesina et al. (2003). The additional geographical controls include the share of the population
at risk of contracting falciparum malaria from Gallup and Sachs (2001), as well as the share of the population living
in Köppen-Geiger tropical zones and distance from the nearest coast or sea-navigable river, both from the data set of
Gallup et al. (1999). See Appendix F for further details.
   47
      Since (i) genetic diversity for contemporary national populations is partly based on the Fst genetic distances between
their pre-Columbian ancestral groups, and (ii) Fst genetic distances and relative expected heterozygosities, even amongst
populations in the pre-Columbian era, are in part co-determined by migratory distances, it is necessary to ensure that
the observed hump-shaped e¤ect of genetic diversity on comparative development, in both the pre-Columbian and
contemporary eras, is not re‡ecting the latent impact of genetic distance to either the cradle of humankind or the world
technological frontier, via channels related to the di¤usion of development (Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2009). Table D.10
in Appendix D demonstrates that the baseline …ndings for genetic diversity from both the limited- and extended-sample



                                                              31
               Table 6: Diversity and Economic Development in 2000 CE and 1500 CE

                                         (1)               (2)            (3)                    (4)
                                                                   Dependent Variable is:
                                                Log Income Per Capita           Log Population Density
                                                      in 2000 CE                       in 1500 CE
      Predicted Diversity             204.610**     237.238***     244.960***
        (Ancestry Adjusted)            (86.385)     (85.031)       (83.379)
      Predicted Diversity Sqr.       -143.437**     -166.507***    -171.364***
        (Ancestry Adjusted)            (61.088)     (60.474)       (59.386)
      Predicted Diversity                                                                    198.587**
        (Unadjusted)                                                                         (79.225)
      Predicted Diversity Sqr.                                                               -145.320***
        (Unadjusted)                                                                         (55.438)
      Log Transition Timing                         0.061          0.002
        (Ancestry Adjusted)                         (0.262)        (0.305)
      Log Transition Timing             -0.151                                               1.238***
        (Unadjusted)                    (0.186)                                              (0.241)
      Log % of Arable Land              -0.110      -0.119         -0.137                    0.378***
                                        (0.100)     (0.107)        (0.111)                   (0.108)
      Log Absolute Latitude             0.164       0.172          0.192                     -0.423***
                                        (0.125)     (0.119)        (0.143)                   (0.122)
      Log Land Suitability            -0.193**      -0.177*        -0.189*                   0.264***
                                        (0.095)     (0.102)        (0.102)                   (0.095)
      Log Population Density in                                    0.047
        1500 CE                                                    (0.097)

      Optimal Diversity               0.713***      0.712***       0.715***                  0.683***
                                        (0.100)     (0.036)        (0.118)                   (0.095)
      Continent Dummies                  Yes        Yes            Yes                       Yes
      Observations                       143        143            143                       143
      R-squared                          0.57       0.57           0.57                      0.68
      Note: Bootstrapped standard errors, accounting for the use of generated regressors, are reported in
      parentheses.
      *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.


    Using a sample of 143 countries for which data are available for the entire set of control variables
used in the baseline regression for the year 1500 CE, Column 1 of Table 6 reveals a signi…cant
hump-shaped e¤ect of genetic diversity on income per capita in 2000 CE, accounting for the set of
baseline controls employed in the historical analysis – i.e., the logs of the timing of the Neolithic
transition, the percentage of arable land, absolute latitude and the suitability of land for agriculture,
as well as continental …xed e¤ects.48 Further, consistent with the notion that the optimal level of
diversity increased in the process of industrialization, as the bene…cial forces associated with greater
diversity became intensi…ed in an environment characterized by more rapid technological progress,
the …ndings indicate that the optimal level of diversity with respect to the modern world income
distribution is indeed higher than that obtained with respect to population density in the pre-colonial
Malthusian era. Speci…cally, while the estimate for the optimal level in 1500 CE is 0.683 (Column
4), the estimated optimum in 2000 CE, under the same speci…cation, is 0.713.

variants of the historical analysis, as well as those from the contemporary analysis, are virtually una¤ected when the
regression speci…cations are augmented to account for appropriate measures of Fst genetic distance to Ethiopia and
to the world technology frontier relevant for the time period being examined. For detailed de…nitions of the various
genetic distance controls used by the robustness analysis in Table D.10, the reader is referred to Appendix F.
  48
     Tables G.5–G.6 in Appendix G present the relevant descriptive statistics for this 143-country sample.




                                                           32
       Column 2 shows that the hump-shaped e¤ect of diversity on income per capita remains virtually
intact when the control for the Neolithic transition is adjusted to capture the average time elapsed
since the pre-Columbian ancestral populations of each country today experienced the transition
to agriculture (i.e., traits that are embodied in the country’s population today, rather than the
country’s geographical attributes). In particular, the estimated linear and quadratic coe¢ cients on
genetic diversity are both statistically signi…cant at the 1% level. They imply that increasing the
diversity of the most genetically homogenous country in the sample (Bolivia) by 1 percentage point
would raise its income per capita in 2000 CE by 29%, whereas decreasing the diversity of the most
genetically diverse country in the sample (Ethiopia) by 1 percentage point would raise its income
per capita by 21%. Further, a 1 percentage point change in diversity (in either direction) at the
optimum level of 0.712 would lower income per capita by 1.7%.49
       Importantly, the hump-shaped e¤ect of genetic diversity on income per capita in 2000 CE does
not re‡ect an inertia originating from its e¤ect on technology and, thus, population density in 1500
CE. As established in Column 3, the results are essentially unchanged if the regression accounts
for the potentially cofounding e¤ect of population density in 1500 CE. Namely, the e¤ect of genetic
diversity on income per capita in 2000 CE does not operate though its impact on population density
in the year 1500 CE.
       The …ndings uncovered by the analysis thus far suggest that genetic diversity has a highly
signi…cant hump-shaped e¤ect on income per capita in the year 2000 CE. Moreover, as established
by the analysis to follow, this overall e¤ect comprises a direct impact that does not operate through
institutional, cultural and other geographical factors.
       Using a sample of 109 countries for which data are available for the institutional and cultural
controls that are employed in the examination, Column 1 of Table 7 demonstrates that genetic
diversity has a hump-shaped e¤ect on income per capita in the year 2000 CE, accounting for the
set of baseline controls employed in the historical analysis – i.e., the logs of the weighted timing of
the Neolithic transition, the percentage of arable land, and absolute latitude, as well as continental
…xed e¤ects.50 The estimated linear and quadratic coe¢ cients associated with the diversity channel
are both statistically signi…cant at the 1% level and the estimate for the optimal level of diversity
is 0.713. The regression in Column 2 examines the robustness of the results to the inclusion of a
measure of institutional quality, as captured by the social infrastructure index of Hall and Jones
(1999). The estimated hump-shaped e¤ect of genetic diversity remains highly statistically signi…cant
and rather stable, while the optimal level of diversity increases to 0.725.51
       The regression in Column 3 is designed to examine whether the e¤ect of genetic diversity operates
via ethnic fractionalization. It demonstrates that the e¤ect of genetic diversity is virtually una¤ected
  49
     Table D.13 in Appendix D reports the standardized beta coe¢ cients and partial R-squares associated with each
regressor in the baseline regressions for both the historical and contemporary analyses.
  50
     The agricultural suitability index was not found to enter signi…cantly in any of the speci…cations examined in Table
7 and is therefore dropped from the analysis. Tables G.7–G.8 in Appendix G present the relevant descriptive statistics
for the 109-country sample employed in Tables 7–8.
  51
     The inclusion of measures from the Polity IV data set, re‡ecting the extent of democracy or the degree of constraints
on the power of chief executives, as additional controls for institutional quality do not a¤ect the results for genetic
diversity. Moreover, because these measures enter insigni…cantly in the regression once social infrastructure has been
controlled for, they are excluded from the analysis in Table 7.




                                                           33
                                 Table 7: Diversity and Other Determinants of Economic Development in 2000 CE

                                              (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)
                                           Full           Full            Full            Full           Full            Full         Schooling       Schooling
                                          Sample         Sample          Sample          Sample         Sample          Sample         Sample          Sample

                                                                    Dependent Variable is Log Income Per Capita in 2000 CE
     Predicted Diversity               315.282***     225.858***      219.453***      245.377***     277.342***      272.274***     271.249***      215.675***
       (Ancestry Adjusted)             (85.309)       (67.857)        (67.261)        (69.200)       (69.452)        (83.202)       (73.818)        (67.984)
     Predicted Diversity Sqr.          -220.980***    -155.826***     -151.489***     -170.036***    -192.386***     -188.868***    -188.899***     -150.871***
       (Ancestry Adjusted)             (60.304)       (48.011)        (47.512)        (48.737)       (49.056)        (58.239)       (52.806)        (48.295)
     Log Transition Timing             -0.273         -0.092          0.032           0.352          0.396*          0.383          0.112           -0.046
       (Ancestry Adjusted)             (0.269)        (0.200)         (0.189)         (0.242)        (0.233)         (0.242)        (0.234)         (0.208)
     Log % of Arable Land              -0.218***      -0.159***       -0.171***       -0.211***      -0.183***       -0.183***      -0.084          -0.084
                                       (0.061)        (0.049)         (0.049)         (0.047)        (0.051)         (0.051)        (0.056)         (0.056)
     Log Absolute Latitude             0.123          0.083           0.038           0.119          0.009           0.007          0.007           -0.006
                                       (0.122)        (0.100)         (0.103)         (0.097)        (0.108)         (0.108)        (0.099)         (0.087)
     Social Infrastructure                            2.359***        2.389***        2.072***       1.826***        1.810***       1.470***        0.880**
                                                      (0.269)         (0.257)         (0.375)        (0.417)         (0.436)        (0.426)         (0.418)
     Ethnic Fractionalization                                         -0.684**        -0.505         -0.333          -0.336         0.051           -0.122
                                                                      (0.277)         (0.319)        (0.280)         (0.291)        (0.280)         (0.265)




34
     % of Population at Risk of                                                                      -0.502          -0.495         -0.734*         -0.723**
       Contracting Malaria                                                                           (0.351)         (0.380)        (0.389)         (0.353)
     % of Population Living in                                                                       -0.319          -0.312         -0.411*         -0.185
       Tropical Zones                                                                                (0.204)         (0.212)        (0.214)         (0.199)
     Mean Distance to Nearest                                                                        -0.368**        -0.367*        -0.179          -0.062
       Waterway                                                                                      (0.186)         (0.190)        (0.216)         (0.188)
     % of Population of European                                                                                     0.061
       Descent                                                                                                       (0.621)
     Years of Schooling                                                                                                                             0.134***
                                                                                                                                                    (0.042)

     Optimal Diversity                 0.713***       0.725***        0.724***        0.722***       0.721***        0.721***       0.718***        0.715***
                                       (0.014)        (0.032)         (0.049)         (0.014)        (0.068)         (0.089)        (0.052)         (0.073)
     OPEC Dummy                        No             No              No              No             Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
     Legal Origin Dummies              No             No              No              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
     Major Religion Shares             No             No              No              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
     Observations                      109            109             109             109            109             109            94              94
     R-squared                         0.74           0.84            0.85            0.87           0.90            0.90           0.91            0.93
     Notes: Bootstrapped standard errors, accounting for the use of generated regressors, are reported in parentheses. All regressions include sub-Saharan Africa
     and continent dummies.
     *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.
by the potentially confounding impact of ethnic fractionalization.52 While, as established earlier in
the literature, ethnic fractionalization does indeed confer a signi…cant adverse e¤ect on income per
capita in the year 2000 CE, the hump-shaped impact of genetic diversity remains highly statistically
signi…cant. Moreover, the estimate for the optimal level of diversity, 0.724, is e¤ectively unchanged
in comparison to earlier columns.
       Column 4 demonstrates the robustness of the hump-shaped e¤ect of genetic diversity to the
inclusion of additional cultural and institutional controls (i.e., legal origins and the fraction of the
population a¢ liated with major religious). The coe¢ cients associated with genetic diversity remain
highly signi…cant statistically and rather stable in magnitude, while the estimated optimal level of
diversity, 0.722, remains virtually intact.
       Column 5 establishes the robustness of the results to the inclusion of controls for the health
environment (i.e., percentage of the population at risk of contracting malaria, and percentage of the
population in tropical zones), additional geographical controls gauging access to waterways, and an
OPEC dummy. The results in this column, which re‡ects the baseline speci…cation for examining the
impact of diversity on development in the modern world, therefore reveal the direct e¤ect of genetic
diversity, once institutional, cultural, and geographical factors are accounted for.53 The direct hump-
shaped impact of genetic diversity on log income per capita in 2000 CE, as established in Column 5,
is depicted on the scatter plot in Figure 8.54
       The coe¢ cients associated with the diversity channel in Column 5 imply that: (i) increasing the
diversity of the most homogenous country in the sample (Bolivia) by 1 percentage point would raise
its income per capita in the year 2000 CE by 39%, (ii) decreasing the diversity of the most diverse
country in the sample (Ethiopia) by 1 percentage point would raise its income per capita by 21%,
(iii) a 1 percentage point change in genetic diversity (in either direction) at the optimum level of
0.721 (that most closely resembles the diversity level of the U.S.) would lower income per capita
by 1.9%, (iv) increasing the diversity of Bolivia to the level prevalent in the U.S. would increase
Bolivia’s per capita income by a factor of 4.7, closing the income gap between the two countries from
12:1 to 2.5:1, and (v) decreasing the diversity of Ethiopia to the level prevalent in the U.S. would
increase Ethiopia’s per capita income by a factor of 1.7 and thus close the income gap between the
two countries from 47:1 to 27:1.
  52
     Results (not shown) from estimating a similar speci…cation that included ethnic fractionalization square as an
additional explanatory variable did not reveal any discernible non-monotonic impact of ethnic fractionalization on
income per capita in 2000 CE. Importantly, the regression coe¢ cients associated with genetic diversity, as well as the
estimate for the optimal level of diversity, were una¤ected.
  53
     As established by Table D.11 in Appendix D, the baseline results for diversity in the contemporary analysis
are qualitatively robust to (i) controls for regional (rather than continental) …xed e¤ects (Column 1), (ii) dropping
observations (Columns 2–4) associated with Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America that, given their laggard
development in comparison to other regions, along with their relatively higher and lower levels of genetic diversity
respectively, may be considered a priori to be in‡uential for generating the worldwide hump-shaped relationship
between diversity and development, and (iii) restricting the regression sample (Column 5) to only countries in the
potentially in‡uential Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America regional clusters. These results demonstrate that the
direct hump-shaped e¤ect of genetic diversity on income per capita in the modern world is not simply a re‡ection of
worldwide cross-regional variations in diversity and economic development.
  54
     Similar to Figure 6 in the preceding historical analysis, Figure 8 is an “augmented component plus residual” plot
described in detail in Footnote 42. Plots depicting the partial regression lines associated with the …rst-order and second-
order e¤ects of genetic homogeneity on log income per capita in 2000 CE are presented in Figures C.5(a)–C.5(b) in
Appendix C.



                                                            35
Figure 8: Adjusted Genetic Diversity and Income Per Capita in 2000 CE – Conditional
on Transition Timing, Land Productivity, Institutional and Geographical Determinants, and
Continental Fixed E¤ects


    The regression in Column 6 examines the robustness of the baseline results to the inclusion
of the share of the population of European descent as an additional control variable. The results
indicate that the coe¢ cients associated with genetic diversity remain highly statistically signi…cant
and reassuringly stable in magnitude, while the estimated optimal level of diversity is virtually
una¤ected.55
    Moreover, as reported in Column 8, even if one accounts for the contribution of human capital
formation over the time period 1960–2000, the hump-shaped e¤ect of genetic diversity on income
per capita in 2000 CE remains highly statistically signi…cant. Further, the estimate for the optimal
level of diversity drops only moderately from 0.718 (as presented in Column 7, that accounts for the
smaller sample of 94 countries for which data on education and all other variables are available) to
0.715.
    Reassuringly, the highly signi…cant and stable hump-shaped e¤ect of genetic diversity on income
per capita in 2000 CE is not an artifact of post-colonial migration towards prosperous countries
and the concomitant increase in ethnic diversity in these economies. Importantly, for the sample of
countries whose national population is largely indigenous to their current geographical location, the
hump-shaped e¤ect of genetic diversity on contemporary income per capita is highly signi…cant and
virtually identical to the one observed in the entire sample. Thus, since genetic diversity in these
populations is the level of diversity predicted by migratory distance from East Africa, rather than
  55
     Since the share of the population of European descent is expected to be highly correlated with unobserved …xed
e¤ects associated with European countries as well as the Neo-Europes (i.e., USA, Canada, New Zealand, and Australia),
Table D.12 in Appendix D repeats the analysis from Columns 5–6 in Table 7 on di¤erent cuts of the cross-country
sample, focusing primarily on countries where the share of Europeans in the population is not confoundingly close to 1.
Importantly, the …ndings therein suggest that the baseline results are robust to controlling for the share of Europeans in
the population even when the sample is restricted to non-OECD countries (Columns 3–4), non Neo-European countries
(Columns 5–6), and non-European countries (Columns 7–8).



                                                           36
                      Table 8: Addressing Endogenous Post-Columbian Migrations

                                      (1)             (2)               (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)
                                   Full            Non             w/o Neo       w/o Latin      w/o Sub         >0.97
                                  Sample          OECD             Europes        America       Saharan       Indigenous

                                             Dependent Variable is Log Income Per Capita in 2000 CE
 Predicted Diversity           277.342***      271.979***        261.367***    412.222***      264.805**     304.735**
   (Ancestry Adjusted)         (69.452)        (84.232)          (69.946)      (148.781)       (107.492)     (111.588)
 Predicted Diversity Sqr.      -192.386***     -188.974***       -181.811***   -287.067***     -183.863**    -213.389**
   (Ancestry Adjusted)         (49.056)        (59.200)          (49.261)      (102.021)       (77.684)      (77.255)
 Log Transition Timing         0.396*          0.390             0.355         0.518*          0.068         0.448*
   (Ancestry Adjusted)         (0.233)         (0.281)           (0.231)       (0.298)         (0.442)       (0.254)
 Log % of Arable Land          -0.183***       -0.236***         -0.201***     -0.189***       -0.211**      -0.104
                               (0.051)         (0.060)           (0.055)       (0.050)         (0.097)       (0.061)
 Log Absolute Latitude         0.009           -0.021            -0.025        -0.139          0.218         -0.074
                               (0.108)         (0.119)           (0.111)       (0.126)         (0.242)       (0.130)
 Social Infrastructure         1.826***        1.313**           1.416***      2.044***        1.585***      1.311*
                               (0.417)         (0.579)           (0.507)       (0.545)         (0.486)       (0.716)
 Ethnic Fractionalization      -0.333          -0.437            -0.390        -0.752**        0.104         -0.044
                               (0.280)         (0.375)           (0.300)       (0.348)         (0.408)       (0.412)
 % of Population at Risk       -0.502          -0.605            -0.591        -0.308          -0.425        -0.153
   of Contracting Malaria      (0.351)         (0.381)           (0.370)       (0.486)         (0.581)       (0.434)
 % of Population Living        -0.319          -0.196            -0.302        -0.520**        -0.528        -0.339
   in Tropical Zones           (0.204)         (0.239)           (0.219)       (0.252)         (0.341)       (0.312)
 Mean Distance to              -0.368**        -0.387*           -0.452**      -0.494***       -0.743        -0.367*
   Nearest Waterway            (0.186)         (0.222)           (0.210)       (0.186)         (0.469)       (0.201)

 Optimal Diversity             0.721***        0.720***          0.719***      0.718***        0.720***      0.714***
                               (0.068)         (0.085)           (0.015)       (0.023)         (0.180)       (0.012)
 Observations                  109             83                105           87              71            37
 R-squared                     0.90            0.82              0.89          0.93            0.86          0.98
 Notes: Bootstrapped standard errors, accounting for the use of generated regressors, are reported in parentheses. All
 regressions include controls for major religion shares as well as OPEC, legal origin, sub-Saharan Africa and continent
 dummies.
 *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.


the actual one, the potential concern about endogeneity between genetic diversity and income per
capita in the modern world is alleviated.
       In particular, as established in Table 8, the hump-shaped e¤ect of genetic diversity remains highly
signi…cant and the optimal diversity estimate remains virtually intact if the sample is restricted to
(a) non-OECD economies (i.e., economies that were less attractive to migrants) in Column 2, (b)
non Neo-European countries (i.e., excluding USA, Canada, New Zealand and Australia) in Column
3, (c) non-Latin American countries in Column 4, (d) non Sub-Saharan African countries in Column
5, and (e) countries whose indigenous population is larger than 97% of the entire population (i.e.,
under conditions that virtually eliminate the role of migration in the creation of diversity over the
last 500 years) in Column 6.56

5.2.2      The Costs and Bene…ts of Genetic Diversity

This section presents empirical evidence on some of the channels through which genetic diversity
confers a hump-shaped e¤ect on income per capita across countries in the modern world. In line with
the theory that diversity should be expected to confer costs on productivity, in the form of lower social
  56
    This result re‡ects the well-known fact from the …eld of population genetics that the overwhelming majority of
genetic diversity in human populations stems from the diversity within groups, as opposed to the diversity between
groups (see, e.g., Barbujani et al., 1997).


                                                            37
                               Table 9: The Costs and Bene…ts of Diversity

                                         (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
                                        Full         Full         Common         Full         Full      Common
                                       Sample       Sample         Sample       Sample       Sample      Sample

                                                                  Dependent Variable is:
                                                   Degree of                            Scienti…c Articles
                                                 Interpersonal                         per Capita per Year
                                                     Trust                                  1981-2000
       Predicted Diversity            -1.855**     -2.193**       -1.901**     2.371***     1.761***   2.816**
         (Ancestry Adjusted)          (0.861)      (0.873)        (0.937)      (0.558)      (0.530)    (1.233)
       Log Transition Timing          0.069        0.079          0.083        -0.087*      -0.080*    -0.180**
         (Ancestry Adjusted)          (0.068)      (0.067)        (0.063)      (0.046)      (0.045)    (0.086)
       Log % of Arable Land           0.002        -0.004         -0.017       0.009        0.006      -0.004
                                      (0.020)      (0.018)        (0.018)      (0.016)      (0.015)    (0.037)
       Log Absolute Latitude          -0.006       0.017          0.009        0.046*       0.055**    0.078
                                      (0.029)      (0.029)        (0.030)      (0.024)      (0.023)    (0.072)
       Social Infrastructure          0.201***     0.108          0.102        0.697***     0.542***   0.627***
                                      (0.070)      (0.085)        (0.083)      (0.109)      (0.124)    (0.200)
       Ethnic Fractionalization       0.056        0.053          0.062        0.093        0.075      0.089
                                      (0.071)      (0.066)        (0.070)      (0.095)      (0.094)    (0.156)
       % of Population at Risk        -0.062       -0.022         -0.038       0.095*       0.136***   0.026
         of Contracting Malaria       (0.090)      (0.088)        (0.093)      (0.054)      (0.048)    (0.121)
       % of Population Living         -0.076       0.002          0.006        0.016        0.049      0.108
         in Tropical Zones            (0.055)      (0.064)        (0.063)      (0.058)      (0.055)    (0.181)
       Mean Distance to               0.093        0.115*         0.096*       0.106***     0.117***   0.159**
         Nearest Waterway             (0.061)      (0.059)        (0.055)      (0.038)      (0.034)    (0.067)
       Years of Schooling                          0.021*         0.027**                   0.031***   0.021
                                                   (0.012)        (0.011)                   (0.008)    (0.023)

       Observations                   58           58             56           93           93         56
       R-squared                      0.79         0.80           0.82         0.80         0.82       0.81
       Notes: Bootstrapped standard errors, accounting for the use of a generated regressor, are reported in
       parentheses. All regressions include additional geographical controls for terrain characteristics, as well
       as OPEC, legal origin, sub-Saharan Africa and continent dummies.
       *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.


capital, and bene…ts, in the form of more rapid knowledge creation, it establishes that countries with
greater diversity are also characterized, on average, by a lower prevalence of interpersonal trust and
a higher intensity of scienti…c knowledge creation. Speci…cally, exploiting cross-country variations in
the degree of interpersonal trust and the annual average number of scienti…c articles per capita in the
1981–2000 time period, the analysis demonstrates that genetic diversity has a statistically signi…cant
negative relationship with the prevalence of trust but a positive one with scienti…c productivity,
conditional on a similar set of baseline controls employed in the preceding analysis of contemporary
comparative development.57
    Using a sample of 58 countries for which trust data as well as data on all baseline controls employed
by the analysis are available, Column 1 of Table 9 shows that genetic diversity has a statistically
signi…cant negative e¤ect on the prevalence of trust, accounting for the Neolithic transition timing
and land productivity channels, as well as contemporary cultural, geographical, and institutional
factors. The coe¢ cient corresponding to the diversity channel indicates that a 1 percentage point
increase in genetic diversity is associated with a 0.02 percentage point decrease in the prevalence of
  57
     For details on the de…nitions and data sources of the dependent variables employed by the current analysis, the
reader is referred to Appendix F.



                                                             38
trust. Moreover, as demonstrated in Column 2, this adverse impact of diversity on trust remains
intact when the regression speci…cation is augmented to account for the e¤ect of average years of
schooling in the population.
    In contrast, using a sample of 93 countries for which data on scienti…c productivity as well as
data on the full set of baseline controls are available, Column 4 shows that genetic diversity has a
statistically signi…cant positive e¤ect on the average annual number of published scienti…c articles per
capita. Speci…cally, the coe¢ cient of interest indicates that a 1 percentage point increase in genetic
diversity is associated with an increase in the annual number of scienti…c articles per capita of about
0.02, conditional on the in‡uence of Neolithic transition timing, land productivity, and contemporary
cultural, geographical, and institutional factors. In addition, as established by Column 5, accounting
for the e¤ect of average years of schooling in the population does not qualitatively alter the bene…cial
impact of diversity on scienti…c productivity in the 1981–2000 time period.
    Finally, Columns 3 and 6 demonstrate that the conditional detrimental e¤ect of genetic diversity
on trust as well as its bene…cial e¤ect on scienti…c productivity both remain fully intact when the
relevant regressions are performed on a common sample of countries, thereby lending further support
to the theoretical assertion that diversity confers con‡icting e¤ects on productivity, generating
ine¢ ciencies in the production process while, at the same time, fostering the expansion of society’s
production possibility frontier.


6    Concluding Remarks
This paper argues that deep-rooted factors, determined tens of thousands of years ago, had a
signi…cant e¤ect on the course of economic development from the dawn of human civilization to the
contemporary era. It advances and empirically establishes the hypothesis that, in the course of the
exodus of Homo sapiens out of Africa, variation in migratory distance from the cradle of humankind
to various settlements across the globe a¤ected genetic diversity, and has had a long-lasting e¤ect on
the pattern of comparative economic development that is not captured by geographical, institutional,
and cultural factors.
    The level of genetic diversity within a society is found to have a hump-shaped e¤ect on de-
velopment outcomes in the pre-colonial era, re‡ecting the trade-o¤ between the bene…cial and the
detrimental e¤ects of diversity on productivity. Moreover, the level of genetic diversity in each
country today (as determined by the genetic diversities and genetic distances amongst its ancestral
populations), has a non-monotonic e¤ect on income per capita in the modern world. While the
intermediate level of genetic diversity prevalent among Asian and European populations has been
conducive for development, the high degree of diversity among African populations and the low degree
of diversity among Native American populations have been a detrimental force in the development
of these regions.




                                                  39
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, “Institutions as a Fundamental
    Cause of Long-Run Growth,” in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, eds., Handbook of
    Economic Growth, Vol IA, Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier North-Holland, 2005.
Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara, “Ethnic Diversity and Economic Performance,”Journal
    of Economic Literature, September 2005, 43 (3), 762–800.
    , Arnaud Devleeschauwer, William Easterly, Sergio Kurlat, and Romain Wacziarg,
    “Fractionalization,” Journal of Economic Growth, June 2003, 8 (2), 155–194.
Ashraf, Quamrul and Oded Galor, “Dynamics and Stagnation in the Malthusian Epoch,”2010.
    Working Paper, Department of Economics, Williams College.
    ,     , and Ömer Özak, “Isolation and Development,” Journal of the European Economic
    Association, April-May 2010, 8 (2-3), 401–412.
Bairoch, Paul, Cities and Economic Development: From the Dawn of History to the Present,
    Trans. by Christopher Braider. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, 1988.
Barbujani, Guido, Arianna Magagni, Eric Minch, and L. Luca Cavalli-Sforza, “An
    Apportionment of Human DNA Diversity,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
    April 1997, 94 (9), 4516–4519.
Barro, Robert J. and Rachel M. McCleary, “Religion and Economic Growth across Countries,”
    American Sociological Review, October 2003, 68 (5), 760–781.
Cann, Howard M., Claudia de Toma, Lucien Cazes, Marie-Fernande Legrand, Valerie
    Morel, Laurence Piou¤re et al., “A Human Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel,” Science,
    April 2002, 296 (5566), 261–262.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. Luca, “The Human Genome Diversity Project: Past, Present and Future,”
    Nature Reviews Genetics, April 2005, 6 (4), 333–340.
Conley, Timothy G., “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence,” Journal of
    Econometrics, September 1999, 92 (1), 1–45.
Dalgaard, Carl-Johan and Holger Strulik, “The Physiological Foundations of the Wealth of
    Nations,” 2010. Discussion Paper No. 10-05, University of Copenhagen.
Desmet, Klaus, Michel Le Breton, Ignacio Ortuño-Ortín, and Shlomo Weber, “Nation
    Formation and Genetic Diversity,” 2006. CEPR Discussion Paper No. 5918.
Diamond, Jared, Guns, Germs and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies, New York, NY: W. W.
    Norton & Co., 1997.
    , “Evolution, Consequences and Future of Plant and Animal Domestication,” Nature, August
    2002, 418 (6898), 700–707.
Easterly, William and Ross Levine, “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divisions,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1997, 112 (4), 1203–1250.
Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokolo¤, “History Lessons: Institutions, Factor
    Endowments, and Paths of Development in the New World,”Journal of Economic Perspectives,
    Summer 2000, 14 (3), 217–232.
Gallup, John L. and Je¤rey D. Sachs, “The Economic Burden of Malaria,” The American



                                               40
    Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, January 2001, 64 (1-2), 85–96.
    ,      , and Andrew D. Mellinger, “Geography and Economic Development,”International
    Regional Science Review, August 1999, 22 (2), 179–232.
Galor, Oded, “The 2008 Lawrence R. Klein Lecture–Comparative Economic Development: Insights
    from Uni…ed Growth Theory,” International Economic Review, February 2010, 51 (1), 1–44.
     and Omer Moav, “Natural Selection and the Origin of Economic Growth,”Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, November 2002, 117 (4), 1133–1191.
     and      , “The Neolithic Revolution and Contemporary Variations in Life Expectancy,”2007.
    Working Paper, Department of Economics, Brown University.
Glaeser, Edward L., Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer,
    “Do Institutions Cause Growth?,” Journal of Economic Growth, September 2004, 9 (3), 271–
    303.
Greif, Avner, “Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: The Maghribi
    Traders’Coalition,” American Economic Review, June 1993, 83 (3), 525–548.
Gri¢ ths, Anthony J. F., Je¤rey H. Miller, David T. Suzuki, Richard C. Lewontin, and
    William M. Gelbart, An Introduction to Genetic Analysis, New York, NY: W. H. Freeman
    & Co., 2000.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, “Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange?,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2009, 124 (3), 1095–1131.
Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
    Per Worker Than Others?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1999, 114 (1), 83–116.
Jones, Eric L., The European Miracle: Environments, Economies and Geopolitics in the History
    of Europe and Asia, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1981.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny,
    “The Quality of Government,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, March 1999, 15
    (1), 222–279.
Lagerlöf, Nils-Petter, “Long-Run Trends in Human Body Mass,”Macroeconomic Dynamics, June
    2007, 11 (3), 367–387.
Landes, David S., The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some Are So Rich and Some So
    Poor, New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Co., 1998.
Macaulay, Vincent, Catherine Hill, Alessandro Achilli, Chiara Rengo, Douglas Clarke,
    William Meehan et al., “Single, Rapid Coastal Settlement of Asia Revealed by Analysis of
    Complete Mitochondrial Genomes,” Science, May 2005, 308 (5724), 1034–1036.
McEvedy, Colin and Richard Jones, Atlas of World Population History, New York, NY: Penguin
    Books Ltd., 1978.
Michalopoulos, Stelios, “The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity: Theory and Evidence,” 2008.
    Working Paper, Department of Economics, Tufts University.
Mokyr, Joel, The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress, New York,
    NY: Oxford University Press, 1990.
Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel, “Estimation and Inference in Two-Step Econometric
    Models,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, October 1985, 3 (4), 370–379.


                                              41
North, Douglass C. and Robert P. Thomas, The Rise of the Western World: A New Economic
    History, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1973.
Olsson, Ola and Douglas A. Hibbs Jr., “Biogeography and Long-Run Economic Development,”
    European Economic Review, May 2005, 49 (4), 909–938.
Pagan, Adrian, “Econometric Issues in the Analysis of Regressions with Generated Regressors,”
    International Economic Review, February 1984, 25 (1), 221–247.
Pomeranz, Kenneth, The Great Divergence: Europe, China and the Making of the Modern World
    Economy, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000.
Prugnolle, Franck, Andrea Manica, and François Balloux, “Geography Predicts Neutral
    Genetic Diversity of Human Populations,” Current Biology, March 2005, 15 (5), R159–R160.
Putterman, Louis, “Agriculture, Di¤usion, and Development: Ripple E¤ects of the Neolithic
    Revolution,” Economica, November 2008, 75 (300), 729–748.
     and David N. Weil, “Post-1500 Population Flows and the Long Run Determinants of
    Economic Growth and Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2010, 125 (4),
    1627–1682.
Ramachandran, Sohini, Omkar Deshpande, Charles C. Roseman, Noah A. Rosenberg,
    Marcus W. Feldman, and L. Luca Cavalli-Sforza, “Support from the Relationship of
    Genetic and Geographic Distance in Human Populations for a Serial Founder E¤ect Originating
    in Africa,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, November 2005, 102 (44), 15942–
    15947.
Ramankutty, Navin, Jonathan A. Foley, John Norman, and Kevin McSweeney, “The
    Global Distribution of Cultivable Lands: Current Patterns and Sensitivity to Possible Climate
    Change,” Global Ecology and Biogeography, September 2002, 11 (5), 377–392.
Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi, “Institutions Rule: The
    Primacy of Institutions Over Geography and Integration in Economic Development,” Journal
    of Economic Growth, June 2004, 9 (2), 131–165.
Spolaore, Enrico and Romain Wacziarg, “The Di¤usion of Development,” Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, May 2009, 124 (2), 469–529.
Stringer, Chris B. and Peter Andrews, “Genetic and Fossil Evidence for the Origin of Modern
    Humans,” Science, March 1988, 239 (4845), 1263–1268.
Tabellini, Guido, “Institutions and Culture,” Journal of the European Economic Association,
    April-May 2008, 6 (2-3), 255–294.
Wang, Sijia, Cecil M. Lewis Jr., Mattias Jakobsson, Sohini Ramachandran, Nicolas Ray,
    Gabriel Bedoya et al., “Genetic Variation and Population Structure in Native Americans,”
    PLoS Genetics, November 2007, 3 (11), 2049–2067.
Weber, Max, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, Trans. by Talcott Parsons and
    Anthony Giddens, 1930. London, UK: Allen & Unwin, 1905.
Weisdorf, Jacob L., “From Foraging to Farming: Explaining the Neolithic Revolution,” Journal
    of Economic Surveys, September 2005, 19 (4), 561–586.
Wooldridge, Je¤rey M., Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, 2 ed., Cambridge,
    MA: The MIT Press, 2010.


                                                42
Appendices

A     Additional Robustness Checks
A.1    Results for Earlier Historical Periods
This section examines the e¤ects of genetic diversity on economic development in earlier historical
periods of the Common Era and, in particular, establishes a hump-shaped relationship between
genetic diversity, predicted by migratory distance from East Africa, and log population density in
the years 1000 CE and 1 CE. In so doing, the analysis demonstrates the persistence of the diversity
channel over a long expanse of time and indicates that the hump-shaped manner in which genetic
diversity in‡uences development, along with the optimal level of diversity, did not fundamentally
change during the agricultural stage of development.
    The results from replicating the analysis of the previous section to explain log population density
in 1000 CE and 1 CE are presented in Tables A.1 and A.2 respectively. As before, the individual
and combined explanatory powers of the genetic diversity, transition timing, and land productivity
channels are examined empirically. The relevant samples, determined by the availability of data on
the dependent variable of interest as well as all identi…ed explanatory channels, are comprised of 140
countries for the 1000 CE regressions and 126 countries for the analysis in 1 CE. Despite the more
constrained sample sizes, however, the empirical …ndings once again reveal a highly statistically
signi…cant hump-shaped relationship between genetic diversity, predicted by migratory distance
from East Africa, and log population density in these earlier historical periods. Additionally, the
magnitude and signi…cance of the coe¢ cients associated with the diversity channel in these earlier
periods remain rather stable, albeit less so in comparison to the analysis for 1500 CE, when the
regression speci…cation is augmented with controls for the transition timing and land productivity
channels as well as dummy variables capturing continental …xed e¤ects.
    In a pattern similar to that observed in Table 3, the unconditional e¤ects of genetic diversity
in Tables A.1 and A.2 decrease slightly in magnitude when subjected to controls for either the
Neolithic transition timing or the land productivity channels, both of which appear to confer their
expected e¤ects on population density in earlier historical periods. However, as argued previously,
these estimates certainly re‡ect some amount of omitted variable bias resulting from the exclusion
of one or more of the identi…ed explanatory channels in Malthusian economic development. On
the other hand, unlike the pattern in Table 3, the coe¢ cients of the diversity channel also weaken
moderately in statistical signi…cance, dropping to the 5% level when controlling for transition timing
in the 1000 CE analysis and to the 10% level under controls for the land productivity channel in the 1
CE analysis. Nonetheless, this reduction in signi…cance is not entirely surprising when one accounts
for the greater imprecision with which population density is recorded for these earlier periods, given
that mismeasurement in the dependent variable of an OLS regression typically causes the resulting
coe¢ cient estimates to possess larger standard errors.
    Column 5 in Tables A.1 and A.2 reveals the results from exploiting the combined explanatory
power of the genetic diversity, transition timing, and land productivity channels for log population
density in 1000 CE and 1 CE. Interestingly, in each case, the linear and quadratic coe¢ cients asso-
ciated with diversity remain rather stable when compared to the corresponding estimates obtained
under a partial set of controls in earlier columns. In comparison to the corresponding results for
population density in 1500 CE from Table 3, the coe¢ cients of the diversity channel uncovered
here are statistically signi…cant at the 5% as opposed to the 1% level, a by-product of relatively
larger standard errors that again may be partly attributed to the higher measurement error a- icting
population density estimates reported for earlier historical periods.



                                                   i
Figure A.1: Predicted Genetic Diversity and Population Density in 1000 CE – Conditional on
Transition Timing, Land Productivity, and Continental Fixed E¤ects




Figure A.2: Predicted Genetic Diversity and Population Density in 1 CE – Conditional on
Transition Timing, Land Productivity, and Continental Fixed E¤ects




                                            ii
               Table A.1: Predicted Diversity and Economic Development in 1000 CE

                                      (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)         (5)            (6)
                                            Dependent Variable is Log Population Density in 1000 CE
   Predicted Diversity         219.722***                    158.631**    179.523***     154.913**     201.239**
                               (68.108)                      (63.604)     (65.981)       (61.467)      (97.612)
   Predicted Diversity Sqr.    -155.442***                   -113.110**   -126.147***    -109.806**    -145.894**
                               (50.379)                      (46.858)     (48.643)       (44.967)      (68.252)
   Log Transition Timing                        1.393***     1.228***                    1.374***      1.603***
                                                (0.170)      (0.180)                     (0.151)       (0.259)
   Log % of Arable Land                                                   0.546***       0.371***      0.370***
                                                                          (0.140)        (0.106)       (0.114)
   Log Absolute Latitude                                                  -0.151         -0.380***     -0.373***
                                                                          (0.103)        (0.110)       (0.137)
   Log Land Suitability                                                   0.043          0.211**       0.190*
                                                                          (0.135)        (0.104)       (0.106)

   Optimal Diversity           0.707***                      0.701***     0.712***       0.705**       0.690**
                               (0.039)                       (0.127)      (0.146)        (0.108)       (0.293)
   Continent Dummies           No               No           No           No             No            Yes
   Observations                140              140          140          140            140           140
   R-squared                   0.15             0.32         0.38         0.36           0.61          0.62
   Note: Bootstrapped standard errors, accounting for the use of generated regressors, are reported in parentheses.
   *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.


    Finally, the last column in each table augments the analysis with controls for continental …xed
e¤ects, demonstrating that the coe¢ cients of the genetic diversity channel in each historical period
maintain signi…cance in spite of the lower degree of cross-country variation in diversity within each
continent as compared to that observed worldwide. Moreover, the magnitudes of the diversity
coe¢ cients remain rather stable, particularly in the 1000 CE analysis, and increase somewhat for
population density in 1 CE despite the smaller sample size and, hence, even lower within-continent
variation in diversity exploited by the latter regression. Further, the estimated optimal levels of
diversity in the two periods are relatively stable in comparison to that obtained under the baseline
regression for the year 1500 CE. The coe¢ cients associated with diversity from the 1000 CE analysis
suggest that, accounting for both land productivity and the timing of the Neolithic transition, a 1
percentage point increase in genetic diversity for the least diverse society in the sample would raise
its population density by 38%, whereas a 1 percentage point decrease in diversity for the most diverse
society would raise its population density by 26%. On the other hand, for the 1 CE analysis, a similar
increase in genetic diversity for the least diverse society would raise its population density by 47%,
whereas a similar decrease in diversity for the most diverse society would raise its population density
by 28%.A.1 The hump-shaped relationships, based on these coe¢ cients, between genetic diversity
and log population density in the years 1000 CE and 1 CE are depicted on the scatter plots in Figures
A.1 and A.2.A.2
    In sum, the results presented in Tables A.1 and A.2 suggest that, consistent with the predictions
of the proposed diversity channel, genetic diversity has indeed been a signi…cant determinant of
Malthusian economic development in earlier historical periods as well. The overall non-monotonic
e¤ect of diversity on population density in the years 1000 CE and 1 CE is robust, in terms of both
 A .1
      These e¤ects are calculated directly via the methodology outlined in Footnote 31 earlier, along with the sample
minimum and maximum genetic diversity values of 0.573 and 0.774, respectively, in both the 1000 CE and 1 CE
regression samples.
 A .2
      Similar to Figure 6, Figures A.1–A.2 are “augmented component plus residual” plots. See Footnote 42 for further
details regarding this type of plot. In addition, for consistency with Figure 1, which depicts the negative e¤ect of
increasing migratory distance from East Africa on genetic diversity, the horizontal axes in Figures A.1–A.2 represent
genetic homogeneity (i.e., 1 minus genetic diversity) so as to re‡ect increasing as opposed to decreasing migratory
distance from East Africa.


                                                           iii
                 Table A.2: Predicted Diversity and Economic Development in 1 CE

                                       (1)         (2)                 (3)       (4)         (5)             (6)
                                             Dependent Variable is Log Population Density in 1 CE
   Predicted Diversity          227.826***                      183.142***    129.180*   134.767**    231.689**
                                (72.281)                        (57.772)      (66.952)   (59.772)     (113.162)
   Predicted Diversity Sqr.     -160.351***                     -132.373***   -88.040*   -96.253**    -166.859**
                                (53.169)                        (42.177)      (49.519)   (43.718)     (79.175)
   Log Transition Timing                        1.793***        1.636***                 1.662***     2.127***
                                                (0.217)         (0.207)                  (0.209)      (0.430)
   Log % of Arable Land                                                       0.377**    0.314**      0.348***
                                                                              (0.158)    (0.125)      (0.134)
   Log Absolute Latitude                                                      0.190      -0.121       -0.115
                                                                              (0.125)    (0.119)      (0.135)
   Log Land Suitability                                                       0.160      0.238*       0.210*
                                                                              (0.173)    (0.124)      (0.125)

   Optimal Diversity            0.710***                        0.692***      0.734**    0.700***     0.694***
                                (0.052)                         (0.027)       (0.347)    (0.188)      (0.194)
   Continent Dummies            No              No              No            No         No           Yes
   Observations                 126             126             126           126        126          126
   R-squared                    0.16            0.42            0.46          0.32       0.59         0.61
   Note: Bootstrapped standard errors, accounting for the use of generated regressors, are reported in parentheses.
   *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.


magnitude and statistical signi…cance, to controls for the timing of the agricultural transition, the
natural productivity of land for agriculture and other unobserved continent-speci…c geographical and
socioeconomic characteristics. More fundamentally, the analysis demonstrates the persistence of the
diversity channel, along with the optimal level of diversity, over a long expanse of time during the
agricultural stage of development.

A.2    Robustness to the Technology Di¤usion Hypothesis
The technology di¤usion hypothesis, as mentioned earlier, suggests that spatial proximity to global
and regional technological frontiers confers a bene…cial e¤ect on the development of less advanced
societies by facilitating the di¤usion of new technologies from more advanced societies through
trade as well as sociocultural and geopolitical in‡uences. In particular, the technology di¤usion
channel implies that, ceteris paribus, the greater the geographic distance from the global and regional
technological “leaders” in a given period, the lower the level of economic development amongst the
“followers” in that period. Indeed, several studies in international trade and economic geography
have uncovered strong empirical support for this hypothesis in explaining comparative economic
development in the contemporary era. This section examines the robustness of the e¤ects of ge-
netic diversity on economic development during the pre-colonial era to controls for this additional
hypothesis.
    The purpose of the current investigation is to ensure that the preceding analyses were not ascribing
to genetic diversity the predictive power that should otherwise have been attributed to the technology
di¤usion channel. To be speci…c, one may identify some of the waypoints employed to construct the
prehistorical migratory routes from East Africa (such as Cairo and Istanbul) as origins of spatial
technology di¤usion during the pre-colonial era. This, coupled with the fact that genetic diversity
decreases with increasing migratory distance from East Africa, raises the concern that what has
so far been interpreted as evidence consistent with the bene…cial e¤ect of higher diversity may, in
reality, simply be capturing the latent e¤ect of the omitted technology di¤usion channel in preceding
regression speci…cations. As will become evident, however, while technology di¤usion is indeed
found to have been a signi…cant determinant of comparative development in the pre-colonial era,


                                                           iv
                Table A.3: The Regional Frontiers Identi…ed for each Historical Period

        City and Modern Location            Continent       Sociopolitical Entity               Relevant Period
        Cairo, Egypt                        Africa          Mamluk Sultanate                               1500   CE
        Fez, Morocco                        Africa          Marinid Kingdom of Fez                         1500   CE
        London, UK                          Europe          Tudor Dynasty                                  1500   CE
        Paris, France                       Europe          Valois-Orléans Dynasty                         1500   CE
        Constantinople, Turkey              Asia            Ottoman Empire                                 1500   CE
        Peking, China                       Asia            Ming Dynasty                                   1500   CE
        Tenochtitlan, Mexico                Americas        Aztec Civilization                             1500   CE
        Cuzco, Peru                         Americas        Inca Civilization                              1500   CE
        Cairo, Egypt                        Africa          Fatimid Caliphate                              1000   CE
        Kairwan, Tunisia                    Africa          Berber Zirite Dynasty                          1000   CE
        Constantinople, Turkey              Europe          Byzantine Empire                               1000   CE
        Cordoba, Spain                      Europe          Caliphate of Cordoba                           1000   CE
        Baghdad, Iraq                       Asia            Abbasid Caliphate                              1000   CE
        Kaifeng, China                      Asia            Song Dynasty                                   1000   CE
        Tollan, Mexico                      Americas        Classic Maya Civilization                      1000   CE
        Huari, Peru                         Americas        Huari Culture                                  1000   CE
        Alexandria, Egypt                   Africa          Roman Empire                                      1   CE
        Carthage, Tunisia                   Africa          Roman Empire                                      1   CE
        Athens, Greece                      Europe          Roman Empire                                      1   CE
        Rome, Italy                         Europe          Roman Empire                                      1   CE
        Luoyang, China                      Asia            Han Dynasty                                       1   CE
        Seleucia, Iraq                      Asia            Seleucid Dynasty                                  1   CE
        Teotihuacán, Mexico                 Americas        Pre-classic Maya Civilization                     1   CE
        Cahuachi, Peru                      Americas        Nazca Culture                                     1   CE


the baseline …ndings for genetic diversity remain robust to controls for this additional in‡uential
hypothesis.
    To account for the technology di¤usion channel, the current analysis constructs, for each his-
torical period examined, a control variable measuring the great circle distance from the closest
regional technological frontier in that period. Following the well-accepted notion that the process
of pre-industrial urban development was typically more pronounced in societies that enjoyed higher
agricultural surpluses, the analysis adopts historical city population size as an appropriate metric to
identify the period-speci…c sets of regional technological frontiers. Speci…cally, based on historical
urban population data from Chandler (1987) and Modelski (2003), the procedure commences with
assembling, for each period, a set of regional frontiers comprising the two largest cities, belonging to
di¤erent civilizations or disparate sociopolitical entities, from each of Africa, Europe, Asia and the
Americas.A.3 The e¤ectiveness of this procedure in yielding an outcome that is consistent with what
one might expect from a general familiarity with world history is evident in the regional frontiers
obtained for each period as shown in Table A.3.A.4 In constructing the variable measuring distance
to the closest regional frontier for a given historical period, the analysis then selects, for each country
 A .3
      The exclusion of Oceania from the list of continents employed is not a methodological restriction but a natural
result arising from the fact that evidence of urbanization does not appear in the historical record of this continent
until after European colonization. Moreover, the consideration of the Americas as a single unit is consistent with the
historical evidence that this landmass only harbored two distinct major civilizational sequences – one in Mesoamerica
and the other in the Andean region of South America. Indeed, the imposition of the criteria that the selected cities
in each continent (or landmass) should belong to di¤erent sociopolitical units is meant to capture the notion that
technology di¤usion historically occurred due to civilizational in‡uence, broadly de…ned, as opposed to the in‡uence
of only major urban centers that were developed by these relatively advanced societies.
 A .4
      Note that for the year 1 CE there are four cities appearing within the territories of the Roman Empire, which at …rst
glance seems to violate the criterion that the regional frontiers selected should belong to di¤erent sociopolitical entities.
This is simply a by-product of the dominance of the Roman Empire in the Mediterranean basin during that period. In
fact, historical evidence suggests that the cities of Athens, Carthage and Alexandria had long been serving as centers
of regional di¤usion prior to their annexation to the Roman Empire. Moreover, the appearance of Constantinople
under Europe in 1000 CE and Asia in 1500 CE is an innocuous classi…cation issue arising from the fact that the city
historically ‡uctuated between the dominions of European and Asian civilizations.


                                                             v
in the corresponding regression sample, the smallest of the great circle distances from the regional
frontiers to the country’s capital city.
    To anticipate the robustness of the baseline results for predicted diversity to controls for the
technology di¤usion hypothesis, it may be noted that migratory distance from East Africa possesses
a correlation coe¢ cient of only 0.02 with the great circle distance from the closest regional frontier
in the 1500 CE sample. Furthermore, for the 1000 CE and 1 CE regression samples, migratory
distance is again weakly correlated with distance from the closest regional technological frontier in
each period, with the respective correlation coe¢ cients being -0.04 and 0.03.A.5 These encouragingly
low sample correlations are indicative of the fact that the earlier regression speci…cations estimated
by the analysis were indeed not simply attributing to genetic diversity the e¤ects possibly arising
from the technology di¤usion channel.
    Column 1 of Table A.4 reports the results from estimating the baseline speci…cation for log
population density in 1500 CE, while controlling for technology di¤usion as originating from the
regional frontiers identi…ed for this period. In comparison to the baseline estimates revealed in
Column 6 of Table 3, the regression coe¢ cients associated with the genetic diversity channel remain
relatively stable, decreasing only moderately in magnitude and statistical signi…cance. Some similar
robustness characteristics may be noted for the transition timing and land productivity channels as
well. Importantly, however, the estimate for the optimal level of diversity remains virtually unchanged
and highly statistically signi…cant. Interestingly, the results also establish the technology di¤usion
channel as a signi…cant determinant of comparative development in the pre-colonial Malthusian era.
In particular, a 1% increase in distance from the closest regional frontier is associated with a decrease
in population density by 0.2%, an e¤ect that is statistically signi…cant at the 1% level.
    Columns 2–3 establish the robustness of the diversity channel in 1000 CE and 1 CE to controls
for technology di¤usion arising from the technological frontiers identi…ed for these earlier historical
periods. Speci…cally, comparing Column 2 with the relevant baseline (i.e., Column 6 in Table A.1),
the linear and quadratic coe¢ cients of genetic diversity for the 1000 CE regressions remain largely
stable under controls for technology di¤usion, decreasing slightly in magnitude but maintaining
statistical signi…cance. A similar stability pattern also emerges for the coe¢ cients capturing the
in‡uence of the diversity channel in the 1 CE regressions. Indeed, the estimates for optimal diversity
in these earlier periods remain rather stable relative to their respective baselines in Tables A.1
and A.2. Finally, in line with the predictions of the technology di¤usion hypothesis, a statistically
signi…cant negative e¤ect of distance from the closest regional frontier on economic development is
observed for these earlier historical periods as well.
    The results uncovered herein demonstrate the persistence of the signi…cant non-monotonic e¤ect
of diversity on comparative development over the period 1–1500 CE, despite controls for the clearly
in‡uential role of technology di¤usion from technological frontiers that were relevant during this
period of world history. Indeed, these …ndings lend further credence to the proposed genetic diversity
channel by demonstrating that the empirical analyses thus far have not been ascribing to genetic
diversity the explanatory power that should otherwise have been attributed to the impact of spatial
technology di¤usion.

A.3     Robustness to Microgeographic Factors
This section addresses concerns regarding the possibility that the baseline results for predicted
genetic diversity could in fact be re‡ecting the latent impact of microgeographic factors, such as the
degree of variation in terrain and proximity to waterways, if these variables happen to be correlated
with migratory distance from East Africa. There are several conceivable channels through which
such factors could a¤ect a society’s aggregate productivity and thus its population density in the
 A .5
      These correlations di¤er slightly from those presented in Table G.4 in Appendix G, where the correlations are
presented for the entire 145-country sample used in the regressions for 1500 CE.


                                                        vi
                   Table A.4: Robustness to the Technology Di¤usion Hypothesis

                                                       (1)           (2)           (3)
                                                          Dependent Variable is
                                                        Log Population Density in:
                                                    1500 CE     1000 CE        1 CE
                       Predicted Diversity         156.736**     183.771**     215.858**
                                                   (75.572)      (88.577)      (105.286)
                       Predicted Diversity Sqr.    -114.626**    -134.609**    -157.724**
                                                   (52.904)      (61.718)      (73.681)
                       Log Transition Timing       0.909***      1.253***      1.676***
                                                   (0.254)       (0.339)       (0.434)
                       Log % of Arable Land        0.363***      0.323***      0.342***
                                                   (0.104)       (0.121)       (0.131)
                       Log Absolute Latitude       -0.492***     -0.454***     -0.212
                                                   (0.134)       (0.149)       (0.142)
                       Log Land Suitability        0.275***      0.239**       0.191
                                                   (0.090)       (0.105)       (0.120)
                       Log Distance to Frontier    -0.187***
                         in 1500 CE                (0.070)
                       Log Distance to Frontier                  -0.230*
                         in 1000 CE                              (0.121)
                       Log Distance to Frontier                                -0.297***
                         in 1 CE                                               (0.102)

                       Optimal Diversity           0.684***      0.683***      0.684**
                                                   (0.169)       (0.218)       (0.266)
                       Continent Dummies           Yes           Yes           Yes
                       Observations                145           140           126
                       R-squared                   0.72          0.64          0.66
                       Note: Bootstrapped standard errors, accounting for the use of
                       generated regressors, are reported in parentheses.
                       *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.


Malthusian stage of development. For instance, the degree of terrain variation within a region can
directly a¤ect its agricultural productivity by in‡uencing the arability of land. Moreover, terrain
ruggedness may also have led to the spatial concentration of economic activity, which has been linked
with increasing returns to scale and higher aggregate productivity through agglomeration by the new
economic geography literature. On the other hand, by geographically isolating population subgroups,
a rugged landscape could also have nurtured their ethnic di¤erentiation over time (Michalopoulos,
2008), and may thus confer an adverse e¤ect on society’s aggregate productivity via the increased
likelihood of ethnic con‡ict. Similarly, while proximity to waterways can directly a¤ect crop yields
by making bene…cial practices such as irrigation possible, it may also have augmented productivity
indirectly by lowering transportation costs and, thereby, fostering urban development, trade and
technology di¤usion.A.6
    To ensure that the signi…cant e¤ects of genetic diversity in the baseline regressions are not simply
re‡ecting the latent in‡uence of microgeographic factors, the current analysis examines variants of
the baseline speci…cation augmented with controls for terrain quality and proximity to waterways. In
particular, the terrain controls are derived from the G-ECON data set compiled by Nordhaus (2006)
and include mean elevation and a measure of surface roughness, aggregated up to the country level
from grid-level data at a granularity of 1 latitude x 1 longitude. In light of the possibility that
the impact of terrain undulation could be non-monotonic, the speci…cations examined also control
for the squared term of the roughness index. The control variables gauging access to waterways,
obtained from the Gallup et al. (1999) data set, include the expected distance from any point within
 A .6
    Indeed, a signi…cant positive relationship between proximity to waterways and contemporary population density
has been demonstrated by Gallup et al. (1999).


                                                       vii
                           Table A.5: Robustness to Microgeographic Factors

                                                          (1)           (2)           (3)
                                                            Dependent Variable is
                                                      Log Population Density in 1500 CE
                       Predicted Diversity           160.346**      157.073**     157.059**
                                                     (78.958)       (79.071)      (69.876)
                       Predicted Diversity Sqr.      -118.716**     -112.780**    -114.994**
                                                     (55.345)       (55.694)      (48.981)
                       Log Transition Timing         1.131***       1.211***      1.215***
                                                     (0.225)        (0.201)       (0.197)
                       Log % of Arable Land          0.397***       0.348***      0.374***
                                                     (0.099)        (0.099)       (0.087)
                       Log Absolute Latitude         -0.358***      -0.354***     -0.352***
                                                     (0.124)        (0.132)       (0.122)
                       Log Land Suitability          0.188*         0.248***      0.160**
                                                     (0.101)        (0.082)       (0.081)
                       Mean Elevation                -0.404                       0.502*
                                                     (0.251)                      (0.273)
                       Terrain Roughness             5.938***                     4.076**
                                                     (1.870)                      (1.840)
                       Terrain Roughness Sqr.        -7.332**                     -7.627***
                                                     (2.922)                      (2.906)
                       Mean Distance to Nearest                     -0.437**      -0.390**
                         Waterway                                   (0.178)       (0.181)
                       % of Land within 100 km                      0.731**       1.175***
                         of Waterway                                (0.310)       (0.294)

                       Optimal Diversity             0.675***       0.696***      0.683***
                                                     (0.224)        (0.188)       (0.083)
                       Continent Dummies             Yes            Yes           Yes
                       Observations                  145            145           145
                       R-squared                     0.72           0.75          0.78
                       Note: Bootstrapped standard errors, accounting for the use of generated
                       regressors, are reported in parentheses.
                       *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.


a country to the nearest coast or sea-navigable river as well as the percentage of a country’s land
area located within 100 km of a coast or sea-navigable river.A.7 Foreshadowing the robustness of the
baseline results, mean elevation, roughness and roughness square possess only moderate correlation
coe¢ cients of -0.11, 0.16 and 0.09, respectively, with migratory distance from East Africa. Moreover,
migratory distance is also only moderately correlated with the measures of proximity to waterways,
possessing sample correlations of -0.20 and 0.19 with the distance and land area variables described
above.
    The results from estimating augmented regression speci…cations for log population density in 1500
CE, incorporating controls for either terrain quality or access to waterways, are shown in Columns
1 and 2 of Table A.5. In each case, the coe¢ cients associated with the diversity channel remain
statistically signi…cant and relatively stable, experiencing only a moderate decrease in magnitude,
when compared to the baseline results from Table 3. Interestingly, the control variables for terrain
quality in Column 1 and those gauging access to waterways in Column 2 appear to confer statistically
signi…cant e¤ects on population density in 1500 CE, and mostly in directions consistent with priors.
The results suggest that terrain roughness does indeed have a non-monotonic impact on aggregate
productivity, with the bene…cial e¤ects dominating at relatively lower levels of terrain roughness and
 A .7
    For completeness, speci…cations controlling for the squared terms of the other microgeographic factors were also
examined. The results from these additional regressions, however, did not reveal any signi…cant non-linear e¤ects and
are therefore not reported.




                                                        viii
the detrimental e¤ects dominating at higher levels. Further, regions with greater access to waterways
are found to support higher population densities.
    The …nal column of Table A.5 examines the in‡uence of the genetic diversity channel when
subjected to controls for both terrain quality and access to waterways. As anticipated by the
robustness of the results from preceding columns, genetic diversity continues to exert a signi…cant
non-monotonic e¤ect on population density in 1500 CE, without exhibiting any drastic reductions
in the magnitude of its impact. Moreover, the estimate for the optimal level of diversity remains
fully intact in comparison to the baseline estimate from Column 6 in Table 3. The results of this
section therefore suggest that the signi…cant non-monotonic impact of genetic diversity on population
density in 1500 CE is indeed not a spurious relationship arising from the omission of microgeographic
factors in the baseline regression speci…cation.

A.4     Robustness to Exogenous Factors in the Diamond Hypothesis
This section demonstrates the robustness of the e¤ects of genetic diversity to additional controls for
the Neolithic transition timing channel. In particular, the analysis is intended to alleviate concerns
that the signi…cant e¤ects of genetic diversity presented in Section 4.2.2, although estimated while
controlling for the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, may still capture some latent in‡uence of this
other explanatory channel if spurious correlations exist between migratory distance from East Africa
and exogenous factors governing the timing of the Neolithic transition. The results from estimating
some extended speci…cations, constructed by augmenting equation (8) with controls for the ultimate
determinants in the Diamond hypothesis, for log population density in 1500 CE are presented in
Table A.6.
    Following the discussion in Section 4.1.3 on the geographic and biogeographic determinants in the
transition timing channel, the additional control variables employed by the current analysis include:
(i) climate, measured as a discrete index with higher integer values assigned to countries in Köppen-
Geiger climatic zones that are increasingly favorable to agriculture; (ii) orientation of continental
axis, measured as the ratio of the longitudinal distance to the latitudinal distance of the continent
or landmass to which a country belongs; (iii) size of continent, measured as the total land area of
the country’s continent; (iv) the number of domesticable wild plant species known to have existed in
prehistory in the region to which a country belongs; and (v) the number of domesticable wild animal
species known to have been native to the region in prehistory, as reported in the data set of Olsson
and Hibbs (2005).A.8
    To demonstrate the robustness of the baseline e¤ects of genetic diversity across the various
extended speci…cations examined in this section, Column 1 …rst presents the results from estimating
the baseline speci…cation for log population density in 1500 CE using the restricted 96-country
sample of Olsson and Hibbs (2005). Reassuringly, the highly signi…cant coe¢ cients associated with
diversity, as well as the other explanatory channels, remain rather stable in magnitude relative to
their estimates obtained with the unrestricted sample in Column 5 of Table 3, implying that any
 A .8
    While the in‡uence of the number of domesticable species on the likelihood of the emergence of agriculture is
evident, the role of the geographic factors requires some elaboration. A larger size of the continent or landmass implied
greater biodiversity and, hence, a greater likelihood that at least some species suitable for domestication would exist.
In addition, a more pronounced East-West (relative to North-South) orientation of the major continental axis meant an
easier di¤usion of agricultural practices within the landmass, particularly among regions sharing similar latitudes and,
hence, similar environments suitable for agriculture. This orientation factor is argued by Diamond (1997) to have played
a pivotal role in comparative economic development by favoring the early rise of complex agricultural civilizations on
the Eurasian landmass. Finally, certain climates are known to be more bene…cial for agriculture than others. For
instance, moderate zones encompassing the Mediterranean and marine west coast subcategories in the Köppen-Geiger
climate classi…cation system are particularly amenable for growing annual, heavy grasses whereas humid subtropical,
continental and wet tropical climates are less favorable in this regard, with agriculture being almost entirely infeasible
in dry and Polar climates. Indeed, the hypothesized in‡uence of these exogenous factors on the Neolithic Revolution
has been established empirically by Olsson and Hibbs (2005) and Putterman (2008).


                                                           ix
            Table A.6: Robustness to Ultimate Determinants in the Diamond Hypothesis

                                          (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)
                                           Dependent Variable is Log Population Density in 1500 CE
        Predicted Diversity        216.847***      252.076***    174.414***     212.123***     274.916***
                                   (62.764)        (71.098)      (62.505)       (70.247)       (73.197)
        Predicted Diversity Sqr.   -154.750***     -180.650***   -125.137***    -151.579***    -197.120***
                                   (45.680)        (52.120)      (45.568)       (51.463)       (53.186)
        Log Transition Timing      1.300***                                                    1.160***
                                   (0.153)                                                     (0.298)
        Log % of Arable Land       0.437***        0.431***      0.441***       0.411***       0.365***
                                   (0.116)         (0.119)       (0.111)        (0.116)        (0.112)
        Log Absolute Latitude      -0.212**        -0.426***     -0.496***      -0.487***      -0.332**
                                   (0.102)         (0.131)       (0.154)        (0.163)        (0.145)
        Log Land Suitability       0.288**         0.184         0.297**        0.242*         0.280**
                                   (0.135)         (0.143)       (0.146)        (0.146)        (0.122)
        Climate                                    0.622***                     0.419          0.374*
                                                   (0.137)                      (0.268)        (0.225)
        Orientation of Axis                        0.281                        0.040          -0.169
                                                   (0.332)                      (0.294)        (0.255)
        Size of Continent                          -0.007                       -0.005         -0.006
                                                   (0.015)                      (0.013)        (0.012)
        Domesticable Plants                                      0.015          -0.005         0.003
                                                                 (0.019)        (0.023)        (0.021)
        Domesticable Animals                                     0.154**        0.121          -0.013
                                                                 (0.063)        (0.074)        (0.073)

        Optimal Diversity          0.701***        0.698***      0.697***       0.700***       0.697***
                                   (0.021)         (0.019)       (0.051)        (0.078)        (0.020)
        Observations               96              96            96             96             96
        R-squared                  0.74            0.70          0.70           0.72           0.78
        Note: Bootstrapped standard errors, accounting for the use of generated regressors, are reported in
        parentheses.
        *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.


sampling bias that may have been introduced inadvertently by the use of the restricted sample in
the current analysis is indeed negligible.A.9
    Columns 2–4 reveal the results from estimating variants of the baseline speci…cation where the
Diamond channel is controlled for not by its proximate determinant but by one or more of its ultimate
determinants – i.e., either the set of geographical factors or the set of biogeographical factors or
both. The results indicate that the coe¢ cients associated with diversity continue to remain highly
signi…cant and relatively stable in magnitude in comparison to their baseline estimates of Column
1. Interestingly, when controlling for only the geographical determinants of the Diamond channel in
Column 2, climate alone is signi…cant amongst the additional factors and likewise, when only the
biogeographical determinants are controlled for in Column 3, the number of domesticable animal
species, rather than plants, appears to be important. In addition, none of the ultimate factors in the
Diamond channel appear to possess statistical signi…cance when both geographic and biogeographic
determinants are controlled for in Column 4, a result that possibly re‡ects the high correlations
amongst these control variables. Regardless of these tangential issues, however, genetic diversity, as
already mentioned, continues to exert signi…cant in‡uence in a manner consistent with theoretical
predictions.
    The …nal column in Table A.6 establishes the robustness of the e¤ects of genetic diversity on
Malthusian development in 1500 CE to controls for both the proximate and ultimate determinants
 A .9
    Note that the speci…cations estimated in the current analysis do not incorporate continental dummies since a
sizeable portion of possible continent-speci…c e¤ects are captured by some of the (bio)geographic variables in the
Diamond channel that are measured at either continental or macro-regional levels. Augmenting the speci…cations with
continental dummies, however, does not signi…cantly alter the results for genetic diversity.


                                                             x
in the Diamond channel. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the Neolithic transition timing variable, being the
proximate factor in this channel, captures most of the explanatory power of the ultimate exogenous
determinants of comparative development in the Diamond hypothesis. More importantly, the linear
and quadratic coe¢ cients of the diversity channel maintain relative stability, increasing slightly in
magnitude when compared to their baseline estimates, but remaining highly statistically signi…cant
in their expected directions. Overall, the results in Table A.6 suggest that the baseline estimates
of the impact of genetic diversity presented in Section 4.2.2 earlier are indeed not simply re‡ecting
some latent e¤ects of the in‡uential agricultural transition timing channel.




                                                  xi
B     The Index of Contemporary Population Diversity
This section discusses the methodology applied to construct the index of genetic diversity for con-
temporary national populations such that it additionally accounts for the between-group component
of diversity. To this e¤ect, the index makes use of the concept of Fst genetic distance from …eld of
population genetics.
    Speci…cally, for any sub-population pair, the Fst genetic distance between the two sub-populations
captures the proportion of their combined genetic diversity that is unexplained by the weighted
average of their respective genetic diversities. Consider, for instance, a population comprised of two
ethnic groups or sub-populations, A and B. The Fst genetic distance between A and B would then
be de…ned as:
                                                      A          B
                                      AB          A Hexp + B Hexp
                                    Fst = 1              AB
                                                                    ,                            (B.1)
                                                        Hexp
where A and B are the shares of groups A and B, respectively, in the combined population; Hexp   A
       B                                                       AB
and Hexp are their respective expected heterozygosities; and Hexp is the expected heterozygosity of
                                                             AB , (ii) the expected heterozygosities
the combined population. Thus, given (i) genetic distance, Fst
                                      A          B
of the component sub-populations, Hexp and Hexp , and (iii) their respective shares in the overall
population, A and B , the overall diversity of the combined population is:
                                                  A           B
                                       AB      A Hexp   +  B Hexp
                                      Hexp =             AB
                                                                  .                               (B.2)
                                                   1    Fst

    In principle, the methodology described above could be applied recursively to arrive at a measure
of overall diversity for any contemporary national population comprised of an arbitrary number of
ethnic groups, provided su¢ cient data on the expected heterozygosities of all ethnicities worldwide
as well as the genetic distances amongst them are available. In reality, however, the fact that the
HGDP-CEPH sample provides such data for only 53 ethnic groups (or pairs thereof) implies that
a straightforward application of this methodology would necessarily restrict the calculation of the
index of contemporary diversity to a small set of countries. Moreover, unlike the earlier historical
analysis, exploiting the predictive power of migratory distance from East Africa for genetic diversity
would, by itself, be insu¢ cient since, while this would overcome the problem of data limitations
with respect to expected heterozygosities at the ethnic group level, it does not address the problem
associated with limited data on genetic distances.
    To surmount this issue, the current analysis appeals to a second prediction of the serial-founder
e¤ect regarding the genetic di¤erentiation of populations through isolation by geographical distance.
Accordingly, in the process of the initial step-wise di¤usion of the human species from Africa into
the rest of the world, o¤shoot colonies residing at greater geographical distances from parental
ones would also be more genetically di¤erentiated from them. This would arise due to the larger
number intervening migration steps, and a concomitantly larger number of genetic diversity sub-
sampling events, that are associated with o¤shoots residing at locations farther away from parental
colonies. Indeed, this second prediction of the serial-founder e¤ect is bourne out in the data
as well. Based on data from Ramachandran et al. (2005), Figure B.1 shows the strong positive
correlation between pairwise migratory distances and pairwise genetic distances across all pairs of
ethnic groups in the HGDP-CEPH sample. Speci…cally, according to the regression, variation in
migratory distance explains 78% of the variation in Fst genetic distance across the 1378 ethnic group
pairs. Moreover, the estimated OLS coe¢ cient is highly statistically signi…cant, possessing a t-
statistic = 53.62, and suggests that predicted Fst genetic distance falls by 0.062 percentage points for
every 10,000 km increase in pairwise migratory distance. The construction of the index of diversity
for contemporary national populations thus employs Fst genetic distance values predicted by pairwise


                                                  xii
     Figure B.1: Pairwise Fst Genetic and Migratory Distances in the HGDP-CEPH Sample


migratory distances.
   In particular, using the hypothetical example of a contemporary population comprised of two
groups whose ancestors originate from countries A and B, the overall diversity of the combined
population would be calculated as:
                                             ^A
                                           A Hexp (dA )    +     ^B
                                                               B Hexp (dB )
                                 ^ AB =
                                 H             h                 i            ,                     (B.3)
                                  exp
                                                1     F^st
                                                        AB (d
                                                             AB )

where, for i 2 fA; Bg, H   ^ i (di ) denotes the expected heterozygosity predicted by the migratory
                            exp
distance, di , of country i from East Africa (i.e., the predicted genetic diversity of country i in the
historical analysis); and i is the contribution of country i, as a result of post-Columbian migrations,
to the combined population being considered. Moreover, F^st   AB (d
                                                                    AB ) is the genetic distance predicted
by the migratory distance between countries A and B, obtained by applying the coe¢ cients associated
with the regression line depicted in Figure B.1. In practice, since contemporary national populations
are typically composed of more than two ethnic groups, the procedure outlined in equation (B.3) is
applied recursively in order to incorporate a larger number of component ethnic groups in modern
populations.




                                                    xiii
C    Supplementary Figures




Figure C.1: Observed Genetic Diversity and Population Density in 1500 CE – Cubic Spline vs.
Quadratic Fit




Figure C.2: Predicted Genetic Diversity and Population Density in 1500 CE – Cubic Spline vs.
Quadratic Fit




                                            xiv
                                    (a) The First-Order E¤ect




                                   (b) The Second-Order E¤ect

Figure C.3: The First- and Second-Order Partial E¤ects of Predicted Diversity on Population
Density in 1500 CE –Conditional on Transition Timing, Land Productivity, and Continental Fixed
E¤ects




                                               xv
Figure C.4: Adjusted Genetic Diversity and Income Per Capita in 2000 CE – Cubic Spline vs.
Quadratic Fit




                                           xvi
                                   (a) The First-Order E¤ect




                                  (b) The Second-Order E¤ect

Figure C.5: The First- and Second-Order Partial E¤ects of Adjusted Diversity on Income Per
Capita in 2000 CE – Conditional on Transition Timing, Land Productivity, Institutional and
Geographical Determinants, and Continental Fixed E¤ects




                                             xvii
                            (a) Migratory Distance and Skin Re‡ectance




                                (b) Migratory Distance and Height




                                (c) Migratory Distance and Weight

Figure C.6: Ancestry-Adjusted Migratory Distance and Some Mean Physiological Characteristics
of Contemporary National Populations




                                              xviii
D    Supplementary Results

     Table D.1: Robustness of the Role of Migratory Distance in the Serial-Founder E¤ect

                                      (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)                (6)
                                                  Dependent Variable is Observed Genetic Diversity
    Migratory Distance            -0.799***         -0.825***        -0.798***       -0.796***       -0.799***          -0.689***
                                  (0.054)           (0.062)          (0.067)         (0.072)         (0.091)            (0.148)
    Absolute Latitude                               -0.015           -0.002          -0.003          -0.002             0.075
                                                    (0.015)          (0.017)         (0.015)         (0.022)            (0.044)
    % of Arable Land                                -0.014           -0.013          -0.009          -0.012             0.002
                                                    (0.026)          (0.031)         (0.028)         (0.040)            (0.045)
    Mean Land Suitability                           1.883            -1.702          -1.347          -1.563             1.353
                                                    (1.515)          (5.575)         (5.019)         (6.466)            (5.404)
    Range of Land Suitability                                        -0.932          -1.332          -1.104             -2.026
                                                                     (4.643)         (4.393)         (5.829)            (5.722)
    Land Suitability Gini                                            -4.124          -4.273          -4.350             -4.121
                                                                     (4.936)         (4.628)         (5.030)            (4.194)
    Mean Elevation                                                                   0.877           0.839              -2.459
                                                                                     (2.355)         (2.394)            (1.572)
    Std. Dev. of Elevation                                                           -0.060          -0.026             3.416
                                                                                     (2.285)         (2.284)            (2.134)
    Mean Distance to Nearest                                                                         -0.084             0.502
     Waterway                                                                                        (1.148)            (0.986)

    Continent Dummies             No                No               No              No              No                 Yes
    Observations                  21                21               21              21              21                 21
    R-squared                     0.94              0.95             0.95            0.96            0.96               0.98
    Partial R2 of Mig. Dist.                        0.94             0.93            0.93            0.90               0.81
    Note: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
    *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.



         Table D.2: Results of Table 1 with Correction for Spatial Dependence in Errors

                                            (1)               (2)              (3)             (4)                  (5)
                                         Dependent Variable is Log Population Density in 1500 CE
        Observed Diversity           413.504***                                         225.440***           203.814***
                                     [85.389]                                           [55.428]             [65.681]
        Observed Diversity Sqr.      -302.647***                                        -161.158***          -145.717***
                                     [64.267]                                           [42.211]             [53.562]
        Log Transition Timing                              2.396***                     1.214***             1.135***
                                                           [0.249]                      [0.271]              [0.367]
        Log % of Arable Land                                             0.730***       0.516***             0.545***
                                                                         [0.263]        [0.132]              [0.178]
        Log Absolute Latitude                                            0.145          -0.162*              -0.129
                                                                         [0.180]        [0.084]              [0.101]
        Log Land Suitability                                             0.734*         0.571**              0.587**
                                                                         [0.376]        [0.240]              [0.233]

        Continent Dummies            No                    No            No             No                   Yes
        Observations                 21                    21            21             21                   21
        R-squared                    0.42                  0.54          0.57           0.89                 0.90
        Notes: Standard errors corrected for spatial autocorrelation, following Conley (1999), are reported
        in brackets. To perform this correction, the spatial distribution of observations was speci…ed on
        the Euclidean plane using aerial distances between all pairs in the sample, and the autocorrelation
        was modelled as declining linearly away from each location upto a threshold of 5,000 km. This
        threshold excludes spatial interactions between the Old World and the New World, which is
        appropriate given the historical period being considered.
        *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.


                                                              xix
         Table D.3: Results of Table 2 with Correction for Spatial Dependence in Errors

                                 (1)             (2)          (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)
                                                                                          Spatial        Spatial
                                OLS           OLS            OLS           OLS            GMM            GMM
                                         Dependent Variable is Log Population Density in 1500 CE
Observed Diversity                        255.219***                   361.420***      285.191***     243.108***
                                          [77.933]                     [108.692]       [81.538]       [55.325]
Observed Diversity Sqr.                   -209.808***                  -268.514***     -206.577***    -179.579***
                                          [58.315]                     [77.740]        [61.906]       [44.271]
Migratory Distance           0.505***     0.070
                             [0.110]      [0.138]
Migratory Distance Sqr.      -0.023***    -0.014*
                             [0.004]      [0.008]
Mobility Index                                            0.353***     0.051
                                                          [0.108]      [0.125]
Mobility Index Sqr.                                       -0.012***    -0.003
                                                          [0.003]      [0.005]
Log Transition Timing                                                                  1.014***       1.119***
                                                                                       [0.356]        [0.370]
Log % of Arable Land                                                                   0.608***       0.634***
                                                                                       [0.187]        [0.202]
Log Absolute Latitude                                                                  -0.209**       -0.133
                                                                                       [0.107]        [0.099]
Log Land Suitability                                                                   0.494**        0.549**
                                                                                       [0.227]        [0.242]

Continent Dummies            No           No              No           No              No             Yes
Observations                 21           21              18           18              21             21
R-squared                    0.34         0.46            0.30         0.43            –              –
Notes: Standard errors corrected for spatial autocorrelation, following Conley (1999), are reported in brackets. To
perform this correction, the spatial distribution of observations was speci…ed on the Euclidean plane using aerial
distances between all pairs in the sample, and the autocorrelation was modelled as declining linearly away from
each location upto a threshold of 5,000 km. This threshold e¤ectively excludes spatial interactions between the Old
World and the New World, which is appropriate given the historical period being considered. Columns 5–6 present
the results from estimating the corresponding 2SLS speci…cations in Table 2 using Conley’s (1999) spatial GMM
estimation procedure.
*** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.




                                                        xx
                                               Table D.4: Robustness to Log-Log Speci…cations

                                     (1)           (2)                   (3)                    (4)                    (5)                  (6)
                                 Limited Sample Historical                          Full Sample Historical                          Contemporary

                                                                               Dependent Variable is:
                                     Log Population            Log Population         Log Population         Log Population        Log Income per
                                       Density in                Density in             Density in             Density in            Capita in
                                        1500 CE                   1500 CE                1000 CE                 1 CE                 2000 CE
      Log Diversity              451.066**     415.864*        423.298**              420.595**              481.771**            516.776***
                                 (151.797)     (190.651)       (170.963)              (199.565)              (239.630)            (187.998)
      Squared Log Diversity      -425.579**    -396.906*       -407.990**             -402.344**             -458.413**           -480.727***
                                 (150.883)     (204.655)       (159.515)              (185.258)              (222.306)            (176.526)
      Log Transition Timing      1.249***      1.177*          1.241***               1.606***               2.132***             0.061
                                 (0.370)       (0.618)         (0.232)                (0.265)                (0.425)              (0.258)
      Log % of Arable Land       0.510***      0.417*          0.392***               0.370***               0.348***             -0.119
                                 (0.164)       (0.221)         (0.105)                (0.116)                (0.133)              (0.103)
      Log Absolute Latitude      -0.155        -0.123          -0.413***              -0.368***              -0.110               0.174
                                 (0.131)       (0.170)         (0.124)                (0.127)                (0.137)              (0.125)
      Log Land Suitability       0.571*        0.674           0.256***               0.189*                 0.209                -0.177*
                                 (0.296)       (0.407)         (0.099)                (0.108)                (0.129)              (0.098)




xxi
      Continent Dummies          No            Yes             Yes                    Yes                    Yes                  Yes
      Observations               21            21              145                    140                    126                  143
      R-squared                  0.89          0.91            0.69                   0.62                   0.62                 0.57
      Notes: The relevant measures of diversity employed are observed diversity in Columns (1)-(2), predicted diversity in Columns (3)-(5), and
      ancestry-adjusted predicted diversity in Column (6). The transition timing measure used in Column (6) is ancestry adjusted. Heteroskedasticity
      robust standard errors are reported in parentheses in Columns (1)-(2). Bootstrapped standard errors, accounting for the use of generated
      regressors, are reported in parentheses in Columns (3)-(6).
      *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.
         Table D.5: Robustness to Genetic Diversity Predicted by the Mobility Index

                                     (1)                   (2)                     (3)                 (4)
                                               Full Sample Historical                          Contemporary

                                                            Dependent Variable is:
                           Log Population        Log Population          Log Population      Log Income per
                             Density in            Density in              Density in          Capita in
                              1500 CE               1000 CE                  1 CE               2000 CE
Diversity                  152.163***            146.551**               196.145**           176.090***
                           (54.100)              (64.082)                (80.093)            (67.405)
Diversity Squared          -113.298***           -110.752**              -148.569***         -120.996**
                           (37.707)              (44.392)                (55.513)            (47.536)
Log Transition Timing      1.553***              2.052***                3.242***            0.047
                           (0.255)               (0.265)                 (0.349)             (0.269)
Log % of Arable Land       0.362***              0.314**                 0.182               -0.144
                           (0.111)               (0.128)                 (0.126)             (0.110)
Log Absolute Latitude      -0.489***             -0.401***               -0.087              0.195
                           (0.135)               (0.146)                 (0.129)             (0.142)
Log Land Suitability       0.256**               0.221*                  0.301***            -0.148
                           (0.101)               (0.118)                 (0.116)             (0.106)

Continent Dummies          Yes                   Yes                     Yes                 Yes
Observations               127                   123                     113                 125
R-squared                  0.71                  0.66                    0.69                0.55
Notes: The relevant measures of diversity employed are genetic diversity predicted by the human-mobility index
in Columns (1)-(3), and its ancestry-adjusted counterpart in Column (4). The transition timing measure used
in Column (4) is ancestry adjusted as well. Bootstrapped standard errors, accounting for the use of generated
regressors, are reported in parentheses.
*** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.




                                                     xxii
                              Table D.6: Zeroth- and First-Stage Results of 2SLS Regressions

                                           (1)             (2)                (3)          (4)             (5)                (6)

                                                   Column 5, Table 2                               Column 6, Table 2
                                       0th-Stage                  1st-Stage            0th-Stage                  1st-Stage
                                                  Dependent Variable is:                          Dependent Variable is:
                                                                         Observed                                        Observed
                                       Observed         Observed         Diversity     Observed         Observed         Diversity
                                       Diversity        Diversity        Squared       Diversity        Diversity        Squared
        2nd-Stage Excluded Instr.:
          Migratory Distance           -0.814***        -5.143***        -5.841***     -0.657***        -3.992***        -4.234***
                                       (0.064)          (0.686)          (0.959)       (0.196)          (0.850)          (1.053)
          Predicted Diversity Sqr.     –                -3.937***        -4.327***     –                -3.699***        -3.752***
            (from 0th-Stage)                            (0.628)          (0.880)                        (0.916)          (1.145)
        2nd-Stage Controls:
          Log Transition Timing        -0.017**         -0.119***        -0.139***     -0.013**         -0.082***        -0.088***
                                       (0.006)          (0.016)          (0.023)       (0.004)          (0.017)          (0.021)




xxiii
          Log % of Arable Land         0.000            0.004**          0.007**       0.002            0.015***         0.017***
                                       (0.003)          (0.002)          (0.003)       (0.004)          (0.003)          (0.005)
          Log Absolute Latitude        0.003*           0.018***         0.020***      0.005*           0.027***         0.028***
                                       (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.003)       (0.002)          (0.006)          (0.007)
          Log Land Suitability         0.005            0.032***         0.035***      0.005            0.031***         0.032***
                                       (0.005)          (0.004)          (0.006)       (0.005)          (0.007)          (0.009)

        Continent Dummies              No               No               No            Yes              Yes              Yes
        Observations                   21               21               21            21               21               21
        R-squared                      0.96             0.99             0.99          0.98             0.99             0.99
        Note: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
        *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.
                                Table D.7: Robustness to the Ecological Components of Land Productivity

                                      (1)            (2)                   (3)                    (4)                    (5)                   (6)
                                   Limited Sample Historical                          Full Sample Historical                           Contemporary

                                                                                 Dependent Variable is:
                                         Log Population          Log Population         Log Population         Log Population        Log Income per
                                           Density in              Density in             Density in             Density in            Capita in
                                            1500 CE                 1500 CE                1000 CE                 1 CE                 2000 CE
       Diversity                  236.192**      242.583**       171.881**              181.681**              195.610**             276.208***
                                  (97.554)       (92.470)        (77.885)               (88.465)               (98.917)              (97.567)
       Diversity Squared          -166.679**     -171.668**      -122.687**             -129.288**             -137.814**            -195.003***
                                  (73.114)       (74.712)        (55.168)               (62.044)               (69.331)              (69.311)
       Log Transition Timing      1.565***       1.689*          1.214***               1.526***               1.839***              -0.027
                                  (0.378)        (0.866)         (0.225)                (0.244)                (0.357)               (0.284)
       Log % of Arable Land       0.547**        0.539           0.382***               0.338***               0.199*                -0.134
                                  (0.192)        (0.313)         (0.091)                (0.093)                (0.104)               (0.089)
       Log Absolute Latitude      0.183          0.221           -0.137                 -0.124                 0.292*                0.069
                                  (0.160)        (0.289)         (0.166)                (0.170)                (0.150)               (0.164)
       Log Temperature            1.520**        1.423           1.508***               1.971***               3.092***              -0.274
                                  (0.591)        (0.993)         (0.535)                (0.558)                (0.580)               (0.458)
       Log Precipitation          0.714***       0.767*          0.358**                0.197                  0.176                 -0.236




xxiv
                                  (0.224)        (0.372)         (0.153)                (0.163)                (0.182)               (0.155)
       Log Soil Fertility         0.162          0.171           0.473                  0.541                  0.772**               -0.258
                                  (0.554)        (0.579)         (0.303)                (0.329)                (0.359)               (0.297)

       Continent Dummies          No             Yes             Yes                    Yes                    Yes                   Yes
       Observations               21             21              145                    140                    126                   143
       R-squared                  0.93           0.93            0.72                   0.67                   0.72                  0.57
       Notes: The relevant measures of diversity employed are observed diversity in Columns (1)-(2), predicted diversity in Columns (3)-(5), and
       ancestry-adjusted predicted diversity in Column (6). The transition timing measure used in Column (6) is ancestry adjusted. The measures
       for temperature and precipitation represent their respective intertemporal averages during the time period 1961–1990 and are computed using
       the gridded dataset of New et al. (2002). The measure for soil fertility incoporates soil carbon density and soil pH, and is obtained from the
       gridded dataset of Ramankutty et al. (2002). All three measures are aggregated to the country level by averaging across the grid cells within
       a country. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses in Columns (1)-(2). Bootstrapped standard errors, accounting
       for the use of generated regressors, are reported in parentheses in Columns (3)-(6).
       *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.
                              Table D.8: Robustness to the Subsistence Mode Prevalent in 1000 CE

                                     (1)                  (2)                (3)                 (4)             (5)                   (6)
                                    Limited Sample 1500 CE                  Full Sample 1500 CE                   Full Sample 1000 CE
                                   Baseline      w/ Sub. Mode            Baseline        w/ Sub. Mode         Baseline        w/ Sub. Mode

                                                                           Dependent Variable is:
                                           Log Population                        Log Population                        Log Population
                                             Density in                            Density in                            Density in
                                              1500 CE                               1500 CE                               1000 CE
      Diversity                  186.515**         180.340***         194.141**           196.984***        200.006**          241.019***
                                 (67.317)          (51.275)           (76.265)            (56.215)          (96.042)           (60.902)
      Diversity Squared          -131.922**        -129.882***        -142.349***         -144.055***       -145.722**         -173.861***
                                 (51.717)          (39.681)           (53.585)            (40.161)          (66.585)           (42.845)
      Log Transition Timing      1.401             0.867              1.107***            1.013***          1.549***           1.388***
                                 (0.826)           (0.849)            (0.254)             (0.210)           (0.320)            (0.252)
      Log Subsistence Mode                         1.678***                               2.030***                             2.543**
                                                   (0.465)                                (0.730)                              (0.996)
      Log % of Arable Land       0.504**           0.453**            0.421***            0.458***          0.384***           0.447***
                                 (0.191)           (0.150)            (0.101)             (0.097)           (0.123)            (0.114)
      Log Absolute Latitude      -0.172            -0.158             -0.420***           -0.332***         -0.369***          -0.288**
                                 (0.150)           (0.155)            (0.128)             (0.115)           (0.141)            (0.121)




xxv
      Log Land Suitability       0.706**           0.413              0.226**             0.162*            0.173              0.067
                                 (0.298)           (0.269)            (0.098)             (0.094)           (0.111)            (0.100)

      Continent Dummies          Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes                Yes
      Observations               20                20                 140                 140               135                135
      R-squared                  0.90              0.92               0.67                0.72              0.58               0.67
      Notes: The relevant measures of genetic diversity employed are observed diversity in Columns (1)-(2), and predicted diversity in
      Columns (3)-(6). Subsistence mode is a categorical measure reported at the level of a cultural group by Peregrine (2003). Speci…cally,
      the measure assumes a value of 0 in the absence of sedentary agriculture, a value of 1/2 when agriculture is practiced but only as a
      secondary mode of subsistence, and a value of 1 when agriculture is practiced as the primary mode of subsistence. The measure is
      aggregated to the country level by averaging across the cultural groups that, in the year 1000 CE, resided in regions within the modern
      national borders of a country. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses in Columns (1)-(2). Bootstrapped
      standard errors, accounting for the use of generated regressors, are reported in parentheses in Columns (3)-(6).
      *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.
Table D.9: Adjusted Migratory Distance vs. Alternative Distances

                                 (1)             (2)         (3)         (4)
                                          Dependent Variable is
                                    Log Income Per Capita in 2000 CE
Migratory Distance           0.601***         0.499***    0.532***    0.564**
  (Ancestry Adjusted)        (0.073)          (0.124)     (0.160)     (0.235)
Migratory Distance Sqr.      -0.030***        -0.026***   -0.027***   -0.029***
  (Ancestry Adjusted)        (0.004)          (0.006)     (0.008)     (0.010)
Migratory Distance                            0.078
  (Unadjusted)                                (0.084)
Migratory Distance Sqr.                       -0.002
  (Unadjusted)                                (0.003)
Aerial Distance                                           0.064
  (Unadjusted)                                            (0.201)
Aerial Distance Sqr.                                      -0.002
  (Unadjusted)                                            (0.011)
Aerial Distance                                                       0.043
  (Ancestry Adjusted)                                                 (0.330)
Aerial Distance Sqr.                                                  -0.001
  (Ancestry Adjusted)                                                 (0.018)

Observations                 109              109         109         109
R-squared                    0.28             0.29        0.29        0.29
Note: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.




                                       xxvi
                                              Table D.10: Robustness to Fst Genetic Distances

                                              (1)                  (2)            (3)                  (4)            (5)                 (6)
                                             Limited Sample Historical             Full Sample Historical                  Contemporary
                                            Baseline       w/ Gen. Dist.        Baseline        w/ Gen. Dist.      Baseline       w/ Gen. Dist.

                                                                                 Dependent Variable is:
                                                    Log Population                      Log Population                     Log Income per
                                                      Density in                          Density in                         Capita in
                                                       1500 CE                             1500 CE                            2000 CE
        Diversity                         184.672**         201.230**         194.681**         194.743**        185.512**         212.380**
                                          (63.338)          (65.970)          (81.638)          (85.603)         (86.160)          (99.759)
        Diversity Squared                 -130.466**        -144.435**        -142.204**        -145.347**       -128.045**        -150.435**
                                          (48.774)          (50.450)          (57.192)          (60.802)         (61.150)          (71.184)
        Log Transition Timing             1.150*            1.044             1.236***          1.025***         -0.218            -0.122
                                          (0.634)           (0.915)           (0.242)           (0.312)          (0.285)           (0.347)
        Log % of Arable Land              0.433**           0.314             0.392***          0.362***         -0.155            -0.136
                                          (0.172)           (0.396)           (0.099)           (0.107)          (0.100)           (0.102)
        Log Absolute Latitude             -0.138            -0.160            -0.419***         -0.477***        0.068             0.077
                                          (0.150)           (0.184)           (0.122)           (0.128)          (0.117)           (0.124)
        Log Land Suitability              0.636*            0.778             0.259***          0.324***         -0.147            -0.148
                                          (0.294)           (0.559)           (0.095)           (0.097)          (0.093)           (0.092)




xxvii
        Genetic Distance   to the U.K.                      -0.014                              -0.027
         (1500 match)                                       (0.049)                             (0.027)
        Genetic Distance   to Ethiopia                      -0.047                              -0.069
         (1500 match)                                       (0.084)                             (0.043)
        Genetic Distance   to the U.S.                                                                                             0.030
         (weighted)                                                                                                                (0.037)
        Genetic Distance   to Ethiopia                                                                                             -0.075*
         (weighted)                                                                                                                (0.043)

        Continent Dummies                 Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes
        Observations                      20                20                142               142              139               139
        R-squared                         0.91              0.91              0.69              0.71             0.61              0.62
        Notes: The relevant measures of diversity employed are observed diversity in Columns (1)-(2), predicted diversity in Columns (3)-(4), and
        ancestry-adjusted predicted diversity in Columns (5)-(6). The transition timing measure used in Columns (5)-(6) is ancestry adjusted as
        well. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses in Columns (1)-(2). Bootstrapped standard errors, accounting
        for the use of generated regressors, are reported in parentheses in Columns (3)-(6).
        *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.
Table D.11: Robustness to Regional Fixed E¤ects and Sub-Sampling on Regional Clusters

                                      (1)             (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)
                                   Full           w/out          w/out        w/out SSA       only SSA
                                  Sample           SSA           LAC           & LAC           & LAC

                                       Dependent Variable is Log Income Per Capita in 2000 CE
Predicted Diversity            299.370***      285.108***    492.169***      597.082***     250.578***
  (Ancestry Adjusted)          (63.294)        (89.612)      (141.359)       (194.662)      (86.422)
Predicted Diversity Sqr.       -209.044***     -199.109***   -342.630***     -415.660***    -175.074***
  (Ancestry Adjusted)          (45.538)        (65.355)      (98.352)        (137.757)      (62.321)
Log Transition Timing          0.293*          0.023         0.352*          -0.033         0.359
  (Ancestry Adjusted)          (0.173)         (0.236)       (0.208)         (0.269)        (0.271)
Log % of Arable Land           -0.188***       -0.195***     -0.192***       -0.152**       -0.173**
                               (0.048)         (0.071)       (0.043)         (0.067)        (0.070)
Log Absolute Latitude          -0.044          0.131         -0.189          -0.173         -0.037
                               (0.090)         (0.120)       (0.114)         (0.153)        (0.111)
Social Infrastructure          1.156**         0.790*        1.525**         0.868          0.413
                               (0.465)         (0.433)       (0.601)         (0.609)        (0.920)
Ethnic Fractionalization       -0.338          0.147         -0.739**        -0.511*        -0.282
                               (0.257)         (0.283)       (0.284)         (0.296)        (0.450)
% of Population at Risk of     -0.671**        -0.561**      -0.426          0.121          -1.135**
  Contracting Malaria          (0.301)         (0.267)       (0.416)         (0.320)        (0.425)
% of Population Living in      -0.307          -0.557***     -0.469**        -0.976***      -0.129
  Tropical Zones               (0.190)         (0.192)       (0.219)         (0.265)        (0.223)
Mean Distance to Nearest       -0.384**        -0.797***     -0.416***       -0.665**       -0.275
  Waterway                     (0.180)         (0.246)       (0.149)         (0.247)        (0.240)

Optimal Diversity              0.716***        0.716***      0.718***        0.718***       0.716***
                               (0.008)         (0.011)       (0.006)         (0.007)        (0.013)
Observations                   109             71            87              49             60
R-squared                      0.90            0.89          0.93            0.94           0.80
Notes: Bootstrapped standard errors, accounting for the use of generated regressors, are reported in
parentheses. All regressions include controls for an OPEC dummy, legal origin dummies, and major religion
shares, as well as regional dummies for (i) Sub-Saharan Africa (except Columns (2) and (4)), (ii) Middle
East and North Africa, (iii) Europe and Central Asia, (iv) South Asia, (v) East Asia and Paci…c, and (vi)
Latin America and Caribbean (except Columns (3)-(5)).
*** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.




                                                  xxviii
                                     Table D.12: Robustness to Percentage of the Population of European Descent

                                                (1)            (2)             (3)          (4)              (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)
                                             Full           Full            Non            Non          w/o Neo         w/o Neo          Non             Non
                                            Sample         Sample          OECD           OECD          Europes         Europes        European        European

                                                                      Dependent Variable is Log Income Per Capita in 2000 CE
       Predicted Diversity               277.342***     272.274***      271.979***      263.805**     261.367***      272.904***     280.902***      280.957**
         (Ancestry Adjusted)             (69.452)       (83.202)        (84.232)        (115.923)     (69.946)        (89.295)       (76.868)        (111.552)
       Predicted Diversity Sqr.          -192.386***    -188.868***     -188.974***     -183.258**    -181.811***     -189.886***    -195.093***     -195.132**
         (Ancestry Adjusted)             (49.056)       (58.239)        (59.200)        (80.816)      (49.261)        (62.495)       (54.133)        (77.587)
       Log Transition Timing             0.396*         0.383           0.390           0.373         0.355           0.386          0.480*          0.480
         (Ancestry Adjusted)             (0.233)        (0.242)         (0.281)         (0.302)       (0.231)         (0.249)        (0.278)         (0.299)
       Log % of Arable Land              -0.183***      -0.183***       -0.236***       -0.235***     -0.201***       -0.202***      -0.198***       -0.198***
                                         (0.051)        (0.051)         (0.060)         (0.060)       (0.055)         (0.055)        (0.055)         (0.055)
       Log Absolute Latitude             0.009          0.007           -0.021          -0.022        -0.025          -0.024         0.016           0.016
                                         (0.108)        (0.108)         (0.119)         (0.122)       (0.111)         (0.112)        (0.112)         (0.115)
       Social Infrastructure             1.826***       1.810***        1.313**         1.304**       1.416***        1.426***       1.790***        1.790***
                                         (0.417)        (0.436)         (0.579)         (0.615)       (0.507)         (0.517)        (0.464)         (0.547)
       Ethnic Fractionalization          -0.333         -0.336          -0.437          -0.446        -0.390          -0.386         -0.384          -0.384
                                         (0.280)        (0.291)         (0.375)         (0.402)       (0.300)         (0.302)        (0.359)         (0.374)
       % of Population at Risk of        -0.502         -0.495          -0.605          -0.591        -0.591          -0.612         -0.511          -0.511
         Contracting Malaria             (0.351)        (0.380)         (0.381)         (0.443)       (0.370)         (0.408)        (0.380)         (0.433)




xxix
       % of Population Living in         -0.319         -0.312          -0.196          -0.184        -0.302          -0.318         -0.276          -0.276
         Tropical Zones                  (0.204)        (0.212)         (0.239)         (0.257)       (0.219)         (0.228)        (0.232)         (0.254)
       Mean Distance to Nearest          -0.368**       -0.367*         -0.387*         -0.382*       -0.452**        -0.461**       -0.315          -0.315
         Waterway                        (0.186)        (0.190)         (0.222)         (0.229)       (0.210)         (0.215)        (0.206)         (0.208)
       % of Population of European                      0.061                           0.095                         -0.157                         -0.001
         Descent                                        (0.621)                         (0.902)                       (0.700)                        (0.891)

       Optimal Diversity                 0.721***       0.721***        0.720***        0.720***      0.719***        0.719***       0.720***        0.720***
                                         (0.068)        (0.089)         (0.085)         (0.195)       (0.015)         (0.022)        (0.021)         (0.036)
       Observations                      109            109             83              83            105             105            88              88
       R-squared                         0.90           0.90            0.82            0.82          0.89            0.89           0.84            0.84
       Notes: Bootstrapped standard errors, accounting for the use of generated regressors, are reported in parentheses. All regressions include controls for major
       religion shares as well as OPEC, legal origin, sub-Saharan Africa and continent dummies.
       *** Signi…cant at 1%, ** Signi…cant at 5%, * Signi…cant at 10%.
                             Table D.13: Standardized Betas and Partial R-squares in the Baseline Regressions

                                      (1)                (2)                  (3)                      (4)                   (5)                  (6)
                                     Limited Sample Historical                                Full Sample Historical                         Contemporary
                                 Tbl. 1, Col. 4     Tbl. 1, Col. 5       Tbl. 3, Col. 6         Tbl. A.1, Col. 6       Tbl. A.2, Col. 6      Tbl. 6, Col. 2

                                                                                    Dependent Variable is:
                                         Log Population                Log Population           Log Population         Log Population         Log Income
                                           Density in                    Density in               Density in             Density in          per Capita in
                                            1500 CE                       1500 CE                  1000 CE                 1 CE                2000 CE
      Diversity                         7.203              6.512                    7.008                    6.955                 7.540             5.510
                                        [0.32]             [0.21]                   [0.07]                   [0.06]                [0.06]            [0.03]
      Diversity Squared                 -6.913             -6.251                   -6.936                   -6.838                -7.364           -5.485
                                         [0.30]             [0.18]                   [0.07]                   [0.06]                [0.06]           [0.03]
      Log Transition Timing             0.372              0.348                    0.490                    0.653                 0.765             0.024
                                        [0.35]             [0.24]                   [0.20]                   [0.28]                [0.34]            [0.00]
      Log % of Arable Land              0.343              0.363                    0.315                    0.304                 0.256            -0.120
                                        [0.29]             [0.24]                   [0.11]                   [0.08]                [0.06]            [0.01]




xxx
      Log Absolute Latitude             -0.109             -0.086                   -0.257                   -0.236                -0.069            0.136
                                         [0.06]             [0.03]                   [0.10]                   [0.07]                [0.01]           [0.02]
      Log Land Suitability              0.291              0.299                    0.225                    0.173                 0.163            -0.201
                                        [0.32]             [0.32]                   [0.06]                   [0.03]                [0.03]            [0.03]
      Continent Dummies                      No                 Yes                    Yes                      Yes                   Yes                Yes
      Observations                            21                 21                    145                      140                   126                143
      R-squared                             0.89               0.90                   0.69                     0.62                  0.61               0.57
      Notes: The relevant measures of diversity employed are observed diversity in Columns (1)-(2), predicted diversity in Columns (3)-(5), and ancestry-
      adjusted predicted diversity in Column (6). The transition timing measure used in Column (6) is ancestry adjusted. Partial R-squares are reported
      in square brackets. The standardized betas are reported in units of a standard deviation in the dependent variable.
E   The HGDP-CEPH Sample of 53 Ethnic Groups
      Ethnic Group        Migratory Distance     Country                        Region
                                (in km)
      Bantu (Kenya)            1,338.94          Kenya                           Africa
      Bantu (Southeast)        4,306.19          South Africa                    Africa
      Bantu (Southwest)        3,946.44          Namibia                         Africa
      Biaka Pygmy              2,384.86          Central African Republic        Africa
      Mandenka                 5,469.91          Senegal                         Africa
      Mbuti Pygmy              1,335.50          Zaire                           Africa
      San                      3,872.42          Namibia                         Africa
      Yoruba                   3,629.65          Nigeria                         Africa
      Bedouin                  2,844.95          Israel                     Middle   East
      Druze                    2,887.25          Israel                     Middle   East
      Mozabite                 4,418.17          Algeria                    Middle   East
      Palestinian              2,887.25          Israel                     Middle   East
      Adygei                   4,155.03          Russia                         Europe
      Basque                   6,012.26          France                         Europe
      French                   5,857.48          France                         Europe
      Italian                  5,249.04          Italy                          Europe
      Orcadian                 6,636.69          United Kingdom                 Europe
      Russian                  5,956.40          Russia                         Europe
      Sardinian                5,305.81          Italy                          Europe
      Tuscan                   5,118.37          Italy                          Europe
      Balochi                  5,842.06          Pakistan                            Asia
      Brahui                   5,842.06          Pakistan                            Asia
      Burusho                  6,475.60          Pakistan                            Asia
      Cambodian               10,260.55          Cambodia                            Asia
      Dai                      9,343.96          China                               Asia
      Daur                    10,213.13          China                               Asia
      Han                     10,123.19          China                               Asia
      Han (North China)        9,854.75          China                               Asia
      Hazara                   6,132.57          Pakistan                            Asia
      Hezhen                  10,896.21          China                               Asia
      Japanese                11,762.11          Japan                               Asia
      Kalash                   6,253.62          Pakistan                            Asia
      Lahu                     9,299.63          China                               Asia
      Makrani                  5,705.00          Pakistan                            Asia
      Miao                     9,875.32          China                               Asia
      Mongola                  9,869.85          China                               Asia
      Naxi                     9,131.37          China                               Asia
      Oroqen                  10,290.53          China                               Asia
      Pathan                   6,178.76          Pakistan                            Asia
      She                     10,817.81          China                               Asia
      Sindhi                   6,201.70          Pakistan                            Asia
      Tu                       8,868.14          China                               Asia
      Tujia                    9,832.50          China                               Asia
      Uygur                    7,071.97          China                               Asia
      Xibo                     7,110.29          China                               Asia
      Yakut                    9,919.11          Russia (Siberia)                    Asia
      Yi                       9,328.79          China                               Asia
      Melanesian              16,168.51          Papua New Guinea              Oceania
      Papuan                  14,843.12          Papua New Guinea              Oceania
      Colombian               22,662.78          Colombia                     Americas
      Karitiana               24,177.34          Brazil                       Americas
      Maya                    19,825.71          Mexico                       Americas
      Pima                    18,015.79          Mexico                       Americas




                                          xxxi
F     Variable De…nitions and Sources
Outcome Variables:
Population Density in 1 CE, 1000 CE, and 1500 CE. Population density (in persons per square km)
for given year is calculated as population in that year, as reported by McEvedy and Jones (1978), divided
by total land area, as reported by the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. The cross-sectional unit
of observation in McEvedy and Jones’s (1978) data set is a region delineated by its international borders in
1975. Historical population estimates are provided for regions corresponding to either individual countries
or, in some cases, to sets comprised of 2–3 neighboring countries (e.g., India, Pakistan and Bangladesh). In
the latter case, a set-speci…c population density …gure is calculated based on total land area and the …gure
is then assigned to each of the component countries in the set. The same methodology is also employed to
obtain population density for countries that exist today but were part of a larger political unit (e.g., the former
Yugoslavia) in 1975. The data reported by the authors are based on a wide variety of country and region-
speci…c historical sources, the enumeration of which would be impractical for this appendix. The interested
reader is therefore referred to McEvedy and Jones (1978) for more details on the original data sources cited
therein.

Income Per Capita in 2000 CE. Real GDP per capita, in constant 2000 international dollars, as reported
by the Penn World Table, version 6.2.

Interpersonal Trust. The fraction of total respondents within a given country, from …ve di¤erent waves of the
World Values Survey conducted during the time period 1981–2008, that responded with "Most people can be
trusted" (as opposed to "Can’t be too careful") when answering the survey question "Generally speaking,would
you say that most people can be trusted or that you can’t be too careful in dealing with people?"

Scienti…c Articles. The mean, over the period 1981-2000, of the annual number of scienti…c articles per
capita, calculated as the total number of scienti…c and technical articles published in a given year divided by
the total population in that year. The relevant data on the total number of articles and population in a given
year are obtained from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators.

Genetic Diversity Variables:
Observed Genetic Diversity in the Limited Historical Sample. The average expected heterozygosity
across ethnic groups from the Human Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel that are located within a given
country. The expected heterozygosities of the ethnic groups are from Ramachandran et al. (2005).

Predicted Genetic Diversity in the Extended Historical Sample. The expected heterozygosity (genetic
diversity) of a given country as predicted by (the extended sample de…nition of) migratory distance from
Addis Ababa (Ethiopia). This measure is calculated by applying the regression coe¢ cients obtained from
regressing expected heterozygosity on migratory distance at the ethnic group level, using the worldwide sample
of 53 ethnic groups from the Human Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel. The expected heterozygosities and
geographical coordinates of the ethnic groups are from Ramachandran et al. (2005).
     Note that for Table D.5 in Appendix D, the migratory distance concept used to predict the genetic diversity
of a country’s population is the human-mobility index, calculated for the journey from Addis Ababa (Ethiopia)
to the country’s modern capital city, as opposed to the default waypoints-restricted migratory distance concept
used elsewhere. For additional details on how the human-mobility index is calculated, the interested reader is
referred to the de…nition of this variable further below.

Predicted Genetic Diversity (Ancestry Adjusted). The expected heterozygosity (genetic diversity) of
a country’s population, predicted by migratory distances from Addis Ababa (Ethiopia) to the year 1500 CE
locations of the ancestral populations of the country’s component ethnic groups in 2000 CE, as well as by


                                                      xxxii
pairwise migratory distances between these ancestral populations. The source countries of the year 1500 CE
ancestral populations are identi…ed from the World Migration Matrix, 1500–2000, discussed in Putterman and
Weil (2010), and the modern capital cities of these countries are used to compute the aforementioned migratory
distances. The measure of genetic diversity is then calculated by applying (i) the regression coe¢ cients obtained
from regressing expected heterozygosity on migratory distance from Addis Ababa at the ethnic group level,
using the worldwide sample of 53 ethnic groups from the Human Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel, (ii) the
regression coe¢ cients obtained from regressing pairwise Fst genetic distances on pairwise migratory distances
between these ethnic groups, and (iii) the ancestry weights representing the fractions of the year 2000 CE
population (of the country for which the measure is being computed) that can trace their ancestral origins
to di¤erent source countries in the year 1500 CE. The construction of this measure is discussed in detail in
Appendix B. The expected heterozygosities, geographical coordinates, and pairwise Fst genetic distances of
the 53 ethnic groups are from Ramachandran et al. (2005). The ancestry weights are from the World Migration
Matrix, 1500–2000.
    Note that, in contrast to the default waypoints-restricted migratory distance concept used elsewhere, the
migratory distance concept used to predict the ancestry-adjusted genetic diversity of a country’s population for
Table D.5 in Appendix D is the human-mobility index, calculated for the journey from Addis Ababa (Ethiopia)
to each of the year 1500 CE locations of the ancestral populations of the country’s component ethnic groups in
2000 CE, as well as for the journey between each pair of these ancestral populations. For additional details on
how the human-mobility index is calculated, the interested reader is referred to the de…nition of this variable
further below.

Distance Variables:
Migratory Distance from Addis Ababa in the Limited Historical Sample. The average migratory
distance across ethnic groups from the Human Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel that are located within a given
country. The migratory distance of an ethnic group is the great circle distance from Addis Ababa (Ethiopia)
to the location of the group, along a land-restricted path forced through one or more of …ve intercontinental
waypoints, including Cairo (Egypt), Istanbul (Turkey), Phnom Penh (Cambodia), Anadyr (Russia) and Prince
Rupert (Canada). Distances are calculated using the Haversine formula and are measured in units of 1,000 km.
The geographical coordinates of the ethnic groups and the intercontinental waypoints are from Ramachandran
et al. (2005).

Migratory Distance from Addis Ababa in the Extended Historical Sample. The great circle distance
from Addis Ababa (Ethiopia) to the country’s modern capital city, along a land-restricted path forced through
one or more of …ve aforementioned intercontinental waypoints. Distances are calculated using the Haversine
formula and are measured in units of 1,000 km. The geographical coordinates of the intercontinental waypoints
are from Ramachandran et al. (2005), while those of the modern capital cities are from the CIA’s World
Factbook.

Migratory Distance from Addis Ababa (Ancestry Adjusted). The cross-country weighted average
of (the extended sample de…nition of) migratory distance from Addis Ababa (Ethiopia), where the weight
associated with a given country in the calculation represents the fraction of the year 2000 CE population (of
the country for which the measure is being computed) that can trace its ancestral origins to the given country
in the year 1500 CE. The ancestry weights are obtained from the World Migration Matrix, 1500–2000 of
Putterman and Weil (2010).

Migratory Distance from a “Placebo” Point of Origin. The great circle distance from a “placebo”
location (i.e., other than Addis Ababa, Ethiopia) to the country’s modern capital city, along a land-restricted
path forced through one or more of …ve aforementioned intercontinental waypoints. Distances are calculated
using the Haversine formula and are measured in units of 1,000 km. The geographical coordinates of the
intercontinental waypoints are from Ramachandran et al. (2005), while those of the modern capital cities are


                                                     xxxiii
from the CIA’s World Factbook. The “placebo” locations for which results are presented in the text include
London (UK), Tokyo (Japan), and Mexico City (Mexico).

Aerial Distance from Addis Ababa. The great circle distance “as the crow ‡ies” from Addis Ababa
(Ethiopia) to the country’s modern capital city. Distances are calculated using the Haversine formula and
are measured in units of 1,000 km. The geographical coordinates of capital cities are from the CIA’s World
Factbook.

Aerial Distance from Addis Ababa (Ancestry Adjusted). The cross-country weighted average of aerial
distance from Addis Ababa, where the weight associated with a given country in the calculation represents
the fraction of the year 2000 CE population (of the country for which the measure is being computed) that
can trace its ancestral origins to the given country in the year 1500 CE. The ancestry weights are from the
World Migration Matrix, 1500–2000 of Putterman and Weil (2010).

Distance to Frontier in 1 CE, 1000 CE, and 1500 CE. The great circle distance from a country’s
capital city to the closest regional technological frontier for a given year. The year-speci…c set of regional
frontiers comprises the two most populous cities, reported for that year and belonging to di¤erent civilizations
or sociopolitical entities, from each of Africa, Europe, Asia, and the Americas. Distances are calculated using
the Haversine formula and are measured in km. The historical urban population data, used to identify the
frontiers, are obtained from Chandler (1987) and Modelski (2003), and the geographical coordinates of ancient
urban centers are obtained using Wikipedia.

Human Mobility Index. The average migratory distance across ethnic groups from the Human Genome
Diversity Cell Line Panel that are located within a given country. The migratory distance of an ethnic group
is the distance from Addis Ababa (Ethiopia) to the location of the group, along an “optimal” land-restricted
path that minimizes the time cost of travelling on the surface of the Earth in the absence of steam-powered
transportation technologies. The optimality of a path is determined by incorporating information on natural
impediments to human spatial mobility such as the meteorological and topographical conditions prevalent
along the path, as well as information on the time cost of travelling under such conditions as reported by
Hayes (1996). Distances are measured in weeks of travel time. The geographical coordinates of the ethnic
groups are from Ramachandran et al. (2005). The methodology underlying the construction of this index is
discussed in greater detail by Ashraf et al. (2010) and Özak (2010).

Genetic Distance to the U.K./Ethiopia (1500 Match). The Fst genetic distance, as reported by
Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009), between the year 1500 CE populations of a given country and the U.K. (or
Ethiopia), calculated as the genetic distance between the two ethnic groups comprising the largest shares of
each country’s population in the year 1500 CE.

Genetic Distance to the U.S./Ethiopia (Weighted). The Fst genetic distance, as reported by Spolaore
and Wacziarg (2009), between the contemporary national populations of a given country and the U.S. (or
Ethiopia), calculated as the average pairwise genetic distance across all ethnic group pairs, where each pair
comprises two distinct ethnic groups, one from each country, and is weighted by the product of the proportional
representations of the two groups in their respective national populations.

Transition Timing and Subsistence Mode Variables:
Neolithic Transition Timing. The number of thousand years elapsed, until the year 2000, since the majority
of the population residing within a country’s modern national borders began practicing sedentary agriculture
as the primary mode of subsistence. This measure, reported by Putterman (2008), is compiled using a wide
variety of both regional and country-speci…c archaeological studies as well as more general encyclopedic works
on the transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture during the Neolithic. The reader is referred to


                                                    xxxiv
the author’s web site for a detailed description of the primary and secondary data sources employed by the
author in the construction of this variable.

Neolithic Transition Timing (Ancestry Adjusted). The cross-country weighted average of Neolithic
transition timing, where the weight associated with a given country in the calculation represents the fraction
of the year 2000 CE population (of the country for which the measure is being computed) that can trace its
ancestral origins to the given country in the year 1500 CE. The ancestry weights are obtained from the World
Migration Matrix, 1500–2000 of Putterman and Weil (2010).

Subsistence Mode in 1000 CE. An index in the [0,1]-interval that gauges the extent to which sedentary
agriculture was practiced, in the year 1000 CE, within a region delineated by a country’s modern international
borders. This index is constructed using data from Peregrine’s (2003) Atlas of Cultural Evolution, which
reports, amongst other variables, a measure of the mode of subsistence on a 3-point categorical scale at the level
of a cultural group (or “archaeological tradition”) that existed in the year 1000 CE. Speci…cally, the measure
is taken to assume a value of 0 in the absence of sedentary agriculture (i.e., if the cultural group exclusively
practiced hunting and gathering), a value of 21 when agriculture was practiced but only as a secondary mode
of subsistence, and a value of 1 when agriculture was practiced as the primary mode of subsistence. Given
that the cross-sectional unit of observation in Peregrine’s (2003) data set is a cultural group, speci…c to a given
region on the global map, and since spatial delineations of groups, as reported by Peregrine (2003), do not
necessarily correspond to contemporary international borders, the measure is aggregated to the country level
by averaging across those cultural groups that are reported to appear within the modern borders of a given
country. For more details on the underlying data employed to construct this index, the interested reader is
referred to Peregrine (2003).

Geographical Variables:
Percentage of Arable Land. The fraction of a country’s total land area that is arable, as reported by the
World Bank’s World Development Indicators.

Absolute Latitude. The absolute value of the latitude of a country’s approximate geodesic centroid, as
reported by the CIA’s World Factbook.

Land Suitability for Agriculture. A geospatial index of the suitability of land for agriculture based on
ecological indicators of climate suitability for cultivation, such as growing degree days and the ratio of actual
to potential evapotranspiration, as well as ecological indicators of soil suitability for cultivation, such as soil
carbon density and soil pH. This index was initially reported at a half-degree resolution by Ramankutty et al.
(2002). Formally, Ramankutty et al. (2002) calculate the land suitability index (S ) as the product of climate
suitability (Sclim ) and soil suitability (Ssoil ), i.e., S = Sclim Ssoil . The climate suitability component is
estimated to be a function of growing degree days (GDD ) and a moisture index ( ) gauging water availability
to plants, calculated as the ratio of actual to potential evapotranspiration, i.e., Sclim = f1 (GDD)f2 ( ). The
soil suitability component, on the other hand, is estimated to be a function of soil carbon density (Csoil ) and soil
pH (pHsoil ), i.e. Ssoil = g1 (Csoil )g2 (pHsoil ). The functions, f1 (GDD), f2 ( ), g1 (Csoil ), and g2 (pHsoil )
are chosen by Ramankutty et al. (2002) by empirically …tting functions to the observed relationships between
cropland areas, GDD , , Csoil , and pHsoil . For more details on the speci…c functional forms chosen, the
interested reader is referred to Ramankutty et al. (2002). Since Ramankutty et al. (2002) report the
land suitability index at a half-degree resolution, Michalopoulos (2008) aggregates the index to the country
level by averaging land suitability across grid cells within a country. This study employs the country-level
aggregate measure reported by Michalopoulos (2008) as the control for land suitability in the baseline regression
speci…cations for both historical population density and contemporary income per capita.

Range of Land Suitability. The di¤erence between the maximum and minimum values of a land suitability
index, reported at a half-degree resolution by Ramankutty et al. (2002), across grid cells within a country. This


                                                       xxxv
variable is obtained from the data set of Michalopoulos (2008). For additional details on the land suitability
index, the interested reader is referred to the de…nition of the land suitability variable above.

Land Suitability Gini. The Gini coe¢ cient based on the distribution of a land suitability index, reported
at a half-degree resolution by Ramankutty et al. (2002), across grid cells within a country. This variable is
obtained from the data set of Michalopoulos (2008). For additional details on the land suitability index, the
interested reader is referred to the de…nition of the land suitability variable above.

Soil Fertility. The soil suitability component of an index of land suitability for agriculture, based on soil
carbon density and soil pH. The soil suitability data are reported at a half-degree resolution by Ramankutty
et al. (2000) and are aggregated to the country level by Michalopoulos (2008) by averaging across grid cells
within a country. For additional details on the soil suitability component of the land suitability index, the
interested reader is referred to the de…nition of the land suitability variable above.

Mean Elevation. The mean elevation of a country in km above sea level, calculated using geospatial elevation
data reported by the G-ECON project (Nordhaus, 2006) at a 1-degree resolution, which, in turn, is based on
similar but more spatially disaggregated data at a 10-minute resolution from New et al. (2002). The measure
is thus the average elevation across the grid cells within a country. The interested reader is referred to the
G-ECON project web site for additional details.

Standard Deviation of Elevation. The standard deviation of elevation across the grid cells within a
country in km above sea level, calculated using geospatial elevation data reported by the G-ECON project
(Nordhaus, 2006) at a 1-degree resolution, which, in turn, is based on similar but more spatially disaggregated
data at a 10-minute resolution from New et al. (2002). The interested reader is referred to the G-ECON
project web site for additional details.

Terrain Roughness. The degree of terrain roughness of a country, calculated using geospatial surface
undulation data reported by the G-ECON project (Nordhaus, 2006) at a 1-degree resolution, which is based
on more spatially disaggregated elevation data at a 10-minute resolution from New et al. (2002). The measure
is thus the average degree of terrain roughness across the grid cells within a country. The interested reader is
referred to the G-ECON project web site for additional details.

Temperature. The intertemporal average monthly temperature of a country in degrees Celsius per month
over the 1961–1990 time period, calculated using geospatial average monthly temperature data for this period
reported by the G-ECON project (Nordhaus, 2006) at a 1-degree resolution, which, in turn, is based on similar
but more spatially disaggregated data at a 10-minute resolution from New et al. (2002). The measure is thus
the spatial mean of the intertemporal average monthly temperature across the grid cells within a country. The
interested reader is referred to the G-ECON project web site for additional details.

Precipitation. The intertemporal average monthly precipitation of a country in mm per month over the 1961–
1990 time period, calculated using geospatial average monthly precipitation data for this period reported by
the G-ECON project (Nordhaus, 2006) at a 1-degree resolution, which, in turn, is based on similar but more
spatially disaggregated data at a 10-minute resolution from New et al. (2002). The measure is thus the spatial
mean of the intertemporal average monthly precipitation across the grid cells within a country. The interested
reader is referred to the G-ECON project web site for additional details.

Mean Distance to Nearest Waterway. The distance, in thousands of km, from a GIS grid cell to the
nearest ice-free coastline or sea-navigable river, averaged across the grid cells of a country. This variable was
originally constructed by Gallup et al. (1999) and is part of Harvard University’s CID Research Datasets on
General Measures of Geography.



                                                     xxxvi
Percentage of Land within 100 km of Waterway. The percentage of a country’s total land area that is
located within 100 km of an ice-free coastline or sea-navigable river. This variable was originally constructed
by Gallup et al. (1999) and is part of Harvard University’s CID Research Datasets on General Measures of
Geography.

Percentage of Population Living in Tropical Zones. The percentage of a country’s population in 1995
that resided in areas classi…ed as tropical by the Köppen-Geiger climate classi…cation system. This variable
was originally constructed by Gallup et al. (1999) and is part of Harvard University’s CID Research Datasets
on General Measures of Geography.

Percentage of Population at Risk of Contracting Malaria. The percentage of a country’s population in
1994 residing in regions of high malaria risk, multiplied by the proportion of national cases involving the fatal
species of the malaria pathogen, P. falciparum (as opposed to other largely non-fatal species). This variable
was originally constructed by Gallup and Sachs (2001) and is part of Columbia University’s Earth Institute
data set on malaria.

Climate. An index of climatic suitability for agriculture, based on the Köppen-Geiger climate classi…cation
system. This variable is obtained from the data set of Olsson and Hibbs (2005).

Orientation of Continental Axis. The orientation of a continent (or landmass) along a North-South or
East-West axis. This measure, reported in the data set of Olsson and Hibbs (2005), is calculated as the ratio of
the largest longitudinal (East-West) distance to the largest latitudinal (North-South) distance of the continent
(or landmass).

Size of Continent. The total land area of a continent (or landmass) as reported in the data set of Olsson
and Hibbs (2005).

Domesticable Plants. The number of annual and perennial wild grass species, with a mean kernel weight
exceeding 10 mg, that were prehistorically native to the region to which a country belongs. This variable is
obtained from the data set of Olsson and Hibbs (2005).

Domesticable Animals. The number of domesticable large mammalian species, weighing in excess of 45
kg, that were prehistorically native to the region to which a country belongs. This variable is obtained from
the data set of Olsson and Hibbs (2005).

Institutional, Cultural, and Human Capital Variables:
Social Infrastructure. An index, calculated by Hall and Jones (1999), that quanti…es the wedge between
private and social returns to productive activities. To elaborate, this measure is computed as the average of
two separate indices. The …rst is a government anti-diversion policy (GADP) index, based on data from the
International Country Risk Guide, that represents the average across …ve categories, each measured as the
mean over the 1986–1995 time period: (i) law and order, (ii) bureaucratic quality, (iii) corruption, (iv) risk
of expropriation, and (v) government repudiation of contracts. The second is an index of openness, based on
Sachs and Warner (1995), that represents the fraction of years in the time period 1950–1994 that the economy
was open to trade with other countries, where the criteria for being open in a given year includes: (i) non-tari¤
barriers cover less than 40% of trade, (ii) average tari¤ rates are less than 40%, (iii) any black market premium
was less than 20% during the 1970s and 80s, (iv) the country is not socialist, and (v) the government does not
monopolize over major exports.

Democracy. The 1960–2000 mean of an index that quanti…es the extent of institutionalized democracy, as
reported in the Polity IV data set. The Polity IV democracy index for a given year is an 11-point categorical
variable (from 0 to 10) that is additively derived from Polity IV codings on the (i) competitiveness of political


                                                     xxxvii
participation, (ii) openness of executive recruitment, (iii) competitiveness of executive recruitment, and (iv)
constraints on the chief executive.

Executive Constraints. The 1960–2000 mean of an index, reported annually as a 7-point categorical
variable (from 1 to 7) by the Polity IV data set, quantifying the extent of institutionalized constraints on the
decision-making power of chief executives.

Legal Origins. A set of dummy variables, reported by La Porta et al. (1999), that identi…es the legal origin
of the Company Law or Commercial Code of a country. The …ve legal origin possibilities are: (i) English
Common Law, (ii) French Commercial Code, (iii) German Commercial Code, (iv) Scandinavian Commercial
Code, and (v) Socialist or Communist Laws.

Major Religion Shares. A set of variables, from La Porta et al. (1999), that identi…es the percentage of a
country’s population belonging to the three most widely spread religions of the world. The religions identi…ed
are: (i) Roman Catholic, (ii) Protestant, and (iii) Muslim.

Ethnic Fractionalization. A fractionalization index, constructed by Alesina et al. (2003), that captures
the probability that two individuals, selected at random from a country’s population, will belong to di¤erent
ethnic groups.

Percentage of Population of European Descent. The fraction of the year 2000 CE population (of the
country for which the measure is being computed) that can trace its ancestral origins to the European continent
due to migrations occurring as early as the year 1500 CE. This variable is constructed using data from the
World Migration Matrix, 1500–2000 of Putterman and Weil (2010).

Average Years of Schooling. The mean, over the 1960–2000 time period, of the 5-yearly …gure, reported
by Barro and Lee (2001), on average years of schooling amongst the population aged 25 and over.




                                                    xxxviii
G   Descriptive Statistics

              Table G.1: Summary Statistics for the 21-Country Historical Sample

                                                      Obs.     Mean      S.D.     Min.     Max.
               Log Population Density in 1500 CE       21      1.169    1.756   -2.135     3.842
               Observed Genetic Diversity              21      0.713    0.056    0.552     0.770
               Migratory Distance from Addis Ababa     21      8.238    6.735    1.335    24.177
               Human Mobility Index                    18     10.965    8.124    2.405    31.360
               Log Neolithic Transition Timing         21      8.342    0.539    7.131     9.259
               Log % of Arable Land                    21      2.141    1.168   -0.799     3.512
               Log Absolute Latitude                   21      2.739    1.178    0.000     4.094
               Log Land Suitability for Agriculture    21     -1.391    0.895   -3.219    -0.288



             Table G.2: Pairwise Correlations for the 21-Country Historical Sample

                                                    (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)       (6)     (7)
    (1)   Log Population Density in 1500 CE       1.000
    (2)   Observed Genetic Diversity              0.244    1.000
    (3)   Migratory Distance from Addis Ababa    -0.226   -0.968    1.000
    (4)   Human Mobility Index                   -0.273   -0.955    0.987     1.000
    (5)   Log Neolithic Transition Timing         0.735   -0.117    0.024     0.011   1.000
    (6)   Log % of Arable Land                    0.670    0.172   -0.183    -0.032   0.521    1.000
    (7)   Log Absolute Latitude                   0.336    0.055   -0.012     0.044   0.392    0.453     1.000
    (8)   Log Land Suitability for Agriculture    0.561   -0.218    0.282     0.245   0.299    0.376     0.049




                                                  xxxix
     Table G.3: Summary Statistics for the 145-Country Historical Sample

                                            Obs.    Mean      S.D.     Min.    Max.
     Log Population Density in 1500 CE       145    0.881    1.500   -3.817    3.842
     Log Population Density in 1000 CE       140    0.463    1.445   -4.510    2.989
     Log Population Density in 1 CE          126   -0.070    1.535   -4.510    3.170
     Predicted Genetic Diversity             145    0.711    0.053    0.572    0.774
     Log Neolithic Transition Timing         145    8.343    0.595    5.991    9.259
     Log % of Arable Land                    145    2.232    1.203   -2.120    4.129
     Log Absolute Latitude                   145    3.003    0.924    0.000    4.159
     Log Land Suitability for Agriculture    145   -1.409    1.313   -5.857   -0.041
     Log Distance to Frontier in 1500 CE     145    7.309    1.587    0.000    9.288
     Log Distance to Frontier in 1000 CE     145    7.406    1.215    0.000    9.258
     Log Distance to Frontier in 1 CE        145    7.389    1.307    0.000    9.261
     Mean Elevation                          145    0.555    0.481    0.024    2.674
     Terrain Roughness                       145    0.178    0.135    0.013    0.602
     Mean Distance to Nearest Waterway       145    0.350    0.456    0.014    2.386
     % of Land within 100 km of Waterway     145    0.437    0.368    0.000    1.000
     Climate                                  96    1.531    1.046    0.000    3.000
     Orientation of Continental Axis          96    1.521    0.685    0.500    3.000
     Size of Continent                        96   30.608   13.605    0.065   44.614




xl
     Domesticable Plants                      96   13.260   13.416    2.000   33.000
     Domesticable Animals                     96    3.771    4.136    0.000    9.000
     Migratory Distance from Addis Ababa     145    8.399    6.970    0.000   26.771
     Aerial Distance from Addis Ababa        145    6.003    3.558    0.000   14.420
     Migratory Distance from London          145    8.884    7.104    0.000   26.860
     Migratory Distance from Tokyo           145   11.076    3.785    0.000   19.310
     Migratory Distance from Mexico City     145   15.681    6.185    0.000   25.020
                                    Table G.4: Pairwise Correlations for the 145-Country Historical Sample

                                                       (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)    (10)     (11)     (12)
       (1)   Log Population Density in 1500 CE       1.000
       (2)   Log Population Density in 1000 CE       0.963    1.000
       (3)   Log Population Density in 1 CE          0.876    0.936    1.000
       (4)   Predicted Genetic Diversity             0.391    0.312    0.341    1.000
       (5)   Log Neolithic Transition Timing         0.511    0.567    0.645    0.275    1.000
       (6)   Log % of Arable Land                    0.582    0.501    0.455    0.132    0.157    1.000
       (7)   Log Absolute Latitude                   0.101    0.090    0.284    0.106    0.322    0.272    1.000
       (8)   Log Land Suitability for Agriculture    0.364    0.302    0.248   -0.251   -0.133    0.649   -0.044    1.000
       (9)   Log Distance to Frontier in 1500 CE    -0.360   -0.367   -0.401   -0.021   -0.396   -0.188   -0.318   -0.012    1.000
      (10)   Log Distance to Frontier in 1000 CE    -0.243   -0.328   -0.389   -0.084   -0.522   -0.101   -0.307    0.175    0.606    1.000
      (11)   Log Distance to Frontier in 1 CE       -0.326   -0.390   -0.503   -0.082   -0.521   -0.177   -0.341   -0.002    0.457    0.703    1.000
      (12)   Mean Elevation                         -0.028   -0.046   -0.047    0.106    0.069   -0.051   -0.026    0.018    0.018    0.033    0.028    1.000
      (13)   Terrain Roughness                       0.197    0.199    0.218   -0.161    0.215    0.126    0.068    0.287   -0.060   -0.110   -0.229    0.626
      (14)   Mean Distance to Nearest Waterway      -0.305   -0.331   -0.366    0.195   -0.017   -0.178   -0.014   -0.230    0.155    0.118    0.170    0.429
      (15)   % of Land within 100 km of Waterway     0.383    0.362    0.391   -0.192    0.110    0.294    0.244    0.290   -0.210   -0.084   -0.219   -0.526
      (16)   Climate                                 0.527    0.567    0.633    0.080    0.621    0.438    0.563    0.101   -0.414   -0.456   -0.460   -0.178
      (17)   Orientation of Continental Axis         0.479    0.500    0.573    0.159    0.644    0.302    0.453    0.066   -0.202   -0.241   -0.336   -0.019
      (18)   Size of Continent                       0.308    0.339    0.408    0.465    0.454    0.244    0.327   -0.159   -0.125   -0.218   -0.267    0.148




xli
      (19)   Domesticable Plants                     0.510    0.538    0.663    0.346    0.636    0.371    0.642   -0.112   -0.439   -0.507   -0.502   -0.197
      (20)   Domesticable Animals                    0.580    0.615    0.699    0.249    0.768    0.366    0.640   -0.055   -0.427   -0.467   -0.461   -0.124
      (21)   Migratory Distance from Addis Ababa    -0.391   -0.312   -0.341   -1.000   -0.275   -0.132   -0.106    0.251    0.021    0.084    0.082   -0.106
      (22)   Aerial Distance from Addis Ababa       -0.287   -0.238   -0.283   -0.934   -0.331   -0.044   -0.017    0.334   -0.053    0.079    0.073   -0.153
      (23)   Migratory Distance from London         -0.537   -0.473   -0.518   -0.899   -0.497   -0.271   -0.385    0.176    0.215    0.224    0.256    0.001
      (24)   Migratory Distance from Tokyo          -0.420   -0.403   -0.353   -0.266   -0.559   -0.187   -0.316    0.056    0.164    0.227    0.224   -0.122
      (25)   Migratory Distance from Mexico City     0.198    0.128    0.167    0.822   -0.034    0.009   -0.006   -0.210    0.169    0.189    0.180    0.002
                              Table G.4: Pairwise Correlations for the 145-Country Historical Sample (Continued)

                                                      (13)    (14)     (15)     (16)     (17)       (18)     (19)       (20)      (21)    (22)     (23)     (24)
       (13)   Terrain Roughness                      1.000
       (14)   Mean Distance to Nearest Waterway     -0.002    1.000
       (15)   % of Land within 100 km of Waterway    0.039   -0.665    1.000
       (16)   Climate                                0.147   -0.497    0.431    1.000
       (17)   Orientation of Continental Axis        0.260   -0.236    0.285    0.482    1.000
       (18)   Size of Continent                     -0.079    0.104   -0.170    0.327    0.668     1.000
       (19)   Domesticable Plants                    0.074   -0.333    0.334    0.817    0.613     0.487     1.000
       (20)   Domesticable Animals                   0.132   -0.322    0.349    0.778    0.743     0.516     0.878     1.000
       (21)   Migratory Distance from Addis Ababa    0.161   -0.195    0.192   -0.080   -0.159    -0.465    -0.346    -0.249     1.000
       (22)   Aerial Distance from Addis Ababa       0.170   -0.220    0.292   -0.074   -0.058    -0.429    -0.281    -0.191     0.934    1.000
       (23)   Migratory Distance from London         0.088   -0.081   -0.042   -0.407   -0.455    -0.569    -0.683    -0.612     0.899    0.800    1.000
       (24)   Migratory Distance from Tokyo         -0.264   -0.128   -0.118   -0.220   -0.672    -0.310    -0.309    -0.626     0.266    0.172    0.418    1.000
       (25)   Migratory Distance from Mexico City   -0.284    0.094   -0.194   -0.014   -0.035     0.268     0.148     0.075    -0.822   -0.759   -0.675   -0.025



                                   Table G.5: Summary Statistics for the 143-Country Contemporary Sample

                                                                                        Obs.      Mean      S.D.       Min.     Max.




xlii
                                 Log Income Per Capita in 2000 CE                        143      8.416    1.165      6.158    10.445
                                 Log Population Density in 1500 CE                       143      0.891    1.496     -3.817     3.842
                                 Predicted Genetic Diversity (Unadjusted)                143      0.712    0.052      0.572     0.774
                                 Predicted Genetic Diversity (Ancestry Adjusted)         143      0.727    0.027      0.631     0.774
                                 Log Neolithic Transition Timing (Unadjusted)            143      8.343    0.599      5.991     9.259
                                 Log Neolithic Transition Timing (Ancestry Adjusted)     143      8.498    0.455      7.213     9.250
                                 Log % of Arable Land                                    143      2.251    1.180     -2.120     4.129
                                 Log Absolute Latitude                                   143      3.014    0.921      0.000     4.159
                                 Log Land Suitability for Agriculture                    143     -1.416    1.321     -5.857    -0.041
                         Table G.6: Pairwise Correlations for the 143-Country Contemporary Sample

                                                                       (1)     (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)
        (1)   Log Income Per Capita in 2000 CE                       1.000
        (2)   Log Population Density in 1500 CE                     -0.011   1.000
        (3)   Predicted Genetic Diversity (Unadjusted)              -0.212   0.378    1.000
        (4)   Predicted Genetic Diversity (Ancestry Adjusted)       -0.157   0.058    0.759    1.000
        (5)   Log Neolithic Transition Timing (Unadjusted)           0.191   0.512    0.276    0.006    1.000
        (6)   Log Neolithic Transition Timing (Ancestry Adjusted)    0.440   0.241   -0.165   -0.161    0.756    1.000
        (7)   Log % of Arable Land                                  -0.008   0.571    0.097    0.078    0.156    0.153   1.000
        (8)   Log Absolute Latitude                                  0.502   0.083    0.082    0.035    0.322    0.411   0.248     1.000
        (9)   Log Land Suitability for Agriculture                  -0.105   0.369   -0.251   -0.240   -0.133   -0.078   0.670    -0.041



                          Table G.7: Summary Statistics for the 109-Country Contemporary Sample

                                                                                 Obs.    Mean     S.D.      Min.    Max.
                     Log Income Per Capita in 2000 CE                             109    8.455   1.189     6.524   10.445
                     Predicted Genetic Diversity (Ancestry Adjusted)              109    0.727   0.029     0.631    0.774
                     Log Neolithic Transition Timing (Ancestry Adjusted)          109    8.422   0.480     7.213    9.250
                     Log % of Arable Land                                         109    2.248   1.145    -2.120    4.129




xliii
                     Log Absolute Latitude                                        109    2.841   0.960     0.000    4.159
                     Social Infrastructure                                        109    0.453   0.243     0.113    1.000
                     Ethnic Fractionalization                                     109    0.460   0.271     0.002    0.930
                     % of Population at Risk of Contracting Malaria               109    0.369   0.438     0.000    1.000
                     % of Population Living in Tropical Zones                     109    0.361   0.419     0.000    1.000
                     Mean Distance to Nearest Waterway                            109    0.298   0.323     0.008    1.467
                     % of Population of European Descent                          109    0.318   0.407     0.000    1.000
                     Average Years of Schooling                                    94    4.527   2.776     0.409   10.862
                     Migratory Distance from Addis Ababa (Unadjusted)             109    9.081   7.715     0.000   26.771
                     Migratory Distance from Addis Ababa (Ancestry Adjusted)      109    6.322   3.897     0.000   18.989
                     Aerial Distance from Addis Ababa (Unadjusted)                109    6.332   3.861     0.000   14.420
                     Aerial Distance from Addis Ababa (Ancestry Adjusted)         109    5.161   2.425     0.000   12.180
                                    Table G.8: Pairwise Correlations for the 109-Country Contemporary Sample

                                                                           (1)      (2)      (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)      (7)        (8)      (9)    (10)
        (1)   Log Income Per Capita in 2000 CE                           1.000
        (2)   Predicted Genetic Diversity (Ancestry Adjusted)           -0.261    1.000
        (3)   Log Neolithic Transition Timing (Ancestry Adjusted)        0.535   -0.241    1.000
        (4)   Log % of Arable Land                                       0.050    0.087    0.214      1.000
        (5)   Log Absolute Latitude                                      0.563   -0.014    0.367      0.242         1.000
        (6)   Social Infrastructure                                      0.808   -0.219    0.363      0.119         0.476        1.000
        (7)   Ethnic Fractionalization                                  -0.644    0.195   -0.406     -0.255        -0.590       -0.468      1.000
        (8)   % of Population at Risk of Contracting Malaria            -0.784    0.406   -0.628     -0.204        -0.599       -0.593      0.672      1.000
        (9)   % of Population Living in Tropical Zones                  -0.418   -0.167   -0.256     -0.001        -0.723       -0.380      0.396      0.414    1.000
       (10)   Mean Distance to Nearest Waterway                         -0.444    0.331   -0.280     -0.189        -0.238       -0.309      0.417      0.443   -0.079    1.000
       (11)   % of Population of European Descent                        0.729   -0.162    0.469      0.248         0.537        0.671     -0.531     -0.633   -0.369   -0.350
       (12)   Average Years of Schooling                                 0.866   -0.138    0.426      0.138         0.556        0.758     -0.478     -0.665   -0.436   -0.360
       (13)   Migratory Distance from Addis Ababa (Unadjusted)           0.284   -0.734    0.253     -0.099        -0.015        0.099     -0.168     -0.424    0.267   -0.279
       (14)   Migratory Distance from Addis Ababa (Ancestry Adjusted)    0.261   -1.000    0.241     -0.087         0.014        0.219     -0.195     -0.406    0.167   -0.331
       (15)   Aerial Distance from Addis Ababa (Unadjusted)              0.335   -0.804    0.203     -0.047         0.064        0.195     -0.229     -0.443    0.239   -0.338
       (16)   Aerial Distance from Addis Ababa (Ancestry Adjusted)       0.328   -0.943    0.173     -0.021         0.131        0.297     -0.261     -0.406    0.108   -0.365




xliv
                             Table G.8: Pairwise Correlations for the 109-Country Contemporary Sample (Continued)

                                                                                                    (11)         (12)         (13)     (14)    (15)
                             (11)   % of Population of European Descent                            1.000
                             (12)   Average Years of Schooling                                     0.767     1.000
                             (13)   Migratory Distance from Addis Ababa (Unadjusted)               0.273     0.191       1.000
                             (14)   Migratory Distance from Addis Ababa (Ancestry Adjusted)        0.162     0.138       0.734        1.000
                             (15)   Aerial Distance from Addis Ababa (Unadjusted)                  0.304     0.261       0.939        0.804   1.000
                             (16)   Aerial Distance from Addis Ababa (Ancestry Adjusted)           0.231     0.233       0.665        0.943   0.819
H     Evidence from Evolutionary Biology
The proposed diversity hypothesis suggests that there exists an aggregate socioeconomic trade-o¤
with respect to genetic diversity within human populations. Speci…cally, higher diversity generates
social bene…ts by enhancing society’s productivity through e¢ ciency gains via complementarity
across di¤erent types, by increasing society’s resilience against negative productivity shocks, and by
fostering society’s adaptability to a change in the technological environment. Higher diversity also
generates social costs, however, by increasing the likelihood of miscoordination and distrust between
interacting agents, and by inhibiting the emergence and sustainability of cooperative behavior in
society. Indeed, the ideas underlying these channels ensue rather naturally from well-established
concepts in evolutionary biology.
    The following narrative discusses some of the analogous arguments from the …eld of evolutionary
biology and presents supporting evidence from recent scienti…c studies. These studies typically focus
on organisms, like ants, bees, wasps, and certain species of spiders and birds, that are not only
amenable to laboratory experimentation, but also display a relatively high degree of social behavior
in nature, such as living in task-directed hierarchical societies, characterized by division of labor,
or engaging in cooperative rearing of their young. The motivation behind studying such organisms
is often related to the work of sociobiologists, such as Wilson (1978) and Hölldobler and Wilson
(1990), who have argued that the application of evolutionary principles in explaining the behavior of
social insects lends key insights to the understanding of social behavior in more complex organisms
including humans.

H.1    Bene…ts of Genetic Diversity
The notion that genetic diversity within a given population is bene…cial for individual reproductive
…tness, and, hence, the adaptability and survivability of the population as a whole, is one of the central
tenets of Darwin’s (1859) theory of evolution. In the short term, by reducing the extent of inbreeding,
genetic diversity prevents the propagation of potentially deleterious traits in the population over
generations (Houle, 1994). In the long term, by permitting the force of natural selection to operate
over a wider spectrum of traits, genetic diversity increases the population’s capacity to adapt to
changing environmental conditions (Frankham et al., 1999).
    To further elaborate, the study by Frankham et al. (1999) provides clear experimental evidence for
the bene…cial e¤ect of genetic diversity in enhancing the survivability of populations under deleterious
changes in the environment. In their experiment, populations of the common fruit ‡y, Drosophila
melanogaster, were subjected to di¤erent rates of inbreeding, and their ability to tolerate increasing
concentrations of sodium chloride, or common salt, which is harmful for this species of ‡ies, was
compared with those of outbred base populations. Indeed, the less diverse inbred populations became
extinct at signi…cantly lower concentrations of sodium chloride than the more genetically diverse base
populations.
    In related studies, Tarpy (2003) and Seeley and Tarpy (2007) employ the honeybee, Apis mellifera,
to demonstrate that polyandry, i.e., the practise of mating with multiple male drones by queen bees,
may be an adaptive strategy since the resultant increase in genetic diversity increases the colony’s
resistance to disease. For instance, having established colonies headed by queens that had been
arti…cially inseminated by either one or ten drones, Seeley and Tarpy inoculated these colonies with
spores of Paenibacillus larvae, the bacterium that causes a highly virulent disease of honeybee larvae.
The researchers found that, on average, colonies headed by multiple-drone inseminated queens had
markedly lower disease intensity and higher colony strength relative to colonies headed by single-
drone inseminated queens.
    In addition to increasing disease resistance, it has been argued that genetic diversity within
honeybee colonies provides them with a system of genetically-based task specialization, enabling


                                                   xlv
  e patrilines had         fitness by enhancing the task allocation                           brood nest temperature over
s for fanning.             system. We suggest that a genetically di-                          ambient temperatures. With
nies, there were
n the proportion
                                                                                                                Fig. 1. Tempera
   in the fanning                                                                                               genetically dive
 om samples at                                                                                                  honey bee colo
 res (6 tempera-                                                                                                shows the aver
nd 4 out of 7 in                                                                                                perature for on
 df ⫽ 4). To test                                                                                               pair of colonies
ges were caused                                                                                                 imental week. O
                                                                                                                can be seen in
 by temperature,
 ment using col-
erature was held
e of day did not
he proportion of
 ing (G ⫽ 16.28,
                       Figure H.1: Thermoregulation in Genetically Uniform vs. Diverse Honeybee Colonies
 nt patrilines to                                       (Source: Jones et al., 2004)

 ture show two
    patrilines them
                un- to respond resiliently to environmental perturbation (Oldroyd and Fewell, 2007). Evidence
               supporting this viewpoint is provided by the study of Jones et al. (2004). Honeybee colonies need
  ses to changing
               to maintain their brood nest temperature between 32 C and 36 C, and optimally at 35 C, so that
 ndition for the thebrood develops normally. Workers regulate temperature by fanning hot air out of the nest when
               the temperature is perceived as being too high and clustering together and generating metabolic
 , the proportion
               heat when the temperature is perceived to be too low. Ideally, a graded rather than precipitous
ferent patrilines
               response is required, so that the colony does not constantly oscillate between heating and cooling
               responses. In their experiment, Jones et al. arti…cially constructed genetically uniform and diverse
 perature. There
               honeybee colonies and compared their thermoregulation performances under exposure to ambient
e observed non-temperatures, …nding that, over a period of 2 weeks, the within-colony variance in temperatures
  ses to environ-
               maintained by the diverse colonies (0.047 C) was less than one-third of the within-colony variance
               of the uniform ones (0.165 C) and signi…cantly di¤erent (F = 3.5, P < 0.001). Figure H.1 illustrates
 line’s threshold
               the superior thermoregulation performance of a genetically diverse colony, in comparison to that of
hermoregulationa uniform one, in the Jones et al. experiment.
 , may be lowerA popular hypothesis regarding the bene…ts of diversity, one that appears most analogous to
               the arguments raised in this paper, suggests that genetically diverse honeybee colonies may operate
 therefore drawmore e¢ ciently, by performing tasks better as a collective, and thereby gain a …tness advantage over
ay from the task
               colonies with uniform gene pools (Robinson and Page, 1989). Results from the experimental study of
of nest matesMattila
                  of and Seeley (2007) provide evidence supporting this hypothesis. Since the channel highlighted
               by this hypothesis is closely related to the idea proposed in the current study, the remainder of this
  the stimulussection
                  to is devoted
                          Fig. 2.toPatrilines       varySeeley
                                       the Mattila and      in their     fanning response to changing ambient tempe
                                                                 experiment.
   the apparentlyA honeybee
                          ﬁve-patriline colonies studied each consisted
                                 colony  propagates  its genes  in two  ways:                   ⬃5000 bees.
                                                                                by producingofreproductive          We used ﬁve-pat
                                                                                                             males (drones)
 proportions and          reduce the sample size required to produce adequate minimum expected values
                 areby producing    swarms, when a reproductive female (queen) and several thousand infertile females
               (workers) leave and establish a new nest. Swarming is costly and perilous; with limited resources
  ented our data.         Each colony was maintained in a two-frame observation hive in an insulated ro
               and labor, a swarm must construct new comb, build a food reserve, and begin rearing workers to
                  in thetemperature
 triline couldreplace                       could
                            aging work force.        be controlled
                                               In temperate               to ⫾1°C.
                                                               climates, newly         Colonies
                                                                                 founded            were
                                                                                          colonies must      heated
                                                                                                          operate      from 25°C to 4
                                                                                                                  e¢ ciently
                          Fanning
               because there
bers, rather than                      bees
                               is limited    (50)
                                          time      were collected
                                                to acquire  the resourcesover     each 2-degree
                                                                            to support               interval
                                                                                        these activities.  Colonyfrom    the entrance t
                                                                                                                   founding
                          A random
               is so di¢ cult            sample
                              that only 20%         of 50survive
                                              of swarms      beestheir
                                                                     was…rst
                                                                           alsoyear;
                                                                                  taken
                                                                                     mostfrom
                                                                                          do notthe   colony
                                                                                                  gather         after
                                                                                                           adequate  foodeach
                                                                                                                          to experime
  s the number    ofthe colony
               fuel       the patriline of all workers sampled, we extracted DNA using the Chelex method (
                                throughout  the  winter  and  die of starvation.  With the  challenges of  successful colony
 er patriline in-         then ampliﬁed by polymerase chain reaction with the microsatellite primers A7
 e first patriline        (36) for colony 1 and A88 (36)xlviand A113 for colony 2. Patrilines were then determ
 nally. This arti-        by Estoup et al. (35).
                              Genetically Diverse
                              Genetically Uniform




     Figure H.2: Comb Area Growth in Genetically Uniform vs. Diverse Honeybee Colonies
                                    (Source: Mattila and Seeley, 2007)


founding in mind, Mattila and Seeley conducted a long-term study to compare the development
characteristics of genetically diverse and genetically uniform colonies after a swarming event. The
researchers began by creating genetically diverse colonies, using queens instrumentally inseminated
with semen from multiple drones, and genetically uniform ones, using queens inseminated by one
drone. They then generated swarms arti…cially, selecting from each colony the queen and a random
subset of her worker o¤spring, and allowed these swarms to found new colonies. The observations
in Mattila and Seeley’s experiment begin on June 11, 2006, when the swarms established their new
nest sites. In particular, they document colony development by measuring comb construction, brood
rearing, foraging activity, food storage, population size, and mean weight gain at regular intervals.
    As depicted in Figure H.2, Mattila and Seeley found that, during the …rst two weeks of colony
development, colonies with genetically diverse worker populations built about 30% more comb than
colonies with genetically uniform populations (F = 25.7, P < 0.001). Furthermore, as illustrated
in Figure H.3, during the second week of colony founding, genetically diverse colonies maintained
foraging rates (measured as the number of workers returning to hive per minute for all workers and for
only those carrying pollen) that were between 27% and 78% higher than those of genetically uniform
colonies. Consequently, after two weeks of inhabiting their nest sites, genetically diverse colonies
stockpiled 39% more food than the uniform ones. The researchers also found that production of new
workers and brood rearing by existing workers were both signi…cantly higher in the genetically diverse
colonies within the …rst month of colony development. As a result of these various accumulated
productivity gains, the genetically diverse colonies all survived an unusually cold exposure, occurring
two months after the establishment of their nest sites, that starved and killed about 50% of the
genetically uniform colonies in the Mattila and Seeley experiment. Based on their …ndings, the
authors conclude that collective productivity and …tness in honeybee colonies is indeed enhanced by
intracolonial genetic diversity.




                                                    xlvii
                             All Workers   Workers Carrying Pollen
                               Diverse       Diverse
                               Uniform       Uniform




       Figure H.3: Foraging Rates in Genetically Uniform vs. Diverse Honeybee Colonies
                                     (Source: Mattila and Seeley, 2007)


H.2    Bene…ts of Genetic Relatedness and Homogeneity
The notion that genetic relatedness between individuals, and genetic homogeneity within a group in
general, can be collectively bene…cial is highlighted in an extension of Darwinian evolutionary theory
known as kin selection theory. In particular, the concept of “survival of the …ttest” in standard
Darwinian theory implies that, over time, the world should be dominated by sel…sh behavior since
natural selection favors genes that increase an organism’s ability to survive and reproduce. This
implication of evolutionary theory remained at odds with the observed prevalence of cooperative
behavior in nature until the formalization of kin selection theory by Hamilton (1964) and Maynard
Smith (1964). According to this in‡uential theory, the indirect …tness gains of genetic relatives can
in some cases more than compensate for the private …tness loss incurred by individuals displaying
altruistic or cooperative behavior. Hence, given that relatives are more likely to share common
traits, including those responsible for altruism or cooperation, kin selection provides a rationale for
the propagation of cooperative behavior in nature.
    An immediate implication of kin selection theory is that, when individuals can distinguish
relatives from non-relatives (kin recognition), altruists should preferentially direct aid towards their
relatives (kin discrimination). The study by Russell and Hatchwell (2001) provides evidence of this
phenomenon in a species of cooperatively breeding birds, Aegithalos caudatus, commonly known as
the long-tailed tit. In this species, individuals distinguish between relatives and non-relatives on
the basis of vocal contact cues (Sharp et al., 2005) and failed breeders become potential helpers
in rearing the young of successful breeders in the same social unit. In their research, Russell and
Hatchwell designed an experiment to investigate whether the presence of kin within the social unit
was necessary for altruistic behavior, and whether kin were preferred to non-kin when given the
choice. As depicted in Figure H.4, the researchers found that failed breeders did not actually become
helpers when kin were absent from the social unit (panel a), but when both kin and non-kin were
present in the same social unit, the majority of failed breeders provided brood-rearing assistance at
the nests of kin (panel b).



                                                        xlviii
 atchwell      Kin preferences in long-tailed tits


                                                                       (a)                         (b)
                                                                 100

                                                                  80



                                            percentage helping
                                                                  60

                                                                  40

                                                                  20

                                                                   0
   5      6      7        8      9                                      kin present   kin absent       kin       non-kin
                                                                        same clan     same clan     same clan   same clan
elled to help (rank)

  of the rank order of nest Figure Figure           4. The kin Bias
                                         H.4: Preferential         preferences     of and helping
                                                                         of Cooperation       with Kin decisions
                                                                                                          in the taken
                                                                                                                  Long-Tailed Tit
 r's last breeding attempt to            by   failed   breeders.
                                                            (Source: Russell and Hatchwell, 2001) helpers
                                                                    (a)  The   proportion     of potential
 per (i.e. 1 indicates the               that helped when kin were present within the same clan
nd nearest nest and so on).              (n  17) and absent from the same clan (n  9) (one-tailed
                       Kin selection also       predicts
                                         binomial      test,that    the extent
                                                             p 5 0.005).     (b) Theof altruism
                                                                                        proportion  should   be positively correlated with
                                                                                                       of potential
                  genetic relatednesshelpers
                                           between     potential
                                                    that  helped helpers       and of
                                                                     at the nests     bene…ciaries,
                                                                                        kin and non-kinand that
                                                                                                             whenthis
                                                                                                                    bothcorrelation should be
                  stronger the greater   were available in the same clan (n  17) (one-tailed binomial for this prediction
                                            the   indirect   …tness    bene…t    from   altruism.    Empirical   support
nest, some moving comes a consid-
                           from the studytest,byp5    0.001).
                                                   Gri¢   n and West (2003) where relevant data from 18 collectively breeding
 genetic data indicated        that
                  vertebrate species was used to test the relationship between the amount of help in brood rearing
 hese choices because         most and how this correlation varied with the bene…t of helping (measured in terms of
                  and relatedness,        (iii) The ability to discriminate kin from non-kin may
 f relatives. Therelatives’o¤spring
                     key role of          production and survival). Speci…cally, the study exploited variation across social
                                                 diminish during a period of separation so that birds
med in an experiment
                  units, withinthateach species, in genetic relatedness, the amount of help, and the indirect …tness bene…t
                                                 that have dispersed and subsequently returned have
ot only refrain offrom     helping
                      helping.    Consistently with kin selection theory, the researchers found that the average across
                                                 a higher error rate in their identi¢cation of kin
n their presence, speciesthey   arewithin-species correlation between the amount of help and genetic relatedness was 0.33
                            in the
                                                 (Sherman
                                                       zero (Pet<al.    1997;Moreover,
                                                                                Komdeur     the&study
                                                                                                   Hatchwell    1999).
 erence to non-kin.
                  and signi…cantly larger than                       0.01).                             also found   that kin discrimination,
eference experiment
                  i.e., thesuggest
                             within-species correlation between the amount of help and relatedness, was higher in species
                                             We have        interpreted       our results      showing      kin-directed
maintenance of cooperative
                  where    the  indirect …tness
                                          care   as
                                                     bene…ts
                                                      being
                                                                 from altruism
                                                               evidence     for  a
                                                                                     were larger.
                                                                                    kin   preference
                                                                                                      Figure
                                                                                                        by
                                                                                                               H.5 depicts the relationship
                                                                                                             helpers.   An in Gri¢ n and
                  between
rst, all failed breeders coop-kin  discrimination      and    the   bene…t    from    altruistic   behavior   across   species
                  West’   s study.        alternative interpretation is that breeders only tolerate
 nt in the same         clan   and        familiar     birds    asfar
                                                                    helpers    and    that familiar     birds are   more between genetic
her than non-kin.While         the studies
                          Second,             discussed
                                          likely they
                                                           thus
                                                   to bedorelatives.
                                                                        provide   evidence
                                                                          Hatchwell
                                                                                              of the positive   correlation
                  relatedness and altruism,                   not substantiate       the et  al. (2001b)
                                                                                          e¤ect             showed
                                                                                                 of relatedness       thatother type of social
                                                                                                                  on the
 n the absence of kin. This
                  behavior stressed inbreeders          reacttheory,
                                            kin selection        morethataggressively
                                                                              of mutually   toorthe  playbackbene…cial
                                                                                                  collectively    calls of cooperation. This
 ene¢ts are insu¤cient           for
                  concept is directly non-kin,
                                          associatedand  withwe thehave     observed
                                                                      classic  problem some       instances
                                                                                          of public           of aggres-
                                                                                                      goods provision     due to the “tragedy
ding in this species     and   that       sion between
                  of commons.” In particular,                 breederswithin
                                                        cooperation        and potential
                                                                                   groups that helpers.
                                                                                                    exploitHowever,     we
                                                                                                             a …nite resource    can be prone
y result fromtorecognition
                      cheating whereby    have
                                             theno     evidence
                                                   sel…sh            to suggest
                                                             interests              that helpers
                                                                          of individuals     result have    detrimentalfor all members of
                                                                                                     in disadvantages
 kin recognition  themechanism            e¡ects on their
                        group. While cooperative                 recipients
                                                          behavior     can beeither
                                                                                 enforcedin terms
                                                                                             through of mechanisms
                                                                                                        mate competi-  such as reciprocity or
on (Hatchwell punishment,
                   et al. 2001b)          tion (Hatchwell
                                   kin selection                   et al. 2000),
                                                   provides a natural                survival,
                                                                            alternative    for theorresolution
                                                                                                      breedingofsuccess
                                                                                                                   such social dilemmas. By
ognition in thehelping
                     strict relatives
                              sense pass  (Russell 1999; B. J. Hatchwell, unpublished data). Indeed,related individuals
                                             on  shared    genes    to the  next   generation,    cooperation   between
  discrimination     of   familiar
                  can be mutually bene…cial.
                                          helpers allow  Experimental
                                                               breeders to   evidence
                                                                                reduce of     the rate
                                                                                           their   importance
                                                                                                        of chickofprovi-
                                                                                                                      genetic relatedness for
  The extensive       mixing behavior
                  cooperative     of         comes     from   the   study   by  Schneider     and
                                          sioning (Hatchwell & Russell 1996), to be heavier (Glen   Bilde  (2008)  that  investigates the role
 the non-breeding       seasoninincooperative
                  of kinship                         feeding amongst the young in Stegodyphus lineatus, a species of spider
                                          & Perrins 1988) and to increase their survival probability
Hatchwell et al.displaying
                    2001a), may sociality in juvenile stages.
                                          to the following year (Russell 1999). In addition, helpers
 cognition errors arising.
                       SchneiderAand Bilde argue that communally feeding spiders are ideal to investigate the costs
                                          can have a positive e¡ect on overall chick provisioning
  kin recognition andmechanism
                        bene…ts of cooperation because of their mode of feeding. These spiders hunt cooperatively, by
                                           frequency, chick weight and their subsequent recruitment
  the question of how much                 (Russell 1999; B. J. Hatchwell, unpublished data). There-
 cted through errors.                      fore, we have not identi¢edxlix
                                                                         any obvious cost to breeders
 ned to their natal clan to                of having helpers and so there is no obvious selective
 of relatives, even when no                advantage in being intolerant of unfamiliar helpers.
              Kin Discrimination




                                          Indirect Fitness Benefit of Helping




       Figure H.5: Kin Discrimination and the Indirect Fitness Bene…t from Cooperation
                                    (Source: Gri¢ n and West, 2003)


building and sharing a common capture web, but they also share large prey items. Since spiders
digest externally by …rst injecting their digestive enzymes and then extracting the liquidized prey
content, communal feeding involves everyone spitting into the same carcass and thereby exploiting a
common resource that was jointly created. Such a system is especially prone to cheating because each
feeder can either invest in the digestion process by contributing enzymes or may cheat by sucking
up the ‡uids with little prior investment. The outcomes of such con‡icts in a collective can thus be
quanti…ed by measuring feeding e¢ ciency and weight gain. In this case, kin selection theory predicts
that groups with higher mean genetic relatedness should outperform others on these biometrics due
to a relatively lower prevalence of such con‡icts.
    To test this prediction, Schneider and Bilde conducted an experiment with three treatment groups
of juvenile spiders: genetically related (sibs), genetically and socially unrelated (unfamiliar nonsibs),
and genetically unrelated but socially related (familiar nonsibs). Social, as opposed to genetic,
relatedness refers to familiarity gained through learned association as a result of being raised by the
same mother (either foster or biological) in pre-juvenile stages. The third treatment group therefore
allowed the researchers to control for nongenetic learned associations that could erroneously be
interpreted as kin-selected e¤ects. In their experiment, Schneider and Bilde followed two group-level
outcomes over time. They measured growth as weight gained over a period of eight weeks and
measured feeding e¢ ciency of the groups by quantifying the mass extracted from prey in repeated
two-hour assays of cooperative feeding. As depicted in Figure H.6, consistently with kin selection,
sib groups gained signi…cantly more weight than unrelated groups (both familiar and unfamiliar)
over the experimental period of 8 weeks (F = 9.31, P < 0.01), and while nonsib unfamiliar spider
groups had a higher start weight than the two other groups, sib groups overtook them by following
a signi…cantly steeper growth trajectory. Indeed, as Figure H.7 illustrates, this growth pattern was
based on the higher feeding e¢ ciency of sib groups compared with nonsib groups, with kin groups
extracting signi…cantly more mass from their prey during a …xed feeding duration (F = 8.91, P
< 0.01). Based on these …ndings, Schneider and Bilde conclude that genetic similarity facilitates
cooperation by reducing cheating behavior and, thereby, alleviates the negative social impact of
excessive competition.




                                                         l
                          Sibs
                          Familiar Nonsibs
                          Unfamiliar Nonsibs




 Figure H.6: Weight Growth in Kin vs. Non-kin Groups of Cooperatively Feeding Spiders
                            (Source: Schneider and Bilde, 2008)




Figure H.7: Feeding E¢ ciency in Kin vs. Non-kin Groups of Cooperatively Feeding Spiders
                            (Source: Schneider and Bilde, 2008)




                                               li
Additional Works Cited
Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee, “International Data on Educational Attainment: Updates
    and Implications,” Oxford Economic Papers, July 2001, 53 (3), 541–563.
Chandler, Tertius, Four Thousand Years of Urban Growth: An Historical Census, Lewiston, NY:
    The Edwin Mellen Press, 1987.
Darwin, Charles, On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, London, UK: John
    Murray, 1859.
Frankham, Richard, Kelly Lees, Margaret E. Montgomery, Phillip R. England, Edwin
    H. Lowe, and David A. Briscoe, “Do Population Size Bottlenecks Reduce Evolutionary
    Potential?,” Animal Conservation, November 1999, 2 (4), 255–260.
Gri¢ n, Ashleigh S. and Stuart A. West, “Kin Discrimination and the Bene…t of Helping in
    Cooperatively Breeding Vertebrates,” Science, October 2003, 302 (5645), 634–636.
Hamilton, William D., “The Genetical Evolution of Social Behaviour I and II,” Journal of
    Theoretical Biology, July 1964, 7 (1), 1–52.
Hayes, Theodore R., “Dismounted Infantry Movement Rate Study,”1996. Technical Report, U.S.
    Army Research Institute of Environmental Medicine.
Hölldobler, Bert and Edward O. Wilson, The Ants, Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of
    Harvard University Press, 1990.
Houle, David, “Adaptive Distance and the Genetic Basis of Heterosis,” Evolution, August 1994,
    48 (4), 1410–1417.
Jones, Julia C., Mary R. Myerscough, Sonia Graham, and Benjamin P. Oldroyd, “Honey
    Bee Nest Thermoregulation: Diversity Promotes Stability,” Science, July 2004, 305 (5682),
    402–404.
Mattila, Heather R. and Thomas D. Seeley, “Genetic Diversity in Honey Bee Colonies En-
    hances Productivity and Fitness,” Science, July 2007, 317 (5836), 362–364.
Maynard Smith, John, “Group Selection and Kin Selection,” Nature, March 1964, 201 (4924),
    1145–1147.
Modelski, George, World Cities: -3000 to 2000, Washington, DC: FAROS 2000, 2003.
New, Mark, David Lister, Mike Hulme, and Ian Makin, “A High-Resolution Data Set of
    Surface Climate Over Global Land Areas,” Climate Research, May 2002, 21 (1), 1–25.
Nordhaus, William D., “Geography and Macroeconomics: New Data and New Findings,” Pro-
    ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, March 2006, 103 (10), 3510–3517.
Oldroyd, Benjamin P. and Jennifer H. Fewell, “Genetic Diversity Promotes Homeostasis in
    Insect Colonies,” Trends in Ecology and Evolution, August 2007, 22 (8), 408–413.
Özak, Ömer, “The Voyage of Homo-Oeconomicus: Some Economic Measures of Distance,” 2010.
    Mimeo, Brown University.
Peregrine, Peter N., “Atlas of Cultural Evolution,”World Cultures: Journal of Comparative and
    Cross-Cultural Research, Fall 2003, 14 (1), 1–75.




                                                   lii
Robinson, Gene E. and Robert E. Page Jr., “The Genetic Basis of Division of Labor in an
    Insect Society,” in Michael D. Breed and Robert E. Page, Jr., eds., The Genetics of Social
    Evolution, Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1989.
Russell, Andrew F. and Ben J. Hatchwell, “Experimental Evidence for Kin-Biased Helping in
    a Cooperatively Breeding Vertebrate,” Proceedings of the Royal Society: Biological Sciences,
    October 2001, 268 (1481), 2169–2174.
Sachs, Je¤rey D. and Andrew Warner, “Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integra-
    tion,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 1995, 26 (1), 1–118.
Schneider, Jutta M. and Trine Bilde, “Bene…ts of Cooperation with Genetic Kin in a Subsocial
    Spider,”Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, August 2008, 105 (31), 10843–10846.
Seeley, Thomas D. and David R. Tarpy, “Queen Promiscuity Lowers Disease within Honeybee
    Colonies,” Proceedings of the Royal Society: Biological Sciences, January 2007, 274 (1606),
    67–72.
Sharp, Stuart P., Andrew McGowan, Matthew J. Wood, and Ben J. Hatchwell, “Learned
    Kin Recognition Cues in a Social Bird,” Nature, April 2005, 434 (7037), 1127–1130.
Tarpy, David R., “Genetic Diversity within Honeybee Colonies Prevents Severe Infections and
    Promotes Colony Growth,”Proceedings of the Royal Society: Biological Sciences, January 2003,
    270 (1510), 99–103.
Wilson, Edward O., On Human Nature, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1978.




                                              liii
