                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ECONOMIC GROWTH IN THE MID ATLANTIC REGION:
                     CONJECTURAL ESTIMATES FOR 1720 TO 1800

                                        Joshua L. Rosenbloom
                                           Thomas J. Weiss

                                        Working Paper 17215
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17215


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2011




This research was funded in part by the National Science Foundation Grant SES-0317265. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Joshua L. Rosenbloom and Thomas J. Weiss. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Economic Growth in the Mid Atlantic Region: Conjectural Estimates for 1720 to 1800
Joshua L. Rosenbloom and Thomas J. Weiss
NBER Working Paper No. 17215
July 2011, Revised March 2013
JEL No. N1,N11,N71,N9,N91,O19

                                               ABSTRACT

We employ the conjectural approach to estimate the growth of GDP per capita for the colonies and
states of the mid-Atlantic region (Del., NJ, NY and Penn). In contrast to previous studies of the region’s
growth that relied heavily on the performance of the export sector, the conjectural method enables us
to take into account the impact of domestic sector, in particular the production of agricultural products
for the domestic market. We find that the region experienced modest growth of real GDP per capita.
Although the rate of growth was modest in comparison to what would materialize in the late nineteenth
century, it was faster than that of the Lower South in the eighteenth century, and at times as fast as
that for the U.S. in the first half of the nineteenth century. In its heyday of growth from 1740 to 1750—before
the dislocations produced by the spread of the Seven Years’ War--real GDP per capita rose at 0.7 percent
per year, driven by the growth of output per worker in both agriculture and nonagriculture, and by
capital accumulation.


Joshua L. Rosenbloom
Department of Economics
University of Kansas
Snow Hall 436
1460 Jayhawk Blvd
Lawrence, KS 66045-2113
and NBER
jrosenbloom@ku.edu

Thomas J. Weiss
Department of Economics
University of Kansas
Lawrence, KS 66045
and NBER
t-weiss@ku.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17215
                                                                                                           1


                          Economic Growth in the Mid Atlantic Region:
                             Conjectural Estimates for 1720 to 1800


        Understanding when and how modern economic growth, characterized by sustained

improvements in per capita income, began remains one of the central concerns of economic

history. In Western Europe and North America, the transition to modern economic growth was

clearly underway by the early nineteenth century. It remains difficult, however, to be much more

precise about the timing of the transition without better estimates of aggregate economic growth

in the eighteenth century.1 In recent years considerable progress has been made in leveraging

new data and new perspectives to illuminate the long-run performance of the English economy,

although how to interpret these data remains in dispute (see, e.g., Clark 2013 and Broadberry et

al 2013).2 In contrast, relatively little attention has been given in recent years to refining our

understanding of the performance of the American economy prior to 1800, and there is

considerable variation (as we document below) in the prevailing views about this period. While

it is tempting to seek a single set of estimates for all of the territories that became the United

States after 1776, the varied nature of regional economies and the limited scope of economic

integration across regions suggest that it may be more useful to build such estimates region by

region.3




1
 As Leunig (2013, p. 1) writes: “Discovering what has happened to national income over the very long
run is an extremely important issue in economic history. It is the essential first step to understanding why
and how modern economic growth emerged
2
 Improving on estimates of pre-1820 economic growth is a central objective of the recently announced
Maddison Project (Bolt and van Zanden 2013).
3
 Lindert and Williamson (2011) take a regional approach in their recent work on the period 1774-1840.
A regional approach has the advantage that some relevant data are available only for one or a few regions.
                                                                                                        2


          In what follows we offer new estimates of the aggregate performance of the Middle

Atlantic region (modern-day New York, Pennsylvania, Delaware, and New Jersey) between

1720 and 1800.4 In contrast to the most widely accepted estimates, which suggest that the region

and all of what became the United States experienced sustained improvements in material living

standards over the course of the eighteenth century, we demonstrate that there was relatively

little long-run improvement prior to 1800, and that any such progress was dwarfed by shorter-run

instability in income. While this finding implies that the onset of modern economic growth in

this region of North America did not occur prior to 1800, it also emphasizes the comparatively

high standard of living that was enjoyed on average by its residents in the eighteenth century,

and the striking ability of the regional economy to sustain this standard of living while

undergoing very rapid extensive growth.5

          Considerable evidence supports the view that residents in all regions of eighteenth-

century British North America enjoyed a high standard of living, and this prosperity attracted

continuing streams of immigrants, encouraged a high birth rate, and fostered investment in slave

and indentured labor; all of which combined to generate one of the highest rates of growth of

population in the world at the time. Abundant land forestalled diminishing returns so that the

high rate of population growth was also transformed into a high rate of growth of gross domestic

product and its components, including exports. The levels of wealth achieved by some free

colonists were high and had increased over the colonial period. The average stature of those

born in the colonies, and thus able to benefit from the cornucopia of produce and the more


4
  We use the regional definition followed by most colonial historians and include Delaware because it
was part of New Jersey during the colonial period. The current Census definition would put it in the
South Atlantic region.
5
    Smith (1981) makes clear that not everyone enjoyed this relatively high standard of living.
                                                                                                                3


favorable environment than that in Europe, increased noticeably (Komlos, 2001; Steckel 2002,

Table 3). As John McCusker (2006, p. 630) put it in his survey of colonial statistics, “On the eve

of the American Revolution, real per capita gross domestic product in the Thirteen Continental

Colonies was: … higher than any other nation in the world at the time.”6

        In contrast to the consensus that exists about the standard of living in the colonies and

about aggregate growth, there is considerably less agreement about the rate of growth of living

standards and per capita GDP. Despite McCusker’s assertion “that its economy grew at the

fastest rate of all known contemporary economies,” scholars remain divided about the actual rate

of economic growth as illustrated in the range of estimated growth rates reported in Table 1.

Most of the estimates for the mainland Anglo-American colonies as a whole fall between 0.3

percent and 0.6 percent per year, but scholars have placed the rate of growth of real GDP per

capita anywhere between 0.05 to 1.0 percent per year. 7 The lower rate implies that however

successful the economy might appear to have been, it was a static prosperity. The higher rate

means that the colonial economy performed on average - over a very long period of time - better

than the U.S. economy performed in the first half of the nineteenth century, an age which

witnessed the industrialization of the northeast, the expansion of railroads and canals, and more



6
  He also alleged that it was “higher by far than it had been a century or a century and a half earlier,” the
result of his having assumed a “long-term rate of growth [that] exceeded, perhaps even doubled, the rate
of growth of Great Britain.”
7
   McCusker (2000, p. 156, Tables 1 and 2, and accompanying text) argued that the weight of opinion
would narrow this range to between 0.3 and 0.6 percent per year. For an earlier argument in favor of this
range, see also McCusker and Menard (1984, pp. 52-57) where they argued that the lower bound of
colonial growth was established by estimates (at the time) of the rate of growth in England, while the
higher rate reflected their view that because the colonies had started out far behind they likely grew faster
than the mother country. McCusker (2000, p. 5) reaffirmed the view that “the long term rate of growth
exceeded, perhaps even doubled, the rate of growth of Great Britain.”
                                                                                                         4


broadly the acceleration of economic growth to modern rates. It is also important to note, that

since the estimated level of GDP per capita in 1800 is widely accepted (see Table 2 below,

Lindert and Williamson, 2011, Table 6, and McCusker, 2000, Table 2), the more rapid the rate of

growth supposed to have prevailed in the preceding decades, the lower the standard of living

must have been at the beginning of the period.

        The range of rates is even more pronounced for individual colonies and regions reported

in the bottom half of Table 1, ranging from minus 0.8 percent per year for New England from

1700-09 to 1770-79 to 1.6 percent per year for Pennsylvania between 1730 and 1770. Lindert

and Williamson (2011, Table 6) report an equally broad range of growth rates across regions for

the period 1774 to 1800. A range of opinion on the speed of economic growth is to be expected

given the divergent nature of the economies of the various colonial regions and the relative

paucity of quantifiable data for the period, but some of the variation may reflect the methods of

estimation. In the absence of comprehensive statistics, past efforts to measure colonial

economic performance have relied on the behavior of what each individual researcher thought of

as either the key economic variable or what they were able to measure, thus ignoring some

possible countervailing influences.8

        Refining our understanding of the dynamics of economic growth in North America

before 1800 requires moving beyond estimates based on a single variable or the impressionistic

combination of several key indicators. A more systematic approach to integrating the available

data is needed, and the method of controlled conjectures provides exactly this. Exports, which

comprised roughly 6-8 percent of the economy, are only a part of the conjectural estimates rather

8
  Alice Hanson Jones (1980), for example, used changes in wealth and an assumption about the likely
ratio of wealth to income to estimate GDP. Marc Egnal (1998, Table 3.6, p. 43) explained that to arrive at
his estimates “initial approximations were derived from data on per capita imports.”
                                                                                                        5


than serving as a proxy for the entire economy’s performance. Likewise our approach takes into

account the influence of increased wealth, 60 percent of which in the Mid Atlantic was the value

of real estate. In other words, this method allows us to produce estimates of GDP per capita that

are consistent with all of the available evidence, while making explicit the assumptions we use in

assembling these different components. And, importantly, this method allows us to assess the

consistency of other estimates with the available evidence.

        The initial application of the conjectural method to the colonies as a whole by Mancall

and Weiss (1999) suggested that the rate of growth of per capita GDP was substantially slower

than had been commonly accepted. Such a result for all the colonies need not, however, reflect

the performance in any specific region, especially given the extraordinary divergence in the

economic systems of the mainland British colonies. Growth rates for New England, which had

no large-scale staple exports, might have differed dramatically from the rates in plantation

regions of the Chesapeake colonies or the Lower South, or even the grain-exporting sectors of

the middle colonies. Moreover the evidence available varies from region to region. Thus, more

precise estimates of growth rates during the colonial period need to come from analysis of

specific regions.

        Here we employ the conjectural approach to develop estimates of the growth of GDP per

capita for the colonies and states of the mid-Atlantic—modern-day New York, Pennsylvania,

Delaware, and New Jersey .9 Our earlier analysis of the economy of the Lower South (Mancall,

Rosenbloom and Weiss 2003) revealed that the region, despite its extensive rice and indigo

exports, had a poor record of intensive economic growth. Exports and output (i.e. real GDP)

9
  We use the regional definition followed by most colonial historians and include Delaware because it
was part of New Jersey during the colonial period. The current Census definition would put it in the
South Atlantic region.
                                                                                                           6


grew quite rapidly, but so too did population, with the result that output per person at the end of

the colonial period, as well as at the end of the century, was virtually the same as it had been in

1720 – around $59-60 (in 1840 prices). The region experienced some very modest growth

between 1740 and 1770, but that could not offset periodic declines in GDP per capita before

1740 and after 1770. 10

        Until now, there has been no similar analysis of the middle colonies, though a number of

previous histories have speculated about the region’s economic performance, arguing that it

experienced sustained growth with trade as the driving factor for regional economic fortunes.11

Summing up much of the scholarship about this region, McCusker and Menard (1984, p. 202)

concluded that “commencing in the 1720s, a long, powerful, sustained expansion characterized

the remainder of the colonial period, with perhaps some (but not much) tailing off after 1760.”12

Marc Egnal (1998, p. 46), though differing in some details, also offered a sanguine assessment of

the region’s growth, noting that while the pace of development was uneven, “[s]olid long-term

growth marked the northern colonies in the eighteenth century.”

        Presumably, results for this region would differ from the Lower South, at least in part

because the Middle Atlantic’s exports of grains figured less prominently in the regional economy



10
   The absence of growth in per capita output in the Lower South reflects to a large extent the changes in
the composition of the population, namely a rise in the share of the female and child shares of the
population, and after 1770 a decline in the slave share of the population, all of which served to reduce the
labor force participation rate.
11
  In some sense, the field has not evolved substantially—at least not in terms of precise quantifiable
estimates, for the past thirty years—since the time when Greenberg (1979, pp. 410-11), suggested that
“economic growth and the social change and dislocation that often accompanied it occurred, in the main,
more rapidly in New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania than elsewhere in North America during the
colonial period.”
12
  McCusker (1972, p. 155, fn 17) argued that economic growth in Pennsylvania proceeded at the
astonishing rate of 1.6 percent per year between 1730 and 1770.
                                                                                                     7


than did the Lower South’s staple exports of rice and indigo. Further, though there were slaves

in the middle colonies, they constituted a far smaller and declining share of the overall

population, most likely because farmers involved in cereal cultivation did not have year-round

demand for labor (Berlin, 1980). Instead, the family or tenant farm dominated the regional

production of wheat and corn. While the majority of these agricultural products were consumed

locally, nonetheless the region exported a considerable quantity of these grains, primarily to the

West Indies and Southern Europe. Yet, to determine what actually happened, we must look at

the available evidence.

       Our estimates reveal a modest upward trend in regional per capita income between 1720

and 1800 along with substantial short-run fluctuations. In the half-century preceding American

independence, per capita income increased at an average annual rate of about 0.13 percent per

year. But that long-run average increase was dwarfed by short-run swings in income. During

the 1750s, for example, the stimulus provided by the French and Indian War contributed to a

nearly 8 percent increase in per capita income, but the dislocations that followed when it ended

wiped out almost all of those gains. And incomes fell sharply in the wake of the American

Revolution, before staging a substantial comeback in the 1790s which reflected the boom in the

export and re-export trade. These figures suggest that to contemporaries the dominant fact of the

aggregate economy must have been its short-run volatility rather than any trend toward sustained

improvement in living standards. They also suggest, consistent with new work by Lindert and

Williamson (2011), that the Revolution produced a substantial drop in American incomes that

persisted until the early 1790s.
                                                                                                         8


Using Controlled Conjectures

        Our estimates of per capita GDP growth for the states and colonies of the middle Atlantic

region are derived using the conjectural estimating equation pioneered by Kuznets (1952),

popularized by David (1967), and modified by Weiss (1994). Output per person (GDP/P) in any

year equals the product of the labor force participation rate (LF/P) and average (non-shelter)

output per worker (GDP/LF), plus an estimate of the rental value of dwellings.13 Output per

worker can, in turn, be written as a weighted average of output per worker in agriculture (a) and

nonagriculture (n), where the weights are each sector's share of the labor force. Thus the basic

estimating equation can be written as:.

        GDP/P = (LF/P) [Sa (O/LF)a + S n (O/LF)n] + (Os/ P)                  (1)

Because Sn = (1 - Sa), the equation can be further simplified to:

        GDP/P = (LF/P) [Sa (O/LF)a + (1 - Sa ) (O/LF)n] + (Os/ P) .                     (2)

As equation (2) makes clear the value of per capita GDP in any year can be computed with data

for just five economic variables: the labor force participation rate, average labor productivity in

agriculture, average labor productivity in nonagriculture, the agricultural share of the labor force,

and the rental value of dwellings. Of course, we do not have data for all five of these variables,

so we must estimate some of them, as we detail below.

        Our estimation procedure proceeds backward in time: the benchmark estimate of the level

of each series in 1800 is projected backwards on the basis of the available evidence and plausible




13
   While the stock of dwellings would have been produced by labor, the annual flow of shelter services
was produced by the housing stock. Thus we treat this service flow independently from the bulk of
output produced by labor so that it does not bias changes in the output per worker values in either
agriculture or nonagriculture. See Weiss (1994, Table 5) for evidence on the bias that was involved in
the period from 1840-60.
                                                                                                          9


conjectures.14 We proceed as if the benchmark figures are known values, even though they are

not known with the precision or completeness of official statistics. Rather, they are estimates

taken from the work of others and were not generated by our conjectures.15 In any case, these

are the benchmark values that we extrapolate backward on the basis of the change in the

conjectural index. These base-year values of output per capita and its components for the region

are summarized in Table 2 and compared to values for the nation as a whole.

        To obtain estimates of per capita GDP for years before 1800 we constructed a time series

for each of the variables that make up the conjectural estimating equation. Three of the series

could be constructed in a fairly straightforward manner because there exists time series evidence

for key items that underlay that series (e.g. population and its composition, which form the basis

of the labor force estimates) or that could serve as a proxy for the desired series (e.g. change in

the value of structures to represent change in the value of dwellings that yielded the annual flow

of shelter services). Discussion of those series is confined to the table notes and the appendix to

this paper. Here we discuss the two series, output per worker in agriculture and in

nonagriculture, that required more effort to construct and are the most important influences on

the economy’s rate of growth. Three pieces of information or assumptions lie behind these

important series: the rate of change in the value of the diet (which is the dominant factor in

determining the rate of growth of agricultural output and thus agricultural output per worker); the



14
  We use the 1800 figures as our benchmark because there is as yet no reliable estimates of the level of
economic performance in the colonial period. Lindert and Williamson’s (2011) work in progress, should
eventually rectify this situation. Their preliminary estimate of per capita income for the Mid Atlantic in
1774 of $76 (in 1840 prices) is very close to the value ($78) we estimate for 1770.
15
   The GDP per capita figures in 1800 for the region were based on the national estimates by Weiss,
(1992, Table 1.4). David’s, (1967) estimates for 1800 are lower than Weiss's and thus dictate less
potential for growth in the preceding century. In both cases, the figures were conjectured in ways that
leave the 1800 figures unbiased by business-cycle influences.
                                                                                                        10


assumption that changes in real wages of urban workers can approximate changes in

nonagricultural output per worker; and the rate of change of participation in the rural agricultural

labor force.



Estimation of Agricultural Output

        Measuring agricultural output is essential to constructing plausible estimates of the rate of

growth of per capita GDP before 1800 because agriculture was the dominant component of the

economy. At the end of the century, agricultural output comprised 41 percent of the region’s

GDP and 45 percent of non-shelter output (Table 2). No time series of the region’s agricultural

output is available for the eighteenth century, but we were able to construct one in fairly direct

fashion. The output of the agricultural sector is comprised of food that was produced and

consumed within the region (f) and those agricultural products that were exported either abroad

(xa) or to other colonies (xo).16



        OA = f + xa + xo



        Food produced for domestic consumption within the region (f) was the largest component

of agricultural output in the colonies. Because of its importance we describe the estimation here


16
    We treat all this agricultural output as though it were marketed in order to place a value on it and to
make our estimates comparable in scope to those for the early part of the nineteenth century. We have not
made estimates of the value of home manufacturing and farm improvements in each year, but the value of
some of that production is implicitly included in our estimates to the extent that such production had
become part of the marketed output in the benchmark year of 1800. In other words, the level of our GDP
series includes some of this output, but changes in these items over time do not have an impact on the rate
of growth. Because these items were likely more important in 1720 than in 1770 or 1800, the inclusion of
a time series of such output would raise the level of GDP in all years, but more so in 1720, and would
thus bias downward the estimated rate of economic growth.
                                                                                                        11


in some detail, and in greater detail in the appendix to this paper. We have compiled a new and

more complete time series on agricultural exports from the region, both to foreign markets (xa) as

well as to other North American colonies (xc), both of which are described in a separate

publication and the appendix to this paper.17

         We estimated food produced for domestic consumption within the region (f) as the

difference between the value of food consumed (c) and the value of food imported into the

region from abroad (fm) as well as from other North American colonies (fo). In other words,

         f = f c - fm - fo

There is no time-series evidence on consumption, but by using the available information about

the diets of colonists and slaves we estimated the trend in the value of food consumed with

which we derived values at benchmark dates from 1720 to 1800.

         The lower bound for the trend would seem to be no growth in the value of the diet. There

is no credible evidence that the value of the diet declined over time, while there is evidence that

military rations, the value of provisions provided to troops in New York and Pennsylvania,

stayed roughly constant. 18 And, data on the wages of working class laborers in Philadelphia

indicate that while there were short-run fluctuations in earnings there was likely no long-term

change in the standard of living for those workers. Real wages may have fallen at times during

the colonial period, but were roughly equal in the late 1720s and 1800.19



17
     See Mancall, Rosenbloom and Weiss (forthcoming)
18
  Gallman, (1971, pp. 71-78), argued that the militia were ordinary members of society serving in the
military for a temporary period of time, so military rations seem like a reasonable proxy for food
consumption by the colonists.
19
   Nash (1979, pp. 392-94). We extended Billy G. Smith’s cost of living index back to 1727 in order to
deflate the nominal wages reported by Nash. Smith (1981, pp. 164-202). The 1800 figure was lower than
that of 1727-28, but the average for 1798-1800 was about the same as that for 1727-28
                                                                                                        12


        The upper bound on the growth of the diet was determined by comparing our benchmark

estimates for 1800 (see Table 2) and evidence on the composition of the diet found in the Rules

for Georgia, which specified, in some detail, the provisions to be provided to persons on charity

who were transported to that colony in the 1730s (Candler, 1904-16, vol. 3, pp. 408-9). Although

this information on the diet pertains explicitly to colonists in Georgia, it nevertheless provides a

point of reference for free colonists elsewhere.20 The specified diet included beef or pork, rice,

peas, flour, beer, molasses, cheese, butter, spice, sugar, vinegar, and salt. Moreover, quantities

of each category of provisions were specified for adult males, adult females, children, and

servants. We have calculated that the weighted average value of these provisions for free

colonists in prices of 1840 amounted to $24.21 Because this figure is approximately the same as

the value other scholars have imputed to food consumed by slaves in 1800, and because it

reflects an estimate of the food consumed by those on charity in a newly formed colony that was

much less advanced economically than New York or Pennsylvania we have taken it as a lower

bound on the value of per capita food consumption for the average free colonist in the more

developed Mid-Atlantic region in the 1730s.

        Taken in conjunction with the given value of the diet in 1800 (see Table 2), this lower

bound value for 1730 yields a very high upper bound on the rate of growth of the diet of 0.37

percent per year over the period, and one that we believe to be implausibly high because it is



20
   The little data available on the value of the diet for charity cases in the Middle Colonies do not yield
enough useful information about the trend in consumption. See, Philadelphia (1802) and Parker (1975, p.
5)
21
   The diet for women and children aged 12 and over was 83 percent that of a male; that for children aged
seven to twelve was half that for those aged 12 and over; and that for those aged two to seven was one-
third. No provisions were provided for those under two years of age (Candler, 1904-16, vol. 3, pp. 408-
09).
                                                                                                        13


unlikely that European colonists in the Mid Atlantic enjoyed a diet in 1720 equivalent to that of

slaves in 1800.. It is difficult to reconcile such a low value of the diet in 1720 with the Mid-

Atlantic region’s strong attraction for settlers. Thus the value of the initial year’s diet had to

have been higher and the rate of growth thereafter must have been slower. Beginning with the

known value of the diet in 1800, if the trend rate of growth in the diet had been only 0.2 percent

per year, the implied value of food consumption per capita in 1720 would have been a more

plausible value of $27, about 15 percent above the value of the slave diet. Even so, this figure

still seems too low to have induced as much immigration and natural population growth as

occurred in the eighteenth century. The implied trend in the growth of the value of the diet of

0.2 percent per year is likely still biased upward, but nevertheless can serve as an upper bound. 22

        We are confident therefore that the long term average growth rate of the value of the diet

between 1720 and 1800 lies somewhere between 0 and 0.2 percent per year, and our baseline

estimate is simply the midpoint of this range—0.1 per cent per year. 23 This trend in the growth

of the diet was used to extrapolate the 1800 benchmark value of food consumed back to 1720.24




22
   In the appendix, we show that the rates of growth in agricultural output per worker implied by different
rates of growth in the diet suggest that 0.2 is a more realistic upper bound.
23
   We also assumed that the slave diet changed at the same rate as that for the average colonist. Because
slaves were relatively unimportant in the region, averaging less than 7 percent of the population for the
entire period and dwindling in importance over time, this has little bearing on the growth of GDP per
capita for the entire population. Had we assumed the slave diet had remained unchanged, GDP per capita
would have risen slower by 0.005 percent per year. If we assumed the slave diet had risen twice as fast,
GDP per capita would have increased faster by only 0.006 percent per year.
24
  As we show below the plausibility of our assumption about the rate of growth in the value of the diet is
reinforced by the implied rate of growth of agricultural labor productivity that it generates.
                                                                                                            14


We then deducted estimates of the import of food from both foreign nations and other North

American colonies from the benchmark estimates of food consumed to obtain the estimate of

food produced within the region for consumption within the region.25

        The components of agricultural output are summarized in Table 3. Regional

consumption of agricultural products and the related regional production comprised the bulk of

agricultural output. The production of food supplied over 90 percent of food consumed within

the region during the colonial period, and amounted to 85 percent of total agricultural output.26

The remainder of the consumption was supplied by imports from abroad and from other North

American colonies. The former supplied about 5 percent of consumption, while imports from

other colonies accounted for 3 to 4 percent. The share of consumption supplied by imports from

abroad was higher after 1790 than it had been during the colonial period, and that supplied by

other states was noticeably higher in 1800, but still food imports in total amounted to only 10

percent of food consumption in the region. In other words, the region supplied the bulk of its

food consumption.

        Agricultural exports abroad and to other colonies appear to have been a positive force for

growth over both long-term periods, with the per capita values having risen at 0.49 percent per

year from 1720 to 1770 and 0.54 from 1720 to 1800. It is striking, however, that it was the

export of agricultural products to other North American colonies that was the more positive



25
   The construction of the time series on food imported from abroad and from other North American
colonies is described in the appendix to this paper.
26
    The rate of growth of food consumed per capita differs from the 0.1 percent growth rate we have
assumed for the diet of free colonists because of shifts in the composition of the population. The relative
level of consumption of free adults is higher than that of children, and that of free colonists is higher than
that of slaves. Declines in the slave share of the population raise the weighted average and its rate of
growth, while increases in the child share of the population lower the weighted average and rate of
growth.
                                                                                                           15


influence at times. Exports abroad on a per capita basis rose at 0.36 percent per year from 1720

to 1770, but declined at 0.07 percent per year from 1770 to 1800, while exports per capita to

other colonies rose at 0.8 percent per year during the colonial period and 1.1 percent per year

after 1770. The latter were a smaller share of exports for most of the period, but by 1800 exports

to other states were about equal to shipments to foreign destinations. Although exports, both

abroad and to other colonies and states, grew substantially, they comprised a much smaller share

of the agricultural sector than did food produced for domestic consumption, amounting to around

11-13 percent, except in 1800 when they comprised about 17 percent. Nevertheless, in most

decades there growth was strong enough to propel the sector’s output at a faster rate than that

exhibited by the sluggish growth of locally consumed food production.

        Combining the various elements of agricultural production we find that agricultural

output per capita rose during the colonial period at 0.18 percent per year, declined noticeably

between 1770 and 1790, and recovered most, but not all, of those losses in the 1790s. Over the

entire period 1720 to 1800, growth in the per capita value averaged 0.07 percent per year.

Output per worker fared slightly better because the agricultural labor force grew more slowly

than population after 1790.27 Over the colonial period, output per worker in agriculture rose at

0.19 percent per year, then accelerated slightly after 1770, and advanced for the entire period

1720 to 1800 at 0.25 percent per year.




27
   The small decline in the agricultural share of the labor force reflects a very gradual decline in the rural
agricultural participation rate of 0.07 percent per year, described further below.
                                                                                                        16


        These growth rates of agricultural output per worker are consistent with several pieces of

evidence regarding the performance of the agricultural sector.28 One is the growth of output per

worker in the early nineteenth century, which defines a likely upper bound on the growth of

output per worker over long periods in the eighteenth century.29 A second is the productivity

growth implied by changes in the length of indentured servant contracts, the modal value of

which suggests little if any gain before 1760 and some increase in servant value after 1770. 30

And finally, our estimated rates of growth of output per worker are very similar to those

estimated by Ball and Walton for Chester county, Pennsylvania, the only other estimate of output

per worker we have been able to find that pertains to the eighteenth-century Middle Atlantic

region. Our estimated rates of change in output per worker – 0.19 percent per year from 1720 to

1770 and 0.25 per year from 1720 to 1800 - are very close to the 0.19 percent per year rate Ball

and Walton found for the period running from 1714-31 to 1775-90. 31 Overall, we think these

comparisons indicate that our implied rates of growth of output per worker are very reasonable

and lend credence to our assumption that the value of the diet rose at 0.1 percent per year and to

our estimates of agricultural output.


28
   The appendix to this paper contains more detailed comparisons of our rates of growth of agricultural
output per worker with these other bodies of evidence.
29
   This point was made by Ball and Walton (1976, p. 103). There could be a decade now and then in
which there was an upsurge in output per worker, but over an extended period of time the growth in
output per worker in the eighteenth century could not have exceeded the average increase over long
periods in the nineteenth century.
30
   Grubb (1992, pp. 181-82 and 202-25) argues that the mode is the superior measure of changes in the
contract length and the value of adult servants because the mean values were influenced by yearly
fluctuations in the age structure of emigrant servants.
31
  Ball and Walton, (1976,pp. 109-113, Table 3). In the appendix we show that even over shorter time
periods our rates of growth are very similar to those they found. The growth of agricultural output per
worker in the region over this long term also compares favorably with our estimate for the Lower South.
For that region we estimated that output per worker rose at 0.22 percent per year from 1720 to 1800.
Mancall, Rosenbloom and Weiss (2003, p. 403).
                                                                                                          17




Estimation of Sectoral Shifts and non-Agricultural Labor Productivity

        In addition to our conjecture about the rate of growth of the value of the diet, which is

embedded in the resulting estimates of output per worker in agriculture, our estimates of GDP

per capita depend on two other time series; the agricultural share of the labor force and non-

agricultural output per worker. Changes in the latter influence directly overall output per worker,

and, since the level of nonagricultural output per worker is greater than that in agriculture,

redistribution of labor between sectors indirectly affects overall output per worker.

        Estimates of the agricultural share of the labor force are based on two factors; changes in

the urban-rural composition of the population and the rate at which the agricultural share of the

rural population changed over time. Due to the growing importance of New York and

Philadelphia to both trans-Atlantic and regional trade, the urban population of the Mid Atlantic

region increased more than eight-fold between 1720 and 1800. However, reflecting the region’s

bountiful agricultural opportunities, total regional population grew even more quickly: rising by

a factor of nearly 14. As a result, the urban share of population fell from 16.5 percent in 1720 to

9.8 percent in 1800.32 Because the agricultural share of the urban labor force was so much

smaller than that of the rural areas, this shift worked to increase the agricultural share of the

region’s labor force.33




32
  In addition to the positive attractions of agriculture, Lindert and Williamson (2011, p. 26) attribute the
decline of urban population in the last quarter of the century to the negative effects of the Revolution and
independence on urban occupations.
33
   If the urban share of the population had remained constant at 16.5 percent from 1720 onward, the
agricultural share of the region’s labor force would have been lower by 2 to 5 percentage points.
                                                                                                    18


       Offsetting the relative decline in the population of the largest cities was the growth of

non-agricultural employment in rural areas and small towns. Based on data from Ball and

Walton (1976) for Chester County, PA we have estimated a decline in the rural agricultural

participation rate of 0.07 percent per year, which reduced the agricultural share of the rural labor

force from 0.85 in 1720 to 0.77 in 1800. Taken together, the decline in the urban population and

the movement of rural labor out of agriculture resulted in the long-run in a nearly stable sectoral

distribution of the labor force. Between 1720 and 1740 the agricultural share of the labor force

increased from 0.71 to 0.74, and then, as urban growth accelerated the share fell through the end

of the century, reaching 0.70 by 1800.

       The impact of these sectoral shifts depends on the difference between agricultural and

non-agricultural output per worker. Although nonagricultural output per worker was nearly 3

times that in agriculture, the shift into the more productive nonagricultural sector was so small

that it had very little impact on output per worker and output per capita.

       Given the smaller share of the non-agricultural labor force in the economy, it would be

difficult for any growth in labor productivity in this sector to have exerted much influence on the

growth rate of the overall economy. In any event, there appears to have been very little increase

in non-agricultural labor productivity prior to 1800. As we noted earlier a series of real wages

for the urban unskilled in Philadelphia experienced significant short-run fluctuations but showed

little long-run trend. Evidence on the wages of urban professionals and skilled craft workers is

more limited, but Peter Lindert and Jeffrey Williamson (2011, p. 26) find that both the share of

these more skilled workers and their relative pay declined in the years between the American

Revolution and 1800. Similarly, Billy Smith’s (1981, pp. 195, 199) estimates of the real wages of

Philadelphia tailors and cordwainers—two of the most numerous groups of urban craft
                                                                                                        19


workers—from 1762 through 1800, reveal that their earnings declined relative to the urban

unskilled.

        Our index of nonagricultural output per worker is based on data for urban unskilled

workers. We combined the evidence on wages for Philadelphia laborers from Nash (1979) for

1727 to 1775 with that from Smith (1981) for 1751 to 1800, and then deflated these by an

estimate of the cost of living to arrive at an estimate of real wages. We used five-year averages

to construct our index of real urban wages.34 Comparison with our estimates of agricultural labor

productivity show that non-agricultural labor output per worker grew more slowly between 1720

and 1770 and 1720 to 1800. After 1770, however, nonagricultural output per worker fared

better, having increased at nearly the same rate as agricultural labor productivity from 1770 to

1800, and growing much faster from 1791 to 1800.35



Economic Growth in the Mid Atlantic Region: The Baseline Conjectures

        We can now turn to the result of interest, the growth of real GDP per capita. Our baseline

estimates of real GDP per capita at benchmark years from 1720 to 1800 are shown in Table 4.

GDP per capita advanced at an average of 0.13 percent per year over the colonial period and 0.07

percent over the period 1720 to 1800. Incomes rose rapidly in the 1750s (0.7 percent per year)

and fell nearly as quickly in the 1760s. While we are not able to construct estimates for 1780,

the figure for 1790 indicates there was a pronounced decline in GDP per capita between 1770




34
  We estimated the index for 1720 by assuming it had changed at the same rate from 1720 to 1725 as it
had from 1725 to 1730.
35
  The absence of progress in non-agricultural labor productivity appears to be consistent with most of the
recent research on British wages during the early stages of the Industrial Revolution, which find that real
wages did not begin to increase until after 1800. See especially, Clark (2005) and Allen (2007).
                                                                                                   20


and 1790, which Lindert and Williamson label the Great Reversal, and which presumably

reflected the effects of the Revolution and the disruption to trading patterns caused by American

independence. The 1790s, however, witnessed a strong recovery: GDP per capita rose at 1.98

percent per year and made up almost all the gains that had been lost in the 20 years preceding

1790.

        A major contributor to the fluctuations in per capita income was the volatility of labor

productivity in the non-agricultural sector. As Table 4 reveals, our index of non-agricultural

labor productivity (derived from the urban real wage series) rose considerably in the 1750s

contributing to the rise in per capita income in that decade. Similarly the drop in urban earnings

between 1770 and 1790 was a major contributor to the drop in income after the Revolution. In

contrast, although agricultural exports were also quite volatile, total output per worker in the

agricultural sector was relatively stable because exports made up such a small part of total

output. In the 1790s the decline in the labor force participation rate pulled down real GDP per

capita by a small amount, but this was offset by the positive effect emanating from a small shift

in the sectoral distribution of the labor force into the more productive nonagricultural industries.

In terms of our estimating series the post-1790 upsurge in GDP per capita is attributable

primarily to increased output per worker: output per worker in agriculture rose at 1.4 percent per

year between 1791 and 1800 (due primarily to increased exports), while non-agricultural output

per worker increased by 3.4 percent per year. To some extent these increases represent recovery

from the distressed conditions that had prevailed during the Revolution and the period of

Confederation. For nonagriculture, the increased output per worker reflects as well the upsurge

in the export trade and, perhaps especially, the re-export trade that the U.S. handled as a neutral

country during war in Europe (See North 1961, chap V).
                                                                                                    21


       We have also constructed a terms of trade index for the region, and used it to estimate

adjusted values of GDP per capita. The terms of trade improved considerably for the region over

the course of the eighteenth century, having risen on average at an annual rate of 1.1 percent per

year from 1720 to 1770 and at 0.96 percent from 1720 to 1800. As a consequence, the

purchasing power of the real exports per capita rose at 1.49 percent per year in the period 1720-

70 and 1.15 percent in the longer period 1720-1800, much faster in both instances than the

growth of real exports per capita. Despite the improvement in the relative price of regional

exports, this adjustment had little impact on the growth of GDP per capita because exports were

such a relatively small portion of the economy. GDP per capita adjusted for changes in the terms

of trade rose at 0.16 percent per year instead of 0.13 percent between 1720 and 1770, and at 0.1

percent instead of 0.07 percent between 1720 and 1800. Because this adjustment has little

impact on economic growth, the discussion below is based on the unadjusted series.



Sensitivity Analysis

       The baseline figures reported in Table 4 rest on several assumptions that reflect our

judgment as to the most likely trends in three variables underlying the calculation of real GDP

per capita: the rate of growth of the value of the diet, the rate at which the rural agricultural

participation rate declined, and the trend in nonagricultural output per worker, which we have

assumed equaled that for real wages of nonagricultural workers in Philadelphia. Here we discuss

altering each of these assumption and show the impact of such changes in Table 5.

       As discussed above, the trend in the value of the diet was taken as the midpoint of what

we argued were plausible lower and upper bounds on the growth in the diet, specifically 0.0 and

0.2 percent per year. Accordingly, we have calculated the growth of GDP per capita using those
                                                                                                             22


lower and upper bound growth rates. If these were the only changes in our calculation, the

consequences are that the rate of growth of real GDP per capita would have been approximately

0.04 percentage points slower or faster over each time period.36

          Our baseline estimates also rested on the assumption that the rural agricultural

participation rate declined at the rate of 0.07 percent per year.37 It is possible that the rate did

not decline at all. Our reading of the literature on the extent to which colonial farmers engaged

in production for the market offers no suggestions that farm households were withdrawing their

labor from agricultural activities.38 On the other hand, it is possible the decline was faster than

0.07 percent per year. In the nineteenth century, the rural agricultural participation rate declined

more rapidly, as one would expect given the higher levels of income and faster rates of increase

in income. In the Mid Atlantic region, the rate for those aged ten and over declined at 0.13

percent per year between 1800 and 1840, nearly twice the rate we have calculated for Chester

county.

          If the rate of decline in the rural agricultural participation rate were slower than our

baseline assumption there would have been less of a shift in the industrial composition of the

labor force towards the more productive nonagricultural sector which would reduce the growth




36
   If we allowed the diet to rise at 0.37 percent per year, the rate implied by assuming that the colonist’s
diet in 1730 equaled that prescribed by the Rules for Georgia, GDP per capita would have risen at 0.22
percent per year over the period 1720 to 1770. But this rate of growth implies that the diet in 1720 would
have been equal to the 1800 value of a slave’s diet ($23.50).
37
    Ball and Walton (1976, p. 109-113, Table 3) appear to have assumed there was no decline in the rural
agricultural participation rates, except for children, in their index of labor inputs per farm for Chester
county from 1714-31 to 1775-90. The rate of 0.07 percent that we use is a weighted average of the decline
in the child participation rate and constancy in the rate for adults implicit in their estimates.
38
   See Rothenberg (1992); Henretta (1978); and Kulikoff (1979). Some household members may have
left agriculture to seek work in nearby cities, but that effect is captured in our conjectures because the
agricultural share of the labor force changes with urbanization.
                                                                                                   23


of output per worker for the entire labor force, and the agricultural labor force would have

increased faster which would reduce the rate of growth of output per worker in agriculture. If,

on the other hand, the rate of decline were faster, the rates of growth of output per worker in

agriculture and in total for the region would have risen faster than in the baseline case. As can be

seen in Table 5 the differences are of the same order of magnitude as those found when we

altered the rate of growth of the diet. If we assumed there was no decline in the rural agricultural

participation rate, GDP per capita would have grown more slowly by 0.08 percent per year; if we

doubled the rate of decline, then GDP per capita would have increased faster by 0.08 percent per

year.

        If we alter the assumption about changes in both of these variables simultaneously, the

changes in real GDP per capita are altered that much more. When both variables are allowed to

change more slowly, real GDP per capita would have grown at 0.12 percent less per year; if both

variables had increased faster, then real GDP per capita would have increased faster by another

0.12 percent per year. In the latter case, economic growth during the colonial period would have

been about 0.26 percent per year, and somewhat slower (0.19 percent per year) over the longer

1720 to 1800 period. The plausibility of these rates of growth, however, is questionable for two

reasons. First this result implies that the value of the colonist’s diet in 1720 was equal that

consumed by a slave in 1800. It seems dubious that migration into the region would have been

as fast as it was if the biggest component of the average standard of living was not much better

than that of a slave. Second, the results imply that agricultural output per worker increased on

average over a period of 80 years at a rate in excess of that found for the first half of the
                                                                                                       24


nineteenth century (0.25 percent per year).39 It seems very unlikely that small-scale farmers in

the 18th century could have made as much or more progress than their nineteenth-century

counterparts at a time when there were fewer technical advances, and little means--such as farm

periodicals that arose in the 19th century--of diffusing knowledge about such advances

throughout the region.

        The third assumption of note, that the rate of change in non-agricultural output per

worker could be approximated by changes in real wages of workers in Philadelphia, resulted in

very little increase in nonagricultural output per worker over the colonial period. Output per

worker in nonagriculture rose quite rapidly from 1720 to 1740, then declined sharply in the

1740s, rose again in the following decade and then fell once more in the 1760s. Overall there

was virtually no change (0.02 percent per year) over the colonial period. Nonagricultural output

per worker fell between 1770 and 1790, but then rose sharply during the 1790s with the result

that the 1800 value was about 10 percent above that in 1720. Over the whole period 1720 to

1800 nonagricultural output per worker rose at 0.12 percent per year, half the rate of growth we

estimated for agriculture. As a result, the relative productivity of non-agricultural to agricultural

labor declined slightly at 0.17 percent per year from 1720-70 and 0.13 from 1720 to 1800, or put

another way the ratio of nonagricultural output per worker to that for agricultural (k) fell from

3.1 in 1720 to 2.8 in 1770 and 1800. If instead of relying on the direct evidence about real wages

we made an alternative assumption that the value of k had remained constant, as had been

assumed by David and Weiss in their conjectures for portions of the early nineteenth century, the




39
  The rate of growth was 0.25 percent per year from 1800 to 1850, slightly faster for the period 1800 to
1840 (0.34 percent per year). Weiss (1994, Table 1.4) and underlying worksheets.
                                                                                                   25


rate of growth of GDP per capita would have been faster by 0.08 percent per year from 1720-70

and 0.06 from 1720 to 1800.

       In summary, reasonable changes in the three key underlying series would change the

growth of GDP per capita by fairly small amounts. However, in none of the alternatives we have

considered did the annual rate of growth rise to 0.3 percent per year. Nevertheless, the Mid

Atlantic region experienced positive long-term growth. In our best estimate the colonial

economy advanced on a per capita basis at 0.13 percent per year, with some sharper advances

having occurred in the 1740s and 1750s. The economy took a big hit during the Revolution and

the Period of Confederation, but recovered smartly after 1791. Nevertheless, the turmoil of the

1770-90 period brought down the average rate of growth for the period 1720 to 1800 to only 0.07

percent per year.

       Our series shows a smoother time path than likely occurred because we are unable to

measure most of the short-run fluctuations in agricultural production and shelter services.

Lacking direct evidence we were obliged to assume that changes in several of the largest

components of GDP were based on linear trends in underlying components. Food production,

for example, was based on the assumption that the value of the diet, and thus food consumption,

increased at a constant rate over time. Only for agricultural exports could we measure year-to-

year fluctuations. And, the value of shelter services was based on a constant rate of the annual

flow of rental services being produced by the stock of dwellings. Because of these sorts of

assumptions, there is certainly less variation in our GDP per capita series than actually took

place. In our series, deviations of GDP per capita from the long-term trend originated for the

most part from fluctuations in the value of exports, and changing urban labor market conditions.

Although the export series reveals substantial fluctuations from year to year, we do not think
                                                                                                         26


those variations capture accurately or completely the variation in GDP or GDP per capita. 40

Even though our series is undoubtedly too stable, it still suggests that short-run fluctuations in

economic activity were relatively pronounced for the region the economy of the Mid Atlantic

region.



Interpretation

          What do our estimates of economic growth for the Mid-Atlantic have to say about the

region’s economic performance? First, these estimates allow us to put this region’s performance

in perspective. The region turned in a better performance than was found for the colonies and

states of the Lower South, the only other region for which we have made comparable estimates.41

For the Lower South, we estimated that real GDP per capita declined slightly – by 0.03 percent

per year from 1720 to 1770 and 0.02 percent per year from 1720 to 1800.42 There is little doubt

that the Middle Colonies experienced noticeably faster economic growth than the Lower South.




     40
      Some fluctuation in exports, agricultural output, and thus the economy as a whole, reflected
variations in rainfall. The Palmer Drought Severity Index, which provides annual measures of the
fluctuation in net moisture available to plants and trees, suggests the region experienced considerable
climatic variation and likely suffered through a number of poor crop years as well as an equal number of
bountiful years. Changes in moisture may also have influenced the trend in output, although the effect
would appear to have been small. See the appendix to this paper for more detailed discussion.
41
    Per capita GDP increased in the Mid Atlantic at roughly the same rates as Mancall and Weiss found for
all the colonies together (1999).
42
   Mancall, Rosenbloom, and Weiss (2003). The poor performance of the Lower South reflects in part
the decline in exports per capita, which fell at 0.04 percent per year from 1720 to 1770 and 0.6 percent
from 1720 to 1800. Another important source of the decline in GDP per capita was the changing
composition of the region’s population, namely a continual increase in the share of the population under
the age of 10 and an increase in the free share of the population. These shifts kept the labor force
participation rate from rising for most of the period and eventually pushing it down, especially after 1770.
If nothing else had changed, this phenomenon alone would have reduced GDP per capita by 0.04 percent
per year between 1720 and 1770 and by 0.27 percent per year between 1720 and 1800.
                                                                                                       27


        Second, our estimates imply that the prevailing wisdom about the rate of growth in North

America before 1800 needs to be reconsidered. Our baseline estimates are well below the

estimates of the region’s growth suggested by Egnal (1998) and McCusker (2006).43 Although

the upper bound of our estimates is only slightly below the lower rate of growth of 0.3 percent

per year that McCusker assumed for the colonies as a whole, it is well below the higher rate of

0.6 percent per year. Moreover, in view of what the conjectural estimating equation implies

about the sources of growth it is unlikely that the Mid Atlantic region could have achieved a

growth rate in the range advocated by McCusker for the colonies without an even more rapid,

and more implausible, growth in agricultural labor productivity than we have assumed.44 In

combination with our earlier estimates for the Lower South, the estimates reported here suggest

that the plausible range of rates of growth for the colonies as a whole needs to be revised

downward.45

        Third, the relative performance of the colonies in the Mid Atlantic regions and the Lower

South also brings into question the importance of exports as an engine of growth in colonial

America. In neither region did exports comprise a substantial portion of the economy, falling



43
  The rate of growth we estimate for the Middle colonies from 1720 to 1770 is well below the rate of 0.6
percent that Egnal estimated for the Northern colonies for the period 1713-75. It is possible that these
two disparate rates are consistent with each other, but given the 0.13 rate of growth we estimate for the
Middle colonies it would require that New England’s rate of growth be quite high – roughly 1.0 percent
per year - in order to bring up the Northern region’s weighted average to 0.6 percent. More notably, our
estimated rate of growth is very far below the 1.6 percent figure that McCusker estimated for
Pennsylvania for the period 1720 to 1774. This would seem to indicate that the behavior of exports to
England, which is the evidence on which he based his estimate, is not a good measure of economic
growth more generally
44
  More rapid growth in agricultural labor productivity would imply growth rates greater than recorded in
the early nineteenth century, and would also mean that food consumption at the beginning of the period
was lower than seems plausible.
45
  Given the population shares in the subregions, New England and the Chesapeake would had to have
grown between 0.8 and 1.0 per cent per year.
                                                                                                       28


well short of the 25 to 30 percent share that McCusker (1999) thought it accounted for. In the

Middle Colonies exports made up roughly 7 percent of GDP, and the per capita value grew

around 0.36 per year during the colonial period, somewhat faster than GDP per capita.46 In the

Lower South, exports figured more prominently, but still did not exceed 14 percent of GDP in

most years, and declined on a per capita basis at 0.04 percent per year, about the same rate as the

decline in GDP per capita (Mancall, Rosenbloom and Weiss 2003).

        Elsewhere we have shown in detail that the ups and downs of the economy of the Lower

South were not correlated with the fluctuations in exports, and the same pattern appears in the

Middle Colonies. That is, the decadal changes in exports per capita do not appear to be highly

correlated with changes in GDP per capita.47 Perhaps more telling as regards the idea of exports

as the locomotive of growth is that the Lower South, the region in which exports were supposed

to have driven economic growth, fared worse in terms of growth of GDP per capita than did the

Middle Colonies.

        Fourth, and finally, the evidence we have presented about the series that underlie our

estimated growth rates suggests that, in contrast to the early nineteenth century, a number of

conditions were less favorable to advances in living standards in the eighteenth century. Unlike

the early nineteenth century, when the labor force to population ratio was rising, demographic

trends in the colonial era were either neutral or tended to offset rising labor productivity. While

slowing natural increase and accelerating immigration after 1800 contributed to a rise in the



46
  The 7 percent figure for the Middle Colonies includes both agricultural and nonagricultural
commodities. Agricultural products alone amounted to about 5 percent of GDP.
47
   Luckily so in some instances, such as the 1730s, when exports per capita abroad and to other colonies
both declined while GDP per capita rose ever so slightly at 0.03 percent per year due to growth in food
production and the value of shelter per capita.
                                                                                                                29


Labor Force Participation Rate, in the colonial period, the LFPR held steady for the most part. It

dipped in the decades immediately after 1720, but regained its starting value by 1770. It fell

noticeably after 1770, and for the entire period 1720 to 1800 changes in the participation rate

served to reduce the growth of GDP per capita. Likewise, sectoral shifts in the composition of

the economy from agriculture to nonagriculture, which were a source of aggregate growth after

1800, were of little importance. The agricultural share of the labor force rose slightly from 1720

to 1740 and then declined; the 70 percent share in 1800 was only slightly below the 72.5 percent

of 1720, so there was very little positive impact on productivity arising from a shift into the more

productive nonagricultural industries.48

        In the face of demographic factors, our conjectures imply that any improvement in living

standards was dependent upon increased output per worker and the gradual accumulation of

capital assets.. Based on our assumption of a rising level of food consumption, agricultural

output per worker rose on average at 0.17 percent per year from 1720 to 1770 and 0.24 percent

from 1720 to 1800. Had the labor force participation rate remained constant and output per

worker increased as we have calculated, then GDP per capita would have grown by about $13

between 1720 and 1800. Because the participation rate fell from .31 to .27, however, a large

portion of this positive effect of rising labor productivity was offset.49 All of the decline in the

participation rate took place after 1770, so that during the colonial period, the increase in output

per worker accounted for most of the increase in GDP per capita.



48
   The small decline in the share of agriculture reflects the decline in the rural agricultural participation
rate, not an increase in urbanization. The urban share of the region’s population declined from 16.5
percent in 1720 to 9.8 percent in 1800.
49
   The decline in the participation rate reflects the changing composition of the population that occurred
after 1770, especially the decline in the adult male share of the population because adult males had a
much higher participation rate than adult females.
                                                                                                 30


       Most of the remaining increase in GDP per capita was generated by the growth of the

housing stock and the resulting flow of shelter services it produced. In other words, capital

accumulation, at least in this one sector, was an important force contributing to rising incomes. If

nothing else had held the economy in check, the rise in the stock of housing would have pushed

up GDP per capita by more than $0.75 during the colonial period and by another $1 after 1770.

That alone would have generated growth in GDP per capita of 0.07 percent per year.

       Taken together these observations suggest that the dynamics of aggregate growth in

North America underwent a significant transition between the eighteenth and nineteenth

centuries; shifting from an economy dominated by extensive growth and subject to significant

short-run fluctuations, to one in which the sustained growth of living standards came to stand out

as increasingly important.
                                                                                     31



                                        Table 1
                      Estimates of Annual Rates of Economic Growth per Capita
                                   Over Long Time Periods
                      Publication                         Geographic     Rate of
                          Date        Time Period          coverage      Growth

Mancall and Weiss        1999          1700-1770        all colonies     0.05%
Jones                    1980          1700-1770        all colonies      0.4%
Egnal                    1998          1713-1775        all colonies      0.5%
McCusker and             1991          1690-1785        all colonies   0.3 - 0.6 %
Menard
McCusker                 2000          1720-1774        all colonies      0.6%
Taylor                   1964      1700-09 to 1770-79   all colonies     1.0 % +



                      Individual Regions
Anderson                1979      1700-09 to 1770-79    New England      -0.80%

Mancall, Rosenbloom     2003          1720-1770         Lower South      -0.03%
and Weiss
Egnal                   1998          1713-1775         Lower South      0.10%

Main and Main           1988          1650-1770          So. New         0.35%
                                                         England
Kulikoff                1979          1705-1776         Chesapeake       0.40%

Egnal                   1998          1713-1775          Northern        0.60%
                                                         colonies
Egnal                   1998          1713-1775         Upper South      0.90%

McCusker                1972          1730-1770         Pennsylvania     1.60%
                                                                                                          32

Notes and Sources to Table 1

   These authors did not all measure growth of real GDP per capita. Some specifically described it as
such, some as Gross or Net National Product or National Income, while others implied that they were
describing change in one of these measures of economic growth, but the specific evidence they used was
some proxy measure, such as TFP or imports.
Peter Mancall and Thomas Weiss (1999, pp. 7-40) measured real GDP per capita using the conjectural
method.
Marc Egnal (1998, p. 43) measured per capita imports as a first approximation, “then checked against
data for long term changes in probate wealth and value of exports.”
Alice Hanson Jones (1980, p. 78) used change in wealth as a proxy for GDP.
George Rogers Taylor, (1964, pp. 24, 437) examined a variety of evidence and provided an informed
opinion about the rate of growth of income per capita.
John McCusker and Russell Menard (1985, pp. 52-57) estimated the rate of growth of GNP per capita
based on estimates of the growth of GNP per capita for England current at the time that they wrote. The
lower rate of 0.3 percent was that achieved by England, which they argue set the lower bound for the
colonies; the higher rate of 0.6 percent reflected their view that because the colonies had started out far
behind they likely grew faster than the mother country.
John McCusker (2000, p. 156, Table 2). In the accompanying text he revealed his preference for the
higher rate of growth of 0.6 percent per year.
Terry Anderson, (1979, p. 253, Table 3 and p.255). His estimate of minus 0.8 percent per year is based
on his estimate of TFP. If one used output per worker the rate of decline is only minus 0.7 percent per
year.
Peter Mancall, Joshua Rosenbloom and Thomas Weiss (2003, pp. 389-424) measured real GDP per capita
using the conjectural method.
Gloria L. Main and Jackson T. Main (1988, pp. 27-46) measured real wealth per capita.
Alan Kulikoff (1979, p. 277) measured real wealth per capita in Prince George’s county, Maryland.
John McCusker (1972, p. 155, fn 17) used growth in exports to England as a measure of growth in NNP.
                                                                                                                     33



                                                       Table 2
   Estimates of GDP and Components in the Base Year of 1800: U.S. and Middle Atlantic Region
                                                       (U.S. dollars, prices of 1840)
                                           United States                          Mid Atlantic
                                         Non-Indian Population                 Non-Indian Population
                                            Totals        Per Capita              Totals       Per Capita
                                            $000's            $s                  $000's           $s

Agricultural Output                        $    167,772     $         31.61           $     47,712      $   32.56
Food Production                                 149,966               28.26                 37,615          25.67
  Food (consumption)                              159,098               29.98                 45,206         30.85
  less interstate food imports                        -                  -                     4,337          2.96
  less food imports from abroad                     9,132               1.72                   3,253          2.22
Agric Exports Abroad                             17,806                   3.36                  5,539         3.78
Agr. Exports to Other Colonies/States                 -                   -                     4,557         3.11
Shelter                                          20,381                   3.84                  9,281         6.33
Non-Shelter NonAgr. Output                      163,369                 30.78                  57,580        39.29
GDP (Narrowly Defined)                     $ 351,522 $                 66.24             $ 114,573      $   78.19
                                            --------------------------------------------------
Labor Force (1,000s of workers)                   1713.2                                          402
  Agricultural                                    1262.2                                        281
  NonAgricultural                                  451.0                                        121
Output per worker
   Agricultural                            $         133                              $         170
   NonAgricultural (EXCL Shelter)          $         362                              $         476
        Ratio NonAgric. To Agric.
            Output per Worker                        2.73                                       2.80



Notes and Sources to Table 2
         Population figures for the U.S. and the Mid Atlantic region underlying the calculations are from
Carter, et al., 2006, Series Aa: 2769-71, 4779-81, 4943-45, and 5407-09. The labor force figures are from
Weiss (1992)
         The figures for GDP and its components for the U.S. in 1800 were taken from Weiss (1992).
The GDP figures for the Mid Atlantic region in 1800 were derived by extrapolating backward an estimate
of the region’s per capita income for 1840. The extrapolating index for per capita income was
constructed as the product of indexes measuring changes in the same variables that underlie the estimates
of the national figures - changes in the agricultural share of the region’s labor force, changes in the
region’s labor force participation rate, changes in agricultural productivity - and an assumption that the
ratio of non-agricultural productivity to agricultural productivity remained constant over the period at the
value established for 1840. It was further assumed that agricultural productivity in the region changed at
the national rate between 1800 and 1840. The region’s per capita income for 1840 is based on the
estimates of Easterlin. (1960, pp. 97-98, Table A-1)
                                                                                                           34

        Agricultural output is the sum of Food Production, Agricultural Exports Abroad and Agricultural
Exports to Other States. Food Production equals food consumption less food imports from other states
and from abroad.
        Per capita food consumed by free adults (those aged 10 and over) and free children (aged 0-9) in
the Mid Atlantic in 1800 was assumed to equal the average of the national figures for those population
groups in 1839, 1849, and 1859. The national figures were calculated from data in Gallman (1960, table,
A-2) and U.S. Census Bureau (1975, series U-215 and 216). Food consumption per slave was assumed to
equal 75 percent that of free whites. These per capita figures were then multiplied by the population in
each group in 1800 to obtain a weighted average value for that year.
        We estimated the 1800 values of agricultural imports from other states by extrapolating forward
the 1768-72 benchmark figures (described in the notes to Table 3). An estimate of the region’s exports to
and imports from other states was derived for 1790-92 by multiplying the 1768-72 value of exports per
ton cleared (for exports) and per ton entered (for imports) by reported figures for the coastal tonnage
entering the ports of New York and Pennsylvania, and inflating these to obtain the value for the Middle
Atlantic Region. The average per capita values of coastal exports and imports for 1790-92 were then
extrapolated forward to 1802 in two parts, using figures on the stock of registered and licensed tonnage.
The 1791 figure was first extrapolated to 1794 based on the gross tonnage engaged in coastal and internal
trade. The 1794 figure was then extrapolated forward based on the enrolled tonnage and the tonnage of
licensed vessels employed in the coasting trade in the states of the Middle Atlantic. In both cases the
extrapolator was a three-year average of tonnage per capita. The tonnage data are from Carter et al, 2006,
Series Df591 and New American State Papers, vol.4, pp. 453-55.
         Food imports from abroad were estimated by calculating food imports per capita for the US.,
converting to 1840 prices, then multiplying by the 1768-72 ratio of the Mid Atlantic's per capita food
imports to those for the US. We calculated food imports in 1800 as a share of total merchandise imports
(Carter, et al, 2006, Series Ee 368) less re-exports (Mancall, Rosenbloom and Weiss, 2008, Appendix
Table 8). The 1768-72 ratio is from, Shepherd (1970, Tables 1 and 2).
         For exports see Mancall, Rosenbloom and Weiss (forthcoming), the Appendix to that paper, as
well as the Appendix to this paper.
         For the free population, the value of shelter services equals 10 percent of the value of the stock of
dwellings in 1798 adjusted for omitted values (Weiss, 1992, Table 1.2; Pitkin, 1967; Soltow, 1989; and
Soltow and Land, 1980). The flow was revalued in prices of 1840 by using the deflator for the gross
rental value of farm dwellings estimated by Towne and Rasmussen (1960) to obtain a per capita figure for
free persons of $6.34. We assumed that the average value of a slave dwelling in each state equaled the
value of those dwellings omitted from the housing survey. That value was calculated for each state as the
product of the national ratio of the value of omitted dwellings to reported dwellings times the value of the
reported dwellings in each state. This gave a dwelling value per slave of $7.18 in 1800 prices. Using a
service flow of 10 percent and converting to 1840 prices we obtain the annual value of shelter of $0.97
per slave.
         Nonagricultural output is the difference between the total GDP and the estimates of Agricultural
Output and the value of Shelter. This residual encompasses all nonagricultural output, except shelter.
Thus it includes the output of fishing, forestry, manufacturing, mining, construction, final services
flowing to consumers, the value of government services as well as investment spending.
                                                                                                                                                            35



                                                                      Table 3
                                Per Capita Values of Agricultural Output for the Colonies and States of the Mid Atlantic Region
                                                            (US Dollars, prices of 1840)
                             Food Production                                    Agricultural Exports
                                                                                                                                  Agricultural
                     Food         Less Food Imported       Food                to Other                      Agricultural         share of the Output per
          Year     Consumed             from             Produced       Abroad Colonies         Total          Output                 LF        Worker
                                               other
                                   abroad     colonies
          1720       28.50         1.38        0.92       26.20           3.23      1.25        4.48            30.69                0.71         139
          1730       28.89         1.69        1.01       26.20           3.47      1.35        4.82            31.02                0.73         143
          1740       29.28         1.33        0.77       27.18           3.82      1.14        4.96            32.14                0.74         146
          1750       29.82         1.35        0.39       28.08           4.12      1.89        6.01            34.09                0.72         157
          1760       30.26         1.24        0.94       28.08           3.20      1.87        5.07            33.15                0.72         151
          1770       30.92         1.54        1.49       27.89           3.86      1.86        5.72            33.61                0.71         153
          1780
          1791       30.99         2.22        1.27       27.50           2.07      1.34        3.41            30.92                0.72         150
          1800       30.85         2.22        2.96       25.67           3.78      3.11        6.89            32.57                0.70         170

                 Average Annual Rates of Change
       1720-1740    0.13      -0.18       -0.91            0.18            0.84     -0.47       0.50             0.23                 0.20       0.26
       1740-1770    0.18       0.49        2.24            0.09            0.04      1.65       0.48             0.15                -0.16       0.14
       1770-1800    -0.01      1.23        2.31            -0.28          -0.07      1.73       0.62            -0.10                -0.03       0.36

       1720-1770      0.16         0.22        0.97        0.12           0.36      0.79        0.49             0.18                -0.01       0.19
       1720-1800      0.10         0.60        1.47        -0.03          0.20      1.14        0.54             0.07                -0.02       0.25



Notes and Sources to Table 3

        The value of food consumed per capita is a weighted average of the value consumed by the colonists and that consumed by the slaves, and
the average for the colonists is a weighted average of that consumed by an adult and that consumed by a child, where the weights are their
respective shares of the population. Children are those under the age of 10.
                                                                                                                                                      36

       We assumed that the per capita consumption figure for free adult colonists increased at an average annual rate of 0.1 percent per year
between 1720 and 1800. The per capita figure for slaves was assumed to equal 75 percent that of a colonist in every year.
        The estimate of food imports from and agricultural exports to other colonies for 1768-72 comes from Shepherd and Williamson (1992, p.
798, Table 2). We calculated the implicit quantities of most food items, revalued them using dollar prices of 1840, then inflated their sum by
dividing it by the share of these food items in the total value of food (in pound sterling) in the original data. We calculated average value per ton
of agricultural exports to and imports from other colonies by dividing the base year values by the average tonnage clearing and entering in the
years 1768-1772, and extrapolated these values to other years using statistics on tonnage entering and clearing.
        Food imports into the Middle Colonies from Southern Europe, the Wine Islands, and the West Indies for 1768-72 are from Shepherd
(1970, Tables 1 and 2). Imports of food from Great Britain were calculated as 3 percent of all imports from that source. The total import figure
was taken from Carter, et al (2006, Series Eg452-455). We calculated average value per ton of agricultural imports for three points of origin
(Europe, Britain and the West Indies) by dividing the base year values by the average tonnage entering from these other destinations in the years
1768-1772. We multiplied these values per ton by tonnage entering New York and Philadelphia from these three points to estimate the value of
food imported from foreign countries. The tonnage data are from Carter (2006) and Lydon (1967).
        Agricultural exports abroad include only those exports produced domestically. The benchmark figure for agricultural exports from the
Middle Colonies to all countries in 1770 is from Shepherd and Walton (1972, pp. 210-227) revalued in 1840 prices of each. We then extrapolated
that benchmark figure forward to 1800 and extrapolated it backward to 1720 based on tonnage clearing Philadelphia and New York. See Mancall,
Rosenbloom and Weiss, (forthcoming).
        Total agricultural output equals the sum of food produced and total agricultural exports.
         The agricultural labor force is the sum of estimates for the white and black workers residing in rural areas, plus an estimate of the small
numbers of the population in farming that were residing in cities. For each of the two rural population groups, the agricultural labor force is the
product of the rural population in that group times a rural agricultural participation rate. The 1800 rural agricultural estimating ratios were taken
from Weiss’s earlier estimates of the U.S. labor force. We assumed those ratios declined over the period 1700 to 1800 at 0.07 percent per year, a
rate derived from the labor force evidence for Chester county, Pennsylvania presented by Ball and Walton ((1976, Table 3 p. 109-113). Their
indexes of labor inputs per farm for Chester county from 1714-31 to 1775-90 appear to have assumed there was no decline in the rural agricultural
participation rates, except for children. The rate of 0.07 percent is a weighted average of the decline in the child participation rate and constancy
in the rate for adults implicit in their estimates. That rate of decline is roughly half the rate at which the free labor force aged 10 and over declined
in the period 1800 to 1840 (0.131 percent per year). The urban farm labor force was assumed to equal one percent of the urban population aged
10 and over, the percentage used by Weiss in his estimates for the nineteenth century. Evidence for Philadelphia in 1774 and 1780-83 ( Price,
1974) provides some confirmation for this percentage.
                                                                                                       37



                                               Table 4
            Conjectural Estimation of GDP per Capita for the Mid Atlantic Region, 1720-1800

                                 NonAgric.                      Extrapolated
                       Agric. Output (excl Agric. NonAgric Value of Non-
             LF Part. Output per shleter) per Share of Share of shelter GDP Value of          GDP per
              Rate     worker      Worker      the LF   the LF   per capita  Shelter           Capita

  1720        0.31      139.06       430.69      0.71       0.29         69.22         4.59    73.81
  1730        0.30      143.25       495.71      0.73       0.27         71.21         4.44    75.65
  1740        0.30      146.42       510.71      0.74       0.26         71.44         4.63    76.07
  1750        0.30      156.93       458.98      0.72       0.28         72.61         4.83    77.44
  1760        0.30      150.88       530.19      0.72       0.28         78.24         5.07    83.31
  1770        0.31      152.71       434.32      0.71       0.29         73.35         5.36    78.70
  1780
  1791        0.29      149.72       351.21      0.72       0.28         59.49         5.97    65.46
  1800        0.27      169.86       475.50      0.70       0.30         71.76         6.34    78.10
 Average Annual Rates of Change
1720-1740     -0.23       0.26       0.86         0.20      -0.53        0.16          0.04    0.15
1740-1770     0.17        0.14       -0.54       -0.16      0.41         0.09          0.49    0.11
1770-1800     -0.43       0.36       0.30        -0.03      0.08         -0.07         0.56    -0.03

1720-1770     0.01        0.19        0.02       -0.01      0.04          0.12         0.31    0.128
1720-1800     -0.15       0.25        0.12       -0.02      0.05          0.05         0.40    0.071

 1720-30      -0.41      0.30        1.42         0.22      -0.57        0.28         -0.33    0.25
 1730-40      -0.04      0.22        0.30         0.18      -0.48        0.03          0.42    0.06
 1740-50      0.16       0.70        -1.06       -0.26      0.71         0.16          0.42    0.18
 1750-60      0.12       -0.39       1.45        -0.01      0.01         0.75          0.50    0.73
 1760-70      0.22       0.12        -1.97       -0.20      0.51         -0.64         0.54    -0.57
1791-1800     -0.54       1.41        3.42       -0.28      0.69          2.11         0.67    1.98
                                                                                                              38




Notes and Sources to Table 4

      The Labor Force Participation Rate is a weighted average of that for free males, free females, and
slaves aged 10 and over. The participation rates for each of the population groups are those for 1800
(Weiss, 1992). Agricultural output per worker and share of the labor force are from Table 3.
       The input values (cols. 1-5) are used to calculate the extrapolated value of GDP per capita. The
independent estimate of the value of shelter is then added to the extrapolated value to obtain the full
measure of GDP, narrowly defined (i.e. excluding home manufactures and farm improvements).
         The agricultural output per worker data are from Table 3. The nonagricultural output per worker
series is based on wages of Philadelphia laborers taken from Nash (1979) for 1727 to 1775 and Smith
(1981) for 1751to1800. We used five year averages to construct an index which was used to extrapolate
the 1800 base year value of nonagricultural output per worker. We estimated the index for 1720 by
assuming the index had changed at the same rate from 1720 to 1725 as it had from 1725 to 1730.
        The per capita value of shelter in 1800 is a weighted average of that for the free population ($6.49)
and for slaves ($0.97). We used an index of change in the stock of dwellings to extrapolate the 1800
figures backward to 1700. We based the index on Jones's (1980, p.78) estimate of the rate of growth of
wealth per capita between 1700-25, 1725-50, and 1750-74, and Gallman's (1992, p. 95) estimate of the
rate of growth of the real value of structures between 1774 and 1799.
         It is worth noting that the 1800 base year values in our conjectures reflect the degree of market
orientation in that year, a degree which is then implicit in our estimates for earlier years. To the extent
that the marketed share of output increased over the period from 1720 to 1800 our estimated rates of
growth understate the increase of market-based GDP. It is possible that the higher rates of growth
estimated by others have implicitly taken this increased commercialization into account, and thus the
difference between our estimate of growth and theirs would be a measure of the rate at which market
orientation had increased. (Grubb, 2004, pp. 351-56).
                                                                                                                                                                   39

                                                                    Table 5
                                                      Sensitivity Analysis of Several Key Assumptions

                    Assumed Rate of Change in the Value             Assumed Rate of Change in the Rural                Assumed Both variables Changed slower or
                               of the Diet                             Agricultural Participation Rate                       faster than the baseline case

                    Baseline Case        slower           faster    Baseline Case        slower         faster      Baseline Case   slower        faster
                                                                                                                      Diet = 0.1   Diet = 0.0   Diet = 0.2
                         0.1              0.00            0.20           0.07             0.00          0.13       AgLFPR = 0.07 AgLFPR = 0.0 AgLFPR = 0.13
                        var a            var b            var c         var a            var d          var e          var a         var f       var g
Real GDP per capita
       1720         $           74   $           76   $       72    $           74   $        79    $        69    $           74    $        82    $         67
       1770         $           79   $           80   $       78    $           79   $        81    $        77    $           79    $        82    $         76
       1800         $           78   $           78   $       78    $           78   $        78    $        78    $           78    $        78    $         78

Implied Rates of Growth of Real GDP per capita
      1720-70               0.128       0.085               0.165          0.128            0.043          0.214             0.128          0.007           0.255
     1720-1800              0.071       0.031               0.108          0.071           -0.014          0.152             0.071         -0.051           0.192

Implied Rates of Growth of Agricultural Output per Worker
      1720-70               0.190        0.090      0.280                  0.190           0.120          0.250              0.190          0.020           0.340
     1720-1800              0.250        0.160      0.340                  0.250           0.180          0.310              0.250          0.090           0.400

Value of the Diet (slave diet in 1800 = $23.45)
      in 1720         $       29.27 $ 31.71 $ 27.02                 $      29.27     $     31.71    $     27.02    $        29.27    $     31.71    $      27.02
  relative to 1800
     slave diet                125%       135%  115%                       125%            135%           115%               125%           135%            115%


Notes to Table 5
See the text for a discussion of the different variants.
For purposes of comparison, the slave diet in 1800 equaled $23.45; the rate of growth of agricultural output per worker from 1800 to 1850 was
0.25 percent per year.
                                                                                                40


                                           SOURCES
Allen, Robert C. 2007. “Pessimism Preserved: Real Wages in the British Industrial Revolution.”
       University of Oxford, Department of Economics working paper no. 314.
Allen, Robert C., Tommy E. Murphy and Eric B. Schneider. 2011. “The Colonial Origins of the
       Divergence of the Americas: A Labour Market Approach.” University of Oxford,
       Department of Economics discussion paper no. 559.
Anderson, Terry. 1979. “Economic Growth in Colonial New England: ‘Statistical Renaissance,’”
      The Journal of Economic History, 39, 243-57.
Archives of the State of New Jersey, First Series, Vol. 7, “Administration of Governor Belcher,”
       pp. 101-401, Newark, NJ.
Ball, Duane and Gary Walton. 1976. “Agricultural Productivity change in eighteenth century
       Pennsylvania, The Journal of Economic History 36, 102-17.
Berlin, Ira. 1980. “Time, Space, and the Evolution of Afro-American Society on Mainland
        British North America,” American Historical Review 85 (1980), 44-78.
Bolt, Jutta and Jan Luiten van Zanden. 2013. “The First Update of the Maddison Project: Re-
        Estimating Growth Before 1820.” Maddison-Project Working Paper WP-4. University of
        Groningen (January).
Broadberry, Stephen et al. 2013. “When did Britain industrialise? The sectoral distribution of te
      labour force and labour productivity in Britain, 1381-1851.” Explorations in Economic
      History 50, 16-27.
Bushman, Claudia L., Harold B. Hancock, and Elizabeth Moyne Homsey, eds. 1986.
     Proceedings of the House of Assembly of the Delaware State, 1776-1781, Newark:
     University of Delaware Press.
Candler, Allen D. 1904-16. The Colonial Records of the State of Georgia. Compilations of
       transcripts of records in the Public Record Office begun by Allen D. Candler and
       completed by William J. Northen and Lucian Lamar Knight.
Carter, Susan, et al. 2006. Historical Statistics of the United States, New York: Cambridge
        University Press.
Clark, Gregory. 2005. “The Condition of the Working-Class in England, 1209-2004.”
       Univeristy of California, Davis, Department of Economics working paper #05-39.
Clark, Gregory. 2010. “The Macroeconomics Aggregates for England, 1209 to 2008,” Research
       in Economic History.
Clark, Gregory. 2013. “1381 and the Malthus delusion.” Explorations in Economic History 50,
       4-15.
Cole, Arthur Harrison.1938. Wholesale Commodity Prices in the United States, 1700-1861.
       Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Colonial Records of Pennsylvania, Vol. 13, Sept., 1781, Dec., 1781; Mar., 1782; April 1782,
       Sept. 1782, and Nov. 1782
                                                                                             41


David, Paul. 1967. "The Growth of Real Product in the United States before 1840: New
       Evidence, Controlled Conjectures." Journal of Economic History 27: 151-97
Documents from the Continental congress, June 10, 1777 (on-line at
     hdl.loc.gov/loc.rbc/bdsdcc.03301)
Egnal, Marc. 1998. New World Economies. New York: Oxford University Press,
Gallman, Robert. 1971. "The Statistical Approach: Fundamental Concepts Applied to History,"
      in G.R.Taylor and L.F.Ellsworth, eds. Approaches to American Economic History.
      Charlottesville: The University Press of Virginia.
Gallman, Robert 1992. "American Economic Growth before the Civil War." In R. Gallman and
      J. Wallis, American Economic Growth and Standards of Living before the Civil War.
      Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gallman, Robert. 1999. "Can We Build National Accounts for the Colonial Period," in William
      and Mary Quarterly.
Gallman, Robert and Thomas Weiss. 1969. “The Service Industries in the Nineteenth Century,”
      in Victor Fuchs, ed. Production and Productivity in the Service Industries.
Goldsmith, Raymond. 1952 “The Growth of Reproducible Wealth in the United States of
      America from 1805 to 1950.” International Association for Research in Income and
      Wealth. Income and Wealth Series II. Income and Wealth of the United States: Trends
      and Structures. Cambridge: Bowes and Bowes, 1952.
Gordon, Thomas. 1829. The History of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
Gottlieb, Manuel. 1964. Estimates of Residential Building, 1840-1939, NBER Technical Paper
       no. 17.
Greenberg, Douglas. 1979. “The Middle Colonies in Recent American Historiography,” William
      and Mary Quarterly 3rd Ser., 36 (1979), 396-427.
Grubb, Farley. 1992. “The Long Run Trend in the Value of European immigrant Servants, 1654-
       1831: New Measurements and Interpretations,” Research in Economic History, 14, 167-
       240.
Grubb, Farley. 2004. “The circulating medium of exchange in colonial Pennsylvania, 1729-1775:
       new estimates of monetary composition, performance, and economic growth,”
       Explorations in Economic History, 41, 329-60.
Henretta, James A. 1978. “Families and Farms: Mentalite in Preindustrial America.” William
       and Mary Quarterly, 3rd ser., 35, 3-32.
Jones, Alice Hanson. 1980. Wealth of a Nation to Be. New York: Columbia University Press
Kahn, Charles. 1992. "A Linear Programming Solution to the Slave Diet." In Robert Fogel and
       Stanley Engerman, eds., Without Consent or Contract. Technical papers, vol. 3, pp. 522-
       35. New York: W. W. Norton.
Komlos John. 2001. “On the Biological Standard of Living of Eighteenth Century Americans:
      Taller, Richer, Healthier.” Research in Economic History, vol. 20, pp. 223-48.
                                                                                            42


Kulikoff, Alan. 1979. “The Economic Growth of the Eighteenth-Century Chesapeake Colonies,”
       The Journal of Economic History, 39, 275-88.
Kuznets, Simon. 1952. "Long Term Changes in the National Income of the United States of
      America since 1870." In Income and Wealth of the United States, Trends and Structure.
      International Association for Research in Income and Wealth, Income and Wealth Series
      II. Baltimore, Md.: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Landon-Lane John, Hugh Rockoff and Richard H. Steckel. 2011. “Droughts, Floods and
      Financial Distress in the United States,” Table 3b, in The Economics of Climate Change:
      Adaptations past and present. Gary D. Libecap and Richard H. Steckel, eds. National
      Bureau of Economic Research. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lebergott, Stanley. 1966. "Labor Force and Employment, 1800-1960." In Dorothy Brady, ed.,
      Output, Employment and Productivity in the United States after 1800. Studies in Income
      and Wealth, no. 30. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lindert, Peter H and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2011. “American Incomes Before and After the
       Revolution.” NBER working paper 17211.
Leunig, Tim. 2013.”Understanding the English economy 1381-1869: Editor’s introduction.”
       Explorations in Economic History. 50, 1-3.
Lydon, James. 1967. “Philadelphia’s Commercial Expansion, 1720-1739,” Pennsylvania
       Magazine of History and Biography, 91, 401-19.
Main, Gloria L. and Jackson T. Main. 1988. “Economic Growth and the Standard of Living in
       Southern New England,” The Journal of Economic History, 48, 27-46.
Mancall, Peter C. and Thomas Weiss. 1999. “Was Economic Growth Likely in British North
      America?” Journal of Economic History 59, 17-40.
Mancall, Peter, Joshua Rosenbloom and Thomas Weiss. 2003. “Conjectural Estimates of
      Economic Growth in the Lower South, 1720 to 1800," in History Matters:
      Economic Growth Technology, and Population, ed. William Sundstrom and Tim
      Guinnane (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2003), 389-424.
Mancall, Peter, Joshua Rosenbloom and Thomas Weiss. 2008. “Commodity Exports,
      Invisible Exports and Terms of Trade for the Middle Colonies, 1720 to 1775,”
      NBER Working Paper No. 14334.
Mancall, Peter, Joshua Rosenbloom and Thomas Weiss. forthcoming. “Exports from the
      States and Colonies of the Mid Atlantic Region, 1720-1800, Research in
      Economic History.
McConnell, Michael. 2004. Army & Empire, Lincoln, University of Nebraska Press.
McCusker, John. 1972. “Sources of Investment Capital in the Colonial Shipping Industry,” The
     Journal of Economic History, 32, p. 155.
McCusker, John. 1999. “Measuring Colonial Gross Domestic Production: an Introduction,”
     William and Mary Quarterly, vol. 56, Jan. 1999, p. 3-8.
                                                                                                 43


McCusker, John. 2000. “Estimating Early American Gross Domestic Product, Historical
     Methods, vol. 33, 2000, p. 156, Table 2 and accompanying text. Here he revealed his
     preference for the higher rate of growth of 0.6 percent per year.
McCusker, John. 2006. “Colonial Statistics,” in Susan Carter, et al, (2006). Historical Statistics
     of the United States: Earliest Times to the Present (Cambridge University Press), vol. 5,
McCusker, John J. and Russell R. Menard (1984). The Economy of British America, 1607-
     1789: Needs and Opportunities for Study. Institute of Early American History and
     Culture. Chapel Hill and London: University of North Carolina Press.
Menard, Russell. 1976. “Comment on Paper by Ball and Walton,” The Journal of Economic
      History 36, 118-25.
Nash, Gary B. 1979. The Urban Crucible: Social Change, Political Consciousness, and the
       Origins of the American Revolution. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
New American State Papers, Commerce and Navigation, vol.4
North, Douglass. 1961. The Economic Growth of the United States, 1790 to 1860, Englewood
       Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Palmer,Wayne C. “Meteorological Drought.” Research Paper No. 45. U.S. Weather Bureau,
       Washington, DC.
Parker, Peter J. 1975. “Rich and Poor in Philadelphia,” Pennsylvania Magazine of History and
        Biography.
Philadelphia Guardians for the Relief and Employment of the Poor of the City of Philadelphia,”
       The Accounts of the Guardians of the Poor, reprinted in Poulson’s American Advertiser,
       May 19, 1802
Pitkin, Timothy. [1816] 1967. A Statistical View of the Commerce of the United States. Reprint,
        New York: Augustus Kelley
Price, Jacob. 1974. “Economic Function and the Growth of American Port Towns in the
        Eighteenth Century,” Perspectives in American History, VIII, pp. 121-186.
Rothenberg, Winifred B. 1992. From Market Places to a Market Economy: The Transformation
      of Rural Massachusetts, 1750-1850. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rothenberg, Winifred B. 1992. “The Productivity Consequences,” in R. Gallman and J. Wallis,
      American Economic Growth and Standards of Living before the Civil War. Chicago:
      University of Chicago Press.
Shepherd, James. 1970. "Commodity Imports" (mimeo) Purdue University Working Paper
Shepherd, James, and Samuel Williamson. 1972. "The Coastal Trade of the British North
      American Colonies, 1768-1772." Journal of Economic History 32: 783-810.
Smith, Billy G., 1981. “The Material Lives of Laboring Philadelphians, 1750 to 1800.” William
       and Mary Quarterly, 3rd ser., 38, no. 2 (April), pp. 164-202.
Soltow, Lee. 1989. Distribution of Wealth and Income in the United States in 1798. Pittsburgh,
       Penn.: University of Pittsburgh Press.
                                                                                             44


Soltow, Lee, and Aubrey Land. 1980. "Housing and Social Standing in Georgia, 1798." The
       Georgia Historical Quarterly 64: 448-58.
Steckel, Richard. 2002. “A History of the Standard of Living in the United States,” EH.Net
       Encyclopedia, Robert Whaples, ed. (July 21).
       http://eh.net/encyclopedia/article/steckel.standard.living.us .
Taylor, George R. 1964. "American Economic Growth before 1840: An Exploratory Essay."
       Journal of Economic History 24: 427-44.
Towne, Marvin, and Wayne Rasmussen. 1960. "Farm Gross Product and Gross Investment in the
      Nineteenth Century." In William Parker, ed., Trends in the American Economy. Studies
      in Income and Wealth, vol. 24. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. 1942. "Fuel Wood Used in the United States, 1630-1930."
       Circular no. 641. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Vickers, Daniel. 1996. “The Northern Colonies: Economy and Society, 1600-1775,” in Stanley
       L. Engerman and Robert E. Gallman, eds., The Cambridge Economic History of the
       United States, vol. 1, The Colonial Era (Cambridge, Eng: Cambridge University Press,
       1996), 209-248.
Votes of Assembly, Pennsylvania Archives, Series 8, Vols. VI, VII, and VIII.
"The Walker Expedition to Quebec, 1711.” 1953. The Publications of the Champlain Society.
      Toronto, pp. 251-54.
Weiss, Thomas. 1992. "U.S. Labor Force Estimates and Economic Growth, 1800 to 1860." In R.
       Gallman and J. Wallis, eds., American Economic Growth and Standards of Living before
       the Civil War. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Weiss, Thomas. 1993. "Long Term Changes in U.S. Agricultural Output per Worker, 1800-
       1900." Economic History Review 46: 324-41.
Weiss, Thomas. 1994. "Economic Growth before 1860: Revised Conjectures." In Thomas Weiss
      and Donald Schaefer, eds., American Economic Development in Historical Perspective.
      Stanford, Cal.: Stanford University Press.
