                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




POST-SECONDARY ATTENDANCE BY PARENTAL INCOME IN THE U.S. AND CANADA:
                WHAT ROLE FOR FINANCIAL AID POLICY?

                                         Philippe Belley
                                          Marc Frenette
                                         Lance Lochner

                                       Working Paper 17218
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17218


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2011




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Lochner acknowledges research support from the Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Philippe Belley, Marc Frenette, and Lance Lochner. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Post-Secondary Attendance by Parental Income in the U.S. and Canada: What Role for Financial
Aid Policy?
Philippe Belley, Marc Frenette, and Lance Lochner
NBER Working Paper No. 17218
July 2011
JEL No. H52,I21,I28

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper examines the implications of tuition and need-based financial aid policies for family income
– post-secondary (PS) attendance relationships. We first conduct a parallel empirical analysis of the
effects of parental income on PS attendance for recent high school cohorts in both the U.S. and Canada
using data from the 1997 Cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth and Youth in Transition
Survey. We estimate substantially smaller PS attendance gaps by parental income in Canada relative
to the U.S., even after controlling for family background, adolescent cognitive achievement, and local
residence fixed effects. We next document that U.S. public tuition and financial aid policies are actually
more generous to low-income youth than are Canadian policies. By contrast, Canada offers more
generous aid to middle-class youth than does the U.S. These findings suggest that the much stronger
family income – PS attendance relationship in the U.S. is not driven by differences in the need-based
nature of financial aid policies. Based on previous estimates of the effects of tuition and aid on PS
attendance, we consider how much stronger income – attendance relationships would be in the absence
of need-based aid and how much additional aid would need to be offered to lower income families
to eliminate existing income – attendance gaps entirely.


Philippe Belley                                     Lance Lochner
Kansas State University                             Department of Economics
Economics                                           Faculty of Social Science
339A Waters Hall                                    University of Western Ontario
Manhattan, KS 66506-4001                            1151 Richmond Street, North
U.S.A.                                              London, ON N6A 5C2
pbelley@k-state.edu                                 CANADA
                                                    and NBER
Marc Frenette                                       llochner@uwo.ca
Social Research & Demonstration Corporation
55 Murray Street Suite 400
Ottawa, Ontario
mfrenette@srdc.org




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17218
        Post-Secondary Attendance by Parental Income in the U.S. and
                Canada: What Role for Financial Aid Policy?∗
    Philippe Belley                         Marc Frenette                               Lance Lochner
 Kansas State University                  Social Research &                      University of Western Ontario
                                       Demonstration Corporation

                                                    June 13, 2011



                                                       Abstract
            This paper examines the implications of tuition and need-based ﬁnancial aid policies for family
        income – post-secondary (PS) attendance relationships. We ﬁrst conduct a parallel empirical anal-
        ysis of the eﬀects of parental income on PS attendance for recent high school cohorts in both the
        U.S. and Canada using data from the 1997 Cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
        and Youth in Transition Survey. We estimate substantially smaller PS attendance gaps by parental
        income in Canada relative to the U.S., even after controlling for family background, adolescent
        cognitive achievement, and local residence ﬁxed eﬀects. We next document that U.S. public tuition
        and ﬁnancial aid policies are actually more generous to low-income youth than are Canadian poli-
        cies. By contrast, Canada oﬀers more generous aid to middle-class youth than does the U.S. These
        ﬁndings suggest that the much stronger family income – PS attendance relationship in the U.S.
        is not driven by diﬀerences in the need-based nature of ﬁnancial aid policies. Based on previous
        estimates of the eﬀects of tuition and aid on PS attendance, we consider how much stronger income
        – attendance relationships would be in the absence of need-based aid and how much additional aid
        would need to be oﬀered to lower income families to eliminate existing income – attendance gaps
        entirely.


1       Introduction

The relationship between family income and educational attainment is of broad interest for both
equity and eﬃciency reasons. Clearly, the failure of youth from low-income families to acquire a
good education limits economic and social mobility. The implications for social eﬃciency are more
complicated. On the one hand, if borrowing constraints or other barriers (e.g. a lack of information)
discourage or prevent economically disadvantaged youth from attending post-secondary institutions,
then outcomes are likely to be ineﬃcient as well as inequitable. On the other hand, if low-income youth
    ∗
    We thank Leesha Lin for her help in providing various CSLP statistics and Enrico Moretti and Janet Currie for
providing us with their data on U.S. colleges and universities by county. For their comments and advice, we thank
Barbara Glover, David Johnson, Steve Machin, Arthur Sweetman, Alex Usher, conference participants at the NLSY97
Tenth Anniversary Conference, 2009 RCEA Summer Labor Economics Workshop, 2008 and 2010 Canadian Economics
Association Annual Meetings, 2008 MESA Workshop, CESifo Workshop on the Economics of Education, 2011 NBER
Spring Labor Meeting, and seminar participants at Boston College, Brown University, McMaster University, NYU,
Pennsylvania State University, University of Illinois, University of Montreal, University of Pittsburgh, and Virginia Tech.


                                                            1
do not attend college or university, because they are ill-qualiﬁed or dislike school, then education gaps
by income need not be ineﬃcient. These competing explanations have led to spirited debate among
economists as to the underlying causes for observed family income – schooling attainment gaps (see,
e.g., Carneiro and Heckman 2002, 2003, Krueger 2003).
       Citing both equity and eﬃciency reasons, most governments heavily subsidize higher education with
the explicit aim of increasing access. In many countries, tuition at post-secondary (PS) institutions is
negligible. In the U.S. and Canada – our focus in this paper – annual tuition at public schools typically
ranges from $3-10 thousand; however, both countries oﬀer considerable ﬁnancial aid to those in need.
In many American states, the direct cost of a higher education (net of non-repayable ﬁnancial aid)
is negative for youth at the bottom of the income distribution.1 More generally, the net price of PS
education is increasing in family income in both Canada and the U.S. Given the substantial resources
devoted to ﬁnancial aid, it is important to ask whether and how these resources aﬀect PS access and
attendance patterns by family income.
       Numerous studies estimate the eﬀects of tuition and speciﬁc ﬁnancial aid programs on PS atten-
dance and completion rates. As recently surveyed by Kane (2006) and Deming and Dynarski (2009),
most conclude that lowering the annual price of PS schooling (either through reductions in tuition or
increases in non-repayable aid) by $1,000 leads to a 3-5 percentage point increase in PS attendance.
Based on these ﬁndings, one would expect the overall structure of need-based ﬁnancial aid to play
an important role in shaping the relationship between family income and PS attendance; yet, this
issue is rarely discussed in the literatures on family income – PS attendance gaps or intergenerational
mobility. Indeed, one is hard-pressed to ﬁnd a full accounting of ﬁnancial aid and tuition costs as they
relate to family income (in either Canada or the U.S.). We take on this task and explore the extent to
which important diﬀerences in the overall structure of aid contribute to or ameliorate Canada – U.S.
diﬀerences in family income – PS attendance patterns.
       Using U.S. data from the 1997 Cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY97) and
Canadian data from the Youth in Transition Survey (YITS), we ﬁrst document a much stronger (un-
conditional) relationship between parental income and PS attendance in the U.S. relative to Canada.
Although more than half of this diﬀerence disappears after controlling for family background, local
area of residence ﬁxed eﬀects, and adolescent cognitive achievement, the remaining diﬀerence is still
substantial. Conditional on these factors, PS attendance rates are roughly 18 percentage points higher
for American youth in the top parental income quartile relative to those in the bottom quartiles. The
   1
    As discussed in greater detail below, this reﬂects tuition net of grants, scholarships, and family tax credits. Of course,
the total cost of PS schooling may be positive due to opportunity costs associated with foregone earnings while in school.



                                                              2
same income – attendance gap is only 7 percentage points in Canada. The cross-country diﬀerence is
largely attributed to relatively low attendance rates by low-income American youth from all ability
backgrounds.
       It is tempting to blame the stronger U.S. income – attendance gap on its higher average tuition
levels: average annual tuition at four-year public institutions was nearly 40% higher in the U.S. than
it was in Canada in 2003-04.2 Yet, this ignores any diﬀerences in ﬁnancial aid policies between the two
countries. To examine the importance of these diﬀerences, we document the overall structure of tuition
and ﬁnancial aid in both countries. In particular, we calculate measures of annual net tuition (tuition
less all non-repayable aid) and out-of-pocket expenditures (net tuition less available government loan
amounts) for public four-year institutions as functions of parental income. Perhaps surprisingly, we
show that, on average, the U.S. is considerably more generous (than Canada) in oﬀering aid to the
most economically disadvantaged, while Canada is slightly more generous (than the U.S.) towards
middle-income youth.3 In contrast to our empirical ﬁndings from the NLSY97 and YITS, these net
tuition and out-of-pocket expenditure schedules predict a weaker parental income – PS attendance
relationship in the U.S.
       The contrast between net tuition schedules and attendance patterns is stark and puzzling. For
example, we show that American youth whose parents earn $25,000 pay roughly $4,000 less in net
tuition than their better-oﬀ counterparts whose parents earn $75,000. In Canada, the same low-income
youth pay roughly $2,500 less, on average, than their wealthier counterparts. All else equal, these net
tuition diﬀerences suggest attendance rates should be 12-20 percentage points higher for low-income
Americans and 8-13 percentage points higher for low-income Canadians relative to their higher income
counterparts.4 Of course, all else is not equal, and other factors may generate a positive relationship
between schooling and parental income (e.g. credit constraints may aﬀect youth from low-income
families, tastes for schooling may be positively related to family income). What is more surprising is
the much stronger positive relationship in the U.S. given its greater targeting of student aid to the
most disadvantaged. Accounting for diﬀerences in aid, low-income Americans pay a few thousand
dollars less than their Canadian counterparts; yet, they attend colleges and universities at much lower
rates. To better understand why, we empirically examine and discuss a number of factors (in addition
   2
     This comparison reﬂects diﬀerences in the purchasing power parity (PPP) index. Average Canadian tuition was
$4,025 in Canadian dollars, while average U.S. tuition was $4,645 in U.S. dollars. Adjusting for PPP (1.20 in 2004),
average U.S. tuition was $5,574 in Canadian dollars.
   3
     Quebec is an exception within Canada. Net tuition in Quebec is similar to that in low-tuition American states;
however, out-of-pocket expenditures are generally higher at all parental income levels than low- or high-tuition American
states.
   4
     These are based on typical estimates of the impact of tuition and aid on attendance ranging from 3 to 5 percentage
points per $1,000 (see Kane 2006 or Deming and Dynarski 2009).


                                                           3
to ﬁnancial aid policies) that may shape the family income – PS attendance relationship.
    Even if PS costs are not the main determinant of family income – attendance diﬀerences, ﬁnancial
aid policies may help eliminate them. Indeed, the need-based nature of aid already serves to reduce
diﬀerences in PS attendance by income. Using standard estimates of the eﬀect of tuition and aid on
attendance, we consider a number of ‘back-of-the-envelope’ calculations that help shed light on the
current and potential role of ﬁnancial aid policies. We ﬁrst consider how much larger American and
Canadian family income – PS attendance gaps would be in the absence of need-based aid programs.
We then consider how much more grant aid would need to be given to low-income families in the
U.S. and Canada to completely eliminate their income – attendance gaps (conditional on adolescent
achievement and family background). These admittedly rough calculations highlight two important
points: (i) there are sizeable diﬀerences in underlying demand for PS education by family income (even
at below-cost tuition levels), and (ii) it would be quite costly to eliminate those diﬀerences entirely by
simply expanding current need-based policies.
    This paper proceeds as follows. The next section brieﬂy reviews the related literatures on family
income – PS attendance gaps and on the eﬀects of tuition and ﬁnancial aid on PS schooling. We
describe the YITS and NLSY97 data in Section 3, presenting evidence on PS attendance by parental
income in Section 4. Section 5 documents PS costs and ﬁnancial aid policies in Canada and the
U.S., focusing on the dependence of net tuition and out-of-pocket expenditures on parental income.
Section 6 considers the implications of Canada and U.S. ﬁnancial aid policies for family income – PS
attendance relationships. We present a few counterfactual calculations that clarify the extent to which
need-based aid can and does inﬂuence income – attendance gaps. Section 7 concludes.


2     Related Literature
2.1   Post-Secondary Attendance Diﬀerences by Family Income

There is a strong correlation between measured cognitive ability and family income. As such, most
researchers examining the relationship between family income and schooling attempt to simultane-
ously control for adolescent achievement and other family background characteristics that might af-
fect schooling. Doing so substantially reduces the role of family income in most studies but does not
generally eliminate it.
    Studies using U.S. data from the 1979 Cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
(NLSY79) generally conclude that family income played little role in PS attendance decisions in the




                                                    4
U.S. during the early 1980s.5 Cameron and Heckman (1998, 2001) ﬁnd that after controlling for family
background, scores on the Armed Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT), and unobserved heterogeneity, fam-
ily income has little eﬀect on PS enrollment rates.6 Carneiro and Heckman (2002) also estimate small
diﬀerences in PS enrollment rates and other higher education outcomes by family income after ac-
counting for diﬀerences in family background and AFQT. Related work by Cameron and Taber (2004)
and Keane and Wolpin (2001) suggests that borrowing constraints had little eﬀect on educational
attainment for the NLSY79 cohort.
       Belley and Lochner (2007) and Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2010) argue that the rising costs
of and returns to PS education in the U.S. since the early 1980s, combined with relatively stable
real government student loan limits, have likely increased the salience of borrowing constraints for
American youth.7 Consistent with this hypothesis, Belley and Lochner (2007) estimate that the
eﬀects of family income on PS attendance (conditional on family background and AFQT scores)
roughly doubled between the early 1980s and 2000s (based on data from the NLSY79 and NLSY97,
respectively). Elwood and Kane (2000) also document an increasing role of family income over the
1980s.8
       In Canada, a lack of appropriate data has limited serious examination of the issue until very re-
cently. Frenette (2007) examines the gap in attendance at four-year PS institutions between youth
from families in the top and the bottom quartiles of family income. Using a Blinder-Oaxaca decompo-
sition, he ﬁnds that 84% of the total gap in attendance between youth from the top and bottom income
quartiles can be accounted for by long-term ability and family diﬀerences like age 15 achievement and
grades, parental inﬂuences, and high school quality.9
       Diﬀerences in approach and speciﬁcations across previous U.S. and Canadian studies make cross-
country comparisons of the relationship between family income and PS attendance diﬃcult. This
   5
     Manski and Wise (1983) document the importance of family income for schooling in the U.S. for earlier cohorts.
   6
     AFQT test scores are widely used as a measure of cognitive achievement by social scientists using the NLSY79
or NLSY97 data. They are strongly correlated with positive outcomes like education and post-school earnings. See,
e.g., Blackburn and Neumark (1993), Murnane, Willett, and Levy (1995), and Cawley, et al. (2000). We discuss the
composition of this test further below.
   7
     Indeed, the fraction of undergraduate borrowers that borrowed the maximum limit from the federal Staﬀord Student
Loan Program nearly tripled to 52% between 1990 and 2000 (Berkner 2000 and Titus 2002). See Heckman, Lochner,
and Todd (2008) for evidence on rising returns to school and College Board (2004) for evidence on rising tuition costs.
   8
     Two other U.S.-based studies are related. Lovenheim (2011) exploits variation in local housing markets to identify
the eﬀects of changes in family wealth on PS enrolment decisions. He estimates signiﬁcant eﬀects of wealth for youth
from lower-income families and ﬁnds that wealth has become a more important determinant of PS enrolment in recent
years. Brown, Scholz and Seshadri (2011) estimate signiﬁcant eﬀects of ﬁnancial aid on schooling attainment among
‘borrowing constrained’ youth using intergenerational data from the Health and Retirement Survey. Roughly half of
their sample (covering the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s) is borrowing constrained by their deﬁnition.
   9
     Christoﬁdes, Cirello, and Hoy (2001) and Corak, Lipps, and Zhao (2003) also examine post-secondary attendance
patterns in Canada, while Frenette (2005) examines diﬀerences in PS attendance rates by parental income in the U.S.
and Canada. None of these studies account for the important role of adolescent achievement.


                                                          5
paper carefully explores this relationship for Canadian and American youth from roughly the same
age cohort using similar measures of family background, parental income, and adolescent cognitive
achievement.

2.2      Eﬀects of Tuition and Financial Aid on Post-Secondary Attendance

A large literature studies the demand for higher education by estimating the eﬀects of tuition and
ﬁnancial aid on PS attendance. Kane (2006) and Deming and Dynarski (2009) provide recent surveys
of this literature, so we limit our discussion to a few key ﬁndings relevant to our analysis.
       Summarizing earlier studies, Leslie and Brinkman (1987, 1988) conclude that a $1,000 (in year
2003 U.S.$) reduction in PS costs leads to a roughly 3-5 percentage point increase in PS attendance
rates in the U.S. Most recent estimates on the eﬀects of tuition on PS attendance using cross-state
variation or variation within states over time fall roughly within this ‘consensus’ range as well (e.g.
Kane 1994, 1999, Cameron and Heckman 2001).10
       Numerous studies estimate the eﬀects of student grant/scholarship aid on enrolment as well. Ex-
amining the introduction of Pell Grants in the mid-1970s, Hansen (1983) and Kane (1994) estimate
small impacts on PS enrolment rates among low-income American youth. Kane (1994) also estimates
separate eﬀects of changes in tuition and estimated Pell Grant aid eligibility amounts on PS enrolment
over the 1970s and 1980s. These estimates generally suggest modest but relatively weaker eﬀects of
Pell Grant aid compared to the eﬀects of tuition.11
       Recent studies have explored the enrolment impacts of more targeted student aid programs. Es-
timated impacts of aid from these studies are generally in line with the ‘consensus’ estimates of the
impact of tuition changes on enrolment (3-5 percentage point enrolment changes per $1,000). For
example, Dynarski (2003) studies the elimination of the Social Security student beneﬁt program in
the early 1980s, which provided income transfers to 18-22 year-old children of deceased, disabled or
retired Social Security beneﬁciaries as long as they remained enrolled full-time in PS school. Her
estimates suggest that an additional $1,000 in student aid would increase PS attendance by about
four percentage points. Dynarski (2000) estimates that an extra $1,000 in non-repayable aid from
the Georgia HOPE scholarship program increased PS attendance by 4-6 percentage points among af-
  10
      A few early studies (e.g. Bishop (1977), Manski and Wise (1983), McPherson and Schapiro (1991)) estimate relatively
larger tuition impacts on enrolment among youth from lower income families. More recent studies (e.g. Elwood and
Kane 2000, Cameron and Heckman 2001) provide mixed evidence on this point. Our calculations below assume similar
responses across the income distribution.
   11
      Seftor and Turner (2002) estimate sizeable eﬀects of changes in Pell Grant amounts/eligibility on enrolment among
‘older’ individuals in their late 20s and 30s.




                                                           6
fected Georgians.12 Abraham and Clark (2006) and Kane (2007) estimate eﬀects of similar magnitude
for the broad-based Washington DC Tuition Assistance Grant program introduced in 2000-01, while
Kane (2003) estimates signiﬁcant enrolment impacts of the recent CalGrant program for low-income
California students with good high school grades. Altogether, these studies suggest that ﬁnancial aid
signiﬁcantly increases PS attendance for a wide range of American subpopulations.
       Fortin (2005) examines the impacts of PS costs in Canada and the U.S. over the 1970s, 1980s, and
1990s. Her estimates imply similar enrolment impacts of tuition for both countries over this period
(roughly 4 percentage point increase per $1,000 tuition reduction). Her estimates also suggest that
increases in student aid have more modest eﬀects (for Canada).
       Our analysis below considers the role of need-based ﬁnancial aid policies on PS attendance patterns.
We are, therefore, primarily interested in the extent to which changes in current amounts of student
aid might impact PS attendance. While evidence from tuition variation (across states/provinces or
within states/provinces over time) and recent state aid programs consistently predicts impacts of 3-5
percentage points per $1,000, earlier studies estimate weaker eﬀects associated with the introduction
of federal Pell grants. Some have suggested that the weaker impacts of Pell Grants may be the result of
complex federal aid application procedures and a lack of information about aid eligibility or amounts.13
These problems are likely to have been most severe at the introduction of Pell Grants in the mid-1970s,
thereby limiting the initial aid impacts estimated by Hansen (1983) and Kane (1994). Today, most
low-income youth interested in attending an American PS institution would ﬁll out federal ﬁnancial
aid forms whether or not they receive any state-speciﬁc grant or scholarship, so potential new students
face this application burden regardless of the source of new aid. For example, Kane (2007) estimates
sizeable impacts of the DC Tuition Assistant Grant Program on the number of FAFSA ﬁlers and
Pell Grant recipients from Washington DC that are similar in magnitude to eﬀects on enrolment.
Furthermore, Kane’s (2003) estimated impacts of the CalGrant program on PS enrollment are based
on a sample of California residents who had applied for federal aid. Both of these studies suggest that
recent ﬁnancial aid programs encourage PS enrolment despite any federal aid application burdens.
However discouraging the federal aid application process may be, the impacts of changing current
ﬁnancial aid policies are likely to be similar regardless of the source of aid.14 The consistency of recent
  12
     Cornwell, Mustard, and Sridhar (2006) also estimate signiﬁcant eﬀects of the Georgia HOPE scholarship on enrolment
rates in Georgia PS institutions.
  13
     As noted by Kane (1994), Pell Grant eligibility is also likely to be measured with error, biasing estimated eﬀects
toward zero in these studies.
  14
     This does not mean ﬁnancial aid forms are not a burden or that aid would not be more eﬀective at encouraging PS
attendance in the absence of complicated forms. Indeed, recent estimates by Bettinger, et al. (2009) suggest that the
burden imposed by federal aid forms may be quite discouraging.



                                                          7
ﬁnancial aid and tuition impacts on enrolment suggest that the relatively small impacts associated
with the introduction of Pell Grants in the mid-1970s are unlikely to be very informative about the
impacts of changes in ﬁnancial aid policies today.
    Given the body of evidence, especially from more recent studies, our calculations below assume
estimated PS attendance responses of 3-5 percentage points per $1,000 in net tuition. Even these
estimates may be conservative, since changes in tuition or the amount of aid oﬀered from any one
source are often oﬀset by changes in other sources of aid (e.g. institutional support). For example,
we show below that diﬀerences in tuition between high- and low-tuition American states are partially
oﬀset, especially among low-income youth, by adjustments in institutional and state aid. This would
tend to bias estimated tuition eﬀects towards zero.


3     NLSY97 and YITS Data

Our main empirical analysis uses data from the NLSY97 and YITS, focusing on educational attainment
as of age 21. The NLSY97 samples American youth ages 12-16 at the beginning of 1997, while YITS
surveys Canadian youth age 15 at the start of 2000.15 Youth in both samples made their PS attendance
decisions in the early to mid-2000s. Most importantly, NSLY97 and YITS contain comparable measures
of adolescent cognitive achievement, parental income during adolescence, and rich measures of family
background.
    In 1997, NLSY97 respondents took a large battery of tests known as the Armed Forces Vocational
Aptitude Battery (ASVAB).16 In 2000, YITS respondents took math, reading, and science tests from
the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA). All respondents took the reading as-
sessment, but only half the respondents took the math assessment while the other half (both randomly
assigned) took the science assessment. We focus on the half taking both the reading and mathematics
assessments. Our analysis uses a combined math-reading achievement measure, which is simply the av-
erage of normalized math and reading assessment scores. For comparability in the NLSY97, we create
a combined math-reading achievement measure from four ASVAB assessments (arithmetic reason-
ing, mathematics knowledge, paragraph comprehension, and word knowledge). Finally, we categorize
individuals according to their normalized test score quartiles.17
  15
     In the NLSY97, we exclude youths that are part of the minority and poor white over-samples, using only the full
random samples in our analysis.
  16
     Four ASVAB subtests are combined to create the AFQT scores discussed earlier. The full set of subtests includes
arithmetic reasoning, assembling objects, auto information, coding speed, electronics information, general science, math-
ematics knowledge, mechanical comprehension, numerical operations, paragraph comprehension, shop information, and
word knowledge.
  17
     For both data sources, we ﬁrst normalize individual test scores by subtracting the mean score and dividing by its



                                                           8
    The NLSY97 measures income for all household members (received in 1996), while YITS only
contains measures of parental income (received in 1999). For comparability, we use total parental
income (excluding income from other household or family members) in both samples for our analysis.18
Parental income is measured when youth are age 15 in YITS and ages 12-16 in the NLSY97; however,
this discrepancy does not play an important role in our ﬁndings. We denominate income in year 1999
dollars, using the U.S. Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers (CPI-U) to adjust for inﬂation
in the NLSY97. We also consider income adjustments to account for diﬀerences in the Canada–U.S.
currency exchange rate or the purchasing power parity (PPP) index.19
    Our analysis focuses primarily on PS attendance as of age 21.20 Individuals in the NLSY97 are
considered to have attended a PS institution if they attended at least 13 years of regular school. This
includes traditional two- and four-year colleges and universities but would generally exclude partici-
pation in shorter training or vocational programs. In YITS, our measure of PS attendance is based
on reported attendance by age 21 in a qualifying PS program or institution, including ‘colleges’ (two-
year institutions), ‘universities’ (four-year institutions), or Quebec’s CEGEP (‘College d’enseignement
general et professionnel’, meaning College of General and Vocational Education) program. Consis-
tent with our NLSY97 measure, we exclude participation in shorter vocational, training, licensing, or
apprenticeship programs. In some cases, we also consider whether youth ever reported attending a
four-year PS institution by age 21.
    Our multivariate analysis controls for a rich set of family background measures. We control for
maternal education by categorizing mothers as high school dropouts, those who completed high school
or more, and those who completed at least one year of PS schooling. We also account for family
structure by controlling for the number of household members under the age of 18 as of the ﬁrst
survey date. Additional family structure information is provided by an indicator variable for whether
both biological parents are present in the home at the time of the initial survey. We include controls
for whether the youth is an immigrant and whether at least one parent is an immigrant. We account
standard deviation. This generates normalized scores for all tests with a mean of zero and standard deviation of one.
In the NLSY97, we normalize within each age group (in years). In YITS, our math-reading achievement measure is the
simple average of the normalized math and reading scores. In the NLSY97, we ﬁrst create a math (reading) score by
taking an average of normalized scores for arithmetic reasoning and mathematics knowledge (paragraph comprehension
and word knowledge). We normalize these scores and then take their average as our math-reading achievement measure
— its correlation with AFQT percentile is over 0.97 in our sample.
  18
     The correlation between total parental income and total household income (used by Belley and Lochner (2007)) is
0.96 in the NLSY97.
  19
     In 1999, the average nominal exchange rate was 1.49 while the PPP was 1.19. That is, the U.S. dollar was worth
1.49 (or 1.19 using PPP) Canadian dollars.
  20
     Schooling attainment at age 22 is used in the NLSY97 if it is missing or unavailable at age 21 (fewer than 10% of all
respondents).




                                                            9
for family residence in a metropolitan area at age 15.21 We control for the mother’s age at the time of
the respondent’s birth as well as gender in both surveys. Finally, we control for race (blacks, hispanics,
other non-whites, and whites) and year of birth in the NLSY97.
       Descriptive statistics for these variables are provided in Table 1 for both surveys.22 Comparisons
across samples suggest that schooling attainment is higher in Canada, except at the top end. Both
high school and PS attendance rates are about 10% higher in Canada than the U.S. (93% vs. 83% for
PS attendance and 71% vs. 63% for high school completion).23 By contrast, 42% of youth attended a
4-year PS school in both countries. Educational attainment is also higher among Canadian mothers.
Compared to American youth, Canadian youth are less likely to be non-white, but more likely to be
ﬁrst- or second-generation immigrants.24 Canadian youth also tend to have slightly older mothers and
are more likely to have both biological parents present in the household during adolescence. Fewer
Canadian youth grow up in metropolitan areas.
       Table 1 also reports average parental income and average income within each of the four quartiles
for Canada and the U.S. (denominated in year 1999 dollars). For comparability, the table shows
U.S. income levels after adjusting for diﬀerences in PPP. After adjusting for PPP, American parents
average about $7,500 less in income than Canadian parents each year.25 Income is more dispersed
in the U.S. Most notably, parents in the lowest income quartile in the U.S. report annual income
averaging $15,600 while Canadian parents in the bottom quartile reported incomes averaging $28,100.
In the top quartile, American and Canadian parental incomes diﬀer by less than $1,000, both averaging
around $125,000.
       Finally, we note that parental income and achievement are strongly correlated in both samples.
Roughly 35% of American youth are in the same achievement and family income quartiles, compared
to 30% of Canadian youth.26
  21
      In the NLSY97, ‘metropolitan residence’ reﬂects residence in a U.S. Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) at age 15
if available; otherwise, we use residence at age 16 (or 17 if also unavailable at 16). An analogous Canadian measure
was created for YITS using an indicator for whether the respondent’s Census Metropolitan Area (CMA) or Census
Agglomeration Area (CA) had a population of greater than 50,000.
   22
      These samples are restricted to individuals for whom we observe both math-reading scores and parental income.
   23
      In the NLSY97, respondents are assumed to have completed high school if they completed 12 or more years of school
by age 21. In YITS, high school completion is self-reported as of age 21.
   24
      In the U.S., hispanic and African Americans are both sizeable minorities, each representing 10-15% of the population.
Asians represent fewer than 5%. In Canada, blacks and hispanics make up less than 1% of the population, while
Asians represent nearly 10% of the population. In 2001, 18% of all Canadians were foreign-born, roughly 40% of them
immigrating from Europe and another third from Asia. By comparison, 11% of the U.S. population in 2000 was foreign-
born, with about half immigrating from Latin America and one-quarter from Asia. Finally, Canada diﬀers in that it
contains a sizeable francophone population with about one-ﬁfth of the population speaking French at home. The vast
majority of Canadian francophones live in Quebec.
   25
      Using the (higher) oﬃcial currency exchange rate, average parental income in the U.S. ($80,000) was almost $9,000
higher than in Canada.
   26
      See Belley, Frenette, and Lochner (2010) for the joint distribution of parental income and achievement in the NLSY97


                                                            10
4    Achievement, Parental Income and Educational Attainment

Figure 1 reports PS attendance rates by parental income quartile in Canada and the U.S. Education
and parental income are positively correlated in both countries, but the correlation is substantially
stronger in the U.S. Canadian youth with parents in the highest income quartile are nearly twenty
percentage points more likely to attend a PS institution than are youth from the lowest income quartile.
In the U.S., this diﬀerence is about 45 percentage points. High income youth from both countries have
similar PS attendance rates, but low income youth in the U.S. have much worse educational outcomes
than their Canadian counterparts.
    Figure 2 shows PS attendance rates by parental income and math-reading achievement quartiles in
YITS and the NLSY97. Not surprisingly, math and reading skills play an important role in determining
educational attainment. Both achievement and parental income are more important determinants of
PS attendance in the U.S. than in Canada. In Canada, income has much greater eﬀects on PS
attendance for the least able than for all other math-reading achievement quartiles. Among the
least able, youth from the highest income quartile appear to be outliers with attendance rates that
are 13-20 percentage points higher than all other income groups. Other achievement groups show
an attendance gap of 8-12 percentage points between the highest and lowest income quartiles. The
picture for the U.S. is quite diﬀerent. In the NLSY97 data, diﬀerences in attendance between the
highest and lowest income quartiles range from 20-30 percentage points for all achievement groups.
    To further explore these relationships, we employ a similar methodology to that used in Ellwood
and Kane (2000), Carneiro and Heckman (2002) and Belley and Lochner (2007), who analyze the
eﬀects of family income and achievement on schooling decisions in the U.S. after controlling for other
family background characteristics. Since we are mainly interested in how parental income – educa-
tional attainment relationships compare between Canada and the U.S., we employ very similar esti-
mation speciﬁcations for both YITS and the NLSY97. Speciﬁcally, we regress educational outcomes
on parental income quartiles during the respondent’s late teenage years, math-reading achievement
quartiles, and nearly identical family background measures (as discussed earlier). We primarily use
parental income and achievement quartiles to allow for non-linear relationships; however, we consider
alternative assumptions about the role of parental income below.
    Table 2 reports estimates of our main speciﬁcations for the YITS and NLSY97 data. First, con-
sider the determinants of PS attendance in Canada and the U.S. reported in the ﬁrst two columns.
There is general agreement between both countries regarding the role played by family background.
and YITS.



                                                  11
Immigration status (of the youth and his or her parents) and maternal education have fairly strong
positive eﬀects on PS attendance rates in both countries. Youth born to older mothers, youth living
in metropolitan areas, and youth living in intact families (both biological parents present) during ado-
lescence are more likely to have attended a PS institution by age 21. The magnitudes of these eﬀects
are modest and similar across the two countries. As observed in Figure 2, math-reading achievement
and parental income are both substantially more important determinants of PS attendance in the
U.S. compared to Canada.27 In Canada, the most able are 37 percentage points more likely to attend
college relative to the least able; this gap is more than 50 percentage points in the U.S. The diﬀerence
in attendance rates between the highest and lowest income quartiles is about 7 percentage points
in Canada and about 18 percentage points in the U.S.28 While this diﬀerence is less than half the
size of the unconditional diﬀerence shown in Figure 1 (largely the result of controlling for cognitive
achievement), it is nonetheless still substantial.
       The ﬁnal two columns of Table 2 examine identical speciﬁcations for attendance at four-year PS
institutions. Interestingly, achievement appears to have similar eﬀects on attendance at four-year
schools in Canada and the U.S., despite the weaker eﬀects of achievement on attendance at any
PS institution in Canada. While the eﬀects of parental income in Canada are slightly stronger for
attendance at four-year PS institutions than at any PS institution, the eﬀects in the U.S. are still
twice as large as in Canada.29
       We have also explored speciﬁcations that use ﬁner measures of achievement (e.g. deciles for math-
reading scores) or that include separate quartiles for math and reading achievement. These speciﬁca-
tions yield very similar results (for the eﬀects of family income) to those reported in Table 2 (available
upon request). Furthermore, Belley and Lochner (2007) show that the eﬀect of parental income in the
NLSY97 is largely unchanged when controlling for adolescent participation in criminal activities to
account for diﬀerences in non-cognitive skills. In the YITS data, Frenette (2007) ﬁnds that self-esteem
and mastery (feeling control over one’s life) play little or no role in explaining the income – university
  27
     If ability is measured equally well by the ASVAB and PISA tests, then Canada – U.S. diﬀerences in the eﬀects of
achievement can be attributed to diﬀerences in the importance of ability. However, if PISA provides a noisier measure
of ability than the ASVAB tests, then we would expect to estimate a weaker relationship between achievement and PS
attendance in Canada. Given a positive correlation between ability and parental income, this would likely lead to a small
upward bias in the estimated eﬀect of parental income in Canada relative to the U.S.
  28
     We control for a very similar set of family background characteristics to those of Belley and Lochner (2007), who
explore the changing eﬀects of family income on educational attainment using the NLSY79 and NLSY97. Our estimates
for the NLSY97 are very similar to theirs, despite using slightly diﬀerent measures of achievement and parental income.
  29
     We have also estimated the eﬀects of achievement and parental income on attendance at a four-year school conditional
on attendance at any PS school. For both countries, achievement has strong positive eﬀects on the likelihood of choosing
a four-year institution over a two-year institution, while income has a small eﬀect in Canada and a modest eﬀect in the
U.S.




                                                           12
attendance gap after controlling for family background and cognitive achievement.
       Given the importance of race and immigration status, we also replicate our analysis for a more
restricted sample that is more demographically similar for Canada and the U.S.: white native-born
youth with native-born parents. We also restrict the Canadian sample to those with English as their
native tongue to best generate a similar ethnic, racial, and cultural sample across the two countries. As
column (i) of Appendix Tables A1 and A2 reveal, the eﬀects of income are stronger for this subsample
(compared to the results reported in Table 2) in both countries. The eﬀects of income are still twice
as strong in the U.S.
       An important concern with using family income quartiles to account for a non-linear relationship
between income and schooling is the diﬀerence in income distributions between the U.S. and Canada.30
As is evident from Table 1, income is more dispersed in the U.S., so the gap between high and low
income families is greater in the U.S. To see whether this explains the larger educational attainment
gaps by parental income quartiles, we estimate speciﬁcations analogous to those of Table 2 using linear
splines.31 This enables us to compare the eﬀects of parental income across countries at any level of
income. Figures 3a and 3b plot the estimated eﬀects of income for PS attendance and attendance
at a 4-year institution as a function of parental income, normalizing all lines to zero at an income
level of $10,000. These ﬁgures are consistent with Table 2 and show that parental income matters
much more in the U.S., whether we use the PPP index or oﬃcial exchange rates to adjust for currency
diﬀerences. For PS attendance in general, the eﬀects of income are largely focused in the income
range of $30-80,000, with much stronger eﬀects in the U.S. throughout this region. For attendance
at four-year institutions, the eﬀects of income are generally stronger in the U.S. (relative to Canada)
throughout the entire income distribution.
       We look more closely at the joint role of achievement and parental income in Table 3, which
reports the estimated eﬀects of parental income (using quartile indicators) on attendance at any
PS institution and at 4-year PS institutions within each math-reading achievement quartile. These
speciﬁcations control for the same background characteristics as in Table 2. Among Canadian youth,
parental income has modest eﬀects on PS schooling for low-achievement youth but smaller eﬀects on
those from higher achievement quartiles. The NLSY97 results show sizeable and statistically signiﬁcant
eﬀects of family income in the U.S. for all achievement groups. Among all but the top achievement
  30
      We also consider an alternative measure of family income which makes an adjustment for family size. Speciﬁcally,
we divide parental income by the square root of family size before deriving income quartiles. This income adjustment
has little eﬀect on the estimated importance of achievement or parental income.
   31
      For comparison with our NPSAS04 analysis of ﬁnancial aid schedules below, we include spline ‘knots’ every $10,000
from $20,000 to $100,000, where all amounts are denominated in Canadian dollars.



                                                          13
quartile, moving from the lowest to highest family income quartile raises PS attendance rates by at
least 20 percentage points.

4.1    Diﬀerences Across Canadian Provinces and American States

We now brieﬂy explore whether parental income – PS attendance gradients diﬀer across provinces/states
within Canada and the U.S. In Canada, Quebec diﬀers from all other provinces in many ways that
may aﬀect income – PS attendance gaps. Not only is Quebec culturally unique, but it also has a very
diﬀerent institutional environment in terms of its structure for higher education and PS aid/costs (see
Section 5). Most notably, Quebec charges lower levels of tuition than other Canadian provinces and
targets relatively more aid to the bottom of the family income distribution. We also divide American
states into those above and below the median in-state public tuition at four-year institutions, $4,675.
The average diﬀerence in tuition between these two groups of states is roughly $2,300.32
    Table 4a presents estimates for speciﬁcations identical to our baseline results in Table 2 separately
for Quebec and for all other Canadian provinces. Relative to Quebec, estimates for other Canadian
provinces reveal slightly stronger eﬀects of parental income on PS attendance but slightly weaker
eﬀects on attendance at four-year institutions (i.e. universities).33 All estimated eﬀects of income are
smaller than their U.S. counterparts.
    Estimates for high- and low-tuition states in Table 4b also reveal a diﬀerence between attendance
at any PS institution and at four-year institutions. The ﬁrst two columns show that family income is
much more strongly related to PS attendance in high-tuition states; however, there is little diﬀerence in
income – attendance gradients for four-year institutions (indeed, the point estimates suggest a slightly
weaker income – attendance relationship in high-tuition states). This makes it somewhat diﬃcult to
draw strong conclusions about the role of in-state tuition levels on income – attendance relationships
within the U.S. As we show below in Section 5, this may not be very surprising given the extent to
which ﬁnancial aid helps oﬀset much of the diﬀerence in tuition, especially for families in the bottom
half of the income distribution.
  32
     Median and average tuition levels reported here are based on assuming average state-speciﬁc tuition for all individuals
in the NLSY97 and then taking the median/mean with respect to all respondents in our sample. Tuition at public two-
year and four-year schools is highly correlated: roughly three-quarters of all individuals with four-year tuition above the
median also have two-year tuition above the median. Data on in-state tuition is from Table 313 of the 2005 Digest of
Education Statistics (Snyder, et al. 2006).
  33
     While not shown, estimates for youth whose ﬁrst language is French are quite similar to those for the Quebec sample.




                                                            14
4.2      Accounting for Diﬀerences by Local Area of Residence and Peer Groups

There are many reasons to think that residential segregation by family income may help explain family
income – PS attendance relationships. For example, higher income youth may attend ‘better’ primary
and secondary schools or they may live in areas with closer access to PS institutions or more college-
level jobs. Their peers and social networks are also likely to be more education-friendly. With greater
residential segregation by income in the U.S., these factors could contribute to a stronger income –
attendance relationship there. To explore this possibility, we consider additional speciﬁcations that
control for local area of residence ﬁxed eﬀects.
       Column (ii) in Appendix Table A1 controls for school (at age 15) ﬁxed eﬀects in Canada.34 The
estimated eﬀects of achievement are remarkably similar to those of Table 2 and the eﬀects of income
are only slightly smaller than our baseline estimates. The NLSY97 sampling scheme stratiﬁed by
geographic area rather than school, so it is not possible to estimate models with school ﬁxed eﬀects.
Column (ii) of Table A2 instead estimates our baseline model with ﬁxed eﬀects for county × MSA
residential status at age 15 (not in MSA, in MSA but not central city, in MSA and central city).
These estimates are also remarkably similar to their counterparts in Table 2. This is, perhaps, more
surprising given the dramatic diﬀerences in schools, inequality, and local labor market conditions
across U.S. counties (and metropolitan status within counties).
       Column (iii) of Table A1 takes advantage of some unique data collected in YITS related to respon-
dents’ perceived returns to schooling and their peers’ education plans. The survey asks respondents
the extent to which they agree that getting a good job later in life depends on success in school. They
are also asked how many of their peers plan to pursue education after high school. Column (iii) reveals
that including responses to these questions in our baseline speciﬁcations for PS attendance has neg-
ligible eﬀects on the estimated achievement and parental income coeﬃcients (compared to Table 2).
This is not because perceived returns and peers have no aﬀect on schooling decisions. Our estimates
imply that youth who strongly agree that schooling is important for getting a good job in the future
are about 8 percentage points more likely to attend PS school than those who strongly disagree with
that statement. Furthermore, youth who report that ‘all’ their peers will attend PS school are about
14 percentage points more likely to attend themselves. While the latter result is not easily interpreted
due to concerns about endogeneity bias and correlated unobserved tastes, these ﬁndings suggest that
our estimated eﬀects of parental income (or achievement) are not driven by diﬀerences in peers or
views about the returns to education.
  34
    Due to the YITS sampling scheme, which is stratiﬁed by schools, our data contain about 30 students on average in
each school.


                                                        15
       The ﬁxed eﬀects estimates in Tables A1 and A2 suggest that income plays an important role
even within schools or local geographic areas. Of course, peers and social networks may operate on
a much more micro level within schools and local residential areas that may not be picked up by
school or county × MSA status ﬁxed eﬀects. Our ﬁndings from YITS regarding peers plans for PS
schooling and youths’ own perceptions about the value of an education suggest that these factors
are important determinants of PS choices, but they do not explain the observed correlation between
parental income and PS attendance (after controlling for achievement and family background). In the
U.S., within-county heterogeneity is likely to be most confounding in more populous areas. Yet, we
ﬁnd similar eﬀects of family income on PS attendance regardless of whether youth come from high
or low population density counties. We also estimate similar eﬀects for youth from non-metropolitan
or metropolitan areas (see Table A3). However important peers and social networks are, we ﬁnd no
evidence that they explain the parental income – educational attainment relationships we ﬁnd in the
U.S. and Canada (or why this relationship diﬀers across these countries).
       By controlling for local residential ﬁxed eﬀects, we also account for diﬀerences in local access to a
PS institution across individuals. In separate speciﬁcations (not shown), we ﬁnd that the presence of
a public PS institution in an individual’s county of residence at age 15 has no signiﬁcant eﬀects on PS
attendance rates or the estimated eﬀects of parental income on PS attendance.35
       Finally, the greater degree of income inequality in the U.S. might suggest that American students
face greater uncertainty in their post-school earnings, which may cause youth from low-income families
to eschew PS schooling and all the debt it entails.36 In this case, we would expect PS attendance
decisions for low-income youth to depend more on local labor market conditions (relative to their
higher income counterparts); yet, controlling for local residential area ﬁxed eﬀects does not appreciably
reduce income – attendance relationships in either Canada or the U.S. We also ﬁnd no diﬀerence in the
estimated eﬀect of family income on PS attendance when we split our sample by local unemployment
rates (see Table A3).
  35
     Results available upon request. We thank Janet Currie and Enrico Moretti for providing their data on PS institutions
by county. See Currie and Moretti (2003) for further details on these data.
  36
     Alternatively, one might wonder if the higher returns to schooling in the U.S. could produce a steeper income
– attendance gradient? (See Burbidge, Magee, and Robb (2002) for one study showing higher returns in the U.S.)
As shown in Belley, Frenette, and Lochner (2010), a standard schooling choice model with heterogeneous tastes for
schooling (with or without credit constraints) suggests that this diﬀerence should lead to a weaker, not stronger, income
– PS attendance correlation in the U.S.




                                                           16
4.3      PS Attendance Conditional on High School Completion

The ﬁnal column in both Tables A1 and A2 conditions the sample on those who have completed
high school. While this does not change the estimated eﬀects of achievement and parental income in
Canada (where most students ﬁnish high school), these eﬀects are noticeably weaker in the U.S. when
compared with Table 2. The estimated eﬀects of income and achievement in column (iii) of Table A2
are roughly half-way between the baseline U.S. and Canada estimates reported in Table 2, suggesting
that as much as half of the Canada–U.S. diﬀerence in the eﬀects of achievement and parental income
on PS attendance may be traced back to the diﬀerential eﬀects of achievement and income on high
school completion.37 Weaker eﬀects of income and achievement conditional on high school completion
are also consistent with dynamic self-selection as discussed in Cameron and Heckman (1998).38


5        Post-Secondary Costs and Financial Aid in Canada and the U.S.

In this section, we discuss tuition costs and ﬁnancial aid policies in Canada and the U.S. Most notably,
we document the relationship between ﬁnancial aid and parental income in both countries. Before
discussing costs and aid, however, we brieﬂy discuss key institutional aspects of higher education in
Canada and the U.S.

5.1      Institutional Environment

In most Canadian provinces, students obtain a high school diploma after completing twelve years of
elementary and secondary schooling. At that point, youth are eligible to begin ‘college’ (usually a two-
or three-year program) or ‘university’ (usually lasting four years for an undergraduate degree). The
province of Quebec diﬀers, however. Students in Quebec normally graduate with a high school diploma
after completing 11 years of schooling. Those that want to attend university must ﬁrst complete a two-
year college program at CEGEP. As a result, Quebec students normally only require three additional
years to complete an undergraduate university degree. Those wishing to obtain a terminal college
diploma (rather than attend university) must complete a three-year CEGEP program. For the cohort
examined in this study, the system also diﬀered in Ontario where most students attending university
    37
     Belley, Frenette, and Lochner (2010) show that family income has a larger impact on high school completion rates
in the U.S. relative to Canada, especially for lower achievement quartiles.
  38
     Very low income (or low ability) youth who ﬁnish high school are likely to have other unobservable characteristics
that make them more likely to continue on in school (e.g. they may enjoy school). This selection is likely to be weaker for
high-income (high-ability) youth, who are likely to attend regardless of other factors. As such, conditioning on high school
completion may generate a negative correlation between family income (ability) and other unobserved determinants of
schooling.




                                                            17
would have attended 13 years of elementary and secondary schooling.39
       In the U.S., high school completion typically requires twelve years of primary and secondary
schooling; however, a state-wide test must also be passed to receive a high school diploma in some
states. Students that do not graduate from high school may take the General Educational Development
(GED), which is meant to substitute for a high school diploma. In most cases, a high school diploma
or GED is required for admission to PS institutions, especially four-year schools.
       With the exception of a small number of private career colleges, as well as some elite professional
programs at the university level, PS institutions in Canada are heavily funded by the government and
are eﬀectively ‘public’ schools. By contrast, roughly 40% of all U.S. degree-granting PS institutions
are private; however, they only enroll about one-in-four American PS students. About 60% of all
American PS students attend four-year institutions.40

5.2      Post-Secondary Education Finance

We now discuss the costs of PS attendance and the structure of ﬁnancial aid programs in Canada
and the U.S.41 We focus on the following factors determining the ﬁnancial situation of students in
both countries: (i) tuition, fees, and other costs; (ii) expected family contributions (EFC) towards PS
schooling; (iii) grants and other non-repayable aid like tax credits; and (iv) student loans. These factors
determine both the net price of PS attendance as well as the out-of-pocket expenditures required of
students.
       We consider costs and aid for the 2003-04 academic year unless otherwise noted, since most of
the youth in the NLSY97 and YITS would typically be enrolled in PS school during that year and
because we can obtain detailed information about PS ﬁnancial aid and costs for the U.S. that year from
the 2004 National Post-Secondary Aid Survey (NPSAS04). Although comparable individual-speciﬁc
information about ﬁnancial aid for students in Canada is not available, the vast majority of aid in
Canada is distributed by the federal or provincial governments subject to known rules. We, therefore,
use provincial and Canada Student Loan Program (CSLP) rules in 2003-04 to determine ﬁnancial aid
availability for students from diﬀerent backgrounds. We speciﬁcally consider detailed rules in the three
  39
     Prior to 1999, university attendance in Ontario required a regular high school diploma (12 years) plus several courses
at the OAC (Ontario Academic Credit) level. Although it was possible to complete the OAC requirements by the end
of grade 12, very few students did. The Ontario system has since been reformed, such that students beginning in high
school in 1999 or later are eligible for university entry after grade 12; however, many students still require an additional
year to obtain the advanced credits (King, et al., 2005).
  40
     About two-thirds of students in four-year institutions attend public schools, whereas nearly all students enrolled in
two-year schools do. These institutional and enrollment statistics are taken from Tables 168 and 243 of the Digest of
Education Statistics, 2005 (Snyder, et al. 2006).
  41
     Although foregone earnings (i.e. the expected earnings one could receive if not enrolled in school) are an important
component of costs, they are roughly similar in Canada and the U.S. (Burbidge, Magee, and Robb 2002).


                                                            18
largest provinces (Quebec, Ontario, and British Columbia) and actual Millennium Foundation awards
to determine ﬁnancial aid (grants and loans) as a function of parental income in those provinces.42
Financial aid in most other provinces is similar in nature to that of British Columbia and Ontario.

5.2.1      Costs

In 2003-04, average tuition at Canadian universities was $4,025. Adding expenses for books, supplies,
housing, and transportation, typically implied total costs to students of more than $10,000 per year.
Tuition levels at two-year colleges are roughly half that of university levels (except in Quebec), and
more youth have local access to colleges than universities, reducing additional costs associated with
housing and transportation. Variability in tuition is quite small in Canada relative to the U.S. At
the college level, tuition is remarkably similar across programs and most provinces; although, Quebec
is a clear exception, where in-province CEGEP students pay only nominal registration fees. At the
university level, tuition varies somewhat from about $2,500 in Quebec to $4,800 in British Columbia
to $5,600 in Ontario.43
       Average tuition levels are much higher in the U.S. than in Canada due to the sizeable share of
private PS institutions in the U.S. Diﬀerences between Canadian and U.S. public school tuition levels
are more modest. In the 2003-04 academic year, average tuition and fees for undergraduates in the
U.S. amounted to $1,900 at two-year public schools, $4,600 at four-year public schools, and $19,000
at four-year private schools (College Board 2004). Adjusting for the relevant PPP inﬂates these U.S.
costs by about 20%, so American students who choose in-state public PS schools typically face costs
that are about 40% higher than those faced by their Canadian counterparts. Of course, tuition and
fees vary substantially across U.S. states (and, to a lesser extent, Canadian provinces) as we discuss
below.
       Among four-year students living away from home, room and board charges added another six to
seven thousand dollars in both Canada and the U.S. (Usher and Steele 2006). Of course, living at home
can save considerably on these costs. Do (2004) notes that about half of U.S. high school graduates do
not have local access to a state-funded PS institution, while Frenette (2004) ﬁnds that only one-in-six
Canadian students do not have access to a local university and nearly all Canadian students have local
access to a two-year college. These diﬀerences appear to be important for residential choices given
that 35% of recent dependent university students who received CSLP aid in Canada lived with their
  42
     Roughly 75% of the Canadian population resides in Quebec, Ontario, or British Columbia.
  43
     Within provinces, tuition is fairly similar across programs and institutions, except for a few recently de-regulated
elite professional programs (especially in Ontario). See Junor and Usher (2004) for a detailed description of PS costs
and ﬁnancial aid in Canada.



                                                           19
parents while only 20% of their American counterparts did.44
       University attendance rates have traditionally been lower among ‘distant’ students, especially
those from disadvantaged families (Card 1995, Kling 2001, Frenette 2004). However, Kling (2001) and
Cameron and Taber (2004) suggest that living near a post-secondary school was less important in the
U.S. during the early 1980s than it was twenty years earlier. We ﬁnd no diﬀerence in family income
– PS attendance gaps in the NLSY97 for students with or without a public PS institution in their
county of residence at age 15.

5.2.2      Financial Aid

Both Canada and the U.S. provide considerable aid in the form of grants (including loan remissions
in Canada), tax credits, and loans. In both countries, the vast majority of ﬁnancial aid is need-based;
although, merit-based aid has grown recently in the U.S.45 We focus on need-based aid in Canada
and the U.S., since we are primarily interested in understanding PS attendance gaps by family income
conditional on adolescent student achievement.
       Throughout most of Canada, student grants and loans are administered through (or in concert
with) the Canada Student Loan Program (CSLP) with the federal government providing 60% of
student assessed need and provincial governments the rest. (Quebec is an exception with its own
student ﬁnancial aid system.) The Millennium Foundation also provided considerable grant and
bursary aid in 2003-04, which we account for in our ﬁgures below. While the details of provincial
aid programs diﬀer, all provide some combination of loans and grants based on student need. In the
U.S., federal rules determine federal grants and loans as a function of student need. Most states and
institutions use a similar need calculation in determining their support.
       Generally, determined ‘need’ simply equals total estimated costs (including tuition, fees, living
expenses, books and equipment, and travel expenses) less an expected family contribution (EFC).
While actual EFCs diﬀer between Canada and the U.S., they are based on similar information.
  44
     Canadian residential status ﬁgures are based on dependent students receiving some form of aid from the CSLP
(excludes Quebec) in 2004-05. (We thank Leesha Lin from the CSLP for providing us with these statistics from the
Provincial Need Assessment Data.) Among 19-year old Canadians surveyed (by YITS) in 2004, 48% of those who had
attended university reported living with their parents in December 2003; this ﬁgure drops to 42% for those in university
four years later at age 23. These ﬁgures are likely higher than that for all CSLP aid recipients, since students living
with their parents are less likely to qualify for ﬁnancial aid. The U.S. ﬁgure is based on all full time/full-year dependent
students ages 18-24 who applied for federal aid and attended an in-state 4-year public institution in 2003-04 (based on
NPSAS04).
  45
     In Canada, roughly $200 million is provided annually in the form of merit aid, compared with over $6 billion in
federal and provincial aid (Berger, Motte, and Parkin 2007). Some U.S. states have introduced scholarships and grants
for students who perform well in high school and attend PS school in-state (many based on the success of Georgia’s Hope
Scholarship Program). PS institutions themselves exercise ﬂexibility in their ﬁnancial aid packages, sometimes using
generous oﬀers to attract top students. This is most common in the most expensive private schools and less common in
public institutions.


                                                            20
       EFCs depend on a student’s own savings and income, as well as that of his parents (dependent
students) or spouse (married students).46 Canadian students in provinces other than Quebec are
expected to contribute all of their savings towards post-secondary schooling, while student savings
are fully exempt in Quebec. American students are expected to contribute 35% of any savings. Be-
cause most traditional students accumulate little savings, these diﬀerences are relatively unimportant.
More importantly, Canada and the U.S. diﬀer substantially in the way they treat student income in
calculating the EFC. In Canada, students are expected to contribute a minimum amount each year
from summer employment, with any additional income above a modest living amount taxed at rates
typically above 80%. Minimum contribution rates can be sizeable, ranging between two and three
thousand dollars in most provinces.47 In contrast, the U.S. imposes no minimum contribution from
students, instead allowing them to earn $2,380 before ‘taxing’ them at a 50% rate. This diﬀerential
treatment of student income plays an important role in determining EFCs and ﬁnancial aid at the low
end of the parental income distribution in the U.S. and Canada.
       Expected parental contributions depend primarily on parental income in both countries, with
assets playing only a minor role.48 Generally, parents with income below an exemption amount are
not expected to contribute to their children’s PS education. Exemption levels are relatively low in the
U.S. and Quebec compared to other Canadian provinces. Parents earning above the exemption level
are eﬀectively taxed by ﬁnancial aid formulas as their expected contribution rises with income.
       Figure 4 shows EFCs as a function of pre-tax parental income for students from two-parent/two-
child families in British Columbia, Ontario, and Quebec.49 The ﬁgure also reports average EFC
amounts by parental income for dependent undergraduate students in the U.S. from the NPSAS04.
(Note that U.S. dollars in this and other ﬁgures of this section have been inﬂated by 20% reﬂecting
the PPP diﬀerence between Canada and the U.S.) The diﬀerential treatment of student contributions
  46
     Parental resources are not considered for independent students. In Canada, a student must typically be married,
have children, been in the workforce for at least 2 years, or been out of secondary school for at least 4 years (5 years in
Ontario, out of full-time studies for 7 years in Quebec) in order to be considered independent. In the U.S., independent
students must be over age 24, married, or with children.
  47
     Students in Quebec and BC are expected to contribute between $2,500 and $3,000 each year, while students from
Ontario are only expected to contribute $1,800 annually. In some cases, students may be given an exemption from the
minimum contribution if they are unable to ﬁnd summer employment. Exemption rates vary from year to year, but
for 2004-05, 23% of dependent university students from British Columbia and 5% of students from Ontario received an
exemption. (We thank Leesha Lin from the CSLP for providing us with these exemption rates from the Provincial Need
Assessment Data.)
  48
     Parental assets are generally exempt throughout Canada, except in Quebec where expected parental contributions
increase by 2% for assets above $90,000 ($250,000 for farmers and ﬁshermen). In the U.S., all housing assets are exempt,
along with any assets below the appropriate exemption amount (e.g. $37,300 for a two-parent family with the older
parent 40 years old). Above the exemption amount, assets are multiplied by 0.12 and then added to parental income in
determining expected parental contributions.
  49
     See Appendix D (available online) for a detailed discussion of EFC and aid calculations in Canada.



                                                            21
from summer work is evident at the low end of the income scale, where the U.S. expects much less
from disadvantaged families. However, the EFC increases quickly in the U.S., overtaking the EFCs
in Ontario and British Columbia at around $30-35,000. Implicit tax rates on parental income above
the exemption level are modest but cover a broad range of incomes for the U.S. and Quebec, whereas
in other Canadian provinces, implicit tax rates on non-exempt income are higher but only apply to
families earning above $55,000 (slightly below the median family income for our YITS sample).
       In Canada, government student aid is oﬀered to cover the diﬀerence between costs and the EFC,
subject to a generous upper limit. (Institutions themselves sometimes provide additional aid to help
meet any need that has not been satisﬁed by federal and provincial sources; however, institutional aid
plays a minor role in Canada relative to the U.S.) In most provinces, total government aid (loans plus
grants) is limited to no more than $275 per week ($9,350 for a typical 34-week academic year) for
single dependent students. While a few provinces oﬀer slightly higher limits, Quebec sets much higher
annual limits of $14,792 (CEGEP) and $17,293 (university undergraduates). Generally, government
loans are the ﬁrst form of aid provided, with grants reserved for those with the greatest need. The
mix between grants and loans is largely a provincial decision. Again, Quebec diﬀers substantially from
the rest of Canada in favoring grants heavily over loans. Quebec limits loan amounts to about $2,500
per year for university undergraduates ($2,000/yr for CEGEP students), providing all other aid in
the form of grants. Other provinces typically oﬀer more of their assistance in the form of loans. See
Appendix D (available online) for further details.
       Most federal grant aid in the U.S. is distributed in the form of Pell grants, targeted to very low
income families. (In 2003-04, the maximum Pell grant award was $4,050, while the maximum Sup-
plemental Educational Opportunity Grant was $4,000.) States and institutions are also an important
source of grant aid, especially for students from middle and higher income families. The Staﬀord
Loan Program oﬀers loans to all students (regardless of need) of up to $2,625 for the ﬁrst year of
PS schooling, $3,500 for the second year, and $5,500 for each of the next three years.50 The total
amount of federal grants and subsidized loans cannot exceed the total cost of tuition, fees, room and
board (TFRB) less the EFC. However, all students can take out unsubsidized Staﬀord loans up to
maximum loan limits or the total cost of schooling (less any subsidized loan amounts) regardless of
calculated need. In this respect, the U.S. federal aid system is more generous to youth from higher
income families compared to the Canadian system. Canada does not oﬀer government student loans
  50
    These limits have increased since 2003-04. Low-income students may receive subsidized Staﬀord Loans, for which
the government pays the interest while the student is enrolled in a PS school, as well as Perkins Student Loans. Higher
income students can take out unsubsidized Staﬀord Loans.




                                                          22
irrespective of need, so students with parents providing little ﬁnancial support may have diﬃculties
making ends meet.
       In Figures 5-8, we show how ﬁnancial aid, net tuition, and out-of-pocket schooling costs for PS
students attending four-year institutions in Canada and the U.S. depend on parental income. Canadian
ﬁgures are based on the CSLP and provincial rules (including Millennium and provincial grants and
bursaries), using province-speciﬁc information about average university costs and student residential
status. We focus on the three largest Canadian provinces (British Columbia, Ontario, and Quebec);
however, patterns for other provinces are governed by similar rules to those of British Columbia and
Ontario (see, e.g., Junor and Usher, 2004). Figures for the U.S. are calculated from the NPSAS04
and are based on 18-24 year-old dependent students that are enrolled in-state in a public four-year PS
institution and applied for federal ﬁnancial aid.51 We separately consider students attending high and
low tuition institutions in the U.S. based on whether the student pays more or less than the median
level of tuition ($4,350).52 Average tuition for the bottom half is $3,300, while it is $6,000 for the top
half. Aid ﬁgures for Canada are reported separately for students living at ‘home’ with their parents
and those living ‘away’ from their parents. Surprisingly, average aid amounts diﬀer very little by
student residential status in the U.S. We, therefore, show averages for American students regardless
of residential status.
       Figure 5 reports total non-repayable aid, including tax credits, grants, scholarships and bursaries,
by parental income.53 (See Appendix B for a discussion of non-repayable aid disaggregated by source.)
American students with parental income below $20,000 received roughly $10,000 in non-repayable aid
from high tuition states and approximately $7,000 from low tuition states. This diﬀerence nearly
compensates for the diﬀerence in tuition. The ﬁgure also shows how non-repayable aid (in particular,
grant and scholarship aid) declines sharply and continuously with income in the U.S. for families
earning less than $60,000. Total non-repayable aid (especially grants and bursaries) in Canada is
generally much lower and varies considerably by student residential status, reﬂecting the diﬀerence in
costs. As noted earlier, Quebec provides all aid in the form of grants above $2,500; however, Ontario
and British Columbia simply have a cutoﬀ need level, above which students receive Millennium or
provincial bursaries/grants and below which they do not.54 Non-repayable aid for Quebec follows
  51
     Using the NPSAS04, we calculate average aid for parental income categories (adjusted for PPP) zero to twenty
thousand dollars, then by every ten thousand dollars up to one hundred thousand dollars, and for one hundred thousand
dollars and above.
  52
     This distinction is largely synonymous with living in high or low tuition states, since variation in in-state tuition
across four-year institutions within states is quite small.
  53
     We also include loan remissions in total non-repayable aid for Ontario and Quebec.
  54
     Through loan remissions, Ontario eﬀectively limits loans to $7,000 and provides all aid above that amount in the
form of grants. The modest increases in aid at very low income levels in Canada are due to the inability of very low


                                                           23
a similar pattern to that of the U.S., phasing out continuously over the bottom half of the income
distribution. By contrast, non-repayable aid in British Columbia and Ontario phases out quite quickly
but at much higher income levels.
    Figure 6 reports available government loans in the U.S. and Canada. U.S. amounts assume all
students can access Staﬀord Loans up to the maximum limits; they also include any need-based
loans (e.g. Perkins loans) as reported by the NPSAS04. Government student loan access is largely
independent of parental income in the U.S. This is not true in Canada, where loans phase-out over a
similar income range as does grant aid. In Ontario and British Columbia, both grants and loans are
available up to fairly high income levels (roughly $70,000 for students living away from home), then
phase-out very quickly.
    Figure 7 subtracts total non-repayable aid from tuition and fees to obtain a measure of ‘net tuition’
at public four-year institutions. This measure does not account for living expenses, which are typically
estimated at $6-7 thousand for students living away from home. So, while net tuition appears to be
higher for Canadian students living at home, the total net cost of university may be lower. Because
ﬁnancial aid and net tuition ﬁgures for the U.S. diﬀer little by residential status, total net costs are
noticeably higher for American students living on their own.
    A few general comments about net tuition are in order. First, the U.S. is, on average, relatively
generous at the low end of the income distribution, even among high tuition states. The Canada –
U.S. diﬀerence in net tuition for very low income families largely reﬂects the diﬀerential treatment
of student income by EFC formulas: Canada expects all students to pay $2-3 thousand towards
their own education while the U.S. does not. Quebec is also quite generous due to its emphasis on
grants over loans. Indeed, net tuition as a function of family income is remarkably similar for Quebec
(students living away from their parents) and low tuition states in the U.S. Second, net tuition increases
substantially with income over the bottom half of the distribution (up to around $60,000) in the U.S.
and Quebec. In Ontario and British Columbia, net tuition is largely independent of family income
until it reaches about $65-75,000, at which point it jumps up $2-3 thousand. In practice, net tuition
is likely to increase more smoothly than reﬂected in the ﬁgure for Ontario and British Columbia due
to institutional grants and scholarships not considered here; however, institutional aid does not play
a major role in Canada.55 Thus, it is highly unlikely that net tuition rises as much with income in
these provinces as it does in either the U.S. or Quebec. Third, net tuition diﬀers across U.S. states
income families to fully beneﬁt from education tax credits.
  55
     Diﬀerences in family assets, youth earnings, and calculated living/travelling costs across individuals would also tend
to smooth out ﬁnancial aid as a function of income in Canada.




                                                            24
depending on state-determined tuition levels and state/institutional aid policies. Although roughly
80% of all in-state students from families earning less than $20,000 have negative net tuition levels
in the U.S., 8% pay more than $1,500 in net tuition. Most of the variation, especially in net tuition
levels, occurs across high-tuition states. Variation in net tuition across low-tuition states is relatively
modest. Finally, it is important to recognize that all NPSAS04 ﬁgures for the U.S. are based on
students choosing to enroll in a four-year public institution. It is possible that students receiving less
generous ﬁnancial aid oﬀers never enroll in the ﬁrst place, so our total grant ﬁgures may be biased
upwards and net tuition ﬁgures downwards compared to the amounts a typical potential student might
face. In Appendix B, we consider bounds on net tuition and out-of-pocket costs (by parental income)
to account for this self-selection. As Figures B3 and B4 show, assuming that youth who do not attend
PS school would have received zero institutional grant aid produces qualitatively similar conclusions.56
       In addition to the net price of attendance, out-of-pocket costs may be an important determinant
of PS attendance for youth who have limited access to credit. Figure 8 shows out-of-pocket expenses,
deﬁned as net tuition less available government loans, for Canada and the U.S. This reﬂects the total
amount of money students are expected to raise on their own (or from parents or other relatives)
each year to ﬁnance tuition costs. On average, the U.S. is relatively generous at the low end of the
income distribution; however, total available aid (repayable and non-repayable) is more generous in
British Columbia and Ontario for middle income families. While Quebec is generous in terms of grant
aid, it is not in terms of total aid. As a result, out-of-pocket expenses are relatively high in Quebec
compared to other Canadian provinces and the U.S. Out-of-pocket expenses in Ontario and British
Columbia do not depend much on parental income for lower and middle income families; however, they
rise considerably with income among higher income families. The value of the Staﬀord Loan program
in the U.S. for students from high-income families is evident in their low out-of-pocket expenditures
relative to their Canadian counterparts.
       Private loans are also a growing source of ﬁnancing for undergraduate students in both the U.S.
and Canada. Unfortunately, we are unable to compare Canada and the U.S. with respect to private
student credit by parental income; however, overall private student borrowing amounts appear to be
roughly similar.57
  56
     Average net tuition for very low income youth is noticeably higher in high tuition states if we assume non-attendees
would not have received any institutional or state aid; however, this bound is extremely conservative given the amount
of state aid that is disbursed.
  57
     In the U.S., private student loans represented 16% of all student loan dollars taken out in 2003-04 (College Board
2006). Junor and Usher (2004) report that roughly 15% of Canadian students reported taking out a private student loan
in 2001-02 (with average annual loan amounts of $5,600).




                                                           25
6    Tuition, Financial Aid, and Family Income – Post-Secondary At-
     tendance Patterns

The relationship between net tuition and family income is important, since it determines the price paid
by diﬀerent types of families. It is clear that lower net tuition levels should encourage PS attendance
among individuals from all backgrounds regardless of whether families have adequate access to credit.
By contrast, out-of-pocket expenditures are likely to aﬀect attendance decisions only for those families
that face cash-ﬂow problems arising from imperfect credit markets. As discussed in Section 2, the
literature has reached some degree of consensus on the eﬀects of tuition and aid on PS attendance;
however, much less is known about the importance of borrowing constraints and the role of out-of-
pocket expenditures (or student loan amounts).
    Net tuition in the U.S. and Quebec increases substantially as parental income rises. Increases are
more modest in British Columbia and Ontario (see Figure 7). These diﬀerences in net tuition imply
that low-income Americans and Quebecois should have much higher attendance rates than their higher
income counterparts, while the same diﬀerences in BC and Ontario should be noticeably smaller. Of
course, many other factors may generate a positive income – attendance relationship. Still, in light
of the much more targeted nature of need-based grant aid in the U.S., it is surprising that income –
attendance gaps are so much stronger in the U.S.
    Required out-of-pocket expenditures may also aﬀect the relationship between family income and
PS attendance due to borrowing constraints. It is, therefore, noteworthy that the general relationship
between out-of-pocket expenditures and parental income (see Figure 8) is quite similar to that of net
tuition at the bottom of the income distribution, reinforcing the prediction (at least among youth
whose parents earn less than $60,000) that the income – attendance relationship should be weaker in
the U.S. than in Canada.
    BC and Ontario sharply reduce both grant and loan aid at the top of the income distribution.
This leads to steep but modest increases in net tuition and substantial increases in out-of-pocket costs
as income rises above $60,000 (see Figures 7 and 8). By contrast, most need-based aid has been
exhausted in the U.S. and Quebec. These patterns imply steeper family income – PS attendance
relationships in the U.S. and Quebec (compared to BC and Ontario) for upper-middle and upper-
income families. While income – attendance gradients are indeed steeper in the U.S. (throughout the
income distribution), they are quite similar between Quebec and other Canadian provinces.




                                                  26
6.1      Quantifying the Role of Need-Based Financial Aid

Our results generally suggest that the underlying demand for PS education is much more strongly
increasing in family income among American youth than among Canadian youth. The greater targeting
of aid to low-income families in the U.S. (largely due to federal Pell Grants) most likely dampens an
otherwise greater discrepancy. This raises two interesting questions: (1) What would happen to family
income – PS attendance relationships if non-repayable need-based aid were eliminated? (2) How much
more non-repayable need-based aid would be needed to eliminate family income – PS attendance gaps
(conditional on student achievement and family background). The answer to (1) not only provides a
useful measure of the importance of current need-based aid policies, but it also provides a measure of
the underlying diﬀerence in demand for PS education by family income. (Appendix C provides details
on the calculations presented here.)
       The literature surveyed in Section 2.2 suggests that a $1,000 change in non-repayable aid leads to
a 3-5 percentage point change in PS attendance for the aﬀected group. Based on these consensus esti-
mates, Figure 9 shows how PS attendance rates are predicted to change (by family income) in Canada
and the U.S. if non-repayable aid amounts for all families were reduced to the amounts reported
for families with incomes above $100,000.58 While the ﬁgure reports overall income – attendance
gaps, the same changes would be observed for gaps conditional on family background and adolescent
achievement. We see that the reductions in aid would cause American (Canadian) youth from fami-
lies earning $25,000 to reduce their PS attendance rates by 14-23 (8-13) percentage points, whereas
reductions would be less than 4 (2) percentage points for youth from families earning $75,000.59 Put
another way, eliminating need-based aid would roughly double conditional income – attendance gaps
in the U.S. and Canada. Also, notice that even if U.S. aid had no eﬀect on attendance, while aid in
Canada had eﬀects of 3-5 percentage points per $1,000, income – attendance relationships would still
be steeper in the U.S.
       Figure 10 shows how much additional non-repayable aid would need to be oﬀered to students
from diﬀerent family income backgrounds to completely eliminate the relationship between income
and attendance conditional on family background and cognitive achievement (see Figures 3a and 3b).
Financial aid would need to increase by 60-100% for low-income students in both countries. Of course,
this would require substantially larger outlays in the U.S. where current aid levels are already relatively
high for those at the bottom of the income distribution.
  58
     As seen in Figure 5, this would not actually eliminate all non-repayable aid, since even students from very high
income families receive tax credits (and, in the U.S., some institutional and state aid).
  59
     Estimates for Canada take population-weighted averages for British Columbia, Ontario, and Quebec.



                                                         27
7    Conclusions

Education is central to future labor market success, so it is important to know whether youth from
low-income backgrounds are taking full advantage of higher education systems. If they are not, then
intergenerational mobility is likely to be severely limited. Our ﬁndings suggest that this concern
is more pronounced in the U.S. than in Canada. In particular, we show that PS attendance rates
among recent cohorts are more strongly related to parental income in the U.S. than in Canada, even
after controlling for similar measures of family background, adolescent cognitive achievement, and
local area of residence ﬁxed eﬀects. Our estimates, therefore, suggest that the stronger U.S. income –
attendance relationship is not simply explained by Canada – U.S. diﬀerences in the correlation between
family income and student ability, residential segregation, peers/social networks, local labor market
conditions, or local access to PS institutions.
    One common concern is that a lack of adequate credit prevents lower income youth from attending
PS school. To explain the stronger income – attendance relationship in the U.S., these constraints
would need to be more binding in the U.S. Yet, we show that out-of-pocket expenditures are lower, on
average, for low-income American youth compared to their Canadian counterparts. We also observe
that PS attendance increases with family income even among middle- and upper-income families in
both Canada and the U.S. Family income is also more strongly related to high school completion
in the U.S. relative to Canada (Belley, Frenette, and Lochner 2010). However important borrowing
constraints may be, they are unlikely to explain much of the Canada – U.S. diﬀerence in family income
– PS attendance patterns.
    It is also possible that the stronger family income – PS attendance relationship in the U.S. is driven
by a stronger correlation between income and tastes for schooling. If so, this stronger correlation must
exist within narrowly deﬁned communities conditional on a broad set of observable family background
characteristics (e.g. parental education, race, family composition). Additionally, to fully explain the
evolution of family income – PS attendance rates in the U.S. since the early 1980s (when family income
– PS attendance gaps were as weak as they are today in Canada), this correlation would need to have
strengthened considerably over time in the U.S. While we are skeptical of this, we leave a serious
treatment of this hypothesis to future research.
    Our primary aim is not to fully account for U.S. – Canada diﬀerences in the relationship between
family income and PS attendance. Instead, we focus on understanding the extent to which the overall
structure of Canadian and American ﬁnancial aid programs contribute to these attendance patterns
regardless of their underlying causes. Both countries spend billions each year on ﬁnancial aid in the


                                                   28
pursuit of greater educational equity – it is important to know what this money ‘buys’. We, therefore,
undertake a careful accounting of all need-based ﬁnancial aid in Canada and the U.S., documenting
the dependence of net tuition and out-of-pocket expenditures on family resources.
   We show that the U.S. provides more aid than Canada at the bottom of the income distribution but
quickly ‘taxes’ non-repayable aid away as parental income rises toward the median. Canada provides
similar aid to low- and middle-income families, ‘taxing’ both non-repayable and loan aid away quickly
for families above the median. Overall, the U.S. is relatively more generous at the low (and high) end
of the income distribution, while Canada is more generous in the middle.
   Consensus estimates of the impact of tuition and aid on PS attendance imply an important role for
need-based aid in shaping family income – PS attendance relationships and, by extension, intergenera-
tional mobility in both the U.S. and Canada. Combining these estimates with the structure of ﬁnancial
aid, we show that income – attendance relationships would be roughly twice as strong as they are now
(in both the U.S. and Canada) in the absence of any need-based aid. Furthermore, the relationship
between income and PS attendance would be even more pronounced in the U.S. relative to Canada
(in absolute terms) in the absence of need-based aid. Thus, underlying diﬀerences in the demand for
education by family income appear to be much stronger in the U.S. Although we are unable to fully
determine why, our analysis casts doubt on many common explanations. We also demonstrate that
eliminating the relationship between income and attendance (conditional on family background and
cognitive achievement) would require substantial increases in aid for both countries, but more so in
the U.S.


References
Abraham, K., and M. Clark (2006), “Financial Aid and Students College Decisions: Evidence from the District
of Columbia Tuition Assistance Grant Program”, Journal of Human Resources, 41(3), 578–610.

Belley, P., and L. Lochner (2007), “The Changing Role of Family Income and Ability in Determining Educational
Achievement”, Journal of Human Capital, 1(1), 37–90.

Belley, P., M. Frenette, and L. Lochner (2010), “Post-Secondary Attendance by Parental Income: Comparing
the U.S. and Canada”, Working Paper.

Berkner, L. (2000), Trends in Undergraduate Borrowing: Federal Student Loans in 1989-90, 1992-93, and 1995-
96, Washington DC: National Center for Education Statistics Report 2000–151.

Berger, J. A. Motte, and A. Parkin (2007), The Price of Knowledge: Access and Student Finance in Canada,
Montreal: Canada Millenium Scholarship Foundation.



                                                     29
Bettinger, E., B.T. Long, P. Oreopoulos, and L. Sanbonmatsu (2009), “The Role of Information and Simpliﬁ-
cation in College Decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA Experiment”, Working Paper.

Bishop, J. (1977), “The Eﬀect of Public Policies on the Demand for Higher Education”, Journal of Human
Resources 12(3), 285–307.

Blackburn, M., and D. Neumark (1993), “Omitted-Ability Bias and the Increase in the Return to Schooling”,
Journal of Labor Economics, 11, 521–44.

Burbidge, J.B, L. Magee, and A.L. Robb (2002), “The Education Premium in Canada and the United States”,
Canadian Public Policy, 28(2), 203–27.

Brown, M., J.K. Scholz, and A. Seshadri, (2011) “A New test of Borrowing Constraints for Education,” Working
paper.

Cameron, S., and C. Taber (2004), “Estimation of Educational Borrowing Constraints Using Returns to School-
ing”, Journal of Political Economy, 112, 132–82.

Cameron, S., and J.J. Heckman (1998),“Life Cycle Schooling and Dynamic Selection Bias: Models and Evidence
for Five Cohorts of American Males ”, Journal of Political Economy, 106, 262–333.

Cameron, S., and J.J. Heckman (2001),“The Dynamics of Educational Attainment for Black, Hispanic and
White Males”, Journal of Political Economy, 109, 455–99.

Card, D. (1995), “Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the Returns to Schooling”, in
L.N. Christoﬁdes et al. (eds.), Aspects of Labour Market Behaviour: Essays in Honor of John Vanderkamp,
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 201–21.

Carneiro, P., and J.J. Heckman (2002), “The Evidence on Credit Constraints in Post-Secondary Schooling”,
Economic Journal, 112, 989–1018.

Carneiro, P. and J.J. Heckman (2003), “Human Capital Policy”, in J.J. Heckman and A. Krueger (eds.) In-
equality in America: What Role for Human Capital Policies?, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Cawley, J., J.J. Heckman, L. Lochner and E. Vytlacil (2000), “Understanding the Role of Cognitive Ability in
Accounting for the Recent Rise in the Economic Return to Education”, in K.J. Arrow, S. Bowles and S. Durlauf
(eds.), Meritocracy and Economic Inequality, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Christoﬁdes, L., J. Cirello, and M. Hoy (2001), “Family Income and Postsecondary Education in Canada”, The
Canadian Journal of Higher Education, 31(1), 177–208.

Corak, M., G. Lipps, and J. Zhao (2003), Family Income and Participation in Post-Secondary Education,
Analytical Studies Branch Research Paper Series. Catalogue no 11F0019MIE2003210. Ottawa: Statistics
Canada.

College Board (2004), Trends in College Pricing 2004, Washington DC: College Board.


                                                    30
College Board (2006), Trends in Student Aid 2006, Washington DC: College Board.

Currie, J., and E. Moretti (2003), “Mother’s Education and the Intergenerational Transmission of Human
Capital: Evidence from College Openings”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1495-1532.

Deming, D., and S. Dynarski (2009), “Into College, Out of Poverty? Policies to Increase the Postsecondary
Attainment of the Poor”, NBER Working Paper No. 15387.

Do, C. (2004), “The eﬀects of local colleges on the quality of college attended”, Economics of Education Review,
23(3), 249–57.

Dynarski, S. (2000), “Hope for Whom? Financial Aid for the Middle Class and Its Impact on College Atten-
dance”, National Tax Journal 53(3), 629–661.

Dynarski, S. (2003), “Does Aid Matter? Measuring the Eﬀect of Student Aid on College Attendance and
Completion”, American Economic Review, 93(1), 279–288.

Ellwood, D., and T. Kane (2000), “Who Is Getting a College Education? Family Background and the Growing
Gaps in Enrollment”, in S. Danziger and J. Waldfogel (eds.), Securing the Future: Investing in Children from
Birth to College, Russell Sage Foundation.

Fortin, N. (2005), “Rising Tuition and Supply Constraints: Explaining Canada – U.S. Diﬀerences in University
Enrollment Rates”, in C. Beach, R.W. Boadway, Robin W., and R. M. McInnis (eds.), Higher Education in
Canada, John Deutsch Institute, McGill-Queens University Press, 369–413.

Frenette, M. (2004), “Access to College and University: Does Distance Matter?” Canadian Public Policy, 30(4),
427–43.

Frenette, M. (2005), “Is Post-Secondary Access More Equitable in Canada or the United States?” Statistics
Canada, Analytical Studies Branch Research Paper No. 244.

Frenette, M. (2007), “Why are Youth from Lower-Income Families Less Likely to Attend University? Evidence
from Academic Abilities, Parental Inﬂuences, and Financial Constraints”, Statistics Canada, Analytical Studies
Branch Research Paper No. 295.

Hansen, W.L. (1983), “Impact of Student Financial Aid on Access”. In: Froomkin, J. (Ed.), The Crisis in
Higher Education, Academy of Political Science, New York, pp. 84-96.

Heckman, J.J., L. Lochner, and P. Todd (2008), “Earnings Functions and Rates of Return”, Journal of Human
Capital, 2(1), 1–31.

Junor, S., and A. Usher (2004), The Price of Knowledge: Access and Student Finance in Canada, Montreal:
Canada Millenium Scholarship Foundation.

Kane, T. (1994), “College Attendance by Blacks since 1970: The Role of College Cost, Family Background and
the Returns to Education”. Journal of Political Economy, 102 (5), 878–911.


                                                      31
Kane, T. (1999), The Price of Admission: Rethinking How Americans Pay for College, Brookings Institution
Press (with Russell Sage Foundation), Washington, DC.

Kane, T. (2003), “A Quasi-experimental Estimate of the Impact of Financial Aid on College-going”, NBER
Working Paper No. 9703.

Kane, T. (2006), “Public Intervention in Post-Secondary Education,” in E. Hanushek and F. Welch (eds.),
Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 2, Ch. 23, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.

Kane, T. (2007), “Evaluating the Impact of the D.C. Tuition Assistance Grant Program”, Journal of Human
Resources 42(3), 555–582.

Keane, M., and K. Wolpin (2001), “The Eﬀect of Parental Transfers and Borrowing Constraints on Educational
Attainment”, International Economic Review, 42, 1051–1103.

King, A.J., W.K. Warren, J.C. Boyer, and P. Chin (2005), Double Cohort Study: Phase 4, Queen’s University:
Social Program Evaluation Group. Report submitted to the Ontario Ministry of Education.

Kling, J. (2001), “Interpreting Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Returns to Schooling”, Journal of
Business & Economic Statistics, 19(3), 358–64.

Krueger, A. (2003), “Inequality: Too Much of a Good Thing”, in J.J. Heckman and A. Krueger (eds.) Inequality
in America: What Role for Human Capital Policies?, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Leslie, L., and P.T. Brinkman (1987), “Student Price Response in Higher Education: The Student Demand
Studies”, Journal of Higher Education 58(2), 181–204.

Leslie, L., and P.T. Brinkman (1988), Economic Value of Higher Education, MacMillan, New York.

Lochner, L., and A. Monge-Naranjo (2010), “The Nature of Credit Constraints and Human Capital”, Working
Paper.

Lovenheim, M. (2011), “The Eﬀect of Liquid Housing Wealth on College Enrollment”, Working Paper.

Manski, C., and D. Wise (1983), College Choice in America, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

McPherson, M., and M. Schapiro (1991), “Does Student Aid Aﬀect College Enrollment? New Evidence on a
Persistent Controversy”, American Economic Review 81(1), 309–318.

Murnane, R., J. Willett, and F. Levy (1995), “The Growing Importance of Cognitive Skills in Wage Determi-
nation”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 77, 251-266.

Snyder, T., A. Tan, and C. Hoﬀman (2006), Digest of Education Statistics 2005, NCES 2006-030, U.S. De-
partment of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Oﬃce.

Titus, M. (2002), Supplemental Table Update for Trends in Undergraduate Borrowing: Federal Student Loans
in 1989-90, 1992-93, and 1995-96, http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2000/2000151update.pdf.

Usher, A., and K. Steele (2006), The State of Student Aid in Canada, Toronto: Educational Policy Institute.


                                                     32
       Figure 1: PSE Attendance by Parental Income Quartiles in
                  Canada (YITS) and the US (NLSY97)
  1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

  0
                 Canada (YITS)                                  US (NLSY97)
              Parental Income Quartile 1                  Parental Income Quartile 2
              Parental Income Quartile 3                  Parental Income Quartile 4


      Figure 2a: Post-Secondary Attendance by Math-Reading
       Ability and Parental Income Quartiles in Canada (YITS)
  1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0 2
0.2
0.1
  0
      Ability Quartile 1    Ability Quartile 2    Ability Quartile 3       Ability Quartile 4
                    Parental Income Quartile 1        Parental Income Quartile 2
                    Parental Income Quartile 3        Parental Income Quartile 4


      Figure 2b: Post-Secondary Attendance by Math-Reading
      Ability and Parental Income Quartiles in the US (NLSY97)
 1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

 0
      Ability Quartile 1    Ability Quartile 2    Ability Quartile 3      Ability Quartile 4
                     Parental Income Quartile 1       Parental Income Quartile 2
                     Parental Income Quartile 3       Parental Income Quartile 4
                       Figure 3a: Estimated Effects of Parental Income on Post-Secondary
                                     Attendance (Spline Function Estimates)
             0.2

            0.15

             0.1
  Effect




            0.05

                  0

           -0.05

            -0.1
                       1                 3                5                 7            9       11
                                                   Parental Income (CAN$ 10,000)

                           NLSY97 (PPP Adjusted)              NLSY97 (Exchange Rate Adjusted)   YITS



                       Figure 3b: Estimated Effects of Parental Income on Attendance at a
                              Four-Year PS Institution (Spline Function Estimates)

            0.2

           0.15

            0.1
Effect




           0.05

             0

         -0.05

           -0.1
                   1                 3                5                 7               9       11

                                                   Parental Income (CAN$ 10,000)

                           NLSY97 (PPP Adjusted)              NLSY97 (Exchange Rate Adjusted)   YITS
                    Figure 4: Expected Family Contribution
30,000


25,000


20,000


15,000


10,000


 5,000


     0
         5     15      25     35       45    55         65    75    85       95

                              Parental Income ($1,000)

                        ON          QC             BC         US




                      Figure 5: Total Non-Repayable Aid
10,000


 8,000


 6,000


 4,000


 2,000


    0
         5     15      25     35       45     55        65    75    85        95
                              Parental Income ($1,000)

         ON Home             ON Away                QC Home              QC Away
         BC Home             BC Away                US LowTuition        US High Tuition
                    Figure 6: Total Available Government Loans
7,000


6,000


5,000


4,000


3,000


2,000


1,000


    0
         5     15      25     35        45       55      65      75    85      95
                                    Parental Income ($1,000)
              ON Home              ON Away            QC Home          QC Away
              BC Home              BC Away            US


               Figure 7: Net Tuition (Tuition less Non-Repayable Aid)
6,000

5,000

4,000

3,000

2,000

1,000

    0

-1,000

-2,000

-3,000

-4,000
         5     15      25     35        45       55       65      75   85       95
                                    Parental Income ($1,000)
             ON Home           ON Away                QC Home           QC Away
             BC Home           BC Away                US Low Tuition    US High Tuition
                            Figure 8: Out-of-Pocket Costs
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
    0
-1,000
-2,000
-3,000
-4,000
-5,000
-6,000
-7,000
-8,000
         5       15    25      35       45       55      65      75    85        95
                                    Parental Income ($1,000)

             ON Home          ON Away                 QC Home               QC Away
             BC Home          BC Away                 US Low Tuition        US High Tuition
                  Figure 9: The Effect of 'Eliminating' Need-Based Non-Repayable Aid on PS
                                       Attendance in the US and Canada
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
  0
           0-20       20-30       30-40     40-50       50-60     60-70      70-80       80-90    90-100     100+
                                            Parental Income Group ($1,000)

          US (current)                              US No Aid (.03 per $1,000)            US No Aid (.05 per $1,000)
          CAN (current)                             CAN No Aid (.03 per $1,000)           CAN No Aid (.05 per $1,000)




            Figure 10: Non-Repayable Aid Required to Eliminate Conditional Family Income
                             -- PS Attendance Gaps in the US and Canada
14,000
12,000
10,000
 8,000
 6,000
 4,000
 2,000
      0
              0-20        20-30     30-40    40-50        50-60     60-70        70-80   80-90    90-100     100+
                                              Parental Income Group ($1,000)

      US (current)                              US No Gap (.03 per $1,000)                US No Gap (.05 per $1,000)
      CAN (current)                             CAN No Gap (.03 per $1,000)               CAN No Gap (.05 per $1,000)
Table 1: Sample Descriptive Statistics

                                                                   Canada (YITS)         US (NLSY97)
Completed High School (as of age 21)                                     0.930                0.832
                                                                        (0.255)              (0.374)
Post-Secondary Attendance (as of age 21)                                 0.710                0.625
                                                                        (0.454)              (0.484)
Post-Secondary Attendance at 4-yr Institution (as of age 21)             0.423                0.420
                                                                        (0.494)              (0.494)
Male                                                                     0.498                0.506
                                                                        (0.500)              (0.500)
White                                                                    0.875                0.695
                                                                        (0.331)              (0.460)
Immigrant                                                                0.082                0.033
                                                                        (0.275)              (0.178)
At Least One Parent an Immigrant                                         0.269                0.126
                                                                        (0.444)              (0.332)
Mother's Age at Birth                                                   28.170               25.991
                                                                        (4.854)              (5.323)
Intact Family during Adolescence                                         0.754                0.563
                                                                        (0.431)              (0.496)
Metropolitan Area during Adolescence                                     0.679                0.790
                                                                        (0.467)              (0.407)
Number of Children in Household under 18                                 1.472                2.329
                                                                        (0.508)              (1.147)
Mother High School Graduate                                              0.887                0.847
                                                                        (0.316)              (0.360)
Mother at Least Some Post-Secondary Schooling                            0.594                0.493
                                                                        (0.491)              (0.500)
Parental Income (in $10,000) during Late Adolescence                     7.174                6.422
                                                                        (5.556)              (4.773)
Average Parental Income (in $10,000) in Quartile 1                       2.814                1.561
                                                                        (1.137)              (0.749)
Average Parental Income (in $10,000) in Quartile 2                       5.481                4.026
                                                                        (0.594)              (0.716)
Average Parental Income (in $10,000) in Quartile 3                       7.552                6.609
                                                                        (0.625)              (0.889)
Average Parental Income (in $10,000) in Quartile 4                      12.660               12.572
                                                                        (8.142)              (4.638)
Sample Size                                                             9,031                 4,108

Note: Table reports means with standard deviations in parentheses. YITS sample includes individuals with
non-missing reading and mathematics scores and parental income. NLSY97 sample includes individuals
with non-missing reading and mathematics scores and parental income measured in 1997 if they had reached
age 21 by 2005. All dollar values denominated in year 1999 dollars. U.S. incomes adjusted by PPP = 1.19.
Table 2: Effects of Family Income, Math-Reading Achievement, and Family Background on Educa

                                                                              Attendance at a Four-Year
                                                     PS Attendance                  PS Institution
                                                  YITS          NLSY97             YITS         NLSY97

Male                                              -0.1272        -0.0927          -0.1478         -0.0895
                                                 (0.0086)       (0.0130)         (0.0089)        (0.0134)
Immigrant                                         0.0812         0.1574           0.0938          0.1507
                                                 (0.0179)       (0.0444)         (0.0186)        (0.0456)
At Least One Parent an Immigrant                  0.0790         0.0521           0.1139          0.0178
                                                 (0.0113)       (0.0242)         (0.0117)        (0.0248)
Mother's Age at Birth                             0.0070         0.0031           0.0061          0.0039
                                                 (0.0010)       (0.0014)         (0.0010)        (0.0014)
Intact Family during Adolescence                  0.0538         0.0793           0.0560          0.0960
                                                 (0.0106)       (0.0150)         (0.0110)        (0.0154)
Metropolitan Area during Adolescence              0.0339         0.0139           0.0351          0.0034
                                                 (0.0097)       (0.0163)         (0.0101)        (0.0167)
Number of Children under 18                       0.0227        -0.0089           0.0400         -0.0028
                                                 (0.0089)       (0.0062)         (0.0093)        (0.0064)
Mother HS Graduate                                0.1123         0.0898           0.0740          0.0222
                                                 (0.0152)       (0.0209)         (0.0158)        (0.0214)
Mother at Least Some PSE                          0.0578         0.0756           0.0774          0.1151
                                                 (0.0100)       (0.0150)         (0.0104)        (0.0154)
Math-Reading Achievement Quartile 2               0.1997         0.2509           0.1671          0.1293
                                                 (0.0122)       (0.0197)         (0.0126)        (0.0202)
Math-Reading Achievement Quartile 3               0.2988         0.3945           0.3139          0.3239
                                                 (0.0124)       (0.0203)         (0.0128)        (0.0208)
Math-Reading Achievement Quartile 4               0.3714         0.5201           0.5215          0.5585
                                                 (0.0126)       (0.0211)         (0.0131)        (0.0217)
Parental Income Quartile 2                        0.0201         0.0290          -0.0005          0.0118
                                                 (0.0126)       (0.0200)         (0.0131)        (0.0205)
Parental Income Quartile 3                        0.0450         0.1232           0.0193          0.0547
                                                 (0.0130)       (0.0213)         (0.0135)        (0.0218)
Parental Income Quartile 4                        0.0693         0.1762           0.0794          0.1645
                                                 (0.0132)       (0.0228)         (0.0138)        (0.0234)

Test of no Income Effects (P-value)              <.0001          <.0001           <.0001          <.0001
Sample Size                                      9,028            3,812           9,028           3,700
Notes: Education measured as of age 21. NLSY97 regressions also control for year of birth and
race/hispanic ethnicity indicators. Test of no Income Effects is an F-test (3 d.o.f.) that all three
coefficients on family income are zero. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Table 3: Effects of Parental Income on Educational Attainment at Age 21 by Math-Reading Ability Quartile

                                                 Post-Secondary Attendance:                  Attendance at a 4-Year Post-Secondary Institution
                                       Achieve.     Achieve.    Achieve.    Achieve.           Achieve.     Achieve.   Achieve.    Achieve.
                                       Quartile 1 Quartile 2 Quartile 3 Quartile 4            Quartile 1 Quartile 2 Quartile 3 Quartile 4
a. YITS
Parental Income Quartile 2               0.0132       0.0485        -0.0313      0.0471          0.0219       -0.0048       -0.0108      -0.0041
                                        (0.0269)     (0.0262)      (0.0251)     (0.0208)        (0.0189)     (0.0260)      (0.0310)     (0.0300)
Parental Income Quartile 3               0.0286       0.0777        -0.0055      0.0683          0.0163       0.0573        -0.0183      0.0276
                                        (0.0294)     (0.0272)      (0.0252)     (0.0205)        (0.0207)     (0.0270)      (0.0311)     (0.0295)
Parental Income Quartile 4               0.1462       0.0809        0.0283       0.0448          0.0960       0.0757        0.0799       0.0571
                                        (0.0315)     (0.0282)      (0.0253)     (0.0202)        (0.0221)     (0.0280)      (0.0313)     (0.0292)
Test of no Income Effects (P-value)      <.0001       0.0129       0.0838        0.0107          0.0001       0.0052        0.0014       0.0675
Sample Size                               2,217        2,358        2,227         2,226           2,217        2,358         2,227        2,226

b. NLSY97
Parental Income Quartile 2               -0.0556      0.0472        0.0888       0.0544          -0.0052      0.0541        0.0127       0.0386
                                        (0.0368)     (0.0450)      (0.0448)     (0.0371)        (0.0259)     (0.0408)      (0.0518)     (0.0519)
Parental Income Quartile 3               0.1631       0.1574        0.1030       0.0878          0.0442       0.1105        0.0174       0.0585
                                        (0.0437)     (0.0472)      (0.0456)     (0.0368)        (0.0308)     (0.0428)      (0.0528)     (0.0517)
Parental Income Quartile 4               0.2020       0.2004        0.2140       0.1294          0.1139       0.2288        0.1392       0.1528
                                        (0.0577)     (0.0515)      (0.0473)     (0.0371)        (0.0408)     (0.0471)      (0.0546)     (0.0520)
Test of no Income Effects (P-value)      <.0001       0.0001        <.0001       0.0014          0.0158       <.0001        0.0061       0.0010
Sample Size                                845          933           973         1061             831          918           957          994
Notes: All regressions control for gender, race/ethnicity (NLSY97 only), immigrant status, whether at least one parent is an immigrant, mother's
education (HS graduate, PS attendance), intact family during adolescence, number of children under 18, mother's age at child's birth, metropolitan
area during adolescence, and year of birth (NLSY97 only). Education measured as of age 21. Test of no Income Effects is an F-test (3 d.o.f.) that
all three coefficients on family income are zero. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Table 4a: Educational Attainment in Canada: Quebec vs. Other Provinces (YITS)

                                                                                       Attendance at a 4-Year
                                                    PS Attendance:                         PS Institution:
                                               Quebec       Other Provinces           Quebec       Other Provinces

Math-Reading Achievement Quartile 2             0.3408            0.1739               0.0825            0.2009
                                               (0.0330)          (0.0130)             (0.0329)          (0.0135)
Math-Reading Achievement Quartile 3             0.4864            0.2578               0.2291            0.3555
                                               (0.0326)          (0.0134)             (0.0326)          (0.0139)
Math-Reading Achievement Quartile 4             0.5887            0.3214               0.5128            0.5424
                                               (0.0331)          (0.0136)             (0.0331)          (0.0142)
Parental Income Quartile 2                      -0.0145           0.0268               -0.0129           0.0019
                                               (0.0293)          (0.0140)             (0.0293)          (0.0146)
Parental Income Quartile 3                      0.0592            0.0358               0.0204            0.0063
                                               (0.0322)          (0.0142)             (0.0322)          (0.0148)
Parental Income Quartile 4                      0.0314            0.0725                0.0982           0.0576
                                               (0.0341)          (0.0144)             (0.0341)          (0.0150)

Test of no Income Effects (P-value)             0.0946            <.0001              0.0049            <.0001
Sample Size                                      1,392            7,636               1,392             7,636

Notes: All regressions control for gender, immigrant status, whether at least one parent is an immigrant, mother's
education (HS graduate, PS attendance), intact family during adolescence, number of children under 18, mother's
age at child's birth, and metropolitan area during adolescence. Education measured as of age 21. Test of no
Income Effects is an F-test (3 d.o.f.) that all three coefficients on family income are zero. Standard errors are in
parentheses.
Table 4b: Educational Attainment in High and Low Tuition U.S. States (NLSY97)

                                                                                Attendance at a 4-Year
                                                   PS Attendance:                   PS Institution:
                                            Low Tuition High Tuition          Low Tuition High Tuition

Math-Reading Achievement Quartile 2             0.2789          0.2225            0.1443          0.1157
                                               (0.0280)        (0.0278)          (0.0285)        (0.0286)
Math-Reading Achievement Quartile 3             0.4127          0.3753            0.3154          0.3281
                                               (0.0292)        (0.0283)          (0.0298)        (0.0291)
Math-Reading Achievement Quartile 4             0.5246          0.5111            0.5395          0.5396
                                               (0.0305)        (0.0293)          (0.0312)        (0.0303)
Parental Income Quartile 2                      0.0180          0.0512            0.0107          0.0181
                                               (0.0283)        (0.0285)          (0.0288)        (0.0292)
Parental Income Quartile 3                      0.0751          0.1746            0.0580          0.0546
                                               (0.0308)        (0.0297)          (0.0314)        (0.0305)
Parental Income Quartile 4                      0.1486          0.2146            0.1841          0.1507
                                               (0.0326)        (0.0321)          (0.0333)        (0.0331)

Test of no Income Effects (P-value)             <.0001         <.0001             <.0001         <.0001
Sample Size                                     1,838          1,974              1,793          1,907

Notes: All regressions control for gender, immigrant status, whether at least one parent is an immigrant,
mother's education (HS graduate, PS attendance), intact family during adolescence, number of children
under 18, mother's age at child's birth, and metropolitan area during adolescence. Education measured as
of age 21. Test of no Income Effects is an F-test (3 d.o.f.) that all three coefficients on family income are
zero. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Table A1: Additional Specifications for Post-Secondary Attendance in Canada (YITS)

                                                   (i)               (ii)                (iii)               (iv)
                                            White English-                         Controls for
                                           Speaking Native Controls for         Perceived Returns PS Attendance
                                             Youth with    School Fixed         to School & Peers' Conditional on
                                            Native Parents   Effects                 PS Plans      Graduating HS

Math-Reading Achievement Quartile 2              0.1803            0.2080              0.1813               0.1626
                                                (0.0158)          (0.0209)            (0.0121)             (0.0125)
Math-Reading Achievement Quartile 3              0.2793            0.3079              0.2729               0.2412
                                                (0.0162)          (0.0202)            (0.0124)             (0.0126)
Math-Reading Achievement Quartile 4              0.3437            0.3874              0.3362               0.3078
                                                (0.0167)          (0.0198)            (0.0128)             (0.0127)
Parental Income Quartile 2                       0.0566            0.0232              0.0198               0.0291
                                                (0.0172)          (0.0190)            (0.0125)             (0.0128)
Parental Income Quartile 3                       0.0717            0.0420              0.0408               0.0428
                                                (0.0173)          (0.0196)            (0.0129)             (0.0130)
Parental Income Quartile 4                       0.1152            0.0456              0.0609               0.0655
                                                (0.0176)          (0.0203)            (0.0131)             (0.0132)

Test of no Income Effects (P-value)              <.0001            0.1081              <.0001              <.0001
Sample Size                                      5,635              9,028              9,028               8,540
Notes: Regressions control for gender, immigrant status, whether at least one parent is an immigrant, mother's
education (HS graduate, PS attendance), intact family during adolescence, number of children under 18, mother's
age at child's birth, and metropolitan area during adolescence. The dependent variable for all specifications is PS
attendance measured as of age 21. Sample for column (i) only includes native-born whites with native parents
whose native tongue is English. Column (ii) controls for school fixed effects. Column (iii) controls for three
indicators measuring level of perceived returns to education and two indicators for whether most or all peers plan to
attend PS schooling (see text for details). Sample for column (iv) includes only those who completed high school.
Test of no Income Effects is an F-test (3 d.o.f.) that all three coefficients on family income are zero. Standard errors
are in parentheses.
Table A2: Additional Specifications for Post-Secondary Attendance in the U.S. (NLSY97)


                                                     (i)                  (ii)                (iii)
                                                                   Controls for
                                               White Native       County x MSA      PS Attendance
                                                Youth with       Residential Status Conditional on
                                               Native Parents      Fixed Effects    Graduating HS

Math-Reading Achievement Quartile 2                0.2550               0.2546               0.2202
                                                  (0.0256)             (0.0207)             (0.0227)
Math-Reading Achievement Quartile 3                0.4037               0.3935               0.3468
                                                  (0.0254)             (0.0214)             (0.0227)
Math-Reading Achievement Quartile 4                0.5429               0.5178               0.4377
                                                  (0.0256)             (0.0223)             (0.0231)
Parental Income Quartile 2                         0.0665               0.0302               0.0226
                                                  (0.0262)             (0.0218)             (0.0228)
Parental Income Quartile 3                         0.1632               0.1242               0.0957
                                                  (0.0266)             (0.0233)             (0.0234)
Parental Income Quartile 4                         0.2178               0.1731               0.1290
                                                  (0.0282)             (0.0253)             (0.0245)

Test of no Income Effects (P-value)                <.0001               <.0001              <.0001
Sample Size                                        2,537                3,797               3,180
Notes: Regressions control for gender, race/ethnicity, immigrant status, whether at least one parent is
an immigrant, mother's education (HS graduate, PS attendance), intact family during adolescence,
number of children under 18, mother's age at child's birth, metropolitan area during adolescence, and
year of birth. The dependent variable for all specifications is PS attendance measured as of age 21.
Sample for column (i) only includes native-born whites with native parents. Column (ii) controls for
school fixed effects. Sample for column (iv) includes only those who completed high school. Test of
no Income Effects is an F-test (3 d.o.f.) that all three coefficients on family income are zero. Standard
errors are in parentheses.
Table A3: Effects of Family Income and Achievement on Post-Secondary Attendance by Area of Residence in the U.S. (NLSY97)


                                                      (i)               (ii)              (iii)              (iv)                (v)                (vi)               (vii)
                                                                                                                                               Moderate
                                                Low County         High County       Non-MSA       MSA Resident            Low County           County            High County
                                                Population          Population     Resident During    During              Unemployment       Unemployment        Unemployment
                                                  Density            Density        Adolescence     Adolescence               Rate               Rate                Rate

Math-Reading Achievement Quartile 2                 0.2738            0.2427             0.2394             0.2553             0.2782             0.2425              0.2547
                                                   (0.0281)          (0.0312)           (0.0455)           (0.0229)           (0.0373)           (0.0375)            (0.0344)
Math-Reading Achievement Quartile 3                 0.4292            0.3593             0.4232             0.3788             0.4150             0.3209              0.4564
                                                   (0.0294)          (0.0317)           (0.0471)           (0.0237)           (0.0375)           (0.0384)            (0.0369)
Math-Reading Achievement Quartile 4                 0.5516            0.4842             0.5610             0.5093             0.5268             0.4786              0.5537
                                                   (0.0309)          (0.0323)           (0.0505)           (0.0244)           (0.0377)           (0.0404)            (0.0388)
Parental Income Quartile 2                          0.0162            0.0598             0.0069             0.0328             0.0738             0.0278              0.0000
                                                   (0.0289)          (0.0338)           (0.0461)           (0.0243)           (0.0389)           (0.0401)            (0.0357)
Parental Income Quartile 3                          0.1267            0.1263             0.1294             0.1174             0.1252             0.1327              0.1380
                                                   (0.0309)          (0.0362)           (0.0496)           (0.0257)           (0.0407)           (0.0441)            (0.0379)
Parental Income Quartile 4                          0.1837            0.1667             0.2301             0.1617             0.1927             0.1611              0.1758
                                                   (0.0348)          (0.0376)           (0.0578)           (0.0274)           (0.0438)           (0.0469)            (0.0424)

Test of no Income Effects (P-value)                 <.0001             <.0001            <.0001             <.0001             0.0001             0.0007              <.0001
Sample Size                                         2,059              1,724              807               3,005              1,336              1,252               1,195

Notes: Regressions control for gender, race/ethnicity, immigrant status, whether at least one parent is an immigrant, mother's education (HS graduate, PS attendance), intact
family during adolescence, number of children under 18, mother's age at child's birth, metropolitan area during adolescence, and year of birth. Regressions in columns (i), (ii),
and (v)-(vii) also control for county of residence and MSA status fixed effects. The dependent variable for all specifications is PS attendance measured as of age 21. Columns (i)
and (ii) divide the sample among individuals who at age 15 resided in a county with population density below or above the sample median. Columns (iii) and (iv) divide the
sample among individuals who at age 15 resided in our out of a metropolitan statistical area. Columns (v) to (vii) divide the sample among individuals living in a county (based
on county of residence at age 15) with unemployment rates in the lowest, middle, or highest terciles in 2000 and 2006. County population and unemployment rates are averaged
over years 2000 and 2006 and are obtained from the 2007 County and City Data Book. Test of no Income Effects is an F-test (3 d.o.f.) that all three coefficients on family
income are zero. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Appendix B                 Post-Secondary Education Finance
B.1      Non-Repayable Financial Aid in Canada and the U.S.
Non-repayable aid in the U.S. is distributed by the federal government (mostly as Pell grants and the Supple-
mental Educational Opportunity Grant), state governments, and institutions themselves. Education tax credits
(and deductions) are an additional source of non-repayable aid to students. The NPSAS04 imputes federal Hope
and Lifetime Learning tax credits as well as any education deductions based on reported parental income and
documents by the Internal Revenue Service reporting education tax credits claimed by income.60 For students
living away from home, Figure B1 shows averages for each of these sources of non-repayable aid by parental
income.61
     We disaggregate non-repayable aid in Canada diﬀerently, since federal aid is exclusively in the form of loans
and we do not have measures of institutional support. Figure B2 reports separate amounts (by parental income)
for the following categories of non-repayable aid in British Columbia, Ontario, and Quebec: (i) Millennium and
provincial grants and bursaries, (ii) loan remissions, and (iii) tax credits. Federal and provincial rules are used
to calculate all aid ﬁgures as discussed in Appendix D (available online). To the extent that some Canadians do
not take advantage of all available tax credits, these ﬁgures may be slightly inﬂated. Because British Columbia
does not use loan remissions, the ﬁgure only reports remissions for Ontario and Quebec.

B.2      Bounding Net Tuition by Parental Income in the U.S.
We have used the NPSAS04 to calculate average tuition T , ﬁnancial aid F , and net tuition N T = T − F by
parental income I conditional on college enrollment; however, we would like unconditional averages for the full
population. Here, we calculate bounds on unconditional averages based on assumptions about non-repayable
institutional and state aid.
    Deﬁne a college enrollment indicator, C ∈ {0, 1}, and π(I) the probability someone with parental income I
is enrolled in college. Then,

              E(N T |I) = E(N T |I, C = 1) − {∆T (I) − [E(F |I, C = 1) − E(F |I, C = 0)]}[1 − π(I)],

where ∆T (I) ≡ E(T |I, C = 1) − E(T |I, C = 0). In the text, we report estimates of E(N T |I, C = 1) and
E(F |I, C = 1) using the NPSAS04. Using the NLSY97, it is straightforward to estimate both π(I) and
∆T (I).62
   It is not possible to determine E(F |I, C = 0) from either the NLSY97 or NPSAS04; however, we can bound
E(F |I, C = 1) − E(F |I, C = 0) using data from NPSAS04. In general, federal student aid oﬀers should be
independent of enrolment choices conditional on family income.63 In this case, a conservative upper bound on
  60
     In 2003-04, the federal Hope tax credit was available to ﬁrst and second year students enrolled at least half-time; it
provided full credit on the ﬁrst $1,000 in tuition and fees and a 50% credit on the next $1,000 for a maximum credit of
$1,500. The Federal Lifetime Learning tax credit, available to all students, provided a credit equal to 20% of tuition and
fees up to a maximum credit of $2,000.
  61
     We use the same NPSAS04 sample as used in the paper (i.e. 18-24 year-old dependent students that were enrolled
in-state in a public four-year PS institution and applied for federal ﬁnancial aid).
  62
     Ignoring any within state variation in in-state tuition at public four-year institutions, E(T |I, C) can be estimated
with the NLSY97 by assigning average in-state tuition levels to individuals according to their state of residence during
adolescence.
  63
     To the extent that tuition levels diﬀer across states, it is possible that student need and federal aid diﬀer across
states. Given diﬀerent enrollment rates across states, this could lead to diﬀerences in average federal aid by enrollment
status. However, since federal aid rarely covers total schooling costs for those eligible, any diﬀerences across states (and,
therefore, enrollment status) are likely to be very small.
ﬁnancial aid diﬀerences by enrollment status assumes that students who do not enroll in college receive zero
state and institutional aid oﬀers. This implies a conservative upper bound (Bound 1) for average net tuition by
parental income:

                    E(N T |I) ≤ E(N T |I, C = 1) − {∆T (I) − E(s + i|I, C = 1)}[1 − π(I)],

where s denotes state-based ﬁnancial aid and i denotes institutional ﬁnancial aid. If we assume that both
state and federal aid are independent of enrollment status (conditional on family income) and that youth not
attending PS school receive zero institutional aid, we obtain a sharper upper bound (Bound 2):

                      E(N T |I) ≤ E(N T |I, C = 1) − {∆T (I) − E(i|I, C = 1)}[1 − π(I)].

Estimates for E(s|I, C = 1) and E(i|I, C = 1) can be obtained from the NPSAS04.
    Assuming youth choosing not to attend PS school do not receive above average ﬁnancial aid oﬀers, NPSAS04-
based estimates of E(N T |I, C = 1) reported in the paper provide a lower bound on net tuition.
    Figures B3 and B4 show these bounds for net tuition and out-of-pocket costs for students living away
from home. Given the important role of state-based ﬁnancial aid, especially in high tuition states, Bound 1 is
extremely conservative. Average net tuition and out-of-pocket expenditures almost certainly lie in the narrow
region between Bound 2 and the values reported in the text.


Appendix C               Counterfactual Non-Repayable Aid Calculations
In estimating the eﬀects of removing aid and eliminating conditional family income – PS attendance gaps, we
disaggregate the population into income categories corresponding to those used in both our spline estimates
(see Figures 3a and 3b) and in our ﬁnancial aid analysis (Figures 4-8). We aggregate over the entire U.S. and
over British Columbia, Ontario, and Quebec in Canada.
    Based on the literature surveyed in Section 2.2, our calculations assume that each additional $1,000 in
grant aid increases PS attendance by .03 or .05 for the aﬀected groups. In calculating the eﬀects of eliminating
‘conditional’ income – attendance gaps, we use the gaps from our spline estimates (see Figures 3a and 3b).
    To calculate the eﬀect of removing need-based aid, we multiply the diﬀerence in non-repayable aid between
each income group and the highest income group (family income over $100,000), by the eﬀect of non-repayable
aid on PS attendance. Letting Ej reﬂect the initial non-repayable aid and Aj the initial attendance attendance
rate for income group j, we compute the counterfactual attendance rate A′j = Aj − γ(Ej − Etop )/1000, where
Etop is the aid given to the top income group and γ is 0.03 or 0.05.
    In calculating the additional aid required to eliminate conditional attendance gaps, let Aj reﬂect the current
attendance rate for youth in income category j and A′j the counterfactual attendance rate associated with no
conditional income – attendance gap (determined from the spline estimates shown in Figures 3a and 3b). Letting
Ej reﬂect current non-repayable aid amount, the counterfactual required aid amount is Ej′ = Ej + 1000 × (A′j −
Aj )/γ where γ is 0.03 or 0.05.
                Figure B1: Non-Repayable Aid by Source in the US
                       (Students Living Away from Parents)
5,000

4,500

4,000

3,500

3,000

2,500

2,000

1,500

1,000

  500

    0
        5     15         25   35           45     55        65      75     85      95
                                    Parental Income ($1,000)
                   Federal         State            Institutional        Tax Benefits



               Figure B2: Non-Repayable Aid by Source in Canada
                      (Students Living Away from Parents)
4,500

4,000

3,500

3,000

2,500

2,000

1,500

1,000

 500

   0
        5     15        25    35        45       55       65        75     85       95
                                    Parental Income ($1,000)
            ON Grants                       ON Loan Remission            ON Tax Ben.
            QC Grants                       QC Loan Remission            QC Tax Ben.
            BC Grants                       BC Tax Ben.
                             Figure B3: Net Tuition with US Bounds
                             (Students Living Away From Parents)
 6,000
 5,000
 4,000
 3,000
 2,000
 1,000
     0
-1,000
-2,000
-3,000
-4,000
            5       15       25      35       45       55       65   75         85        95
                                          Parental Income ($1000)
         ON                               QC                              BC
         US Low Tuition (NPSAS04)         US Low Tuition Bound 1          US Low Tuition Bound 2
         US High Tuition (NPSAS04)        US High Tuition Bound 1         US High Tuition Bound 2



                         Figure B4: Out-of-Pocket Costs with US Bounds
                              (Students Living Away From Parents)
 5,000
 4,000
 3,000
 2,000
 1,000
     0
-1,000
-2,000
-3,000
-4,000
-5,000
-6,000
-7,000
-8,000
-9,000
           5       15        25      35       45       55       65   75         85       95
                                          Parental Income ($1000)
         ON                               QC                              BC
         US Low Tuition (NPSAS04)         US Low Tuition Bound 1          US Low Tuition Bound 2
         US High Tuition (NPSAS04)        US High Tuition Bound 1         US High Tuition Bound 2
