NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EARLY MATERNAL EMPLOYMENT AND FAMILY WELLBEING
Pinka Chatterji
Sara Markowitz
Jeanne Brooks-Gunn
Working Paper 17212
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17212

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2011

The authors gratefully acknowledge that the project was supported by Grant Number R03HD052583
from the National Institute of Child Health And Human Development. The content is solely the responsibility
of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institute of Child
Health And Human Development, the National Institutes of Health, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Pinka Chatterji, Sara Markowitz, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Early Maternal Employment and Family Wellbeing
Pinka Chatterji, Sara Markowitz, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn
NBER Working Paper No. 17212
July 2011
JEL No. I1
ABSTRACT
This study uses longitudinal data from the NICHD Study on Early Child Care (SECC) to examine
the effects of maternal employment on family well-being, measured by maternal mental and overall
health, parenting stress, and parenting quality. First, we estimate the effects of maternal employment
on these outcomes measured when children are 6 months old. Next, we use dynamic panel data models
to examine the effects of maternal employment on family outcomes during the first 4.5 years of children’s
lives. Among mothers of six month old infants, maternal work hours are positively associated with
depressive symptoms and self-reported parenting stress, and negatively associated with self-rated overall
health among mothers. Compared to mothers who are on leave 3 months after childbirth, mothers
who are working full-time score 22 percent higher on the CES-D scale of depressive symptoms. However,
maternal employment is not associated with the quality of parenting at 6 months, based on trained
assessors’ observations of maternal sensitivity. Moreover, during the first 4.5 years of life as a whole,
we find only weak evidence that maternal work hours are associated with maternal health, and no evidence
that maternal employment is associated with parenting stress and quality. We find that unobserved
heterogeneity is an important factor in modeling family outcomes.

Pinka Chatterji
State University of New York at Albany
Economics Department
1400 Washington Avenue
Albany, NY 12222
and NBER
pchatterji@albany.edu
Sara Markowitz
Department of Economics
Emory University
1602 Fishburne Dr.
Atlanta, GA 30322
and NBER
sara.markowitz@emory.edu

Jeanne Brooks-Gunn
Columbia University
National Center for Children and Families
525 West 120th Street, Box 39
New York, NY 10027
brooks-gunn@columbia.edu

I.

Introduction

Maternal employment has been the norm in the US since the 1980’s. As of 2008, 71
percent of mothers of children under age 18 participated in the labor force (US BLS, 2009).
Rates of labor force participation in 2008 were somewhat lower, but still high, for mothers of
young children and infants – 64 percent of mothers with children under 6 years old, and 56
percent of mothers of infants participated in the labor force in 2008 (US BLS, 2009). Childrearing and market work are both time-intensive activities. Thus, there has been concern that
maternal employment harms children by reducing the quantity and quality of time mothers spend
with their families (Baum 2003; Ruhm, 2004; Cawley & Liu, 2007).
When mothers reallocate their time from home to market work, however, this shift
potentially affects not just the health and wellbeing of children but also the health and well-being
of the parents and the family as a whole (Bianchi 2000; Riggio, 2006). In the economics
literature, previous research on the effects of maternal employment has focused on a narrow set
of child outcomes - scores on cognitive tests and a single behavioral assessment, the Behavior
Problems Index (BPI). However, because only child outcomes and not maternal or family
outcomes are examined, we obtain an incomplete picture of the effects of maternal employment
from these studies. To develop public policies that meet the needs of a society in which most
mothers are employed, we need a broader knowledge base regarding how maternal employment
affects families.
This study uses longitudinal data from Phases I and II of the NICHD Study on Early
Child Care (SECC) to examine the effects of maternal employment on family well-being,
measured by maternal mental and overall health, parenting stress, and parenting quality. First, we
estimate the effects of maternal employment on these outcomes measured when children are 6

3

months old, a point at which child-rearing is particularly time-intensive and maternal
employment may have its most important effects. Next, we take advantage of the longitudinal
aspect of the SECC and use dynamic panel data models to examine the effects of maternal
employment on family outcomes during the first 4.5 years of children’s lives. Notably, these
models account for both unobserved heterogeneity as well as state dependence in the maternal
health and parenting outcomes. The primary contributions of this paper are: (1) we examine the
effects of maternal employment on a broader set of family outcomes than most US-based studies
have considered, including parenting quality assessed in a laboratory setting; (2) in addition to
work hours, we consider effects of work characteristics such as job flexibility; (3) we draw on
longitudinal data to gauge whether effects persist over early childhood; and (4) we use empirical
methods that address the potential endogeneity of maternal work hours, as well as the dynamic
nature of the relationship between maternal employment and family outcomes.
Our findings indicate that maternal employment is associated with reductions in family
wellbeing when children are 6 months old. Among mothers of six month old infants, maternal
work hours are positively associated with depressive symptoms and self-reported parenting
stress, and negatively associated with self-rated overall health among mothers. Compared to
mothers who are on leave 3 months after childbirth, mothers who are working full-time score 22
percent higher on the CES-D scale of depressive symptoms. However, maternal employment is
not associated with the quality of parenting at 6 months, based on trained assessors’ observations
of maternal sensitivity. Moreover, during the first 4.5 years of life as a whole, we find only weak
evidence that maternal work hours are associated with maternal health, and no evidence that
maternal employment is associated with parenting stress and quality. We find that unobserved
heterogeneity is an important factor in modeling family outcomes.

4

II.

Effects of early maternal employment on family outcomes

There is an extensive theoretical and empirical literature outside of economics that
highlights the importance of the family environment, parenting, and maternal health in shaping
children’s health and developmental trajectories (National Research Council and Institute of
Medicine, 2000; Belsky, 1988; Coleman,1988; Bornstein, 2002). Parenting behaviors, such as
nurturance, discipline, and teaching, as well as the home environment have powerful influence
on children’s wellbeing and development (Brooks-Gunn & Markman, 2005). Parenting and the
home environment have been linked to cognitive and behavioral outcomes such as children’s
academic achievement, social functioning, and health (Bornstein, 2002; Collins et al., 2000;
Steinberg, 2001; Steinberg & Sheffield-Morris, 2001). Specifically, parental hostility, low
nurturance, parenting stress, physical discipline and other harsh parenting practices are
associated with aggression, low self-control, higher levels of externalizing behavior problems,
and other mental health problems in children (Feldman et al., 2000; Qi & Kaiser, 2003; Barry et
al., 2005; Ispa et al. forthcoming).
Poor parental health also reduces the quality of time mothers spend with their children
and is associated with adverse outcomes. Numerous studies show that clinical depression in
mothers as well as self-reported depressive symptoms, anxiety, and psychological distress, are
important risk factors for adverse emotional and cognitive outcomes in their children,
particularly during the first few years of life (Gray et al. 2004; NICHD Early Child Care
Research Network, 1999; Petterson & Albers, 2001). Depressed mothers of infants are less
interactive with and less responsive to their children (Campbell et al. 1995), and are less likely to
seek appropriate health care for their children (Minkovitz et al., 2005). Compared to infants of

5

healthy mothers, infants of depressed mothers are more negative and less playful (Cohn et al.,
1986; Field, 1984), have more behavior problems during childhood (Field 1984; Barry et al.,
2005; Essex et al., 2001; Lyons-Ruth et al., 1997; Hay et al., 2003), and they are more likely to
eventually develop psychopathology during childhood and adulthood (Downey & Coyne, 1990;
Kim-Cohen et al., 2005).
Despite the importance of maternal health and parenting outcomes, there has been little
attention in the economics literature to the effects of maternal employment on outcomes of
family members other than children. Most research focuses on the effects of maternal
employment on children’s academic and behavioral outcomes. Recent research indicates that
early maternal employment increases the frequency of child behavior problems, and detracts
from school readiness, verbal ability, and test scores (Berger et al., 2008; Berger et al., 2005;
Brooks-Gunn et al., 2002; Hill et al., 2005; Waldfogel et al., 2002; Waldfogel, 2002; Ruhm,
2004; Ruhm 2008; Baum, 2003; James-Burdumy, 2005; Gregg et al., 2005 ). Full-time
employment during the first eighteen months is particularly harmful for children’s cognitive and
behavioral outcomes (Gregg et al., 2005; Baum, 2003; Brooks-Gunn et al., 2002).
These effects of maternal employment on children vary by the characteristics of children
(e.g., age, race/ethnicity, and gender of child) and families (e.g., SES), and also by child care
quality (e.g., type of child care arrangement). The negative effects of maternal employment tend
to be stronger for children from more advantaged, majority-race backgrounds (Ruhm, 2008;
Berger et al., 2008; Gregg et al., 2005). Moreover, non-standard maternal work schedules during
the child’s first few years are associated with child behavior problems (Daniel et al., 2009; Han,
2005), and recent research based on the SECC shows that more hours of non-relative child care
are associated with child behavior problems up to age 15 (Vandell et al., 2010).

6

A few recent studies focus on the effect of one aspect of maternal employment – the
length of maternity leave – on maternal health, which is one of the measures of family wellbeing
we consider in the present study. These studies offer mixed evidence that maternity leave is
associated with maternal health. Based on Canadian data, Baker and Milligan (2008) evaluate a
mandated increase in the number of weeks of maternity leave granted to new parents. They find
that increasing paid leave benefits from a maximum of 25 weeks to 50 weeks has no influence on
maternal health measured by self reported health status, a depression scale, an indicator of post
partum depression and a count of post-partum physical problems. In the US context, Chatterji &
Markowitz (2005, 2008) use data from the 1988 National Maternal and Infant Health Survey
(NMIHS) and the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study – Birth Cohort (ECLS-B) to examine the
association between maternity leave length and maternal health. The findings from these two
papers suggest that longer maternity leave (paid and un-paid) is associated with lower levels of
maternal depressive symptoms, a lower likelihood of the mother having frequent outpatient visits
during the first six months after childbirth, and better self-reported overall health among
mothers.
To our knowledge, only one recent study in economics has focused on the effects of
maternal employment on the wellbeing of the family. Baker, Gruber & Milligan (2008) take
advantage of a natural experiment in which one Canadian province (Quebec) introduced a
comprehensive, highly subsidized child care system. This policy change led to a rise in child
care usage, an increase in maternal employment, and an increase in children’s adverse health and
developmental outcomes in Quebec relative to the rest of Canada. These negative effects on
children are consistent with the US-based literature on the effects of maternal employment on
child outcomes. Baker, Gruber & Milligan, however, also examine family outcomes which have

7

not been studied in the US context. These authors find that the policy change was associated
with less effective parenting, less satisfaction with marital relationships, increases in maternal
depressive symptoms, and decline in the overall self-assessed health of fathers (but not mothers).
This study is notable in that the authors examine a range of family indicators of wellbeing, not
just children’s outcomes, and all effects suggest detrimental effects of child care and maternal
employment on families.
We build on this recent paper by examining these types of effects in the US context
where, compared to Canada and other industrialized countries, mothers return to work early and
at best have limited access to paid leave and affordable, high quality child care. This paper
contributes to the growing economics literature on the effects of maternal employment in three
respects. First, it expands the range of outcomes considered by examining the effects of
maternal employment on several measures of family wellbeing that are critical to young
children’s development -- maternal mental health, maternal overall health, parenting stress, and
the quality of parenting.
Second, we use data from the SECC, the only national, longitudinal data set available that
includes detailed information on maternal work hours as well as state-of-the-art measurement of
family outcomes, including laboratory assessments of parenting behaviors. Using the SECC, we
attempt to address the possibility that unmeasured factors confound an observed association
between maternal employment and family outcomes by estimating models that include an
unusually extensive set of controls, including measures of initial family wellbeing and maternal
ability, and by estimating dynamic panel models which address unobserved heterogeneity as well
as state dependence in the outcomes.

8

Third, we build on prior work by examining not only the effects of maternal work hours
on family wellbeing, but also the effects of the characteristics of her work – specifically, whether
the mother does some work at home, whether she has flexible hours, whether she travels
overnight for work, and whether she works non-standard hours. By examining these
characteristics in addition to hours of work, we gain a richer and more nuanced picture of how
maternal employment affects families.

III.

The NICHD Study of Early Child Care (SECC)

The SECC is a longitudinal study designed to examine the relationship between child
care and children’s development. In 1991, the SECC enrolled 1,364 healthy infants with
English-speaking, adult mothers from ten sites across the United States.1 The sampling plan
ensured representation of mothers who planned to work or attend school full-time, as well as
mothers who planned to work/attend school part-time and mothers who planned to be home fulltime with their infants (see NICHD Early Child Care Research Network, 1994, for a detailed
description of the study design). The SECC was conducted in three phases, following children
and their families from birth until age 15. This paper is based on data from Phase I and Phase II
of the study, which includes repeated assessments of children, parents, and caregivers, as well as
multiple home and telephone interviews with parents, caregivers, and child care directors. We
draw on data collected from the time children were 1 month old until children were 54 months or
about 4.5 years old.
Compared to the NLSY79 and other similar surveys used in prior work, measurement of
maternal and child outcome variables is much more extensive in SECC. Data were collected
1

Little Rock, AR; Irvine, CA; Lawrence, KS; Boston, MA; Philadelphia, PA; Pittsburgh, PA; Charlottesville, VA;
Morganton, NC; Seattle, WA; Madison, WI

9

from children and their families in a variety of settings, including the child’s home, the child care
setting (if used), a laboratory playroom, and through telephone contacts with a parent. Outcomes
are measured using a variety of methods including use of trained observers, interviewers,
questionnaires, and testing (NICHD SECC website, 2011). Interviewers visited mothers and
children in their homes when children were 1, 6, 15, 24, 36, and 54 months old. Families also
participated in telephone interviews between home visits that were conducted at 3, 9, 12, 18, 21,
27, 30, 33, 42, 46 and 50 months. During the home visits, mothers completed a variety of
instruments designed to measure depression, parenting stress, relationship quality, social support,
and their attitudes towards work and child-rearing. Mothers also provided extensive information
about socio-demographic characteristics, employment, and child care during the home visits.
During the home visits, trained interviewers observed mothers’ interactions with children and the
state of the household environment. Information on household composition, employment, child
care and some health measures were updated every 3 to 4 months through the telephone contacts.
Beginning with the 15-month interview, certain mother/child assessments were conducted in a
laboratory setting.
In our first set of analyses, we analyze effects of maternal work on family outcomes
measured when children are 6 months old. Our 6-month sample includes 1,198 mother/child
pairs who have available information on all measures used in the analysis, with the exception of
maternal occupation prior to childbirth, maternal reading score, and maternal smoking during
pregnancy. For these latter three measures (described below), we replaced missing values with
sample means and included in all models a dummy variable indicating that an imputed value was
used.

10

In our second set of analyses, we use a pooled sample which includes repeated
observations on children and mothers. When analyzing effects of maternal employment on
maternal overall health, we pool data from all telephone and home interviews from 1 month until
54 months, yielding potentially 16 assessment time points for each mother (we are not able to
use the 1 month assessment as a time point since we use this interview for lagged values of the
dependent variable for the 3 month interview, as described below). In these models, maternal
overall health and maternal employment are measured about every 3 months. We run analyses
with an unbalanced panel of 18,655 observations which includes observations with available data
on maternal health, employment, a standard set of time-invariant characteristics.
When analyzing maternal depression and parenting quality, we pool data from the 6, 15,
24, 36 and 54 month interviews. For the depression outcomes, we run analyses on a sample
limited to 5,618 observations with available data; for parenting quality, the sample size is 4,371.
When analyzing parenting stress, we pool data from the 6, 15, 24 and 36 month interviews, since
parenting stress is not assessed at the 54 month interview – the sample size for these analyses is
4,573. Results are discussed below.
a. Family Outcomes
Depressive symptoms: We measure maternal depression using the 20-item Center for
Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D), which is used to measure depressive
symptoms in the past week in non-clinical populations. Mothers completed CES-D instruments
during the 1, 6, 15, 24, 36, and 54 month home interviews. The CES-D is one of the most widely
used psychiatric scales and captures mood, somatic problems, problems in interactions with
others, and issues with motor functioning, such as “I felt lonely,” “my sleep was restless,” and “I
could not get going.” The respondent is asked to respond to each item according to a 4-point

11

Likert scale, with higher values corresponding to higher frequency of the item in the past week.
For example, for the item “I felt lonely,” mothers responded either “less than 1 day” (zero
points), “1-2 days” (1 point), 3-4 days (2 points), or 5-7 days (3 points). Scores range from 0 to
60, and a score of 16 or higher is suggestive of clinically defined depressive disorder. The CESD scale, however, does not correspond to a DSM-IV diagnosis of major depression. It is used
primarily as a screening tool for depression, not as a diagnostic tool (Eaton et al. 2003).
We create two measures of depression from the CES-D scale, a continuous measure of
symptoms and a dichotomous indicator of depression. Because the CES-D is skewed to the right
in these data, we use the natural log of the total CES-D score as the continuous measure.2 The
dichotomous measure is a dummy variable indicating whether or not the respondent’s CES-D
score is equal to or exceeds 16. This dummy variable is not equivalent to a psychiatric diagnosis
of depression, but it does capture respondents who are experiencing many symptoms of
depression, or several symptoms with high frequency, in the past week (Eaton et al. 2003).
The sample average CES-D score at the 6-month interview is 8.9, and 17 percent of the
sample is depressed at the time of the 6-month interview (Table 1). It is notable that mothers
who are employed at 6 months have appreciably lower CES-D scores and rates of depression at
both the 1 month and 6 month interviews compared to mothers who are not employed at 6
months (Table 2). The rate of depression among full-time employed mothers at 6 months is 15
percent versus 22 percent among mothers who were not employed at 6 months (Table 2).
Overall health: Every three months, SECC mothers rated their own health in the past 3
months, compared to other women their age. Mothers can report their health as poor (1), fair (2),
good (3) or excellent (4). We combine the poor and fair rankings since the number of mothers
reporting poor health was small. We use this rating as an outcome measure, as well as a
2

In this variable and in others where log values are used, the zeros are replaced with a value of 0.5.

12

dichotomous indicator that equals one if the mother reports her health in general is fair or poor.
Since the question does not specify physical or emotional health, these variables may capture
both physical and mental illness.
Mothers reported on their health through home and telephone interviews every 3-4
months from the 1 month until the 54 month interview. At the 6-month interview, 12 percent of
mothers report poor or fair health (Table 1). Employed mothers at 6 months have much lower
rates of poor/fair health at the 1 month and at the 6 month interviews compared to mothers who
are not employed at 6 months – for example, 9 percent of full-time employed mothers report
poor or fair health at 6 months compared to 18 percent of mothers who are not employed at 6
months (Table 2).
Parenting Stress: To measure parenting stress, we draw on two scales completed by
SECC mothers during the home interviews. At the 1 month and 6 month interviews, mothers
completed a 30-item version of the Abidin Parenting Stress Index, which is designed to measure
parent-child relationship stress and risk for adverse parenting and child behavioral outcomes.
The index includes items such as “I feel trapped by my responsibilities as a parent”, “I enjoy
being a parent” and “I feel capable and on top of things when caring for my baby.” At the 15, 24
and 36-month interviews, mothers were administered a 20 item adapted form of the Parent Role
Quality Scale, which is appropriate to measure parenting stress among parents of toddlers and
pre-school age children. Mothers are presented with ten potential concerns and ten potential
rewards of child-rearing, and are asked to rate how much these concerns and rewards reflect their
own experiences in parenting. The scale includes concerns such as “feeling tied down because
of the children” and “the unending responsibilities” and rewards such as “the love your child
shows” and “seeing your child grow and change.” For both measures of parenting stress, higher

13

scores indicate a greater degree of parenting stress. Table 2 shows that employed mothers at 6
months report lower rates of parenting stress than mothers who were not employed at 6 months.
This is true of parenting stress measured at the 1 month interview as well.
Maternal Sensitivity: Maternal sensitivity is measured using trained observers’ ratings of
videotapes of mothers’ behavior toward their children in semi-structured play situations. At 6
and 15 months, mother/child interactions were observed in the child’s home, while at 24, 36, and
54 months these observations were conducted in the laboratory. These interactions are designed
to demonstrate the degree to which the mother responds in a sensitive way to the child’s
nondistress, intrusiveness (reverse scored), and positive regard (at the 6, 15, and 25 month
assessments), and the mother’s supportive presence, hostility (reverse scored) and respect for
autonomy (at 36 and 54 months). Higher scores indicate higher degree of sensitivity to the child.
Table 2 shows that although employed mothers report better mental and overall health and lower
parenting stress than mothers who are not employed at 6 months, full-time employed mothers are
not different from mothers who are not working at 6 months in maternal sensitivity. Part-time
working mothers have slightly higher sensitivity ratings compared to mothers who are not
working at 6 months.
b. Maternal employment
Mothers provided employment information during each home interview (1, 6, 15, 24, 36
and 54 months) and most this information was updated during intervening telephone contacts
every 3 to 4 months. For each of these potentially 16 time points, we created several measures of
lagged maternal employment. As described in the next section, we use lagged measures to avoid
problems with reverse causality. The measures are: (1) the number of hours worked per week
measured at the home or telephone interview that was conducted 3 months prior (hours worked

14

at last interview); (2) the average of weekly hours prior two assessments conducted 3 and 6
months ago (average hours worked over past 2 waves); and (3) the average weekly hours the
mother worked up to and including the most recent prior assessment point (average hours
worked in child’s life). Based on these continuous measures of work hours, we also created
three dummy indicators for: (1) worked 1 to 20 hours per week at last interview; (2) worked 21
to 39 hours per week at last interview; and (3) worked at least 40 hours per week at last
interview. When we estimate models using the full sample, the baseline category combines
mothers who are not employed with mothers who are employed but are on leave at 3 months.
When we estimate models using a sample limited to employed mothers (defined as mothers who
report that they are employed and working or employed and on leave at the 1 month interview),
the baseline category is limited to mothers who are employed but are still on leave at the 3 month
interview.
In addition to work hours, employed SECC mothers provided information regarding the
characteristics of their jobs. In all home and telephone interviews from 3 to 54 months, mothers
were asked the number of hours they could work at home, and the time of day of their work
hours (daytime, evening, night or varying shifts). From this information, we created a dummy
variable indicating the mother could work at least 10 hours a week from home, and a dummy
variable indicating the mother worked a non-daytime shift. During the 6, 15, 24 and 36 month
interviews, mothers also reported whether their job required overnight travel (never, less than
once a month, more than once a month) and whether their work hours were not at all flexible, a
little flexible (can leave in an emergency), fairly flexible, and completely flexible. From this
information, we created dummy variables indicating whether the mother’s job requires any
overnight travel (either less than once a month or more than once a month) and whether the

15

mother’s job is either fairly or completely flexible. When work characteristics are of interest, we
limit the sample to employed mothers.
At the 6-month interview, 64 percent of mothers were employed or on leave, and the
average weekly hours among employed mothers was about 33 (Table 1). Among employed
mothers at the 6-month interview, 64 percent reported flexible hours, 22 percent worked
alternate shifts, 18 percent had overnight travel, and 12 percent worked from home at least 10
hours per week (Table 1).
c. Other covariates
To adjust for other factors that may confound an association between maternal
employment and family outcomes, we estimate models that include extensive sets of controls for
family socio-economic status, the mother’s education and ability, the mother’s attitudes towards
employment, and the initial health endowment of the child. All models include the following
measures: mother’s age in years, number of years of education, size of household measured at 1month interview, maternal race/ethnicity (dummy indicators for African-American and Other
race with white as the baseline, dummy indicator for Hispanic), child’s gender (dummy indicator
for female), dummy indicator for child’s birth order (second, third, fourth, or higher with
firstborn as the baseline); dummy indicators of birth month of the child (all were born in 2001);
dummy indicator for low birth-weight child (2500 grams or less); dummy indicator for
premature child (born before 37 weeks gestation); dummy indicator for whether mother smoked
at all during pregnancy; dummy indicator for any pregnancy complications; mother’s
standardized score on PPVT reading test administered at 36 month interview, and dummy
indicators for each SECC site.

16

Some models also include the following measures: dummy indicators for mother’s
occupation in the year prior to childbirth,3 family income in the year prior to childbirth, current
family income, mother’s score on scale measuring progressivity of child-rearing beliefs
measured at 1-month interview, mother’s score on scale measuring work commitment
administered at 1-month interview, mother’s score on scale measuring benefits of maternal
employment administered at 1-month interview, dummy indicators for family structure at 1month (single parent/other family structure, live-in partner with married as the baseline, dummy
indicator for child’s father does not live in HH), and dummy indicators for whether the child
spends at least 10 hours a week in six types of child care arrangements (daycare center, child
care home, father, grandparent, in-home caregiver, multiple arrangements).4

IV.
A.

Empirical Approach

Effects of maternal employment on 6-month family outcomes
We begin by estimating Eq. 1 using outcomes measured when children are 6 months old

(t=6 in Equation 1).
(1) yi6 = Xi6α + Wi3β + νi + εi6
In equation 1, yi6 represents the ith family’s health or parenting outcome at the 6-month
interview, X is a vector of covariates, W is a vector of lagged measures of maternal employment
measured at the 3-month interview, ν represents unmeasured family/maternal characteristics that
affect y, ε is a random error term, and α and β are parameters to be estimated. As discussed
below, lagged employment is used to help reduce the possibility of bias resulting from reverse
3

Professional; technician or related support; sales; administrative support or clerical; private household; protective
service; service; farm operation or management; mechanic or repairer; construction or other trade; machine operator,
assembler, or inspector; transportation or material moving; handler, equipment cleaner, helper, or
laborer; with executive, administrative or managerial as the baseline.
4
Children who did not use any of these child care arrangements for 10 or more hours per week were considered to
be exclusively in the care of the mother. At 6 months, about 14% of employed mothers were using exclusive
maternal care.

17

causality. For continuous outcomes (e.g., depressive symptoms, parenting quality, parenting
stress), we use OLS for estimation of Equation 1, while we use standard probit models for binary
outcomes (e.g. poor/fair health, depressed) and an ordered probit model for self-assessed health
rating (e.g., 1 = fair/poor health, 2 = good health, 3 = excellent health). We estimate HuberWhite standard errors adjusted for clustering on site.
The causal effect of maternal employment on family wellbeing, β, may be positive or
negative. Maternal employment may detract from family wellbeing by reducing the amount of
time mothers spend investing in their families and in their own health and wellbeing. Prior
research indicates that employed mothers spend less time with their children than non-employed
mothers (Cawley & Liu, 2007).5 On the other hand, maternal employment brings more income
that can be used to purchase market goods that benefit the family and the mothers themselves.
Estimation of β is complicated by several potential problems. First, if families/mothers
have unmeasured characteristics (ν) that are correlated with both family outcomes (y) and
maternal work hours (W), the estimate of β will be biased. As Ruhm (2004), Gregg et al. (2005),
and others have noted, this bias could operate in either direction. Mothers who are relatively
resistant to stress and depression may be more likely to work, and also more likely to have
positive family outcomes, compared to less resistant mothers. This case would suggest that β is
biased upwards, since the coefficient captures both the causal effect of employment on outcomes
as well as the unmeasured resilience of mothers.
On the other hand, if mothers select into employment along unmeasured characteristics
that detract from family outcomes, the estimate of β would be biased downwards. For example,
5

Cawley & Liu (2007), using 2003-2006 data from the American Time Use Survey, find that conditional on
spending some time with children, employed mothers spend 139 fewer minutes (on the reference day) with their
children than stay-at-home mothers, controlling for maternal race/ethnicity, age, education, marital status and other
factors (Cawley & Liu, 2007). Bianchi (2000) notes that employed mothers sleep fewer hours and spend less time in
self-care and leisure time activities compared to non-employed mothers.

18

if mothers experiencing difficult adjustment to parenthood are more likely to return to work and
more likely to have adverse outcomes, β will capture both the effects of employment and this
poor adjustment effect. In our sample, employed mothers at 6 months tend to be healthier at
baseline and generally more advantaged than non-employed mothers (Table 2). This fact
suggests, but does not definitively imply, that employed mothers also may have unobserved
characteristics that pre-dispose them to favorable family outcomes compared to non-employed
mothers (Altonji et al., 2005).
In order to reduce the possibility of bias from unmeasured factors, we estimate models
with unusually rich and extensive sets of control variables. We begin with a specification that
includes only pre-determined variables – maternal age, maternal race/ethnicity, total household
size, maternal education, maternal reading test score (a proxy for ability), pregnancy
complications, mother smoked during pregnancy, low birth weight child, premature child, child
gender, birth order of child, birth month of child, site fixed effects, and lagged maternal health
and parenting (measured by maternal depression, maternal overall health and maternal parenting
stress at the 1-month interview). Notably, our baseline model adjusts extensively for the
family’s initial state of health and wellbeing, as well as for maternal ability, which are perhaps
the two most likely confounding factors.6
Next, we estimate richer specifications to gauge the degree of selection along observed
characteristics of the family. We incrementally add controls for (1) maternal occupation prior to
the child’s birth and family income prior to the child’s birth; and (2) family structure, maternal
beliefs about the benefits of employment, work commitment, and beliefs about child-rearing

6

Although it is possible that maternal employment already has affected family outcomes by the 1 month interview,
this is unlikely. In our sample, 135 mothers are employed at the 1-month interview, but only 31 of these mothers
have returned to work full-time, and 104 of these mothers report having fairly or completely flexible hours.

19

measured when the child was 1 month old.7 We also re-estimate all of these models after
limiting the sample to mothers who are employed (either working or on leave) at the 1 month
interview. Limiting the sample this way may further reduce unobserved heterogeneity, although
it comes at the cost of a reduction in power.
In addition to unobserved heterogeneity, a second potential problem that arises in
estimating β is reverse causality. Although we seek to estimate the effect of maternal
employment on family wellbeing, causation may run the other way, with mothers changing their
employment decisions in response to their own and their family’s health and wellbeing. For
example, a mother may cut back on her work hours if she feels that employment interferes with
her parenting or causes stress for the family. To address the possibility of reverse causality, we
use a lagged measure, maternal employment at 3 month interview, in all 6-month models.
A third empirical issue is the interpretation of the estimate of β. Our interest is in the
total effect of maternal employment on family outcomes (Gregg et al., 2005). For example, if
maternal employment leads to usage of child care and an increase in family income, these
changes may affect families, and our intention is to capture both types of effects through the
coefficient on maternal employment. This focus affects what right hand side variables we
include in the model. Although we include an extensive set of controls to reduce unobserved
heterogeneity, we avoid including variables that may capture mechanisms through which
maternal employment affects families.
In particular, in our main specifications, we do not include current family income or
current child care arrangements as right hand side variables since these factors may be critical
mechanisms through which maternal employment affects family outcomes. In alternative

7

These latter two sets of variables, particularly those measured when the child is 1 month old, may be endogeneous
to the return-to-work decision. Thus, we interpret findings from these two models with caution.

20

specifications, however, we do include these variables in order to gauge how much of the effect
of employment on family outcomes is operating through income and child care arrangements.
Income is likely to be the primary route (although probably is not the only route) through which
maternal employment improves family outcomes; including a control for family income thus
may exacerbate any negative effects of maternal employment that may exist. In the case of child
care, one possibility is that the use of child care improves family outcomes, if child care is a
positive experience for children and their parents – in this case, including controls for child care
would, like income, worsen any negative effects of maternal employment that may exist. If child
care causes stress and difficulties for children and parents, however, including controls for child
care may actually reduce any estimated negative effects of maternal employment on outcomes.
A fourth empirical issue is the possibility that the effect of maternal employment varies
by family characteristics. Following the literature on maternal employment and children, we
estimate models on the following sub-samples: mothers who are living in poverty at baseline vs.
mothers who are not; mothers with less than 16 years of education vs. college educated mothers;
mothers living in poverty at baseline vs. mothers not living in poverty at baseline; and married
vs. unmarried mothers. Since the SECC did not over-sample disadvantaged or minority
populations, our samples sizes are small for some of these analyses, and we cannot examine
effects for racial/ethnic sub-samples.
B.

Effects of maternal employment on family outcomes during the first 4.5 years of life
Next, we move to examining whether the effects of maternal employment on family

outcomes persist during early childhood. To do so, we use pooled data from Phases I and II of
the SECC, which include information collected when the children were 1 month to 54 months

21

old. Here, we examine effects of lagged maternal work hours only, and do not consider other
work characteristics, due to data availability.
We estimate dynamic panel data models which account for individual fixed effects, as
well as the strong degree of persistence in maternal health and parenting outcomes during the
first 4.5 years of children’s lives. This persistence may be due to true state dependence (e.g.,
stock of maternal health and parenting capital evolves slowly over time) and/or to unmeasured
factors (e.g. genetics) (Contoyannis, 2004). To account for this persistence, our models include a
lagged dependent variable on the right hand side, as seen below in Equation (1’). In equation 1’,
yit represents the ith family’s health/parenting outcomes at time t, yit-1 is a lagged dependent
variable measured 3 months prior to t, X is a vector of time-varying covariates, W is a lagged
measure of maternal employment measured 3 months prior to t, ν represents unmeasured
family/maternal characteristics that affect y, ε is a random error term, and α, β, and δ are
parameters to be estimated.
(1’) yit = yit-1δ + Xitα + Wit-1β + νi + εit
In the case of the maternal overall health outcome, we draw on unusually rich data.
Maternal overall health, maternal employment information and some critical time-varying
factors (household size, whether the father lives in the household) are reported by mothers about
every 3 months from the 1 month to the 54 month interviews. We emphasize that the frequency
of the data collection for this outcome reduces the likelihood of confounding by unmeasured
time-varying factors, but increases the likely degree of state dependence in the maternal health
outcome. For other outcomes (depression, parenting stress, quality of parenting), we draw on
data that is available at the 1, 15, 24, 36, and 54 month interviews. Confounding by time-varying
unmeasured factors is of greater concern in these models.

22

To estimate Eq. 1’, we use Arellano-Bond (A-B) difference GMM methods (Arellano &
Bond, 1991). These methods are well-suited for our case in which we have: (1) individual fixed
effects; (2) a lagged dependent variable on the right hand side; and (3) a large N and a small t.
A-B methods address the problem that lagged health/parenting (on the right hand side of Eq. 1’)
is correlated with the error term once the equation is first-differenced to remove the individual
fixed effect. The A-B approach involves instrumenting for the difference between lagged and
current health/parenting using deeper lagged measures of health/parenting. In our application,
we also need to instrument for lagged work hours, which are predetermined in Equation 1’ but
become endogenous to the model when we take the first difference. We use the one-step version
of the A-B estimator which generates robust standard errors, and we report results from tests for
first and second order autocorrelation, and from Hansen’s J test of overidentification.

V.

Results

We begin the formal analysis with an examination of the effects of maternal work hours
measured at the 3 month interview on the five different maternal mental health and parenting
outcomes measured when the child is six months old. Table 3a shows results for the full sample,
where mothers who are employed but are on leave at 3 months have zero work hours and thus
are combined in the baseline category with mothers who are not employed. Table 3b shows
results for the employed sample, where mothers with zero work hours at 3 months are all
employed but on leave from their jobs. In both tables, the dependent variables are listed in the
rows. Column 1 shows estimates from the most parsimonious specification. The models in the
columns labeled 2 through 6 incrementally add covariates as indicated in the bottom rows of the
table. For continuous outcomes, we show estimated coefficients and T-statistics from OLS

23

models, and for dichotomous outcomes, we show average marginal effects and T-statistics from
probit models.
The first row of estimates in Tables 3a and 3b pertain to the log CES-D score. For both
the full and the employed samples, lagged hours of work are associated with increases in
depressive symptoms. While the magnitude varies some according to the other included
covariates, all coefficients are positive and statistically significant at the 5 percent level in a twotailed test. The coefficients indicate that on average, an increase in weekly work hours of 10
hours is associated with an increase in the depression score in the range of 3 to 7 percent among
the full sample, and a similar range of 6 to 9 percent for the employed sample. These are
relatively small effects, given that a 10 hour increase corresponds to about a 40 percent increase
in work hours among employed mothers (lagged work hours among employed mothers at the 6
month interview was about 25 hours per week).
Moreover, increases in work hours do not move mothers over the indicator threshold for
depression unless current child care arrangements are included as covariates and the full sample
is used for estimation (Tables 3a and 3b). Columns 5 and 6 in Table 3a show that after the
indirect effect of child care arrangements is netted out of the total effect, increased work hours
have a detrimental effect on maternal mental health, as indicated by an increased probability of
being over the CES-D threshold score of 16. The magnitude of this effect implies that a ten hour
increase in work hours on average increases the likelihood of depression by .02 in the both
samples, which is about a 12 percent increase at the sample mean for depression of 17% in the
full sample (Columns 5 and 6, Table 3a).
But what this finding also indicates is that that at least some forms of child care have a
protective effect on maternal mental health – adjusting for other factors, the results show that

24

using center-based child care and having a grandparent care for the child, relative to care by the
mother, both are associated with reductions in depressive symptoms at the 6 month interview
(results not shown). However, as we argue above, the effect we are most interested in is the total
effect of work hours on the outcomes, not the effect of working net of the mechanisms. The
models that exclude child care represent the total effect of hours on the depression indicator,
which includes the direct effect of working on health, as well as the indirect effects of child care
arrangements and income (which is determined by work hours) on health.
For the full sample, Table 3a shows that overall health, parenting stress, and parenting
quality are all unaffected (statistically) by increases in maternal work hours. These insignificant
results persist regardless of the other included variables. However, these results likely reflect the
averages of two groups of women, those who work and those who do not. Among employed
mothers, in fact, we find that hours worked is positively associated with self-reported parenting
stress at 6 months (Table 3b). However, this stress apparently does not translate into poorer
parenting based on objective measurements, as increased work hours are not statistically
associated with the parenting quality (maternal sensitivity) score at 6 months (Tables 3a-b).
We also estimated the models shown in Tables 3a-b using sub-samples of mothers who
were college educated, not college educated, married at the 1 mo. interview, not married at the 1
mo. interview, living in poverty at the 1 mo. interview and not living in poverty at the 1 mo.
interview (results not shown). Some of these samples are small, but the general pattern of
findings suggests that the negative effects of work hours on depression and parenting stress are
driven by effects among married mothers, and they hold for both college and not college
educated mothers. The sub-sample analyses indicate that after including controls for income and

25

child care, work hours detract from parenting quality in the not college educated and the not poor
samples, but not in the college educated or the poor samples.
In Table 4, we show results from ordered probit models in which we examine the effects
of maternal work hours on self-rated overall health of mothers measured at 6 months. The
findings suggest that in the full sample, which includes both working and non-working mothers,
there are no effects of work hours at 3 months on maternal overall health at 6 months. However,
among mothers who are employed or on leave at 6 months, higher work hours at 3 months is
associated with a reduction in overall health. This effect is small in magnitude – a 10 hour
increase in work hours at 3 months (about a 40 percent increase) is associated with a 2 percent
reduction in the probability of being in excellent health, and a 2 percent increase in the
probability of being in good health.
In the appendix, we show results from models in which we use alternative definitions of
work hours, and results from models in which we examine characteristics of work at 6 months.
Rather than use the number of weekly hours worked at the 3 month interview, in Appendix Table
1 we use 1) the average hours per week worked over the child’s life (i.e. in the first 6 months); 2)
the average weekly hours reported in the one month and three month interviews; and 3) three
indicator variables for the categories of working 1 to 20 hours per week at last interview,
working 21 to 39 hours per week at last interview, and working at least 40 hours per week at last
interview. The models shown in these tables use the same set of covariates used in column 3 of
Tables 3a and 3b. We use this specification because it includes the most complete set of
covariates, while still providing an estimate of the total effect of work hours on the outcomes.
The results in Appendix Table 1 are similar to those in the previous tables, where more
hours of work are associated with higher CES-D scores. However, we learn from this table that

26

the effect is driven by, and is concentrated among, women working 40 or more hours at the three
month interview. Mothers who work 40+ hours when their infants are 3 months old have
depressive symptoms score that are 16 to 22 percent higher than other mothers, after adjusting
for other factors (Appendix Table 1). This increase in depressive symptoms, however, does not
translate into an increase in the likelihood of having a CES-D score greater than 16 (Appendix
Table 1). The probability of being in poor health is not associated with work hours, nor is the
parenting quality score. Parenting stress, however, is increasing with hours of work among
women in the employed sample. Women who work any of the categories of hours (1-20, 21-39
and 40+) at 3 months report more stress relative to their employed counterparts who are on leave
and working zero hours at 3 months (Panel B, Appendix Table 1). This result does not hold in
the corresponding model using the full sample (Panel A, Appendix Table 1).
Appendix Table 2 shows the effects of different job characteristics on the maternal health
and parenting outcomes among the sample of employed women. The job characteristics
considered are: whether flexible hours are available, whether the job requires overnight travel,
whether the mother works non-standard hours, and whether the mother works from home 10
hours or more a week. We interpret these findings with caution since these characteristics are
measured at 6 months (the mothers did not provide information on flexible hours and overnight
travel at the 3 month telephone interview). Two findings are notable. First, more hours of work
at 3 months are still associated with more depressive symptoms and parenting stress at 6 months,
even when controls for work characteristics are included in the model. Second, although flexible
hours and overnight travel are not statistically associated with any of the health and parenting
outcomes, non-standard work hours are associated with increases in depressive symptoms of 16
to 18 percent, as well as increases in the parenting stress index. The ability to work from home

27

at least 10 hours per week is associated with a reduction of in the probability of being in fair or
poor health, although the size of this effect appears to be implausibly large.
To summarize, the results thus far demonstrate that work hours, particularly full-time
work hours, at 3 months have adverse effects on maternal depressive symptoms, parenting stress,
and overall maternal health measured at 6 months. But these effects do not appear to have
clinical ramifications since work hours are not associated with the quality of parenting (as
measured by a trained observer) or dichotomous indicators of depression and fair/poor health.
The next question to ask is if these detrimental effects persist when we examine the
child’s first 4.5 years of life (1 mo. – 54 mo. interview). In Table 5, we present two sets of
findings estimated using a sample that pools data from the 1 month to the 54 month interviews.
The first set of findings are estimates from standard OLS models with robust standard errors
adjusted for clustering on respondent id. These models are based on our preferred specification
(column 3 in Tables 3a-b) but they also include a lagged version of the dependent variable as a
covariate. The obvious drawback of these models is omitted variables bias - the individual fixed
effect may be directly related to the health/parenting outcome, as well as correlated with right
hand side variables, including lagged work hours. The next set of findings show the A-B
estimates. In these models, we account for both state dependence as well as unobserved
heterogeneity, and we treat the dependent variables as continuous in all cases.
In Table 5, two findings are notable. First, for all outcomes, the pooled OLS models
show strong state dependence. However, once the individual fixed effect is acknowledged in the
A-B model, state dependence is no longer apparent in the log CES-D, parenting stress, and
parenting quality outcomes. In the case of the depressed, poor/fair health, and overall health
outcomes, state dependence still exists, but its importance is diminished considerably once fixed

28

effects are considered. Second, there is no evidence that the detrimental effects of maternal
employment we observed at the 6 month interview persist during early childhood. In fact, more
maternal work hours is associated with reductions in parenting stress, perhaps because mothers
find combining work and child care satisfying once children grow older. More maternal work
hours is associated with lower overall health, but the magnitude of this effect appears to be small,
and we find no effect of work hours on the likelihood of being in fair/poor health.
As expected, we reject the null of zero autocorrelation in the test for order 1
autocorrelation. We fail to reject order 2 autocorrelation in all models except the parenting stress
model. This result suggests no autocorrelation in the original error term in any of the models
aside from the parenting stress model. We fail to reject the overidentifying assumptions in all
models expect parenting stress and log CES-D. Overall, then, the A-B model appears
appropriate in all models expect for parenting stress, and we have some concern about the
identifying assumptions in the CES-D model as well.

VI.

Conclusions

Prior work on the effects of maternal employment has focused on child outcomes. In this
paper, we add to the literature by examining effects of maternal work on maternal health and
parenting outcomes. We find that among employed mothers, work hours measured when infants
are about 3 months old are positively associated with depressive symptoms and parenting stress,
as well as a small decline in self-reported overall health, measured when infants are about 6
months old. The effects on depression are driven by mothers who are working full-time at 3
months post-childbirth, while for parenting stress, any level of work hours at 3 months is
associated with adverse effects. The only work characteristic that appeared to affect outcomes

29

was alternate shift work, which is associated with more depressive symptoms and parenting
stress at 6 months.
However, these detrimental effects do not persist as children get older. During the first
4.5 years of children’s lives as a whole, more work hours is not associated with depression, and
has very small detrimental effects on maternal overall health. If anything, more maternal work
hours reduces parenting stress during the first 4.5 years.
These findings are consistent with those of Brooks-Gunn et al. 2010, who use structural
equation modeling and data from the SECC to assess the effects of first-year maternal
employment on children’s outcomes up to age 7. They find that there are both negative and
positive effects of maternal employment on children’s cognitive, social, and emotional outcomes,
but the net effect on children is zero (Brooks-Gunn et al., 2010). We find that for maternal
health and parenting outcomes, full-time maternal employment at 3 months detracts from
mothers’ health and increases stress at 6 months post childbirth. These effects are unlikely to
have long-term effects on families since (1) maternal employment affects depressive symptoms,
but does not affect the CES-D threshold for a likely clinical case of depression; (2) the effects on
maternal overall health are statistically significant, but small in magnitude; and (3) self-reported
parenting stress is affected, but objective measurement of parenting quality is not affected.
Moreover, when the first 4.5 years post-childbirth are considered as a whole, there is no pattern
of negative effects of maternal employment on maternal health and parenting.
However, the results still suggest that the transition back into employment immediately
after childbirth is difficult for the average family, detracting from maternal health and increasing
self-reported parenting stress. These findings emphasize the need for parental leave policies that

30

allow new parents to take longer leave, and/or work fewer hours in the first few months after
childbirth.

31

References
1. Altonji, J.G., Elder, T.E., Taber, C.R., 2005. Selection on Observed and Unobserved
Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools. Journal of Political Economy
113, 151-184.
2. Arellano, M., Bond, S., 1991. Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte Carlo
evidence and an application to employment equations. The Review of Economic Studies
58(2), 277-297.
3. Baker, M., Milligan, K., 2008. Maternal employment, breastfeeding, and health:
Evidence from maternity leave mandates. Journal of Health Economics 27, 871-887.
4. Baker, M., Gruber, J., Milligan, K., 2008. Universal Child Care, Maternal Labor Supply,
and Family Well-Being. Journal of Political Economy 116, 709-856.
5. Barry TM, Dunlap ST, Cotton SJ, Lochman JE, Wells KC. 2005. The influence of
maternal stress and distress on disruptive behaviors problems in boys. Journal of the
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 44: 265-273.
6. Belsky J. 1988. The ‘effects’ of infant day care reconsidered. Early Childhood Research
Quarterly 3: 235-272.
7. Berger, L.M., Hill, J., Waldfogel, J., 2005. Maternity Leave, Early Maternal Employment
and Child Health and Development in the US. The Economic Journal 115, F29-F47.
8. Berger, L., Brooks-Gunn, J., Paxson, C., Waldfogel, J., 2008. First-year maternal
employment and child outcomes: Differences across racial and ethnic groups. Children
and Youth Services Review 30, 365-387.
9. Baum, C.L. (2003). Does early maternal employment harm child development? An
analysis of the potential benefits of leave taking. Journal of Labor Economics 21: 409-48.
10. Bianchi, S.M., 2000. Maternal Employment and Time with Children: Dramatic Change
or Surprising Continuity? Demography 37, 401-414.
11. Bornstein, M.H. (ed.), 2002. Handbook of Parenting, Biology and Ecology of Parenting.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Place of Publication: Mahwah, NJ.
12. Brooks-Gunn J, Han WJ, Waldfogel J. 2002. Maternal employment and child cognitive
outcomes in the first three years of life: the NICHD Study of Early Child Care. Child
Development 73 : 1052-72.
13. Brooks-Gunn, J., Markman, L.B., 2005. The Contribution of Parenting to Ethnic and
Racial Gaps in School Readiness. Future of Children 15, 139-168.
14. Brooks-Gunn, J., Han, W.J., Waldfogel, J., 2010. First year maternal employment and
child development in the first 7 years. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 75(2), pp. 1-147.
15. Cameron, A.C., Trivedi, P.K., 2005. Microeconometrics Methods and Applications
Cambridge University Press, New York.
16. Campbell SB, Cohn JF, Meyers T. 1995. Depression in first-time mothers: Mother–infant
interaction and depression chronicity. Developmental Psychology 60 : 349-357.
17. Cawley, J., Liu, F., 2007. Maternal Employment and Childhood Obesity: A Search for
Mechanisms in Time Use Data. NBER Working Paper 13600.
18. Chatterji, P., Markowitz, S., 2005. Does the length of maternity leave affect maternal

32

health? Southern Economic Journal 72, 16-41.
19. Chatterji, P., Markowitz, S., 2008. Family leave after childbirth and the health of new
mothers. NBER Working Paper 14156.
20. Cohn J, Matias R, Tronick EZ, Connell D, Lyons-Ruth K. 1986. Face-to-face
interactions of depressed mothers and their infants. New Directions for Child
Development 34: 31-45.
21. Coleman, J., 1988. Social capital in the creation of human capital. American Journal of
Sociology, 94, S95 – S120.
22. Collins, W. A., Maccoby, E. E., Steinberg, L., Hetherington, E. M., & Bornstein, M. H.
(2000). Contemporary research on parenting: The case for nature and nurture. American
Psychologist, 55, 218–232.
23. Contoyannis, P., Jones, A., Rice, N., 2004. The dynamics of health in the British
Household Panel Survey. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 19: 473-503.
24. Dearing, E., Taylor, B.A., McCartney, K., 2004. Implications of Family Income
Dynamics for Women’s Depressive Symptoms During the First 3 Years After Childbirth.
American Journal of Public Health 94, 1372-1377.
25. Daniel, S.S., Grzwacz, J.G., Leerkes, E., Tucker, J., Han, W.. Nonstandard maternal work
schedules during infancy: Implications for children’s early behavior problems. Infant
Behavior & Development 32(2), 195-207.
26. Downey, G., Coyne, J.C., 1990. Children of depressed parents: An investigative review.
Psychological Bulletin 108, 50-76.
27. Eaton WW, Muntaner C, Smith C, Tien A, Ybarra M. 2003. Center for epidemiologic
studies depression scale: Review and revision (CESD and CESDR). In The use of
psychological testing for treatment planning and outcomes assessment, 3rd edition,
chapter 40, volume III, edited by M.E. Maruish. Mahwah, NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, pp.8-9.
28. Essex M, Klein M, Miech R, Smider N. 2001. Timing of initial exposure to maternal
major depression and children’s mental health symptoms in kindergarten. British Journal
of Psychiatry 179: 151-156.
29. Feldman R, Sussman AL, Zigler E. 2004. Parental leave and work adaptation at the
transition tp parenthood: Individual, marital, and social correlates. Journal of Applied
Developmental Psychology 25(4) : 459-479.
30. Field, T. 1984. Early interactions between infants and their postpartum depressed
mothers. Infant behavior and Development 7: 517-522.
31. Gray RF, Indurkhya A, McCormick MC. 2004. Prevalence, stability, and predictors of
clinically significant behaviors problems in low birth weight children at 3, 5, and 8 years
of age. Pediatrics 114 : 736-743.
32. Gregg, P., Washbrook, E., Propper, C., Burgess S., 2005. The Effects of a Mother’s
Return to Work Decision on Child Development in the UK. The Economic Journal 115,
F48-F80.
33. Han, W., 2005. Maternal nonstandard work schedules and child cognitive outcomes.
Child Development 76, 137-154.

33

34. Hay DF, Pawlby S, Angold A, Harold GT, Sharp D. 2003. Pathways to violence in the
children of mothers who were depressed postpartum. Developmental Psychology 39 :
1083-1094.
35. Hill, J.L., Waldfogel, J., Brooks-Gunn, J., Han, W., 2005. Maternal Employment and
Child Development: A Fresh Look Using Newer Methods. Developmental Psychology
41, 833-850.
36. Ispa JM, Fine MA, Halgunseth LC, Harper S, Robinson J, Boyce L, et al. Maternal
intrusiveness, maternal warmth, and mother-toddler relationship outcomes: Variations
across low-income ethnic and acculturation groups. Child Development. 2004;75:1613–
1631.
37. James-Burdumy, S., 2005. The Effect of Maternal Labor Force Participation on Child
Development. Journal of Labor Economics 23, 177-211.
38. Kim-Cohen, J., Caspi, A., Moffitt, T.E., 2005. Prior juvenile diagnoses in adults with
mental disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry 60, 709-717.
39. Lyons-Ruth, K., 1996. Attachment relationships among children with aggressive
behavior problems: the role of disorganized early attachment patterns. J Consult Clin
Psychol 64, 64-73.
40. Minkovitz, C.S., Stobino, D., Scharfstein, D., Hou, W., Miller, T., Mistry, K.B., Swartz,
K., 2005. Maternal depressive symptoms and children’s receipt of health care in the first
3 years of life. Pediatrics 115, 306-314.
41. NICHD Early Child Care Research Network, (1999). Chronicity of maternal depressive
symptoms, maternal sensitivity, and child functioning at 36 months. Developmental
Psychology, 35(5): 1297-1310.
42. NICHD Early Child Care Research Network. (1994). Child care and child development:
The NICHD Study of Early Child Care. In S. L. Friedman and H. C. Haywood (Eds.),
Developmental follow-up: Concepts, domains, and methods (pp. 377-396). New York:
Academic Press.
43. NICHD SECC,www.nichd.nih.gov/research/supported/seccyd/ , Accessed June 2011.
44. Petterson, S.M., Albers A.B., 2001. Effects of poverty and maternal depression on early
childhood development. Child Development 72, 1794-1813.
45. Qi, C.H., Kaiser A.P., 2003. Behavior problems of preschool children from low-income
families: Review of the literature. Topics in Early Childhood Special Education 23, 188216.
46. Riggio, H.R., 2006. Introduction: The Adaptive Response of Families to Maternal
Employment: Part II – Family Perspectives. American Behavioral Scientist 49, 13031309.
47. Ruhm, C.J. (2004). Parental Employment and Child Cognitive Development. Journal of
Human Resources, 39, 155-92.
48. Ruhm, C.J. (2008) Maternal employment and adolescent development. Labour
Economics, 15, 958-983.
49. Steinberg, L., Sheffield-Morris, A., 2001. Adolescent development. Annual Review of
Psychology 52, 83-110.

34

50. Steinberg, L. (2001). We know some things: Parent-adolescent relationships in retrospect
and
prospect. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 11(1), 1-19.
51. National Research Council and Institute of Medicine (2000). From Neurons to
Neighborhoods: The Science of Early Childhood Development. Committee on Integrating
the Science of Early Childhood Development. Jack P. Shonkoff and Deborah A. Phillips,
eds. Board on Children, Youth, and Families, Commission on Behavioral and Social
Sciences and Education. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
52. US Bureau of Labor Statistics, Employment characteristics of families summary, USDL
09-0568, May 2009.
53. Vandell, D.L., Belsky, J., Burchinal, M., Steinberg, L., Vandergroft, N., NICHD Early
Child Care Research Network, 2010. Do Effects of Early Child Care Extend to Age 15
Years? Results From the NICHD Study of Early Child Care and Youth Development.
Child Development, 81(3), 737-756.
54. Waldfogel, J., 2002. Child Care, Women’s Employment, and Child Outcomes. Journal of
Population Economics 15(3), 527-548.
55. Waldfogel, J., Han, W., Brooks-Gunn, J., 2002. The Effects of Early Maternal
Employment on Child Cognitive Development. Demography 39, 369-392.

35

TABLE 1: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS, 6 MO. SAMPLE (N = 1,198)
mean
SD
min
max
Maternal health and Parenting at 6 months
CES-D score
8.87
8.19
0.50
52.00
Depressed
0.17
0.37
0.00
1.00
Overall health rating (1 = poor, 2 = fair, 3 = good, 4 = excellent)
3.31
0.68
2.00
4.00
Overall health is poor or fair
0.12
0.33
0.00
1.00
Parenting stress score
50.06
9.80
26.00
83.00
Parenting quality score (maternal sensitivity)
9.24
1.78
3.00
12.00
Maternal Employment and Family Income
Mother is employed (either working or on leave) (6 mos.)
0.64
0.48
0.00
1.00
Current weekly hours (6 mos.)
21.21
19.15
0.00
122.00
Average hours in child’s life (1 mo., 3 mo., & 6 mo.)
13.53
12.75
0.00
103.33
Average weekly hours over two prior assessments (1 mo. & 3 mo.)
9.69
11.34
0.00
94.00
Currently works 1 to 20 hours weekly
0.15
0.36
0.00
1.00
Currently works 21 to 39 hours weekly
0.17
0.37
0.00
1.00
Currently works 40+ hours weekly
0.33
0.47
0.00
1.00
Current weekly hours among employed mothers (6 mos.) (n = 772)
32.90
13.56
0.00
122
Average hours in child’s life (1 mo., 3 mo., & 6 mo.)
20.32
10.71
0.33
103.3
Average weekly hours two prior assessments among employed (1 mo. & 3 mo.) (n = 772)
14.03
11.34
0.00
94
Currently works 1 to 20 hours weekly, employed mothers (n = 772)
0.23
0.42
0.00
1.00
Currently works 21 to 39 hours weekly, employed mothers (n = 772)
0.26
0.44
0.00
1.00
Currently works 40+ hours weekly, employed mothers (n = 772)
0.51
0.50
0.00
1.00
Mother’s work hours are completely or fairly flexible, employed mothers (n = 772)
0.64
0.48
0.00
1.00
Mother works evening, night, or variable shifts, employed mothers (n = 772)
0.22
0.42
0.00
1.00
Mother’s work involves any overnight travel, employed mothers (n = 772)
0.18
0.39
0.00
1.00
Mother can work from home 10+ hours weekly, employed mothers (n = 772)
0.12
0.33
0.00
1.00
Total family income in dollars, 6 mo.
49340.58 39381.26 2500.00 315000.00

36

Total family income in year prior to birth of child
Initial Health & Wellbeing of Family
CES-D score, 1 mo.
Depressed, 1 mo.
Overall health rating (1 = poor, 2 = fair, 3 = good, 4 = excellent), 1 mo.
Overall health is poor or fair (1/0), 1 mo.
Parenting stress score, 1 mo.
Health complications during pregnancy
Child was low birth-weight (<=2500 grams)
Child was premature (<=37 weeks)
Mother smoked during pregnancy
Mother smoked during pregnancy missing
Maternal Characteristics
Age
Education in years
Standardized PPVT score, 36 mos.
PPVT score missing
Non-Latino white
African-American
Latino
Other race
Total household size, 1 mo.
Married, 1 mo.
Lives with a partner, 1 mo.
Single or other family structure, 1 mo.
Occupation prior to birth of child
Executive, administrative, managerial
Professional
Technical or related support

52391.49 39279.10 2500.00 275001.00
11.13
0.24
3.48
0.04
53.14
0.32
0.02
0.04
0.23
0.08

8.85
0.43
0.58
0.20
10.65
0.47
0.15
0.19
0.40
0.27

0.50
0.00
2.00
0.00
27.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

53.00
1.00
4.00
1.00
94.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

28.42
14.37
99.54
0.10
0.82
0.12
0.04
0.06
4.05
0.80
0.08
0.12

5.54
2.47
17.15
0.30
0.38
0.32
0.20
0.25
1.28
0.40
0.27
0.32

18.00
7.00
40.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

46.00
21.00
159.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
14.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

0.09
0.21
0.04

0.28
0.41
0.19

0.00
0.00
0.00

1.00
1.00
1.00

37

Sales
Administrative support or clerical
Private household
Protective service
Service
Farm operation or management
Mechanic operator, assembler, inspector
Machine operator, assembler, inspector
Transportation or material moving
Handler, equipment cleaner, helper, laborer
Occupation missing
Child characteristics
Female child
Second born
Third born
Fourth born or higher birth order
Child care arrangements at 6 mos.
Child care center, 10+ hours week
Child care home, 10+ hours week
Father, 10+ hours per week
Grandparent, 10+ hours per week
In-home caregiver, 10+ hours per week
Multiple arrangements, 10+ hours per week
Maternal Beliefs
Progressive beliefs about child-rearing, 1 mo.
Beliefs about benefits of maternal employment, 1 mo.
Commitment to work, 1 mo.

0.10
0.22
0.01
0.003
0.11
0.003
0.01
0.04
0.003
0.01
0.16

0.30
0.42
0.10
0.05
0.32
0.06
0.07
0.19
0.06
0.10
0.37

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

0.49
0.35
0.14
0.06

0.50
0.48
0.35
0.23

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

0.09
0.22
0.13
0.11
0.09
0.17

0.29
0.42
0.34
0.31
0.28
0.37

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

32.78
19.18
21.20

3.52
3.16
5.85

18.00
5.00
6.00

40.00
30.00
36.00

38

TABLE 2: MEANS BY WEEKLY WORK HOURS AT 6 MOS., 6 MO. SAMPLE (N = 1,198)
0 HOURS 1-20 HOURS 21-39 HOURS 40+ HOURS
n = 428
n = 181
n = 198
n = 391
CES-D score
10.37
7.30***
7.77***
8.50***
Depressed
0.22
0.13***
0.12***
0.15***
Overall health rating (1 = poor, 2 = fair, 3 = good, 4 = excellent)
3.19
3.44***
3.37***
3.33***
Overall health is poor or fair
0.18
0.08***
0.12**
0.09***
Parenting stress score
51.78
49.31***
49.63***
48.74***
Parenting quality score (maternal sensitivity)
9.01
9.75***
9.39***
9.18
Current weekly hours (6 mos.)
0.00
13.32***
31.23***
42.99***
Average hours in child’s life (1 mo., 3 mo., & 6 mo.)
1.28
8.16
18.75
26.78
Average weekly hours over two prior assessments (1 mo. & 3 mo.)
1.92
5.57
12.50
18.68
Total family income in dollars, 6 mo.
37739.50 50870.18***
56553.04*** 57679.03***
Total family income in year prior to birth of child
45846.98
53549.73**
58863.64*** 55741.69***
CES-D score, 1 mo.
12.76
9.73***
10.05***
10.54***
Depressed, 1 mo.
0.31
0.19***
0.22**
0.21***
Overall health rating (1 = poor, 2 = fair, 3 = good, 4 = excellent), 1 mo.
3.37
3.57***
3.56***
3.52***
Overall health is poor or fair (1/0), 1 mo.
0.09
0.01***
0.03***
0.02***
Parenting stress score, 1 mo.
54.16
52.59*
53.38**
52.16***
Health complications during pregnancy
0.33
0.32
0.31
0.33
Child was low birth-weight (<=2500 grams)
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.02
Child was premature (<=37 weeks)
0.03
0.03***
0.04**
0.05*
Mother smoked during pregnancy
0.28
0.16
0.20
0.22
Mother smoked during pregnancy missing
0.09
0.06
0.06
0.10
Age
27.72
29.06***
28.82**
28.70***
Education in years
13.75
14.93***
14.82***
14.56***
Standardized PPVT score, 36 mos.
97.55
103.44***
100.30*
99.54*
PPVT score missing
0.12
0.07*
0.08
0.10
Non-Latino white
0.76
0.91***
0.82
0.84***

39

African-American
Latino
Other race
Total household size, 1 mo.
Married, 1 mo.
Lives with a partner, 1 mo.
Single or other family structure, 1 mo.
Executive, administrative, managerial
Professional
Technical or related support
Sales
Administrative support or clerical
Private household
Protective service
Service
Farm operation or management
Mechanic operator, assembler, inspector
Machine operator, assembler, inspector
Transportation or material moving
Handler, equipment cleaner, helper, laborer
Occupation missing
Child care center, 10+ hours week
Child care home, 10+ hours week
Father, 10+ hours per week
Grandparent, 10+ hours per week
In-home caregiver, 10+ hours per week
Multiple arrangements, 10+ hours per week
Progressive beliefs about child-rearing, 1 mo.
Beliefs about benefits of maternal employment, 1 mo.

0.17
0.04
0.07
4.30
0.73
0.11
0.16
0.04
0.11
0.02
0.08
0.16
0.01
0.00
0.13
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.01
0.02
0.38
0.02
0.06
0.03
0.04
0.02
0.05
32.30
18.32

0.06***
0.02
0.04
4.14
0.88
0.05**
0.07***
0.06
0.34***
0.03
0.14**
0.19
0.01
0.00
0.13
0.01
0.00
0.01**
0.00
0.00*
0.09***
0.02
0.10**
0.19***
0.09***
0.10***
0.18***
33.09**
18.19

0.12*
0.04
0.07
3.67***
0.83
0.06**
0.11*
0.09**
0.29***
0.07***
0.12
0.20
0.01
0.00
0.13
0.01
0.01
0.04
0.00
0.00*
0.04***
0.15***
0.32***
0.18***
0.22***
0.12***
0.28***
33.07***
19.89***

0.08***
0.05
0.07***
3.93***
0.83
0.06**
0.10**
0.15***
0.20***
0.04**
0.10
0.32***
0.01
0.01
0.08***
0.00
0.01
0.05
0.00
0.01
0.02***
0.17***
0.41***
0.20***
0.14***
0.14***
0.22***
33.01***
20.21***

40

Commitment to work, 1 mo.
Mother’s work hours are completely or fairly flexible, employed mothers
Mother works evening, night, or variable shifts, employed mothers
Mother’s work involves any overnight travel, employed mothers
Mother can work from home 10+ hours weekly, employed mothers

20.27
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

20.06
0.80
0.39
0.08
0.17

21.70***
0.61
0.23
0.21
0.11

22.48***
0.58
0.14
0.22
0.11

NOTES: (1) The zero hours category includes 2 respondents who are employed but are on leave at the time of the 6-month interview; (2) T-tests
performed on equality of means for each work hour category (1-20, 21-39, 40+) versus the 0 hour category; (3) * denotes statistically significant
difference at the .10 level, ** denotes statistically significant difference at the .05 level and *** denotes statistically significant difference at the
.01 level; (4) T-tests not conducted for the maternal work characteristics variables since only employed mothers responded to these questions

41

Table 3a: Effect of maternal work hours at 3 mos. on maternal health and parenting measured at 6 mo. wave – Full sample
Model #
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Dependent Variable:
Log CES-D score
0.003
0.004
0.004
0.004 0.007 0.007
3.95
4.09
3.50
3.08
1.97
1.90
Depressed (0/1)
0.0004 0.0006 0.0006 0.0006 0.002 0.002
0.78
1.38
1.48
1.27
2.06
1.96
Overall health is poor/fair (0/1)
-0.0002 -0.0004 0.0006 -0.0002 -0.002 -0.001
-0.72
-1.04
-0.79
-0.42
-1.88
-1.77
Parenting stress score
-0.001
0.002
0.002
0.004 0.007 0.009
-0.050
0.02
0.20
0.39
0.51
0.64
Parenting quality score
-0.001
-0.002 -0.001
-0.002 -0.005 -0.005
-0.23
-0.52
-0.39
-0.50
-1.13
-1.17
Covariates:
Standard set of covariates
X
X
X
X
X
X
Maternal occupation and family income in year prior to childbirth
X
X
X
X
X
Family structure, maternal work commitment, and maternal beliefs about childrearing
X
X
X
X
and benefits of work, measured at 1 mo.
Current family income
X
X
Current child care arrangements
X
X
Notes: (1) Table shows estimates from OLS and probit models (for 0/1 dependent variables) with Huber-White standard errors adjusted for clustering on site; (2)
Table shows estimated coefficient (OLS models) or average marginal effect (probit models) and T-stat on maternal weekly work hours measure, measured at 3
mo. telephone interview; (3) Standard set of covariates includes: log CES-D at 1 mo., overall health at 1 mo., parenting stress at 1 mo., maternal age in years,
maternal education in years, household size at 1 mo., maternal PPVT reading score, maternal reading score missing (1/0), maternal race/ethnicity (black, other
race vs. white, Latino vs. non-Latino), dummy indicators for birth order of child (second, third, fourth or higher vs. firstborn), child was low birthweight (1/0),
child was premature (1/0), pregnancy complications (1/0), mother smoked during pregnancy (1/0), mother smoked during pregnancy missing (1/0), dummy
indicators for site, and dummy indicators for child birth month; (4) N = 1,198

42

Table 3b: Effect of maternal work hours at 3 mos. on maternal health and parenting measured at 6 mo. wave – Employed sample
Model #
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Dependent Variable:
Log CES-D score
0.006
0.006
0.006
0.006
0.009
0.009
3.43
2.96
2.75
2.51
2.00
1.94
Depressed (0/1)
0.001
0.001 0.0004 0.0004
0.002
0.002
1.04
0.85
0.62
0.66
1.75
1.74
Overall health is poor/fair (0/1)
0.0001 -0.00003 0.0005
0.001 -0.0005 -0.0005
0.30
-0.09
0.34
0.47
-0.86
-0.81
Parenting stress score
0.030
0.027
0.030
0.032
0.029
0.031
3.00
2.66
2.94
3.13
1.90
1.99
Parenting quality score
-0.002
-0.002 -0.001 -0.001
-0.005
-0.005
-0.42
-0.35
-0.21
-0.26
-0.86
-0.89
Covariates:
Standard set of covariates
X
X
X
X
X
X
Maternal occupation and family income in year prior to childbirth
X
X
X
X
X
Family structure, maternal work commitment, and maternal beliefs about childrearing
X
X
X
X
and benefits of work, measured at 1 mo.
Current family income
X
X
Current child care arrangements
X
X
Notes: (1) Table shows estimates from OLS and probit models (for 0/1 dependent variables) with Huber-White standard errors adjusted for clustering on site; (2)
Table shows estimated coefficient (OLS models) and average marginal effect (probit models) and T-stat on maternal weekly work hours measure, measured at 3
mo. telephone interview; (3) Standard set of covariates includes: log CES-D at 1 mo., overall health at 1 mo., parenting stress at 1 mo., maternal age in years,
maternal education in years, household size at 1 mo., maternal PPVT reading score, maternal reading score missing (1/0), maternal race/ethnicity (black, other
race vs. white, Latino vs. non-Latino), dummy indicators for birth order of child (second, third, fourth or higher vs. firstborn), child was low birthweight (1/0),
child was premature (1/0), pregnancy complications (1/0), mother smoked during pregnancy (1/0), mother smoked during pregnancy missing (1/0), dummy
indicators for site, and dummy indicators for child birth month; (4) N = 772, mothers from full sample who were employed (working or on leave) at 1 mo.
interview.

43

Table 4: Effect of maternal work hours at 3 mos. on maternal overall health
measured at 6 mo. wave
Mother’s self-rating of overall health
PANEL A

Work hours at 3 months
Cut 1
(se)
Cut 2
(se)
PANEL B
Work hours at 3 months
Health is excellent
Health is good
Health is fair or poor

(3 = excellent, 2 = good,
1= fair or poor)
Ordered Probit Model
Full Sample
Employed Sample
-0.002
-0.004
(-1.34)
(-2.15)
0.639
0.626
(0.800)
(1.06)
2.30
2.41
(0.816)
(1.09)
Marginal Effects
Full Sample
-0.001
(-1.34)
0.001
(1.37)
0.0003
(1.28)
Employed Sample

Work hours at 3 months
Health is excellent

-0.001
(-2.15)
Health is good
0.001
(2.19)
Health is fair or poor
0.0004
(1.99)
Notes: (1) Panel A shows estimated coefficient and T-statistic on maternal work hour measure from an ordered probit model. T-statistics are based on robust
standard errors adjusted for clustering on site. (2) Panel B shows marginal effects and T-statistics. Marginal effects indicate the change in the probability of
being in the health category associated with a one hour increase in maternal work hours at 3 months. (3) All models include standard set of covariates described
in notes to Table 3 as well as maternal occupation, family income in year prior to childbirth, family structure, maternal work commitment, and maternal beliefs
about childrearing and benefits of work.; (4) Full sample N = 1198; Employed sample N = 772, sample limited to respondents who are employed (either working
or on leave) at 1 mo.

44

w(t-1)
y(t-1)
n
# instruments
AR(1) test
stat
Pr > z
AR(2) test
stat
Pr > z
Overiden. test

Table 5: Effects of maternal work hours on maternal health and parenting, 1 mo.- 54 mo.
Log CES-D
Parenting stress
Parenting quality
Depressed
Poor/fair health
Pooled
A-B
Pooled
A-B
Pooled
A-B
Pooled
A-B
Pooled
A-B
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
0.00003
-0.003
-0.007
-0.077
0.460
-0.001
-0.0004
-0.001
-0.0004
0.00004
(0.05)
(-1.48)
(-1.55)
(-3.88)
(20.38)
(-0.20)
(-1.64)
(-0.49)
(-2.49)
(0.08)
0.538
0.028
0.510
0.034
0.003
0.061
0.340
0.080
0.318
0.066
(34.34)
(0.69)
(43.89)
(0.62)
(1.57)
(0.75)
(16.27)
(2.24)
(20.62)
(4.43)
5,618

4,169
20
-13.08
(0.00)
1.02
(0.307)

4,573

3,213
12
-4.28
(0.00)
-2.43
(0.015)

4,371

3,071
15
-6.87
(0.00)
-0.05
(0.959)

5,618

4,169
20
-11.1
(0.00)
0.38
(0.706)

18,655

16,962
240
-22.48
(0.000)
-0.46
(0.649)

Overall health rating
Pooled
A-B
OLS
0.0004
-0.002
(1.16)
(-2.89)
0.474
0.075
(43.64)
(5.86)
18,655

16,962
240
-26.93
(0.00)
0.45
(0.655)

19.79
15.48
8.49
14.65
233.29
211.54
(0.071)
(0.009)
(0.387)
(0.261)
(0.272)
(0.665)
Notes: (1) Table 5 only shows estimated coefficients and T-statistics on lagged work hours and lagged dependent variable. Models also include: whether father
is in household, household size, and dummy variables for survey wave – estimated coefficients not shown; (2) In pooled OLS models, robust standard errors
adjusted for clustering on respondent are shown; (3) Arellano-Bound estimates generated using one-step, difference A-B estimator with robust standard errors.

45

Appendix Table 1: Effect of maternal work hours on maternal health and parenting measured at 6 month SECC interview
OLS Models with alternate measures of maternal employment
Dependent Variable
Log CES-D score
Depressed
Overall health poor/fair
Parenting stress score
Parenting quality score
Panel A: Full Sample
Ave hours in child’s life 0.004
0.0004
-0.001
-0.012
-0.003
2.96
0.77
-1.28
-0.54
-0.58
Ave hours in prior 2 waves
0.005
0.001
-0.001
0.016
-0.001
2.35
1.33
-1.04
0.75
-0.30
1-20 hours, 3 mo.
0.028
-0.024
-0.021
0.35
0.30
-0.43
-0.66
0.44
21-39 hours, 3 mo.
0.027
-0.022
-0.004
0.53
0.25
-0.74
-0.11
0.74
40+ hours, 3 mo.
0.156
0.013
-0.021
-0.025
3.86
0.75
-1.11
-0.06
Panel B: Employed Sample
Ave hours in child’s life 0.007
0.0001
-0.002
0.037
-0.003
2.03
0.62
-0.47
1.63
-0.57
Ave hours in prior 2 waves
0.007
0.0001
-0.0005
0.060
-0.0003
1.76
0.86
-1.05
3.17
-0.1
1-20 hours, 3mo.
0.05
-0.016
-0.026
1.47
0.48
-0.35
-1.06
2.37
21-30 hours, 3 mo.
0.07
-0.048
0.02
1.60
0.62
-1.50
0.95
2.60
40+ hours, 3 mo.
0.22
-0.001
-0.009
1.34
2.65
-0.05
-0.76
2.90
Notes: (1) Table shows estimated coefficients and T-statistics in parentheses from OLS models with Huber-White
standard errors adjusted for clustering on site; (2) Table shows estimated coefficient on maternal work hours measure(s) only. Work hours measures are: average
hours per week worked in child’s life; Average hours per week in prior two interviews (1 and 3 mos.); Hours worked in prior (3 mo.) interview, 1-20 hrs/wk;
Hours worked in prior (3 mo.) interview, 21-39 hrs/wk; Hours worked in prior (3 mo.) interview, 40+ hrs/wk (3) All models include standard set of covariates
described in notes to Tables 3a-b as well as maternal occupation, family income in year prior to childbirth, family structure, maternal work commitment, and
maternal beliefs about childrearing and benefits of work.; (4) Full sample N = 1198; Employed sample N = 772, sample limited to respondents who are
employed (either working or on leave) at 1 mo.

46

0.05
0.92
0.010
0.06
-0.027
-0.14

-0.005
-0.05
0.012
0.05
-0.035
-0.14

Appendix Table 2: Effect of work characteristics on maternal health and parenting measured at 6 month SECC interview –Employed sample
Log CES-D score Depressed (1/0) Poor/fair health (1/0) Parenting stress index Parenting quality score
Hours worked per week in prior (3 mo.) interview
0.005
0.000
0.000
0.030
0.000
2.450
0.460
0.020
2.840
-0.220
1-20 hours worked in prior interview
-0.019
-0.022
-0.014
1.152
-0.021
-0.170
-0.500
-0.520
1.890
-0.370
21-39 hours worked in prior interview
0.051
-0.053
0.026
1.473
0.050
0.430
-2.030
1.150
2.470
0.610
40+ hours worked in prior interview
0.202
-0.008
-0.013
1.267
-0.031
2.430
-0.350
-0.810
2.470
-0.340
Flexible hours
-0.014
-0.010
0.008
0.004
-0.028
-0.027
-0.204
-0.272
0.032
0.034
-0.160
-0.110
0.260
0.140
-1.040
-1.010
-0.410
-0.540
0.590
0.580
Overnight travel
0.020
0.022 -0.006 -0.005
-0.007
-0.007
0.125
0.233
-0.029
-0.028
0.180
0.210 -0.180 -0.170
-0.260
-0.260
0.200
0.360
-0.500
-0.470
Non-standard hours
0.164
0.178 -0.006
0.000
0.003
0.003
1.498
1.331
0.037
0.039
2.270
2.150 -0.170 -0.010
0.140
0.150
3.340
2.860
0.710
0.700
Works from home 10+ hrs
0.014
0.016 -0.002 -0.006
-0.066
-0.064
-0.512
-0.489
0.035
0.040
0.140
0.150 -0.070 -0.190
-2.630
-2.400
-0.720
-0.700
0.460
0.530
Notes: (1) For continuous variables, table shows estimated coefficients and T-statistics in parentheses from OLS models with Huber-White
standard errors adjusted for clustering on site; for dichotomous variables, average marginal effect is shown instead of coefficient (2) Table shows estimated coefficient on maternal
work hours and job characteristics measure(s) only. (3) All models include standard set of covariates described in notes to Tables 3a-b as well as maternal occupation, family
income in year prior to childbirth, family structure, maternal work commitment, and maternal beliefs about childrearing and benefits of work.; (4) N = 772, sample limited to
respondents who are employed (either working or on leave) at 1 mo.

47

48

