                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                MUTUAL FUND PERFORMANCE EVALUATION:
                     A COMPARISON OF BENCHMARKS
                     AND BENCHMARK COMPARISONS


                          Bruce N. Lehmann

                          David M. Modest




                       Working Paper No. 1721




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 1985




We would Hke to express our gratitude to Roy Henriksson for pro
viding us with his mutual fund data base, Karen Bettauer for
assistance in updating it, and the Faculty Research Fund of the
Columbia Business School and the Institute for Quantitative
Research in Finance for their support. We are also grateful for
comments from Allan Kleidor,, Robert Korajozyk, Arthur Warga and
seminar' partic-pant at Stanford University, and the Universities
of Caiforn-ja at Berkeley and Los Angeles. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program -in Financial Markets
nd Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #1721
                                                    October 1985



                        Mutual Fund Performance Evaluation:
                            A Corrparison of Benchmarks
                            and Benchmark Comparisons

                                     ABSTRC



      Our primary goal in this paper is to ascertain whether the absolute and

relative rankings of managed funds are sensitive to the benchmark chosen to

measure normal performance. We employ the standard CAPM benchmarks and a va-

riety of APT benchmarks to investigate this question. We found that there is

little similarity between the absolute and relative mutual fund rankings ob-

tained from alternative benchmarks which suggests the importance of knowing

the appropriate model for risk and expected return in this context. In addi-

tion, the rankings are quite sensitive to the method used to construct the

APT benchmark. One would reach very different conclusions about the funds'

performance using smaller numbers of securities in the analysis or the less

efficient methods for estimating the necessary factor models than one would

arrive at using the maximum likelihood procedures with 750 securities. We

did, however, find the rankings of the funds are not very sensitive to the

exact number of common sources of systematic risk that are assumed to impinge

on security returns. Finally, we found statistically significant measured ab-

normal performance using all the benchmarks. The economic explanation of this

phenomenon appears to be an open question.



Bruce Lehinann                                     David M. Modest
Graduate School of   Business                      Graduate School of Business
Co1rbia  University                                Colunbia University
Ni York, NY 10027                                  New York, NY 10027
I. Introduction
      Thirty years of scientific progress in financial economics has left the central problem of
portfolio performance evaluation largely unresolved. This unhappy state of affairs persists
despite broad agreement on an intuitive level that an actively managed portfolio with
superior performance should exhibit higher returns on average than a passively managed
portolio with the same amount of risk. Unfortunately, two obstacles stand in the way of
implementing this intuitive notion of superior performance to evaluate the track record
of maiiagecl funds. The first difficulty stems from disagreement on the appropriate way
to quantify risk and hence on what constitutes normal performance. The second problem
concerns errors in inference that can arise when portfolio managers can, in fact, outperform
the   market.

      In   order to nieasiire abnormal performance by mutual funds. it is necessary    to have

a benchmark for normal performance. Modern portfolio theory purports to provide such
a standard of comparison — that combination of the market portfolio and the riskiess as-

set which is of comparable risk. Not surprisingly, nunierous     investigators   have employed
the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) to evaluate the performance of mutual funds.'
Roll(1077,1078). however, has forcefully argued that the use of the CAPM as a bench-
mark in performance evaluation is logically inconsistent under the assumptions of the model
since any measured abnormal performance can only occur when the market proxy is in-
efficient. In tile absence of any systematic evidence of abnormal performance by mutual
funds, Roll's critique would appear to be an academic point. Yet there is plenty of ancillary
empirical evidence indicating the mean-variance inefficiency of the usual indices, including
the anomalies involving dividend yield. firm size, and price/earnings ratios, which leads one
to question the use of the usual CAPM market proxies as an appropriate benchmark.2

  ' These include Treynor(1065), Treynor and Mazuy(1066), Sharpe(10G6), Jensen(1968.-
1969), Friend, illume, and Crockett( 1070) McDonald( 1073.1074), and Mains(1977).
  2 See, for example, Caunistraro(1973), Basu(1977), Litzenberger and Ramaswamy(1979),
Banz(1081), Reinganuin(1081). The direct evidence on the validity of the CAPM is mixed.
Studies examining the Sharpe-Lintuer version of the model such as Black,.Jensen and Sc-
holes(1072), Fama and MacBeth(1073), and Blume and Friend(1973)          have rejected the hy-
pothesisthat the usual indices are the tangency portfolios associated with the riskless rate.
The evidence on the zero-beta CAPM also has resulted in mixed conclusions concerning
the mean-variance efficiency of these indices as evidenced by the results of Gibbons(1982),
Jobson and Korkie(1982), Shanken(1984), and Stambaugh(1982).

                                               1
     The apparent inefficiency of the usual market proxies coupled with concern over the
testability of the CAPM (e.g. Roll(1977)) has led researchers to explore alternative the-
ories of asset pricing. One theory which has stimulated much recent research is the Ar-
bitrage Pricing Tlieory(APT) developed by Ross(1976,1977). In that seminal work, Ross
contended that the fundamental idea imbedded in the CAPM is the differentiation be-
tween idiosyncratic risk that can he eliminated in large portfolios through diversification
and systematic risk that is pervasive and cannot be easily avoided.3 He further reasoned
that systematic risk need not be adequately represented by a single common factor such
as the return on the market and instead presumed that there are K common sources of
covariation (risk) affecting security returns. These K factors constitute another potential
benchmark with which to measure normal performance.
     Since the theory does not require that these sources of systematic risk be specified
a priori, empirical implementation of the APT usually involves the construction of basis
or reference portfolios to mimic the factors. There are any number of ways to form such
portfolios. There are not only several methods for forming the portfolios but there are
different procedures for estimating the factor models of security returns that underly these
computations. In addition, one has discretion over how many securities to use in the
analysis and how many factors to extract. In principle, each variant provides another
potential benchmark.
    Even if there were no question about the appropriate benchmark, it is still difficult
to measure managerial performance when mutual fund managers are superior investors.
This second difficulty arises from problems associated with measuring portfolio risk when
managers act on private information and, as a consequence, continually revise the compo-
sition of their portfolios and the risk level of their funds. After relaxing the assumptions
of the CAPM. Mayers and Rice( 1979) provide sufficient conditions under which the stan-
dard Security Market Line analysis is a valid measure of portfolio performance ability.
Unfortunately, as shown by Dybvig and Ross(1981), their sanguine conclusion rests on
the assumption that managers possess no market timing ability and that any abnormal
performance is due to stock selection. This occurs because uninformed investors, unable
    The idea that the important distinction is between diversifiable and nondiversifi-
able is also captured in the single index market model of security returns introduced by
Markowitz(1952) and developed and extended by Sharpe(1963,19C7).

                                             2
 to observe managers' private information signals or actual portfolio choices, may perceive
 implicit changes in expected returns due to market timing as needless additions to vari-
 ance when they are forced to draw inferences solely on the basis of the realized returns of
 the portfolio. In this case, the usual Security Market Line analysis will detect abnormal
 performance but will be unable to distinguish superior from inferior ability.4
      Our primary goal in this paper is to ascertain whether the absolute and relative rank-
 ings of managed funds are sensitive to the benchmark chosen to measure normal perfor-
 mance. An ancillary goal of the paper is to examine the efficacy of Security Market Line
 type analysis in the evaluation of mutual fund performance given the shifting composi-
 tion of managed portfolios. Not only do we compare and contrast the CAPM and the
 APT, but we also examine the different basis portfolio construction methods that have
 been suggested in the literature to produce portfolios that are highly correlated with the
 common factors underlying the APT. The question of whether comparatively inexpensive
 but statistically inefficient basis portfolio formation procedures lead to quantitatively seri-
 ous benchmark errors is of special interest. In Lehmann and Modest(1985b) we studied the
 different procedures suggested to mimic the factors and frnmd evidence that suggests that
 inexpensive basis portfolio procedures sacrifice a significant amount of statistical precision
and seem to do a relatively poor job of mimicking the factors. However, the analysis there
left open the question of whether this statistical evidence would translate into meaningful
economic differences. Mutual fund performance evaluation provides a natural laboratory
for the investigation of these questions.
     It is worth emphasizing that previous research would suggest that we should expect few
substantive differences in the performance measures implied by alternative risk adjustment
procedures. For example, Stambaugh(1983) found that the choice of a market proxy made
little difference in CAPM tests. Moreover, Roll(1079) found that three market proxies
provided nearly identical performance measures for randomly selected portfolios and that
these risk adjustment methods produced almost the same rankings as no adjustment at all.
Similarly, Copeland and Mayers(1982) and Chen, Copeland, and Mayers(1983) found that
the choice of a performance benchmark did not affect inferences regarding the Value Line
    The problem of measuring the quality of investment ability has also recently beem
addressed by Verrechia(1980), Pileiderer and Bhattacharya(1983), Admati and Ross (1985),
and Grinblatt and Titman(1985).

                                              3
enigma. It is certainly of independent interest to know whether alternative risk measure-
mcnt procedures yield similar rankings in this context as well.
     The application of the APT involves numerous technical and economic questions. The
next sectioii discusses some of the economic and statistical issues associated with the em-
ployment of the APT in benchmark comparisons. In Section III we discuss the ability of
Jensen(10G8.GO)-style Security Market Line regressions5 and Jensen(1072) arid Pfleiderer
and Biiattacharva(183) quadratic regressions to detect abnormal performance and market
timing ability in the APT context. The data is discussed in Section IV. Section V reports
the empirical results. We begin by presenting summary statistics concerning the compar-
ative performance of different APT benchmarks. These statistics contrast the inferences
concerning abnormal mutual fund performance that are arrived at using reference portfo-
lios constructed from different sized cross-sections of securities and alternative estimation
methods. We also consider the dependence of the absolute and relative rankings of the
on the number of factors which are extracted from the data. The focus then shifts to an
examination of the performance of the CAPM and APT benchmarks. In particular, we
examine whether the APT has anything different to say about the performance of mutual
fiuids than the CAPM. Finally, we use quadratic regressions to examine the problems
associated with the shifting composition and risk of managed portfolios. The final section
provides concluding remarks concerning the abnormal performance of mutual funds and
the comparative merits of alternative benchmarks.


II. Implementing The APT

    A. The Arbitrage Pricing Theory
    The cornerstone of the APT is the statistical assumption that security returns de-
pend on K common factors, whose risk cannot be eliminated in arbitrary well-diversified
portfolios, plus some idiosyncratic risk that (as the number of securities becomes infinite)
can be diversified away in such portfolios. Under the assumption that these factors affect
securities returns linearly, the factor model for returns takes the form:

    This question has also been recently (and independently) examined by Connor and
Korajczyk(1984).

                                              4
                                      = E1 +       bkkt + t                                 (1)

                                    E[6kt] = E[1tI5kt}   =0
where:

          Return on security i between time t-1 and time t for i=1 N
          Expected return on security i
   kt     Value taken by the kth common factor { i.e source of systematic risk } between
          time t — 1 and t

          sensitivity of the return of security i to the ktl common factor { called the factor
          loading } and
          the idiosyncratic or residual risk of the return on the th security between time
         t— 1 and time t which has zero mean, finite variance and is sufficiently independent
         across securities for a law of large numbers to apply.
     In these circumstances, Ross(197G,1077) showed that it is possible to form zero net
investment arbitrage portfolios with no systematic risk and negligible idiosyncratic risk as
well. Intuitively, these nearly riskless portfolios should have zero profits in the absence of
taxes and transaction costs. Ross formalized this intuition and proved that if the number of
securities satisfying the return generating process (1) is large, then, to ensure that riskless
arbitrage profits cannot be made, expected returns must satisfy (approximately):


                                      A0 + b1A1 + ... + bkAk                               (2)
where:

   A0    the intercept in the pricing relation and
   Ak    the risk premium Oli tile kth common factor, k = 1,.. ., K.
If the return on the market was the only common factor, then ) would be the expected
excess return on the market.
    The theory has received considerable attention and has been discussed and further
developed in numerous papers including Huberman(1982), Chamberlain and Rothschild.
(1983), Chamberlain(1983), Dybvig(1983). Grinblatt and Titman(1983,1984), Chen and

                                               5
Ingersoll(1O83) Connor(1084.1085), and Ingersoll(1984).6 These extensions have been pri-
in;rily devoted to three topics: (a) characterization and weakening of the sufficient con-
ditions for (2) to hold as an approximation in large economies; (b) derivation of sufficient
coiicIitons for (2) to hold as an equality in large econoniies: and (c) computation of explicit
Lomids on the deviations from (2) in finite economies.
      For empirical purposes, it is obviously advantageous to be able to assume that equation
(2) provides an exact, rather than an approximate, theory of expected returns. Therefore
we shall presume sufficient structure so that expected returns exactly satisfy:

                                                                                               (3)

where:
      E the N x 1 vector of expected returns on the N securities,
           the K x 1 vector of risk prenhia on the K factors,
      B the N x K matrix of individual security factor loadings: b1,        i=   1. .   ...N   j=
           1     K,
and      is as defined above. Sufficient conditions are given in Grinhlatt and Titman(1983),
Coniior(1084). and Ingersoll(1084).. They basically involve the assumptions that investors
are not too risk averse, the idiosyncratic risk of the individual assets is not too substantial,
and the value of any asset as a proportion of total wealth is iiot too large. Limiting necessary
and sufficient conditions are given in Chamberlain and Rothschild(1083). They show that
in large economies where large subsets of security returns follow a factor model, an exact
pricing relationship will hold if and only if (in the limit) there is a risky, well-diversified
portfolio on the mean-variance efficient frontier constructed from the (countably infinite)
subset of returns satisfying the approximate factor structure.
      Finally, we differentiate two versions of the APT which involve different interpretations
of .     Like the CAPM, the APT has both a riskiess rate and a zero beta formulation.
The riskiess rate version is appropriate when it is possible to form a positive investment
portfolio of risky assets whose return variance goes to zero as the number of assets which
  6 For a critique of the theory see Shanken(1982) and Dhrymes.Friend and Gultekin
(1984). For replies to these articles, see Dybvig and Ross(1983), Pfleiderer and Reiss(1983),
and Roll and Ross(1984).

                                               6
 satisfy an approximate factor structure grows large. In this version of the APT, A0 is the
 riskiess rate. The zero beta formulation arises when it is not possible to form a limiting
 riskiess portfolio of risky assets. Under this formulation, one of the factors corresponds
 to the 7,erO beta return. What makes the zero beta factor different from the other factors
 is that. under an appropriate transformation of the factor space, all securities will have
 equal sensitivity to it. Hence   is zero when the zero beta formulation is appropriate.7 In
 what follows, we will use both the riskiess rate and zero beta formulations of the APT to
examine whether conclusions regarding the comparative performance of alternative APT
benchmarks is sensitive to which version of the APT is apposite.8
B. The APT and Estimation of the Factors
     To be sure, testing and using this theory would be straightforward if the common fac-
tors 8kt could be easily identified with observable economic or financial data. Unfortunately,
financial theory seenis to be capable of rationalizing a wide variety of potential sources of
systematic risk. -In consecluence, several authors have used the statistical method of factor
analysis in order to ascertain whether (1) is an appropriate model for security returns and
(3) provides an accurate model of expected returns. These studies include Gehr(1975),
Roll and Ross(1980), Gibbons(1983), Reinganum(1981), Hughes(1982), Brown and We-
instein(1983), Chen(1983), Dhrymes, Friend and Gultekin(1984,1985), and Lehmann and
Modest(1985a).9
     The first step in obtaining an APT benchmark is to construct portfolios which re-
flect the behavior of the K unobservable common factors. There are a number of different
portfolio formation procedures that can be used to construct these mimicking portfolios.
Four different methods were compared in Lehmann and Modest(1985b): a generalized least
squares (GLS) procedure, a variant of the GLS procedure that produces what we call mini-

     Note that the distinction between the two versions of the APT arises from the fea-
sibility of forming riskless portfolios of risky assets and not from constraints on riskiess
borrowing and lending or short sales, a point emphasized by Ingersoll(1984). The zero beta
version of the APT thus differs in a fundamental way from the zero beta version of the
CAPM.
     In Lehmann and Modest(1985a) we provide detailed evidence on the merits of the two
versions.
     Studies which have investigated factor models of asset returns without reference to
arbitrage pricing theory include King(19G6), Farrell(1974), Feeney and Hester(1967), Fama
and MacBeth(1973), Rosenberg and Marathe(1979), and Arnott(1980).

                                             7
mum idiosyncratic risk portfolios, and two quadratic programming procedures that impose
constraints to produce minimum idiosyncratic risk portfolios with small portfolio weights.
The evidence presented there suggests the superiority of the minimum idiosyncratic risk
procedure and consequently we used that portfolio formation procedure here. The novelty
of the minimum idiosyncratic procedure compared with the more familiar cross-sectioual
regression methods prompts the following detailed examination.
       Since the minimum idiosyncratic risk procedure is a variant of the GLS procedure,
it is useful to first consider the statistical intuition underlying generalized least squares
methods. Under the assumption that the returns of the N securities under consideration
are generated by a K factor linear structure as given in (1), we can write the assumed joint
return generating process of the N securities as:

                                                                                          (4)

where the residual risks     are assumed to satisfy:

                                                   =
                                                                                          (5)
                                         EV1 =
and1 is a positive definite symmetric matrix. Since the factors are unobservable, the
model is not identified without further a priori restrictions. We therefore assume that the
random factors       (a K x 1 vector) and the corresponding elements of the factor loading
matrix. B (N x K), have been normalized so that:'°


                                                                                          (6)
                                                   =   I
       Treating the factor loadings in equation (4) as explanatory variables that are measured
without error and the common factors as parameters to be estimated, one natural way to
proceed is to run an ordinary least squares cross-sectional regression of the excess returns
  10   The elements of B are still not uniquely determined since for all orthogonal matrices
T, any matrix B = BT will yield the same return generating process. We assume that
the necessary K(K — 1)/2 constraints required to ensure that T =        I have been imposed
arbitrarily. For example, it is conventional in factor analysis to require B'cZB to be a
diagonal matrix.
                                               8
 of the individual securities,   — , on the factor loadings along the lines of the procedure
 followed by Fama and MacBeth(1973). The ordinary least squares estimates of the factors
 at date t would then he given by:U

                                   OLS = (B'Br'B'k,                                         (7)

 Note that the projection niatrix (B'B)'B' can be thought of as the transpose of a (time
 invariant) N x K matrix of portfolio weights that can be used in conjunction with the
 returns R. at any date t to obtain an estimate of the realization of the K common factors
t• The ordinary least squares estimator is not efficient, however, since it ignores the
information in tile covariance matrix of the residual risks, 12. A more efficient procedure is
the generalized least sciuares estimator of 8 given by: 12

                             8GLS = (B'12                    —
                                                                 E]                         (8)

This estimator is the niinimum variance linear unbiased estimator of 6 and, in addition,
                                                                 since pl1mN CLS
•                                                                                     -
it is consistent as the number of assets tends towards• infinity
                                                           •   •
                                                                                        =
follows   when liiuIN.{B'12'BJ' = 0.
     To understand the relationship between the generalized least squares(GLS) estimator
and the minimuni idiosyncratic risk estimator, it is useful to reformulate the GLS problem
as a portfolio 1)iObleifl following Litzenberger and Raniaswamy(1979) and Rosenberg and
Mararhe(1070). In particular, the GLS estimator can be thought of as the solution of the
following portfolio optimization procedure: choose the N portfolio weights        (to mimic
the j' factor) so that they:

                                        minw'Dw1                                        (9a)
subject to:
                                         =0
                                                                                        (Ob)
                                         =1       3=Ià

 " The covariance matrix of the OLS factor estimates is:     (B'B)B'12'B(B'B)'.
 12 The covariance matrix of the GLS factor estimates is:    (B'12'B).
                                              9
 where      is the kth column of the factor loading matrix B and D is the diagonal matrix
 consisting of the variances of the idiosyncratic risk vector     It is straightforward to show
 that the solution to the portfolio problem posed in (0) is given by (B'D'B)' B'D' which
 is equivalent to the GLS estimator given in (8) when the residual covariance matrix 12 is
 diagonal. In practice, we rescale the weights      so that they sum to one so that these sets
 of weights can properly be interpreted as portfolio weights. This is the generalized least
 squares version of the portfolio formation procedure adopted by Faina and Madlleth(1073)
 and similar in spirit to the GLS estimators used by Black and Scholes(1074).'4
      How does measurement error in the factor loadings and idiosyncratic variances affect
 the properties of the Fama-Mac Beth portfolios? An examination of equations (9a) and (9b)
 reveals three ways that measurement error can effect the construction of the Fama-Mac Beth
reference portfolios: (i) the use of estimated idiosyncratic variances in the calculation of the
sample residual risk of the portfolios [i.e. w'DwJ, (ii) the effect of the requirement that
the portfolio weights be orthogonal to the sample loadings of the common factors not being
mimicked [i.e. wk = 0         Vj    k[. and (iii) the repercussions of the stipulation that the
Fama-MacBeth basis portfolios have sample loadings of unity [i.e. w.b1 =         1].   The most
pernicious effect of measurement error on basis portfolio performance is likely to arise froni
the requirement that the sample loadings of the basis portfolios equal one. Why should
this he the case? First, intuition gleaned from the statistical literature suggests that the
performance of these portfolios should not be markedly degraded by the presence of mea-
surement error in the residual variances. This sanguine conclusion follows from experience
in heteroskedastic regression settings that suggests weighted least squares estimation with
weights that are imperfectly correlated with the true weights typicalig achieves much of the
potential gain in efficiency. Second. the requirement that the portfolio weights be orthog-
onal to the sample loadings of the other common factors is essentially costless since this
constraint merely determines a particular sample rotation of the factors. Unfortunately,
the stipulation that the Fama-MacBeth basis portfolios have sample loadings of unity [i.e.

 13
      Note that since we are ignoring the off-diagonal elements of [2 such as industry ef-
fects, this procedure is actually better characterized as weighted least squares or diagonal
generalized least squares.
  14
     We will follow common usage and refer to the GLS estimator as a Fama-MacBeth
estimator despite the fact that they actually used ordinary least squares.

                                              10
wh1 =      1]   is a potential source of difficulty in the presence of measurement error in the
factor loadings.'5
     The basic problem is that measurement error in the loadings will reduce the correlation
of the returns on the Fama-Mac Beth portfolios with the underlying common factors.'6 Why
does this occur? The intuition lies in the fact that the Fama-MacBeth procedure will tend
to give greater weight to security returns associated with large sample factor loadings and
will typically dowuweight those with small loading estimates. This is appropriate in the
absence of measurement error since the returns of securities with large factor loadings are
more informative about fluctuations in the common factor. However, large estimated factor
loadings can occur for a combination of two reasons: large true factor loadings or large errors
in the estimation of small true factor loadings. Similarly, small sample factor loadings can
reflect either small true factor loadings or offsetting measurement error in otherwise large
loadings. Thus the Faina-MacBeth weighting procedure is less fitting when large sample
loadings can arise from measurement error as well. In the extreme, measurement error in
factor loadings can be so malignant as to virtually eliminate the information content of
these estimates regarding fluctuations in the common factors.
     The minimum idiosyncratic risk procedure employed here mitigates the harmful effects
of measurement error by ignoring the differing information content of individual security
returns regarding fluctuations in the factors that is implicit in the sample factor loading
estimates. In particular, our procedure involves choosing the portfolio weights w1 which
solve:

                                           minw11Dw                                      (Wa)

     It is worth noting that the deleterious effects of measurement error on basis portfo-
ho performance do not devolve from the analogous problems in a least squares regression
setting where measurement error in the independent variables leads to biased and incon-
sistent estimates of regression coefficients. In the present setting, there isno particular
benefit associated with an estimator possessing unbiasedness [i.e. E[j = 8j as opposed
to an alternative estimator with E[S] = + ,c8 since the correlation of the estimator
with the common factors is unaffected by affine transformations and the scale of the com-
mon factors is arbitrarily determined by the normalization that E[&] I. As with the
orthogonality constraint, bias in the Fama-Macfleth portfolios taken alone only implicitly
delimits a particular sample rotation of the factors.
 16
    This is formally shown for the case of a single common factor in Lehmann and Modest-
(1985h).

                                                11
 subject to:

                                        k°                                               (lob)

 where t is a vector of ones and where   is again the kth column of B.'7 These portfolios
 are similar to Fama-MacBeth ones in that they minimize the sample idiosyncratic variance
 of the basis portfolios subject to the constraint that the weights be orthogonal to the
sample loadings of the factors not being mimicked [i.e. wbk = 0 Vj kJ. The difference
between the two procedures lies in the requirement that the Fama-MacBeth portfolio have
a sample loading of unity on the factor being mimicked while the minimum idiosyncratic
risk portfolios must simply cost a dollar. As a consequence, the minimum idiosyncratic risk
procedure ignores the information in the factor loadings: a bad decision in the absence of
measurement error and a potentially good choice in its presence.18
     In Lehrnanu and Modest(1985b) we scrutinized comprehensive evidence regarding the
comparative merits of the two procedures. The basic conclusion reached there was that
the minimum idiosyncratic risk procedure perfornied at least as well (and usually better
than) its competitors.'9 This suggests the sampling error in our factor loadings is suffi-
ciently serious so   as   to render the minimum idiosyncratic risk procedure more effective in
actual practice. As a consequence, we employ this method of portfolio formation in this
investigation.
   Finally, a note is in order regarding the excess return portfolios that are appropriate
when the riskless rate version of the APT is correct. For each basis portfolio formation
method, we constructed minimum idiosyncratic risk portfolios using that method which had
weights orthogonal to B and which cost a dollar. The details are discussed in Lehmann
and Modest(1985b). As noted there, the Fama-Macfleth and minimum idiosyncratic risk
 17 This estimator can be computed as follows. Let B =           . . . ) and suppose we
are interested in mimicking the Jt/L factor. The minimum idiosyncratic risk estimator is
                         where B* = (12 . . . .. .) and t is a vector of ones in the jilL
colunin.
  18 J Lehmarm and Modest(1985b) we show that the correlation of the Fama-MacBeth
basis portfolios with the common factors exceeds the correlation of the minimum idiosyn-
cratic risk portfolios with the factors in the absence of measurement error, but that the
ordering may be reersed in the presence of measurement error.
 19 In addition to the two methods discussed here, we also considered two quadratic pro-
gramming procedures which constrained the basis portfolios to have small weights.

                                                12
procedures provide identical excess return portfolios up to a factor of proportionality. As
a consequence, the remarks in this subsection are not relevant for our constructed excess
return portfolios which are used under the assumption that the riskless rate version of the
APT is true, but are relevant in analyzing the results that presume the zero beta version
of the APT is appropriate.°
     C. Estimation Methods
     Four different methods for estimating the factor loadings and idiosyncratic variances
underlying the APT are described in this section. Two of the methods are statistically
efficient hut computationally costly versions of maximuni likelihood factor analysis. We
also examine an instrumental variables estimator and the method of principal components.
As the number of securities grows large, all four methods provide consistent estimates of
the factors and, as the number of observations grows large, consistent estimates of the
factor loadings and idiosyncratic variances as well.2' However, it is obviously of greater
than academic interest to know whether the comparatively inefficient methods provide
performance comparable to that produced by the computationally burdensome efficient
estimation methods with the data available to us. This could occur because of the large
cross-sections of security returns that we employ or because of good small sample properties
of the comparatively inefficient estimation methods.
    The primary assiuiiption of the APT is that security returns are generated by a K
factor linear structure as given by equation (4):

                                                                                        (4)

Given the structure in (4) in conjunction with the assumptions in (5) and (6) about the
covariance matrices of the residual risks and the factors, the covariance matrix of security
returns, ,   can   be written as:
                                       E=BB'+fl                                        (11)

    Theoretically, the APT places no restrictions on 2 other than the requirement that the
  20 If we employed measured riskless rates (i.e. one month Treasury bill returns) instead
of the excess return portfolios, the differences between the procedures would again be of
considerable concern. In this circumstance, we would employ the minimum idiosyncratic
risk procedure.
  21 Given sufficient assumptions on ft

                                             13
off-diagonal elements are sufficiently sparse so that the residual risks are diversifiable (in the
limit) and, hence, security retirns satisfy an approximate factor structure.22 Unfortunately,
it is not possible to estimate the factor loadings and the elements of l when security returns
possess only an approximate factor structure. One popular way to proceed is to assume
that security returns satisfy an exact statistical factor structure in that residual risks are
uncorrelated across firms. With this additional assumption, the residual covariance matrix
  is equal to a diagonal matrix D, and one can proceed with estimation using the fact that
the covariance matrix of security returns E can be written as:



                                         E=BB'+D                                            (12)

     Obviously, efficient estimation requires a priori specification of the joint distribution
of security returns and the factors. Under the assumption of joint normality, the sample
covariance matrix of security returns is distributed as Wishart, and the log likelihood
function of E conditional on the sample covariance matrix is given by:



             £(ES) =
                         -NT ln(2) -         lnjE -   1
                                                              -              -
                                                                                            (13)
                      = -NT lu(22r) — T In IEI —T—trace(SE')
                           2             2            2

    Maximization of the log likelihood firnction (13) subject to the covariance restriction
given by (12). provides efficient estimates of the factor loadings and idiosyncratic variances
underlying the presumed statistical factor analysis model of security returns. Under the null
hypothesis that the APT is true, however, there is additional information in the theoretical
restriction given in equation (3) that expected security returns are spanned by their factor
loadings and the factor risk premia which can, in principle, lead to more efficient estimates
of B and D. Imposition of this additional constraint involves taking the log likelihood
function (13) and substituting in the APT mean restriction:


                                                                                            (14)

 22 The formal requirement is that as N —÷ oo the eigenvalues of I remain bounded.

                                               14
The log likelihood function is then given by:
                      —NT               T
          £(EIS) =             ln(2r) — — in      E
                        2
                                              T                                            (15)
                                          1
                                     —
                                                      t — [o + B]YE'(R — k.Ao +   B])
which can be rewritten as:
              NT
 £(EJS) =          ln(27r) —     1njE
              T                                                                           (16)
         —
                      — + ( — [tAo + B])]'E1[( ) + ( — [&o + i)1

This can be simplified to:

              £(EjS) = _NT1fl(2,) —                        — !trace(SE1)
                        2                     2              2
                                                                                          (17)
                                      •
                                           — -(— \o — BA)'E'(— .A0 — B.)
Maximization of (17) yields what we refer to below as restricted maximum likelihood esti-
mates. This restricted maximum likelihood procedure involves maximizing the unrestricted
log likelihood function (13) plus an additional term involving the weighted average of the
deviations of the sample mean security returns from the product of the factor loadings and
the corresponding risk prenna.
    The unrestricted maximum likelihood estimates of the relevant parameters may be ob-
tained by setting the derivatives of (13) equal to zero and iteratively solving the first order
conditions with respect to B and D. The corresponding restricted maximum likelihood
estimates may be obtained by setting the derivatives of (17) equal to zero and iteratively
solving the first order conditions with respect to B, D, ,\, and ,o. While this is a conceptu-
ally simple exercise, it is computationally infeasible to obtain these estimates by iteratively
solving the first order conditions when the number of securities being analyzed is sub-
stantial. We therefore employed a significantly cheaper alternative: the EM algorithm of
Dempster, Laird, and Rubin(1977). In Lehmann and Modest(1985a) we discuss the actual
estimation procedure. Its primary virtue is that its memory requirements and computa-
tional costs are less burdensome than the standard procedures for performing maximum
likelihood analysis, such as those described in Lawley and Maxwell(1971).

                                                      15
     The maximum likelihood procedures described above provide efficient estimates of the
factor loadings and idiosyncratic variances used as inputs in (10) to coustnict portfolios
that mimic the common factors. The principal drawback of these procedures is that they
are moderately expensive in terms of the real computer time it takes for each rim to be
completed. Given the relatively high cost of these efficient procedures, several authors have
proposed the use of less costly procedures with the hope that the loss in efficiency is only
small. Chamberlain and Rothschuld(1983) and Connor and Korajczyk(1084), for instance,
have recently suggested the use of principal components as an inexpensive alternative to
maximum likelihood factor analysis. The connection between principal components and
the statistical factor analysis model is, as Chamberlain and Rothschuld(1983) showed, that
as the number of securities being analyzed tends toward infinity, the first K eigenvectors
obtained from the cigenvalue decomposition of the covariance matrix of security returns will
converge to the factor loadings underlying security returns. Connor and Korajczyk(1084)
showed that this holds for the sample covariance matrix as well. The primary disadvantage
of priiicipal components is that it ignores information contained in the sample idiosyncratic
variances which potentially might lead to more efficient estimates of the factor loadings in a
finite sample.23 Nonetheless, since the one time extraction of eigenvalues and eigenvectors
does not require iteration over first order conditions like the nonlinear maximum likelihood
procedures, it can be cheaper and therefore a potentially attractive alternative.24
     We employed the singular value decomposition algorithm included in the NAG Sub.
routine Library to obtain the required eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Each column of the K
eigenvectors was multiplied by the square root of the corresponding eigeuvalue in order to
scale the factors to have unit variance. Estimates of the idiosyncratic variances were then
obtained using equation (12) to solve for D given the the estimated factor loadings B (the
 23 This can be seen by noting that principal components is equivalent to maximum likeli-
hood factor analysis when the idiosyncratic variances are assumed to be identical, i.e. when:
D 2I. Thus the relationship between principal components and maximum likelihood is
similar to the relationship between ordinary least squares and generalized least squares.
  24 Principal components is cheaper in that one eigenvalue decomposition provides the
eigenvectors (and hence the factor loadings) needed for a factor model with anywhere
between 1 and N factors whereas this would require N different maximum likelihood runs.
However, unrestricted maximum likelihood factor analysis of 750 securities with 5 factors
using the EM algorithm, for instance, would on average be less costly than principal
components although significantly more expensive than one instrumental variables run
with 5 factors on 750 securities.

                                             16
 transformed eigenvectors), and the sample covariance matrix S.
      Another relatively inexpensive alternative to maximum likelihood factor analysis is in-
 strumental variables factor analysis along the lines suggested by Madansky(1064) and Hag-
 glund(1082). Ixstrumental variables estimators have recently been employed by Chen( 1083)
 and Madansky and Marsh(1985). The central idea of these instrumental variables estima-
 tors is to substitute consistent estimates of the factors   for the factors themselves in equa-
tion (4) and theii estimate the factor loadings B by ordinary least squares.2' Chen(1083)
used portfolios formed by mathematical programming based on maximum likelihood factor
 analysis of 180 securities as the required consistent estimates of the factors. We employ
a simpler instrumental variables procedure, which is described in detail in Lehrnann and
Modest(1085b) that does not require pieliminary maximum likelihood factor analysis.

III. On The Detection of Abnormal Performance
      The ability to construct benchmark portfolios along the lines of (10) which are poten-
tially free of the biases which have been attributed to the CAPM benchmarks suggests
their use in performance evaluation. However, the putative freedom from benchmark error
of the reference portfolios need not imply that their use in the usual strategies for assessing
mutual fund performance will lead to correct inferences. As is obvious from the discussion in
Mayers and Rice(1979), Verrechia(1D80), Dybvig and Ross(1981), Adxnati and Ross(1085),
Pifriderer and Bhattacharya(1083), and Griublatt and Titman(1085), benchmark error is
not the only difficulty plaguing performance evaluation. Nontrivial problems of inference
arise when mutual fund managers have some ability to predict benchmark returns.
      If a portfolio manager has substantive market timing ability, the manager's portfolio
choices will be correlated with the subsequent benchmark returns. Hence, measured covari-
ation between the mutual fund returns and benchmark returns will convolve two influences
— the manager's market timing ability and the chosen level of risk, 0niy in special circum-

stances will it be possible to sort out these effects. Since measured covariation need not
 25   The application of instnunental variables methods to factor analysis models typically
involves the assumption that the idiosyncratic disturbances are independent (as in the sta-
tistical factor analysis model). The procedures, however, will provide consistent estimates
even when the idiosyncratic disturbances are correlated so long as the disturbances are
sufficiently independent for a law of large numbers to apply as the number of securities
tends toward infinity.

                                               17
only reflect the (con.tant) risk level chosen by the manager, it cannot be used to naively
form a combination of reference portfolios which are of comparable risk to the mutual fund.
Thus it will not be possible to rate managerial investment performance with these tools in
the presence of market timing ability.
     The problem is considerably simplified if our goal is merely the detection of abnormal
performance and not the measurement of its degree. Excess returns regressions of the
form employed by Jensen(1OGS.1OGO) will, apart from sampling error. successfully detect
abnormal performance even if managers possess market timing ability. Hence we will limit
our attention to this more modest goal and defer for the present the quantification of
managers investment skills.

     Suppose that the uninformed investors perceive that the APT is exactly true so that
returns on N individual securities satisfy:


                                                                                          (18)


where R is a K x I vector of reference portfolios and B is the N x K matrix of factor
loadings. Here we let R and mt denote raw returns when the zero beta version of the APT
is appropriate and we presume that they represent excess returns when the riskiess rate
formulation is correct. We assume that the reference portfolios H are perfectly correlated
with the coj-ruxion factors and that B is measured without error as well. Consider the return
on a n1utual fund portfolio:


                                pt =    il                                                (10)
                                    =        [wj(t)bR?lt + W(8)E1]


where   ci() is the weight of security i in the mutual fund portfolio at date t, b is a 1 x K
row vector of B and      is   a vector of signals received by the mutual fund manager that are
used for predicting R and . It is convenient to rewrite (19) as:

                                              =
                                                  §ptmt +                                 (20)
where:
                                        —    + (3)'

                                        =w(8)E                                   (21)

                                        =

In (21), $ is the target or average of the fund, and () is the time t deviation from
,9 selected by the manager (assumed to average zero over the sample). Note that if the
manager possesses stock selection ability, pt will not have a zero mean.
     What happens if, as uninformed investors, we nm the regression of      on R, ?
Letting E*[XJYI denote the minimum variance linear estimator of X given Y (i.e. the
regression function), we obtain:


                                  E*{RptlRmt] = +        mt                      (22)

where:
                       = [ — COV{XRmt,Rt}'E'flm ÷E{4R}]
                       = [j9 --

                       =                                                         (23)

                   Em = E[{Rmt - Rm}{&nt
                       = E[Rmtl

and x is used as shorthand notation for x(s)' and Cov{xRmt,Rmt} is a 1 x K vector of
the covariances between xR and the K elements of Rmt. The coefficient c is the usual
Jensen performance measure.
                                                     = 0 ] and to time the market
    In the absence of the ability to pick stocks [i.e.
i.e. E{XRmt} = Cov{xmt, R} = 0 for all j=1....K], the regression equation (22) will
indicate no abnormal performance since, in this instance:



                                   E*[RptI} =                                    (24)

                                            19
 If the mutual fund manager possesses stock selection ability but no market timing
                                                                                   ability,
 the regression will indicate superior performance since


                                  E*[RptiRmtl = p +                                      (25)


 where     > 0 under mild restrictions. This is merely a restatement of the Mayers and
 Rice (1979) proposition, as simplified and extended by Dybvig and Ross(1981), that the
 Jensen measure will correctly indicate superior performance when managers possess security
 selection ability but are unable to time the market. Finally, ifportfolio managers possess
 market timing ability as well, the Jensen measure may be positive or negative depending
 on the terms in brackets on the first line of (23). Hence, the Jensen measure will indicate
 abnormal performance but cannot be used to rank managers.

     These results are useful in that the simple Jensen measure can, ignoring sampling
variation, detect both normal and abnormal performance. Unfortunately, it is not capable
of indicating whether managerial ability is of the market timing or stock selection variety.
Yet there is a hint in (22) and (23) of the possibility of detecting the presence of market
timing ability due to the terms involving COY{ZRmt, R,.} and E{XRmt}. These terms
suggest that perhaps a quadratic regression could detect market timing ability when returns
unconditionally follow the APT (18).

    The quadratic regression framework originally was examined by Treynor and Mazuy
(lOGO). Its possibilities as a framework for separating market timing and stock selection

ability were studied by Jensen(1072), an analysis which was corrected and extended in
Pfieiderer and Bhattacharya(1983). Its possibilities are seen by considering (for the sake of
notational simplicity) the one factor version of (20):


                                         = I9ptR?r&t   + pt                             (26)


and studying the quadratic regression:


                        E*[RptRmt,QtI = +                                              (27)
                                             20
The regression slope coefficients are given by:

                          / VarIRmtlV'     -
                                       Coy R t,
                1*
                 2p
                          I
                          \.       . t)/
                                    I
                                   1p2 I!                     p2
                                                              I
                                                              \ rnt,
                          (/ c
                                                  —

                      —
                      —
                                                 flo;+Cov(xt,R;)
                          3m           (74m)     /9p3rn +    cov(,)                          (2S)
                                                           O4          Cov(t,R)
                      =
                               o
                                   +—.--.---.
                                    4m        —a0                      Cov(t, R)
                                        -Yip
                                   +
                               o        Y2p


where '73m and 4m are the skewness arid kurtosis of           respectively, and fl is the target
     of the mutual fund. Similarly, the intercept of the quadratic regression is:

                              = rp+$p1in+Cov(tRme)—bpm —b;k
                                                                                             (20)
                              = + Cov(t, Rmt)              lipRm —

In   tile absence of market timing ability, Cov{xt. R} and Cov{t, R} are both zero so
that the coefficient on Rmt will be the target beta of the fund and that on          will be zero.
So long as the market timing information and preferences of the manager and the distri-
bution of Rmt are such that the appropriate combinafion of Cov{,                   Cov{zt, R},
a3,, and 74m are non-zero, then                will be non-zero, indicating the presence of market
tiiiung ability.
       This is a remarkable result in that it makes no assumptions about the return generating
process beyond stationarity, linearity and the validity of the APT benchmark. Without
assuming anything beyond finite third and fourth order moments, the quadratic term
will be zero in the absence of timing ability. So long as tile inforniation and the preferences
of tile fund manager are such that portfolio returns are skewed to the right, as conceived
of, for example, in the first example of Dybvig and Ross(1981),             will be non-zero and,
hence, will indicate the presence of timing ability. The basis idea is quite simple: market
timers should make money when the market rises or falls dramatically, that is, when the
squared return on the market is large.
       Of course, without further restriction on distributions and preferences, it will not, in
general, be possible to measure the magnitudes of market timing and security selection

                                                      21
ability. As is obvious froni equation (28) above, if there is no co-skewness between the
fluctuations in the fund beta and the return on the factor (i.e. Cov{x, R} is zero), it
will he possible to estimate the target beta of the fund and Cov{xt,       but it will not be
possible to separate the two sources of abnormal performance. This can he accomplished
by placing sufficient structure on the problem so that measurement of Cov{z, R} leads
to estimation of Cov{zt, Rmt}, which permits the estimation of     using equation (20). For
example, Pfleiderer and Bhattacharya( 1083) assume the joint normality of Rmt, . and
and the linearity of ; in • Still, the potential capability to detect the presence of market
timing ability with the simple quadratic regression procedures represents a promising ad-
vance, although its actual usefulness is, of course, an empirical question that we will begin
to examine below.


IV. The Data
    In implementing the CAPM toohtain risk-adjusted excess returns, we use the stan-
dard benchmarks: the CRSP equally-weighted and value-weighted indices of NYSE stocks
taken from the CRSP monthly index file. The construction of reference portfolios for the
APT benchmarks, however, is not so straightforward. Some of the computational as-
pects and potential virtues of efficient estimation procedures were detailed in the preceding
sections. Here we discuss some of the data analytic alternatives facing investigators.
    One choice facing researchers is the appropriate frequency of observation for estimat-
ing the factor models of securit.y returns underlying the APT. Many choices are readily
available since the CRSP daily return file provides returns on all NYSE and AMEX
stocks since July 1962, and minimal computational skill stands between us and weekly,
monthly or other intermediate frequency data. The primary advantage of daily data is the
potential increase in precision of the estimated variances and covariances, the inputs to
the factor analysis model, that comes with sampling the data more often. The two main
disadvantages of daily data are the persistent incidence of non-trading and thin trading
which bias the estimates of second-order moments and the biases in mean returns associ-
ated with bid-ask spreads that are studied in Blume and Stambaugh(1983) and Roll(1983).
Following Roll and Ross(1980), we opted for the putative benefits of a large sample and
used daily data to estimate the factor models, although the optimal observation frequency

                                             22
is an empirical question worthy of detailed investigation and one which we are currently
examining (Lehmann and Modest(1985c)). Portfolio weights constructed from daily data
based on the minimum idiosyncratic risk procedure outlined above were then multiplied by
monthly security returns to construct monthly returns on our basis portfolios.26
     Our mutual fund data base consists of the returns on one hundred and thirty (130) mu-
tual funds over the fifteen year period January 1968-December 1982. We are grateful to Roy
Henriksson for graciously supplying us with the vast majority of this data. The monthly
returns are calculated from the end of month bid prices and monthly dividends obtained
from Standard and Poor's Over-the-Counter Daily Stock Price Record, Weisenberger's In-
vestment Companies annual compendium, and Moody's Annual Dividend Record. It is
worth emphasizing that the Over-the-Counter Daily Stock Price Record omits a significant
fraction of the dividends paid and reliance must be made on the other two sources to obtain
accurate dividend information. The sample was chosen to include a variety of funds with
differing risk postures. No municipal bond fund or option fund, however, was included. It
should also be pointed out that the Henriksson sample was chosen so that the funds sur-
vived over the January 1068-June 1080 period. This raises the potential for some problems
due to a possible survivorship bias, although the results below show no evidence of such
a bias. Due to our concern that •the risk levels of the funds were not constant over the
fifteen year period, we restricted our attention to examining the behavior of the funds over
three five-year subperio ds: January 1068-December 1972, January 1073-December 1077,
and January 1978-December 1982.
     The CRSP daily file contains 1359, 1346 and 1281 securities which were continuously
listed and had no missing observations during the three five-year periods covered by our
mutual fund data. We confined our attention to these firms in order to have the same
number of observations for each security and ignored any potential selection bias associ-
ated with this choice. Computational considerations required the analysis of no more than
750 scurities simultaneously. We have carried out runs using as many as one thousand
  26 Another alternative would have been to multiply the portfolio weights times daily se-
curity returns and then aggregate these daily returns to obtain monthly portfolio returns.
In Lehmann and Modest(1985b), we examined both reference portfolio formation proce-
dures and found little difference between the two approaches. Concern over bid-ask spread
bias in this procedure, which calls for daily rebalancing, led us to opt for the buy-and-hold
strategy.

                                             23
 securities. However, the larger number of securities yielded a minimal improvement over
 the performance of reference portfolios based on 750 securities and proved to be dispro-
 portionately expensive iii terms of the computational time. The CRSP daily file lists
 securities in alphabetical order by most recent name. To guard against any biases induced
 by the natural progression of letters (General Electric, General Motors, etc.), we randomly
 reordered the firms. The number of daily observations in these samples was 1234, 1263, and
 12G4 rcspcctively. The usual sample covariance matrix of these security returns provided
 the basic input to our subsequent analysis.


 V Empirical Results
     In this section we provide evidence on the comparative performance of different bench-
 marks for evaluating mutual fund performance. In particular, do the absolute and relative
rankings of the funds hinge on which benchmark is chosen to evaluate normal performance?
Tables 1 — 6 provide evidence on the performance of alternative APT benchmarks. The
tables summarize and contrast the behavior of the intercepts from simple Jensen-style re-
gressions of mutual fund returns on the APT basis portfolios as given by equation (22).
The basic questions here are whether the less efficient (and less costly) basis portfolio
formation procedures lead to different conclusions than the more efficient procedures and
whether the conclusions about performance are sensitive to the number of factors assumed
to irnderly security returns or the number of securities included in the analysis. Tables 7
and 8 provide the corresponding information comparing APT and CAPM benchmarks in
order to highlight the contrasts across asset pricing models. Table 9 summarizes the infor-
mation from quadratic regressions along the lines of equation (27) using both APT and
CAPM benchmarks in order to shed some light on one possible cause of the anomalous
behavior of the intercepts from the Jensen-style mutual fund regressions.27
    The first eight tables provide careful scnitiny of the similarities and differences in the
intercepts across performance benchmarks. The tables come in pairs (i.e. the eight tables
consist of four sets of two tables each), each of which contrasts the behavior of different
benchmarks in a particular dimension. The first of the two tables summarize the central
 27 In the current version of the paper we only include the results from the quadratic
regressions using the five factor APT benchmark.

                                             24
 tendencies of the intercepts from each benchmark across the 130 mutual funds. The second
 table in each pair provides two measures describing the relationships among the intercepts
 from the different benchmarks.

      The first table in each pair provides four summary measures describing the typical be-
 havior of the intercepts for each benchmark over our three sample periods. The first three
 statistics are the mean intercept, the mean absolute intercept, and the average absolute
 t-statistic.28 These t-statistics are simply the estimated intercepts divided by the usual
 ordinary least squares standard errors where the standard errors are calculated under the
 assumption that the residuals in (22) are independent and have common variance over time.
 Unfortunately, these t-statistics may lack the appropriate statistical justification in the con-
text of mutual fiuid performance evaluation: as long as managers vary the composition of
their Portfolios in attempts to outperform the market, mutual fund returns will be likely to
have non-stationary variances even if the return generating process of individual securities
is stationary and, hence, the resulting heteroskedasticity biases the associated t-statistics.29
To guard against this possibility, we also present adjusted t-statistics using estimated stan-
dard errors that are consistent in the presence of arbitrary forms of het.eroskedasticity,
rather than the usual least squares standard errors. These adjusted standard errors have
been proposed and examined in work by Hansen(1982), White(1980) and Hsieh(1083).3°
     Of course, these usual summary statistics merely serve to characterize the typical be-
havior of these 3ample intercepts and cannot be used to draw inferences about the typical
behavior of the true intercepts without further assumptions that facilitate statistical in-
ference. Unfortunately, we are unable to construct the usual joint F-te8t of whether the
intercepts are significantly different from zero since the number of funds (130) is greater
than the number of time series degrees of freedom (GO) and hence the sample covariance
matrix of the residuals from equation (20) is singular. One strategy to employ in the face
of this difficulty is to examine the individual t-statistics to see if any of them are sufficiently

  28 In parentheses below the sample averages we also present the sample standard devia-
tions of the intercepts and the t-statistics across funds.
  29 In a slightly different context, the problems associated with heteroskedasticity in the
evaluation of mutual fund performance are discussed in more detail by Breen, Jagannathan.
and Ofe(1984).
  30 An analysis of their small sample properties using Monte Carlo simulations is presented
in Hsieh(1983).

                                                25
 large that it would surely lead to an F-statistic greater than the appropriate critical value.
 This is the intuition behind the application of the Bonferroni inequality to this problem as
 discussed by Miller(IOGG) and employed in Fama(1084). Briefly, the Bonferroni inequality
 states that if we examine N possibly dependent t-statistics at the critical value associated
 with a/N. then we are sure that we have at most a joint test at the significance level a.
 Of course. the inherent conservatism in reducing the significance level to a/N means that
 we will often fail to reject the null hypothesis when it is false. This does not appear to be
 a problem in this application, however, as in each period there are a number of t-values
 greater than four which is high enough to violate the Bonferroni bound at the one per cent
 level.

      The second table in each pair describes the degree of association among the inter-
 cepts computed from different performance benchmarks.3' We employ two measures to
 characterize these relationships: simple (i.e. Pearson product moment) correlations and
 Spearman rank correlations.32 The simple correlations are well-known statistics which
have a variety of conventional interpretations. For example, the squared simple correlation
l)etWeen intercepts from two different benchmarks is a (biased) estimate of the percentage
of the variation in the intercepts from one benchmark that can be explained by variation in
                                                  uplained
the intercepts from a second procedure (i.e. ii — _____       variation
                                                            variation----------j from a sim-
                                                        — ---—----.—--
                                                      total
pie cross-sectional regression of the intercepts from one benchmark on those of
another). One difficulty in interpreting simple correlations is that they are very sensitive
to outlying observations—-a small number of large positively related outliers may cause a

 ' It is argued by some that ranking funds on the basis of estimated alphas is inappropri-
 ate since differences may merely reflect, for instance, diversity in leverage and that a more
 appropriate measure is the Treynor-Black appraisal ratio: the estimated intercept divided
 by the idiosyncratic variation. Since the goal here is simply to see whether rankings depend
 on which henchiiiark is chosen, the quuestion of which ranking scheme is more appropriate
 is irrelevant. To the extent that the conventional wisdom is correct and alternative risk
 adjustment procedures lead to similar inferences, the rankings should he the sanie across
benchmarks regardless of the particular ranking scheme chosen. Since the intercepts are
economic quantities which are of considerable interest in their own right, we provide the ev-
idence in this form. Moreover, we suspect that we would obtain similar results if we worked
with the Treynor-Black appraisal ratio or. equivalently, the t-statistics of the intercepts.
  32 Unfortunately, we cannot report standard errors and confidence intervals for our es-
timated rank and simple correlations due to the likely presence of correlation among the
intercepts across funds. As a consequence, the correlations cannot he subjected to formal
statistical tests without further assumptions.

                                             26
 sample correlation to he large and positive even when there is a strong negative relationship
 between the bulk of the observations. This can occur because, in the presence of outliers,
 the total variation in intercepts across funds is likely to be relatively large compared to the
 unexplained variation in intercepts since the hulk of the total variation will be explained by
 the similar behavior of the outliers. Since the intercepts from different benchmarks typically
 are of similar magnitude for the funds with very large positive and negative alphas. the
 sensitivity of simple correlations to extreme observations is a potentially serious problem.
 Consequently, we also report Spearman rank correlations, which provide estimates of the
 degree of association among intercepts which have little sensitivity to outlying observations.
     Not surprisingly, rank correlations measure the degree of association of the ranks of
 the intercepts (i.e. the firni with the largest alpha is ranked one, that with the second
largest alpha is ranked two, etc.) across the different benchmarks. Their insensitivity to
outlying observations follows from measuring the magnitude of an intercept by its rank: the
difference in the size of the largest alpha and the tenth largest alpha can be enormous, but
the difference in ranks is only nine. The use of rank correlations has another justification in
this context. Since one purpose of mutual fund performance evaluation is to provide ordinal
rankings of funds, rank correlations summarize differences in the inferences produced by
alternative benchmarks in an apt way.
     Since rank correlations are less widely employed among financial ecOnomists than sim-
ple correlations, one natural question concerns the interpretation of the magnitudes of sam-
ple rank correlations. One answer to this question in the present setting can he obtained
by examining the formula for the Spearman rank correlation:


                   jkrank1
                        —  6l(yia_k)2
                             (N(N2 — 1))
                                                                                          (30)
                          -
                          —     6 Average Squared Difference of Ranks
                                                   (N2-1)
where g is the rank of the 1th firm using the th benchmark. Obviously, the sample variance
of the difference in ranksZS of the intercepts is the key variable (the remaining numbers
simply transform the sample variance of the difference in ranks into an approximately

    The average squared deviation of the sample difference in ranks equals the sample
variance since the average difference in ranks must equal zero.

                                              27
 unbiased estimate of the simple correlation). With 130 funds, if the typical difference in
 ranks is one (i.e. finc1s with ranks 1 and 2 by one method are ranked 2 and 1 by the other
 method, funds with ranks 3 and 4 switch places, etc.), the sample variance of the difference
 in ranks will he one as well and the rank correlation would equal 0.9906. Similarly, if
 the typical difference in the ranks of intercepts between two methods was two and the
 corresponding sample variance of these differences is four, the rank correlation would equal
 0.0086. Other rank correlations associated with different typical rank differences are easy
 to compute—a typical rank difference of five ranks leads to a rank correlation of 0.9911, a
 ten rank difference implies a 0.0645 rank correlation, fifteen implies 0.9201, twenty implies
0.8580. twenty-five implies 0.7781, thirty implies 0.6805, thirty-five implies 0.5651, forty
implies 0.4310. forty-five implies 0.2810, and fifty implies 0.1124. Clearly, rank correlations
of 0.5 to 0.8 are associated with very large typical deviations in the ranks of intercepts
across benchmarks.

     The first thing one notices in the Jensen-type regressions reported in the Tables is
the persistent incidence of negative intercepts especially with the APT benchmarks. Con-
sider, for instance, the average estimated aiphas from the regressions run in excess return
form using tile unrestricted maximum likelihood estimation procedure presented in Table 1
(which we simply refer to as maximum likelihood in the tables). The average excess return
of the funds was —4.76% on an annual basis for the first five year period (—.406% per
month), —6.14% annually for the second period (—.527% per month), and —1.50% per year
for the third period(—.126% per month).34 Inspection of the individual alphas of the funds
verifies that the intercepts are almost uniformly negative and that the mean is not being
pulled down by a few funds with exceptionally poor performance. This can also be seen by
noting tile relatively small difference between the absolute values of the average intercepts
and tile sample means of the absolute values of tile intercepts. In the first two five year
periods the average values of the adjusted and unadjusted t-statistics are sufficiently large
to suggest that many of the intercepts are significantly different from zero. In short, our

    Since the conclusions one would reach about the performance of alternative APT
benchmarks turns out to be independent of whether the regressions are run in raw or
excess return form, we limit om discussion in the text to the results from regressions run
in excess return form. We emphasize these results due to evidence presented in Lehmann
and Modest( 1085a) that suggests the preferability of this form of the APT.

                                             28
 APT benchmarks suggest the presence of widespread abnormal performance by mutual
 funds across our sample periods, a finding which we further discuss below.
      With these preliminary observations in hand, Tables 1 and 2 examine the impact
 of alternative methods of estimating the factor model for security returns underlying the
 APT. Four different estimation methods were compared using samples of 750 securities:
 two maximum likelihood procedures, an instrumental variables estimator and the method
 of principal components. These procedures were discussed in Section II.B. The maximum
 likelihood procedures differ in that the restricted maximum likelihood method also uses
 the information in the sample means as outlined in equation (15a) while conventional
maximum likelihood factor analysis ignores this information. Tables 1 and 2 compare these
 APT benchmarks assuming there are five common sources of systematic risk.35 For each
estimation method, statistics are presented for regressions run in raw return form, which
corresponds to the zero-beta version of the APT, and for regressions run in excess return
form corresponding to the riskless rate version of the APT.
     Examination of Table 1 reveals that there is some variation in the mean intercept
across estimation methods, although the differences in most cases are not terribly large.
Compared with- the average intercept using the unrestricted maximum likelihood procedure,
the mean alpha from the restricted maximum likelihood procedure was 28 basis points per
annum lower in the first five year period, 2 basis points higher in the second period and 5
basis points per year higher in the third period. Again using the average intercepts from
the unrestricted maximum likelihood procedure as a standard of comparison, the average
intercepts using the instrumental variables estimation procedure were 35 basis points higher,
16 basis points lower, and 63 basis points higher in periods one through three respectively.
The corresponding numbers using the principal components procedure were +208 basis
points. +20 basis points, and +11 basis points.
    Table 2 presents additional information on the absolute and relative rankings across
estimation methods in the form of simple and Spearman rank correlation coefficients be-
tween the intercepts using the different estimation methods. As is evident from the Table,
the intercepts from the unrestricted and restricted maximum likelihood procedures are al-

    Tables Al and A2 in the Appendix present the corresponding results when there are
assumed to be ten common sources of covariation.

                                            29
 ways highly correlated. The lowest simple correlation between the intercepts in the three
 periods is .9093. which occurs in the first five year period. For all three periods, the rank
 correlation is .0000. The degree of similarity between the absolute and relative rankings
 using the unrestricted maximum likelihood procedure and the less efficient instrumental
 variables and principal components procedures is not nearly so strong. To he sure, the
 lowest simple correlation between the intercepts from the unrestricted maximum likelihood
procedure and the instnunental variables procedure is .0557, occurring in the third five
year period. Similarly, the lowest simple correlation between the unrestricted maximum
likelihood procedure and the principal components procedure is .0267 in the first five year
period. While even the lowest simple correlations are quite high, the same cannot be said
for the rank correlations. The rank correlations between the unrestricted maximum likeli-
hood procedure and the instriuuental variables procedure are .0402, .5162. and .5044 in the
three five year periods. The corresponding rank correlations with the principal components
procedure are .5544, .5379. and .0608. Note that the difference in the magnitudes of the
simple and rank correlations is likely to he a reflection of the outlier problem and that the
rank correlations on the order of 0.5 suggest considerable differences in the relative rankings
of mutual funds by the efficient and the inefficient estimation methods. In short, while the
absolute rankings of the fiuids appear to be relatively insensitive to the estimation method.
the relative rankings can he greatly influenced by this choice.

     Given the factor loadings and the idiosyncratic variances, the efficiency of the minimum
idiosyncratic risk estimator of the basis portfolios increases with the number of securities
used in the cross-section. This gain in efficiency, however, is not without cost: namely
the increased computational time involved in performing the factor analysis on the greater
number of securities. Statistical evidence in Lehmann and Modest(1985b) suggests this
gain can be quite substantial. In order to study whether the number of securities used
in estimation has an economically significant impact on the performance of the reference
portfolios as benchmarks, we performed unrestricted maximum likelihood factor analysis
on the first 30, 250, and 750 securities in our randomly sampled data file. Tables 3 and 4
present the evidence on the impact of the number of securities used in estimating the APT
on inferences regarding mutual fund performance. The tables report results based on a
five factor model for security returns which was estimated using the unrestricted maximum

                                             30
likelihood procedure with 30, 250, and 750 securities.36 The results in Table 3 indicate
substantial variation in the mean aiphas depending on the number of securities used in
the estimation. Previous authors, such as Roll and Ross(1980), have based their inferences
concerning the APT on maximum likelihood estimation of factor models involving thirty
to sixty securities. As is evident, this leads to very different conclusions about the ab-
solute and relative performance of the fn.nds than would be reached from performing the
analysis with a much larger number of securities. The difference between the mean aiphas
using 30 securities and those based on 750 securities is, on an annual basis, +390 basis
points, +133 basis points and +233 basis points for the three five year periods respectively.
The corresponding differences with the mean intercepts from runs using 250 securities are
+138, —90 and +43 basis points. Table 4, as did Table 2 above, presents the simple and
rank correlations of the intercepts from the three periods when 30, 250. and 750 securities
were used in estimating the factor loadings and idiosyncratic variances of the APT. While
the correlations are moderately high, they are nowhere near unity. The simple correlations
between the intercepts using 30 and 750 securities range from .6513 to .0785, while the cor-
responding numbers for the rank correlations range from .7314 to .8705. The corresponding
range of correlations between the intercepts based on estimation with 250 and 750 securities
are .6687 to .9508 for the simple correlations, and .8153 to .9106 for the rank correlations.
In short, Tables 1 — 4 suggest that using inefficient estimation procedures due either to an
inefficient method or a small number of securities can lead to substantially different conclu-
sions than one would reach with more efficient procedures. Thus the dissimilarities in the
relative rankings of the funds found here suggest that the statistical differences documented
in Lehmann and Modest(1985b) between efficient and inefficient estimation methods can
lead to substantively different economic conclusions regarding the performance of mutual
funds.

    In our final comparison of APT benchmarks, we examined how sensitive the absolute
and relative rankings of the funds are to the presumed number of common factors affecting
security returns. In particular, we contrast the performance of basis portfolios constructed
under the alternative assumptions that there are five, ten, and fifteen common factors using

 36 Tables
           A3 and A4 in the Appendix present the corresponding numbers from a ten
factor model of security returns.

                                             31
 the estimated factor loadings and idiosyncratic variances from maximum likelihood factor
 analysis of 750 securities. Tables 5 and 6 present evidence on whether the number of corn-
 mon factors assumed to be generating security returns has a large impact on the inferences
 one would make about the absolute and relative rankings of funds. As is readily apparent,
 the number of common factors assumed to impinge on security returns has far less impact
on the rankings of the funds than does the choice of estimation method or number of se-
curities used in estimation. The difference between the mean intercepts from estimating
five factors relative to ten factors is (on an annual basis) —2 basis points, +88 basis points,
and —230 basis points in the three five year periods respectively. The corresponding differ-
ences between the mean intercepts using ten and fifteen factors are +11, —32 and —1 basis
point(s) respectively. Except for the difference between the mean intercepts using five and
ten factors in the third and, perhaps, the second five year period, these differences are all
quite small. The same picture arises from an examination of the correlations in Table 6.
The simple correlations between the intercepts from the five and ten factor models range
from .0850 to .0055 and the rank correlations range from .9577 to .9643. The corresponding
correlations between the ten and fifteen factor intercepts are also very high with the simple
correlations ranging from .9737 to .0004 and the rank correlations ranging from .9785 and
.9831. Thus the choice of the number of factors does not appear to be an important one
in evaluating the performance of mutual funds. Evidence presented in Lèhmann and Mod-
est(1085a) suggests that a ten factor model might he marginally preferable to a five factor
model but that there is no apparent advantage to going to fifteen factors. The evidence
presented here reinforces the observation that there is no meaningful economic difference
in assuming there are ten common sources of systematic risk as opposed to fifteen common
factors.

     Having compared alternative APT benchmarks, the natural question to ask is whether
the APT has anything different to say about performance evaluation than the CAPM.
Tables 7 and 8 present summary statistics and correlations that attempt to shed light
on this question. As a point of reference we also present summary statistics based on
no risk adjustment as well. The difference between the mean intercepts using the APT
benchmark and the mean intercepts using either of the CAPM benchmarks is striking.
While the aiphas from the APT benchmarks are markedly negative in all three periods, the

                                             32
CAPM aiphas are much less negative. A comparison of the average t-statistics suggests
that the CAPM aiphas are not nearly as statistically significant as the APT aiphas. The
means of the CAPM alphas using the value-weighted index are (on an annual basis) 353,
567, and 294 basis points higher in the three five year periods than the mean value of
tile APT aiphas using the unrestricted maximum likelihood estimation procedure with
750 securities to construct the APT benchmark. The corresponding difference between

the CAPM aiphas using the equally weighted index are +483, +584, and —167 basis
points. These sharp differences are further indicated by the relatively low simple and rank
correlations between the intercepts. The simple correlation between the APT intercepts
and the CAPM intercepts using the value weighted index are .7896, .6545, and .4959.
The corresponding rank correlations are .7238, .7076, and .8378. The simple and rank
correlations between the intercepts using tile equally weighted CAPM benchmark and the
APT benchmark are .6055. .9804, .9003. and .7797. .4860, .7773, respectively. Thus in fact
we see that the conclusions one would reach would be dramatically affected by the choice
between an APT benchmark and a CAPM benchmark.
     An examination of Table 8 also indicates interesting differences among the two dif-
ferent CAPM benchmarks. For instance, tile simple correlations between the intercepts
constructed using the CRSP value-weighted and equally weigilted indices is .9599, .7200,
and .4076 in tile three periods respectively. The corresponding rank correlations are .5530,
.1836. and .6690. It thus appears, unlike the results in Stambaugh(1982), that inferences re-
garding the relative performance of mutual funds is quite sensitive to the particular market
proxy chosen.

    What accounts for the sharply negative intercepts? We offer two potential expla-
nations. Tile first possibility is that there is error in our constructed benchmarks. For
example. in Lchmann and Modest(1985a), we found that the APT could explain the em-
pirical anomalies involving dividend yield and own variance but could not account for size
related anomalies. In particular, we found that the regression of the value weighted CRSP
index on our basis portfolios yielded significant negative intercepts in each of the five year
periods covered by the mutual fund data. The predominantly negative intercepts from the
mutual fund regressions could follow from this phenomenon to the extent that funds hold
a large part of their portfolios in stocks with large market capitalizations, although it is

                                             33
worth noting that the intercepts from the value weighted regressions were not as large and
negative as the mean intercept from the mutual fund regressions. The second explanation
involves true or spurious market timing by mutual fimd managers. As discussed above in
Section III. if the risk of a mutual fund is constant over the sample period, then the fund's
alpha is, in principle, an accurate measure of the fund's stock selection ability. However if
the funcl' risk level is not constant, possibly due to shifts associated with market timing
attempts or because of the option nature of levered securities, then the alpha is no longer a
nicasure of the funds performance ability since the estimated intercept may be arbitrarily
positive or negative depending on the covariance between changes in the funds risk posture
and the returns on the factors.37
    We ran quadratic regressions of the mutual funds' returns on the factors and the factors
squared. as outlined in equation (27) for tile single factor case, to examine whether real
or artificial market timing accounts for the incidence of persistently negative intercepts.
Under tile joint null hypothesis that the risk of the funds is constant and that the returns
of the individual securities are generated by a K factor linear structure, one should not be
able to reject the joint hypothesis that the coefficients on the quadratic terms are zero.38 If
the residuals from the qiadratic regression are homoskedastic. then the appropriate joint
test is a standard F-test. However, if the residuals are heteroskedastic, then the usual F-
statistic is not appropriate since it fails to possess an F distribution in these circumstances
and, hence, can lead to incorrect inferences regarding the null hypothesis. Asymptotically,
an appropriate test can he conducted using the procedures proposed by Hansen(1982),
Whjte(1980) and Hsieh(1983) to construct heteroskedastic-consistent covariance matrices
along tile lines of the adjusted t-statistics discussed above. This test has the shortcoming
that its small sample distribution is not known and reliance must be made on the fact that
the test statistic is asymptotically distributed as chi-squared.
    In Table 9 we present summary statistics for tests that the risk levels of the funds

    See Jagannathan and Korajczyk(1084) for a discussion of the problems associated
with the artificial market timing caused by the holding of levered securities. See Pfieiderer
and Bhattacharya(1083) and Grinblatt and Titman(1985) for a discussion of the spurious
market timing that can arise when managers revise their portfolios more frequently than
we observe returns.
 38 This assunies, of course, that we know K and that we have basis portfolios which are
highly correlated with the factors.

                                              34
are constant under the assumption that there are five common factors affecting security
returns. For each sample period, we provide evidence on the fraction of the funds for which
we could reject the hypothesis that the quadratic terms were zero at the 1%, 5%, 10%, and
 15% significance levels. We present results from both the F-tests, which are valid under
the assumption that the residuals are homoskedastic, and the Chi-squared tests which are
asymptotically valid under arbitrary forms of heteroskedasticity. An examination of Table 0
reveals that the Chi-squared tests lead, under the assumption of independence, to a greater
number of rejections of the null hypothesis of constant risk levels in all three periods than
would have been expected a priori. The F-tests on the other hand lead to apprcximately the
number of rejections that would have been expected, except in the second five year period.
For instance, in the first five year period, the Qhi-square test rejects the null hypothesis
that the quadratic terms are zero for 14.6% of the firms at the 1% significance level, 23.8%
at the 5% level, 35.4% at the 10% level, and 42.3% at the 15% significance level. The F-test,
however, leads to rejection of the null for only 2.3% of the firms at the 1% level, 5.4% at
the 5% level, 13.1% at the 10% level, and 20.0% at the 15% significance level. It is difficult
to know what to make of these differences as the F-test is only valid under the assumption
of homoskedasticity, an assumption which seems to he of dubious validity in this context,
and the small sample properties of the Chi-squared test are unknown.9 We are currently
examining the relationship between the intercepts and these test statistics on an individual
fund basis to see if this will shed any light on the prevalence of negative aiphas.


VI. Conclusion
    In Lehmann and Modest(1985b), we provided a comprehensive statistical examina-
tioii of the merits of different basis portfolio formation strategies. Two of the conclusions
which emerged from that study were: (1) that comparatively efficient estimation methods
such as maximum likelihood and restricted maximum likelihood factor analysis significantly

    One natural way to confront this problem is to carry out a direct test of the ho-
moskedasticity. Monte Carlo evidence presented in Hsieh(1083), however, suggests that
direct tests of heteroskedasticity have little power to discriminate between homoskedastic-
ity and heteroskedasticity. Hsieh suggests that even in small samples there is little harm
(and potentially a significant gain) to always using the heteroskedastic-consistent stan-
dard errors. Unfortunately, this does not speak to the problem here which is the rate of
convergence of the test statistic to its asymptotic distribution.

                                             35
outperform the less efficient instrumental variables and principal components procedures
and (2) increasing the the number of securities used to construct the reference portfolios
seems to dramatically improve their ability to mimic the common factors. That paper left
open. however, the question of whether the use of comparatively inefficient portfolio for-
mation procedures would have a significant quantitative impact on inferences in particular
applications such as the evaluation of managed portfolios.
    In this paper we have examined the performance of 130 mutual fimds over the pe-
riod January 1068-December 1982 in an attempt find out whether inferences about the
performance of these funds are sensitive to the benchuxiark chosen to measure normal per-
formance. In this regard, we studied the behavior of the intercepts from Jensen-style mutual
fund regressions which used different risk measurement procedures. As a consequence, we
examined alternative APT and CAPM benchmarks. In particular, we addressed the
cluestion of whether the absolute and relative rankings of the funds depend on the chosen
benchmark.
    Three conclusions emerged from this comparison. First. absolute and relative mutual
fund rankings are quite sensitive to the method used to construct the APT benchmark. One
would reach very different conclusions about the funds' performance using smaller numbers
of securities in the analysis or the less efficient estimation methods than one would arrive
at using the maximum likelihood procedures with 750 securities. Second, the rankings of
the funds are not very sensitive to the exact number of common sources of systematic risk
that are assumed to impinge on security returns. There were virtually no differences in the
rankings between the ten and fifteen factor models and only small differences with the five
factor benchmark. Third. there is little similarity between the rankings using the standard
CAPM benchmarks and the APT benchmarks which suggests the importance of knowing
the appropriate model for risk and expected return in this context. We are currently
engaged in research along these hues (Lehmann and Modest(1985a)). Moreover, to the
extent that the CAPM is the proper theory of expected returns, the results presented
here suggest that the choice of the appropriate market proxy is an important one.
    In short, the one firm conclusion that can be reached from our analysis is that the choice
of what constitutes normal performance is important for evaluating the performance of
managed portfolios. It is also worth stressing that these findings are in no way compromised

                                             36
by the potential problems associated with the shifting risk levels of managed funds. These
problems oniy affect the interpretation of the intercepts from the Jensen-style regressions.
If the choice of a benchmark were an unimportant one, different benchmarks should have
yielded similar results—the overwhelming fact is that they did not.
    These findings stand in sharp contrast to much of the conventional wisdom in the
literature. We conjecture that many investigators would not have expected substantive
differences in the APT benchmarks produced by efficient and inefficient estimation meth-
ods in our large cross-sections. Conversely, some scholars would doubtless have predicted
large differences in the inferences produced by APT benchmarks with different numbers
of factors. Finally, previous evidence suggests alternative risk adjustment procedures lead
to similar inferences in settings other than the present one. Our comprehensive examina-
tion of mutual fund performance suggests that each of these intuitions is unreliable in this
context.
    Along with the three conclusions which have emerged from our analysis, one puzzle
has also arisen: the persistent incidence of large and negative alphas. While theoretically
it is possible that this negative abnormal performance can be attributed to real or artificial
market timing or to a value weighted bias in our constructed benchmarks, the preliminary
evidence is not conclusive. We are thus still actively engaged in efforts to explain this
phenomenon.




                                             37
                                TABLE   1:       STATISTICS OF INTERCEPTS ACROSS ESTIIIATION 1IETIIODS OF          TIlE   APT
                                                      (standard deviations in parentheses)
                                                      Number of factors: 5
                                                      Number of funds: 130
                                                      Number of Securities Used in Estimation::   150

                                                                                Re s t r i c ted
Sample Period       Statistic                Maximum Likelihood            Maximum Likelihood         Instrumental Variables Principal_Components
                                               Raw       Excess             Raw             Excess       Raw       Excess      Raw       Excess
                                              Returns    Returns           Returns          Returns     Returns    Returns    Returns    Returns

                                             - .00313      - .00406    -                -             -                                      -
                              ean                                          .00334           .00429        .00286   - .00317     - .00091         .00234
                                             (.00431)      (.00346)    (.00445)         (.00354)      (.00401)     (.00315)     (.00356)     (.00333)
                  Mean Absolute
                                             0.00394       0.00447     0.00413          0.00468       0.00364      0.00407      0.00258      0.00321
January 1968-       Intercept
December 1972
                Average Absolule                  1.55       1.98           1.61             2.04          1.40         1.83         1.09         1.42
                   t-statistic                   (1.20)     (1.12)         (1.24)           '(1.14)       (1.07)       (1.03)        (.86)        (.92)
                Average Absolute                  1.53       2.05           1.59             2.12          1.40         1.91         1.17         1.52
                   t—Adjusted                    (1.22)     (1.15)         (1.25)           (1.17)        (1.08)       (1.09)       (0.93)        (.98)
                                             -   .00299                -                -             -            -            -
                              ean
                                                           - .00527        .00295           .00525        .00319       .00540       .00346   - .00503
                                             (.00361)      (.00338)    (.00359)         (.00336)      (.00348)     (.00314)     (.00391)     (.00359)
                  Mean Absolute
                                             0.00379       0.00555    0.00375           0.00553       0.00381      0.00564      0.00429      0.00539
January 1973-       Intercept
December 1977
                Average Absolute                  1.70       2.60           1.69             2.59          1.85         2.50         2.03         2.41
                   i—statistic                   (1.13)     (1.32)         (1.12)           (1.30)        (1.17)       (1.14)       (1.32)       (1.37)
                Average Absolute                  1.82       2.78           1.80             2.77          2.00         2.61         2.15         2.55
                   t-Adjusted                    (1.21)     (1.44)         (1,20)           (1.42)        (1.25)       (1.18)       (1.39)       (1.44)
                                                           -.00126     -   .00071       -.00122       -
                         Ii   eaii
                                             -.00074                                                      .00042   -.00014      -.00042      -.00111
                                             (.00269)      (.00248)    (.00261)         (.00248)      (.002/0)     (.00270)     (.00271)     (.00243)
                  Mean Absolute
                                             0.00210       0.00212    0.00208           0.00209       0.00203      0.00206      0.00202      0.00206
January 1978-       Intercepi
December 1982
                Average Absolute                 0.89        0.94           0.88             0.92         0.80         0.83         0.82         0.8]
                   t—slaListic                    (.75)      (.79)          (.74)            (.78)        (.65)         (.70)        (.69)       (.71)
                Average Absolute                 0.96        1.02           0.95             1.00         0.85         0.88         0.89         0.92
                   i—Adjusted                    (.81)       (.86)          (.80)            (.85)        (.69)         (.74)        (.79)       (.76)
                          TABLE     2:    CORRELATIONS OF INTERCEPTS ACROSS ESTIMATION          tIETILODS   OF   TILE   APT
                                                     (Excess Return Version of APT)

                                                    Number of factors: 5
                                                    Number of funds: 130
                                                    Number of Securities Used in Estimation:      750

                                                          SIMPLE CORRELATIONS                 ____________ RANK CORRELATIONS
                                                         Restricted                                          Restric[d
                                            Maximum       Maximum Instrumental    Principal      Maximum      Maximum         Instrumental    Principal
Sample   Period                          Likelihood      Likelihood  Variable    Components   Likelihood     Likelihood          Variables   Components

                                           1.0000           .9993       .9640       .9267       1.0000            .9999             .9492       .5544
                   Likelihood
                  Restricted
January 1968-      Maximum                     .9993       1.0000       .9931       .9144        .9999           1.0000             .9491       .5516
December 1972
                  Likelihood
                  Instrumental
                                               .9640        .9590     1.0000        .9122        .9492            .9491           1.0000        .5085
                   Variables


                    Maximum
                                           1   .0000        .9999       .9908       .9926       1.0000            .9999             .5162       .5379
                   Likelihood                   .




                  Restricted
January 1973-      Maximum                     .9999       1.0000       .9914       .9919        .9999           1.0000             .5165       .5373
December 1971
                  Likelihood
                  Instrumental
                                               .9908        .9919      1.0000       .9752        .5162            .5165           1.0000        .3950
                   Variables


                    Maximum
                                           1   .0000        .9996       .9557       .9800       1.0000            .9999             .5044       .9698
                   Likelihood
                   Restricted
January 1978—       Maximum                    .9996       1.0000       .9516       .9784        .9999           1.0000             .5041       .9702
December 1982
                   Likelihood
                  Instrumental                 .9557        .9576      1.0000       .9226        .5044            .5041           1.0000        .4981
                   Va r iab I e s
     TABLE   3:   STATISTICS OF INTERCEPTS ACROSS          NUMBER OF   SECURITIES USED_IN ESTiMATING THE APT


                                  Number of factors: 5
                                  Estimation method: Maximum Likelihood
                                  Number of funds: 130

§!ple   Period        Statistic                   30                            250                           750
                                         Raw            Excess         Raw             Excess         Raw               Excess
                                        Returns         Returns       Returns          Returns       Returns            Returns
                           Hean
                                       0.00052         - .0008/    - .00157           - .00292   - .00313           - .00406
                                       (.00382)        (.00332)    (.00363)           (.00332)   (.00431)           (.00346)
                    Mean    Absolute
                                        0.00276     0.00241       0.00219             0.00344    0.00394            0.00447
January 1968-         Intercept
December 1972
                  Average Absolute       0.96            0.76          0.99             1.39          1.55               1.98
                     t—statistjc         (.79)           (.62)         (.82)            (.91)        (1.20)             (1.12)
                  Average Absolute       1.01            0.80          1.04             1.46          1.53               2.05
                     t-Adjusted          (.84)           (.65)         (.85)            (.95)        (1.22)             (1.15)
                                       - .00194    - . 00417      -.00301         - .00602       - .00299
                        Mean                                                                                        -.00527
                                       (.00379)     (.00358)      (.00354)            (.00333)   (.00361)           (.00338)
                    Mean Absolute
        1973-                          0.00335     0.00462        0.00376         0.00622        0.00379            0.00555
January               intercept
December 1971
                  Average Absolute       1.09            1.13          1.60            2.53           1.70               2.60
                     t—statistjc         (.76)           (.75)        (1.00)          (1.10)         (1.13)             (1.32)
                  Average Absolute       1.21            1.27          1.77            2.57           1.82               2.78
                     t-Adjusted          (.86)           (.84)        (1.13)          (1.11)         (1.21)             (1.44)
                                                                  -                              -                  -
                        Mean           öTo.ooOs                                   -.O0i              .00074             .ooiT
                                       (.00293)    (.00302)       (.00267)        (.00250)       (.00269)           (.00248)
                    Mean Absolute
                                       0.00293     0.00219        0.00195         0.00196        0.00210            0.00212
January 1978-         Intercept
December 1982
                  Average Absolute       0.96           0.63           0.74            0.75          0.89               0.94
                     t—statistjc         (.70)          (.57)          (.70)           (.66)         (.75)              (.79)
                  Average Absolute       1.00           0.70           0.81            0.81          0.96               1.02
                     t—Adjusted          (.71)          (.62)          (.71)           (.11)         (.81)              (.86)
         TABLE   4:   CORRELATIONS
                      ______       OF INTERCEPTS ACROSS     NUMBER OF   SECURITiES USED IN ESTIMATING TIlE APT
                                          (LViTAT)
                                   Number of factors: 5
                                   Estimation Method: Maximum Likelihood
                                   Number of funds: 130


                                         SIMPLE CORRELATiONS                                    RANK CORRELATIONS


Sample Period                                                    L                                    ?             i
                         30          1.0000         .8498       .7577                  1.0000         .8936      .8669
January 1968-
December 1972
                         250          .8498     1.0000          .9706                   .8936        1.0000      .9704

                         30          1.0000         .9508       .9785                  1.0000         .8153      .7314
January 1973-
December 1977                                   I   .0000                               .8153        1.0000      .9519
                         250          .9508                     .9911

                        30
                        —            1.0000         .6687       .6513                  1.0000         .9106      .8795
January 1978-
December 1982
                                      .6687     1.0000          .9755                   .9106        1.0000      .9572
                     TABLE    5:   STATISTICS OF INTERCEPTS ACROSS NUMBER OF FACTORS
                                     iidi
                                   Estimation method: Maximum Likelihood
                                   Number of Securities Used in Estimation:                 750
                                   Number of funds: 130

Sample Period       Statistic                       5                         10                               15
                                           Raw           Excess      Raw            Excess             Raw              Excess
                                          Returns        Returns    Relurns         Returns        Returns              Returns
                                      - .00313          - .00406   - .00268        - .00404       - .00357          - .00395
                      Heaii
                                      (00431)           (.00346)   (.00399)        (.00321)       (.00488)          (.00377)
                  Mean Absolute
        1968-                         0.00394           0.00447    0.00351         0.00439        0.00425           0.00438
January             intercept
December 1972
                Average Absolute           1.55           1.98       1.34            2.05              1.45              1.88
                   t—statistic            (1,20)         (1.12)     (1'.04)         (1.16)         (1.14)               (1.17)
                Average Absolute           1.53           2.05       1.51            2.30           1.74                 2.22
                   t—Adjusted             (1.21)         (1.15)     (1.13)          (1.33)         (1.33)               (1.38)
                                      - .00299          -.0052]    - .00223        - .00454       -.   0ö           -
                      Me an
                                      (.00361)          (.00338)   (.00313)        (.00300)       (.00316)          (.00318)
                  Mean Absolute
                                     0.00379            0.00555    0.00298         0.0048:3       0.00316           0.00511
January 1973-       Intercept
December 1977
                Average Absolute           1.70           2.60       1.40            2.37              1.46              2.52
                   t—statisiic            (1.13)         (1.32)     (1.01)          (1.17)         (1.02)               (1.21)
                Average Absolute           1.82           2.78       1.59            2.68              1.68              2.89
                   t—Adjusted             (1.21)         (1.44)     (1.17)          (1.35)         (1.19)               (1.41)
                                      -
                      Mean
                                          .oôo                                     -:ooi                            -.oö
          .
                                      (.00269)          (.00248)   (.00279)        (.00275)(.00292)                 (.00281)
                  Mean Absolute
                                     0.00210            0.00212    0.00306         0.00342        0.00329           0.00352
January 1978-       Intercept
December 1982
                Average Absolute          0.89            0.94       1.26            1.45              1.38              1.48
                   t—statistic             (.75)          (.19)      (.81)           (.92)             (.93)             (.96)

                Average Absolute          0.96            1.02       1.51            1.72           1.73                 1.86
                   1—Adjusted              (.81)          (.86)     (1.05)          (1.09)         (1.22)               (1.19)
                     TABLE 6:   CORRELATIONS_OF INTERCEPTS ACROSS NUMBER OF FACTORS
                                     (Excess Return Version of APT)

                                Estimation Method: Maximum Likelihood
                                Number of Securities Used in Estimation:   750
                                Number of funds: 130


                                       SIMPLE CORRELATIONS                               RANK CORRELATIONS

Sample Period                      5            10            15                   5            10            15

                                1.0000         .9955         .9750           1.0000            .9577         .9370
January 1968-
December 1972
                10               .9955        1.0000         .9737               .9577        1.0000         .9831

                 5
                 —              1.0000         .9859         .9732           1.0000            .9643         .9469
January 1973-
December 1917
                10               .9859        1.0000         .9904            .9643           1.0000         .9185

                 5              1.0000         .9955         .9750           1.0000            .9643
January 1978-    —                                                                                           .9469
December 1982
                10               .9955        1.0000         .9737            .9643          1.0000          .9785
                     TABLE 7: STATISTICS OF INTERCEPTS ACROSS BENCHMARKS

                         APT: Number of factors: 5
                               Estimation method: Maximum Likelihood
                               Number of Securities Used in Estimation: 750
                               Number of funds: 130
                                  (standard deviations in parentheses)

                                                  APT                     CAPN
                                                                   Value       Equally  No Risk
Sample Period       Statistic                                     Weighted    Weighted Adjustment
                                         Raw            Excess     Excess      Excess    Excess
                                        Returns         Returns    Returns     Returns   Returns

                                    -.00313          —.00406      -.00117    -.00012      0.00545
                      Mean
                                    (.00431)         (.00346)     (.00365)   (.00352)     (.00339)
                  Mean Absolute
                                    0.00394          0.00447      0.00260    0.00234       0.00576
January 1968-       Intercept
December 1972
                Average Absolute         1.55            1.98       0.99         0.81       1.03
                   t—statjstic          (1.20).         (1.12)      (.81)        (.71)      (.58)
                Average Absolute         1.53           2.05        1.01         0.83       1.04
                   t-Adjusted           (1.22)          (1.15)      (.82)         (.72)     (.58)
                                    - .00299        - .00527      -.00066    - .00053     0.00111
                      Mean
                                    (.00361)         (.00338)     (.00378)   (.00410)     (.00402)
                  Mean Absolute
                                        .00379      0.00555       0.00302    0.00569       0.00318
January 1973-       Intercept
December 1977
                Average Absolute         1.70           2.60        1.31         1.52       0.53
                   t-statistic          (1.13)          (1.32)      (.87)         (.82)     (.53)
                Average Absolute         1.82           2.78        1.31         1.58       0.54
                   t-Adjusted           (1.21)          (1.44)      (.86)        (.86)      (.53)

                      Mean
                                    -   .00074      - .00126      0.00116    -   .00266   0.01363
                                    (.00269)         (.00248)     (.00332)   (.00273)     (.00401)
                  Mean Absolute
                                    0.00210         0.00212       0.00245    0.00329      0.01363
January 1978-       Intercept
December 1982
                Average Absolute        0.89            0.94        0.91         1.14       2.11
                   t—statistic           (.75)          (.79)       (.69)        (.69)      (.45)
                Average Absolute        0.96            1.02        0.94         1.18      2.12
                   t—Adjusted            (.81)          (.86)       (.71)        (.71)      (.45)
                                     TABLE   8:   STATISTICS OF INTERCEPTS ACROSS BENCIU'IARKS

                                         APT:     Number   of factors:          5
                                                  Estimation     method:        Maximum   Likelihood
                                                  Number of Securities Used in             Estimation:    750
                                                  Number of funds: 130
                                                  Excess Return Version of APT


                                                     SIMPLE CORRELATIONS                                           RANK CORRELATIONS

                                                   _____      CAPH                                                        CAPII

                                                    Value            Equally       No Risk                       Value        Equally      No    Risk
Sample Period                          APT         Weighted          Weighted     Adjustment       APT          Weighted      Weighted     Adjtment
                         APT          1.0000         .7896             .6055        -.3436       1.0000           .7238            .7797    -.0819
January   1968-        CAPN
                                       .7896        l.000()            .9599         .2355        .7238          1.0000            .5530        .0376
December 1972     Value Weighted

                        CAPM           .6055         .9599            1.0000         .4952        .7797           .5530           1.0000    -.1132
                  Equally Weighted

                         APT          1.0000         .6545             .9804         .2723       1.0000           .7076            .4860    - .0181

January 1973-          CAPM
                                       .6545        1.0000             .7200         .8876        .7076          1.0000            .1836    - .2084
December 1977     Value Weighted

                        CAPM           .9804         .7200            1.0000         .3776        .4860           .1836           1.0000        .1762
                  Equally Weighted

                         APT         1.0000          .4959             .9003       - .2715       1.0000           .8378            .7773    - .0898

January 1978-          CAPH
                                       .4959        1.0000             .4076         .5755        .8378          1.0000            .6690        .0861
December 1982     Value Weighted

                        CAPM           .9003         .4076            1.0000       - .4952        .7773           .6690           1.0000     .2721
                  Equally Weighted
                         TABLE    Al:    STATISTICS OF iNTERCEPTS ACROSS ESTiMATION f'IFTIIODS OF TUE  API
                                                                                                   -_____

                                                   Number of factors:   10
                                                   Number of fwids:   130
                                                   Number of Securities Used in Estimation:                 750
                                                                        Restricted
p1e    Period        Statistic          Maximum_Likelihood               Maximum_Likelihood      insirumental Variables Principal             Components
                                          Raw              Excess         Raw       Excess            Raw             Excess         Raw        Excess
                                         Returns           Returns       Returns    Returns          Returns          Returns       Returns     Returns
                                        - .00268       -   .00404    - .00294      -
                       Uean                                                            .00435    - .00398         - .0042]      - .00122       - .00289
                                        (.00399)       (.00321)      (.00415)      (.00321)      (.00452)         (.00339)      (.00336)       (.00301)
                 Average Absolute       0.00351       0.00439        0.00313       0.00468       0.00462          0.00467       0.00264        0.0034]
January 1968-        Intercept
L)ecember 1972
                 Average Absolute         1.34              2.05          1.38          2.15          1.67             1.98          1.11          1.53
                    t—slatistic          (1.04)            (1.16)        (1.05)        ('1.19)       (1.13)           (1.05)         (.85)         (.96)
                 Average Absolute         1.51              2.30          1.56          2.43          1.79             2.20          1.25          1./1
                    1—Adjusted           (1.13)            (1.33)        (1.15)        (1.36)        (1.17)           (1.22)         (.95)        (1.09)
                                        - .00223      -    .00454    -            -              -                -             -             -
                       Hean                                              .00215        .00446        .00337           .00582        .00331        .00544
                                        (.00313)      (.00300)       (.00311)      (.00297)      (.00351)         (.00324)      (.00369)       (.00344)
                 Average Absolute       0.00298       0.00483        0.00291           0.00475   0.00396          0.00601       0.0040]       0.005/0
January 1913-        Intercept
December 1977
                 Average Absolute         1.40              2.36          1.36          2.29          1.71             2.]2          1.76          2.3/
                    t—statistic          (1.01)            (1.1])         (.99)        (1.14)        (1.07)           (1.19)        (1.10)        (1.19)
                 Average Absolute         1.59             2.68           1.54          2.60          1.95             3.04          1.99          2.63
                    t—Adjusted           (1.1])            (1.35)        (1.15)        (1.31)        (1.24)           (1.38)        (1.24)        (1.33)
                                        -.00271       -                           -                               -
                                                           .00321    -.00280           .00345    -.00124              .00163    -.00047       -.00148
                        eaii
                                        (.00279)      (.00275)       (.00288)     (.00294)       (.00264)         (.00261)      (.00266)      (.00236)
                 Average Absolute       0.00306       0.00343        0.00314      0.00366        0.00223          0.00234       0.00201       0.00220
January 1978-        Intercept
December 1982
                 Average Absolute         1.26             1.45           1.26          1.50         0.92             0.99          0.83          0.91
                    1—statistic           (.8])            (.92)          (.88)         (.94)        (.73)            (.77)          (.66)        (.69)
                 Average Absolute         1.50             1.72           1.51          1.79         1.07              l.1(         0.94          1.04
                    t—Adjusled           (1.05)           (1.09)         (1.01)        (1. 12)       (.86)            (.95)         (.15)         (.78)
                      TABLE A2:    CORRELATIONS OF INTERCEPTS ACROSS ESTIMATION METHODS OF THE APT
                                                                     of APT)

                                         Number of factors: 10
                                         Numberof funds: 130
                                         Number of Securities Used in Estimation:     750


                                              SIMPLE CORRELATIONS                _______ RANK CORRELATIONS
                                             Restricted                                Restricted
                                    Maximum   Maximum Instrumental Principal  Maximum   Maximum Instrumental Principal
Sample Period                     Likelihood Likelihood Variable Components Likelihood Likelihood Variables Components
                   Maximum
                                    1.0000      .9989      .9814      .9547     1.0000       .9998    .9314    .6141
                 Likelihood
                 Restricted
January 1968-     Maximum            .9989     1.0000      .9801      .9465         .9998   1.0000    .9366    .6124
December 1972
                 Likelihood
                Instrumental         .9814      9801      1.0000      .9423         .9374    .9366   1.0000    .5228
                 Variables


                   Max imuin
                                    1.0000      .9996      .9872      .9787     1.0000       .9999    .6149    .5170
                 Likelihood
                 Restricted
January 1973-     Maximum            .9996    1.0000       .9870      .9744         .9999   1,0000    .6142    .5164
December 1977
                 Likelihood
                Ins trutnental
                                     .9812      .9870     1.0000      .9710         .6149    .6142   1.0000    .4330
                 Variables


                   Maximum
                                    1.0000      .9969      .8604      .8044     1.0000       .9994    .5062    .9468
                 Likelihood
                 Restricted
January 1918-     Maximum            .9969    1.0000       .8280
December 1982                                                         .7656         .9994   1.0000    .5035    .9459
                 Likelihood
                Instrumental
                                     .8604      .8280     1.0000      .8863         .5062    .5035   1.0000    .4982
                 Variables
    TABLE A3:    STATISTICS OF iNTERCEPTS ACROSS          NUMBER   OF SECURITIES USED IN ESTIMATING TIlE APT


                                 Number of factors: 10
                                 Estimation method: Maximum Likelihood
                                 Number of funds: 130

Sainple Period       Statistic                 30                              250                          750
                                      Raw           Excess            Raw             Excess      Raw              Excess
                                     Returns        Returns          Returns          Returns    Returns           Returns

                                    0.00185          -                            -
                       Flean                             .00081      .00152           .00292     .00268           - .00406
                                    (.00387)        (.00332)        (.00396)         (.00339)   (.00399)          (.00321)
                 Average Absolute   0.00318      0.00241           0.00284       0.00344        0.00351           0.00447
January 1968-        intercept
December 1972
                 Average Absolute     1.09               0.76         1.02             1.39       1.34              1.98
                    i-statistic       (.83)              (.59)        (.84)           (1.01)     (1.04)            (1.16)
                 Average Absolute     1.22           0.80             1.15             1.46       1.51              2.05
                    t-Adjusted        (.96)              (.64)        (.90)           (1.08)     (1.13)            (1.33)
         .
                                    - . 000                                      - .00652       - . 00223
                       Mean                      -1T4TöTi                                                            47i
                                    (.00448)     (.00375)           (.00354)      (.00346)      (.00313)          (.00300)
                 Average Absolute   0.00463     0.00639            0.00386       0.00667        0.00298           0.00483
January 1973-        Intercept
December 1977
                 Average Absolute     1.62               1.87         1.63             2.76       1.40              2.36
                    i—statistic       (.99)         (1.07)           (1.02)           (1.17)     (1.01)            (1.17)
                 Average Absolute     1.82           2.04            1.89              2.91       1.59              2.68
                    i—Adjusted       (1.15)         (1.19)          (1.21)            (1.24)     (1.17)            (1.35)
                                    0.00182     0.00087- .001T-.0O269                           -.0027i           -.00321
                       Mean
                                    (.00332)    (.00321)           (.00273)      (.00260)       (.00279)          (.00275)
                 Average Absolute   0.00299     0.00246            0.00245       0.00302        0.00306           0.00343
January 1978-        Intercept
December 1982
                 Average Absolute     0.95           0.70            0.89              1.12       1.26              1.45
                    i-statistic       (.70)          (.55)           (.69)             (75)       (.87)             (.92)
                 Average Absolute     1.07           0.81            1.02              131        1.51              1.72
                    i-Adjusted        (.78)          (.65)           (.84)             (89)      (1.05)            (1.09)
        TABLE A1i:   CORRELATIONS OF INTERCEPTS ACROSS     NUMBER OF   SECURITiES USED    iN ESTIMATING TIlE APT


                                   Number of factors: 10
                                   Estimation Method: Maximum Likelihood
                                   Number of funds: 130


                                        SiMPLE CORRELATIONS                                       RANK CORRELATIONS


Sample Period                         2            ?2          L                                                      7
                        30          1.0000         .5920       .6137                     1.0000            .8618      .8348
January 1968-
December 1972
                       250           .5920     1.0000          .9769                      .8618        1.0000         .9605

                       30
                       —            1.0000         .9813       .9708                     1.0000            .6908      .7463
January 1973-
December 1977
                       2             .9813     I   .0000       .9836                      .6908        1   .0000      .9047

                       30
                       —            1.0000         .2403       .0903                     1.0000            .8742      .8468
January 1978-
December 1982
                       -9            .2403     1.0000          .9612                      .8742        1.0000         .9549
                                        References
ADMATI, ANAT R. AND PAUL C. PFLEIDERER [19853, "Interpreting the Factor Risk
     Premia in the Arbitrage Pricing Theory: Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 35,
     pp. 191-105.
ADMATI. ANAT R. AND STEPHEN A. Ross [1985], "Measuring Investment Performance
     in a Rational Expectations Model," Journal of Business, Vol. 58, pp. 1-26.
ARNOTT, ROBERT D. [10803, "Cluster Analysis and Stock Price Movements," Financial
     Analysts Journal, Vol. 3, pp. 56-62.
BANZ. ROLF [1081]. "The Relationship Between Return and Market Value of Common
       Stocks," Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 0, pp. 3-18.
BASU, S. [1977], "Investment Performance of Common Stocks in Relation to their Price-
       Earnings Ratios: A Test of Market Efficiency." Journal of Finance, Vol. 32. Pp.
         663-682.
BLACK, FISCHER, MICHAEL C. JENSEN AND MYRON SCHOLES [1972], "The Capital
       Asset Pricing Model: Some Empirical Tests." In Michael C. Jensen, Studies in the
       Theory of Capital Markets, New York: Praeger.
BLACK. FISCHER AND MYRON SCHOLEs [1974], "The Effects of Dividend Yields and
         Dividend Policy on Cominoit Stock Prices and Returns," Journal of Financial
         Economics, Vol. 1. pp. 1-22.
BLtTME. MARSHALL E. AND IRWIN FRIEND [1973], "A New Look at the Capital Asset
      Pricing Model," Journal of Finance, Vol. 28, pp. 19-34.
BLUME, MARSHALL E. AND ROBERT F. STAMBATJGH [1983], "Biases in Computed
      Returns: An Application to the Size Effect," Journal of Financial Economics, Vol.
      12. pp. 387-404.
BREEN, BILL. RAy! JAGANNATHAN AND RONI OFFER [1984], "Market Timing and
       Investment Performance - A Comment," Working Paper 111. Banking Research
       Center. Kellogg Graduate School of Management, Northwestern University.
BROWN. STEPHEN J. AND MARK T. WEINSTEIN [1983], "A New Approach to Testing
     Arbitrage Pricing Models: The Bilinear Paradigm," Journal of Finance, Vol. 28,
     pp. 711-743.
CANNISTRARO, RICHARD S. [1073], "The Predictive Ability of Price/Earnings Ratios
      for Determining Risk-Adjusted Performance of Common Stocks," Unpublished,
      Sloan School of Management, MIT.
CHAMBERLAIN, GARY [1983], "Funds, Factors, and Diversification in Arbitrage Pricing
     Models," Econometrica, Vol. 51, pp. 1305-1323.
CHAMBERLAIN, GARY AND MICHAEL ROTHSCHILD [19831, "Arbitrage, Factor Structure
        and Mean-Variance Analysis on Large Asset Markets," Econometrica, Vol. 51, pp.
        128 1-1304.

CHEN, NAI-Fu [1983], "Some Empirical Tests of the Theory of Arbitrage Pricing," Journal
       of Finance, Vol. 38, pp. 1393-1414.

                                            1
CHEN, NAI-FU AND JONATHAN E. INGERSOLL JR. [1983], "Exact Pricing in Linear
       Factor Models with Infinitely Many Assets: A Note," Journal of Finance, Vol. 38,
       pp. 985-088.
CONNOR, GREGORY [1984], "A Unified Beta Pricing Theory," Journal of Economic The-
     ory, Vol. 34, pp. 13-31.
      —-—---.—[1085], "An Intertemporal Equilibrium Beta Pricing Model." Unpublished,
       Kellogg Graduate School of Management, Northwestern University.
CONNOR, GREGORY AND ROBERT A. KORAJCZYK [1984]. "Performance Measurement
     with the Arbitrage Pricing Theory: A New Framework for Analysis," Unpublished,
     Kellogg Graduate School of Management, Northwestern University.
DEMPSTER, ARTHUR P., N.M. LAIRD AND DONALD B. RUBIN [1977], "Maximum
      Likelihood from Incomplete Data via the E-M Algorithm," Journal of the Royal
      Statistical Society, Vol. Series B 39, pp. 1-38.
DHRYME5, PHOEBUS J., IRWIN FRIEND, MUSTAFA M. GULTEKIN AND N. BULENT
     GULTEKIN [1985], "An Empirical Examination of the Implications of Arbitrage
        Pricing Theory," Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 9, pp. 73-99.
DHRYMES, PHOEBUS J., IRWIN FRIEND AND N. BTJLENT GTJLTEKIN [1984], "A Crit-
        ical Reexamination of the Empirical Evidence on the Arbitrage Pricing Theory,"
        Journal of Finance, Vol. 3, pp. 323-346.
DYBVIG, PHILIP H. [1983], "An Explicit Bound on Deviations from APT Pricing in a
      Finite Economy," Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 12, pp. 483-496.
DYBVIG. PHILIP H. AND STEPHEN A. ROSS [1981]. "The Simple Analytics of Perfor-
      mance Measurement," Unpublished, Yale University.
           [1983], "Yes, The APT Is Testable," Unpublished, Yale University.
FAMA, EUGENE F. [1984], "Term Premiums in Bond Returns," Journal of Financial
        Economics, Vol. 13, pp. 529-54G.
FAMA. EUGENE F. AND JAMES D. MACBETH [1073], "Risk, Return, and Equilibrium:
       Some Empirical Tests," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81, pp. 607-636.
FARRELL, J . L. [1974], "Analyzing Covariation of Returns to Determine Homogeneous
      Stock Groupings," Journal of Business, Vol. 47, pp. 186-207.
FEENEY. GEORGE J. AND DONALD D. HESTER [1967], "Stock market Indices: A
      Principal Components Analysis." In Donald D. Hester and James Tobin, Risk
      Aversion and Portfolio Choice, New York: John Wiley and Sons.
FIRm, MICHAEL A. [1977], "The Investment Performance of Unit Trusts in the Period
       1965-1975," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 7, pp. 311-333.
FRIEND, IRWIN, MARSHALL E. BLUME AND JEAN CROCKETT [1970], Mutual Funds
       and Other Institutional Investors: A New Perspective, New York: McGraw-Hill.
GEHR JR., ADAM [1975], "Some Tests of the Arbitrage Pricing Theory," Journal of the
      Midwest Finance Association, Vol. , pp. 91-105.

                                           2
GIBBONS, MICHAEL R. [1982], "Multivariate Tests of Financial Models: A New Ap-
     proach," Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 10, pp. 3-27.
            [1983], "Empirical Examination of the Return Generating Process of the
      Arbitrage Pricing Theory," Unpublished, Graduate School of Business, Stanford
         University.
GRINBLATT, MARK AND SHERIDAN TITMAN [10831, "Factor Pricing in a Finite Econ-
      omy," Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 12, pp. 405-507.
      ----——--—[1084], "The Relationship Between Mean-Variance Efficiency and Arbitrage
         Pricing," Working Paper 4-83. Graduate School of Management, UCLA.
              —[1985]. "Portfolio Performance Evaluation: Old Issues and New Insights,"
         Working Paper 16-84, Graduate School of Management, UCLA.
HAGGLUND, GOSTA [1982], "Factor Analysis by Instrumental Variables Methods," Psy-
     chometrika. Vol. 47, pp. 209-221.
HANSEN. LARS P. [1082], "Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of-Moments
         Estimators," Econometrica, Vol. 50, pp. 1020-1054.
HSIEH. DAVID A. [1083]. "A Heteroscedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator
       for Time Series Regressions," Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 22, pp. 281-200.
HTJBERMAN. GUR [1082], "A Simple Approach to Arbitrage Pricing Theory," Journal of
      Economic Theory, Vol. 28, pp. 183-191.
HUGHES, PATRICIA [1082], "A Test of the Arbitrage Pricing Theory," Unpublished, Uni-
        versity of British Columbia.
INGERSOLL JR.. JONATHAN E. [1084]. "Some Results in the Theory of Arbitrage Pric-
      ing." Journal of Finance, Vol. 39, pp. 1021-1030.
JAGANNATHAN, RAVI AND ROBERT A. KORAJCZYK [19841, "Assessing The Market
        Timing Performance of Managed Portfolios," Working Paper 118, Banking Re-
        search Center, Kellogg Graduate School of Management, Northwestern University.
JENSEN, MICHAEL C. [1968], "The Performance of Mutual Funds in the Period 1945-
      1964," Journal of Finance, Vol. 23, pp. 389-416.
     ——-—--[1069]. "Risk, the Pricing of Capital Assets, and the Evaluation of Invest-
      ment Portfolios," Journal of Business, Vol. 42, pp. 167-247.
            [1072], "Optimal Utilization of Market Forecasts and the Evaluation of In-
      vestment Portfolio Performance." In G. P. Szego and Karl Shell, Mathematical
      Methods in Investment and Finance, Amsterdam: North Holland.
JOBSON, J.D. AND BOB M. KORKIE [1982], "Potential Performance and Tests of
        Portfolio Efficiency," Journal of Finincial Economics, Vol. 10, pp. 433-466.
KING, BENJAMIN F. [1066], "Market and Industry Factors in Stock Price Behavior,"
        Journal of Business, Vol. 39, pp. 139-190.
LAWLEY, D.N. AND A.E. MAXWELL [1971], Factor Analysis as a Statistical Method,
     New York: Elsevier.

                                            3
LEEMANN, BRUCE N. AND DAVID M. MODEST [1985a}, "The Empirical Foundations
     of the Arbitrage Pricing Theory I: The Empirical Tests," Unpublished, Graduate
     School of Business, Columbia University.
———-—-----———---[1985b], "The Empirical Foundations of the Arbitrage Pricing Theory H:
         The Optimal Construction of Basis Portfolios," Unpublished, Graduate School of
         Business, Columbia University.
               [1985c], "Temporal Aggregation and the Optimal Construction of Basis
         Portfolios," Unpublished, Graduate School of Business, Columbia University.
LINTNER, JOHN [1965], The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection of Risky In-
         vestments in Stock Portfolios and Capital Budgets," Review of Economics and
         Statistics, Vol. 47, pp. 13-37.
LITZENBERGER, ROBERT H. AND KRISHNA RAMASWAMY [1979], "The Effects of Div-
         idends on Coinnion Stock Prices: Theory and Empirical Evidence," Journal of
         Financial Economics, Vol. 7, pp. 163495.
MADANSKY, ALBER.T [1964], "Instrumental Variables in Factor Analysis," Psychometrika,
     Vol. 29, pp. 105-113.
MADANSKY, ALBERT AND TERRY MARSH [1985]. "The Factor Structure of Asset Re-
     turns: How Many Factors Are There and Which Ones Are Priced," Unpublished,
     Sloan School of Management. M.I.T.
MAINS, NORMAN E. [1977]. "Risk, the Pricing of Capital Assets, and the Evaluation of
       Investment Portfolios: Comment," Journal of Business, Vol. 50. pp. 371-384.
MARJcowITz, HARRY [1952], "Portfolio Selection," Journal of Finance, Vol. 7, pp. 77-91.
MAYEBS, DAVID AND EDWARD RICE [1979], "Measuring Portfolio Performance and
        Empirical Content of Asset Pricing Models," Journal of Financial Economics,
        Vol. 7, pp. 3-29.
MCDONALD, JOHN C. [1973]. "French Mutual fund Performance: Evaluation of Interna-
     tionally Diversified Portfolios." Journal of Finance, Vol. 28, pp. 1161-1180.
         —[1974], "Objectives and Performance of Mutual Funds, 1960-1969," Journal
     of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 9, pp. 311-333.
MILLER, RUPERT G. [1966], Simultaneous Statistical Inference, New York: McGraw-Hill.
MOsSIN, JAN [1966], "Equilibrium in a Capital Asset Market," Econometrica, Vol. 34.
        pp. 768-783.
PFLEIDERER, PAUL C. AND SUDIPTO BHATTARCHARYA [1983], "A Note on Perfor-
       mance Evaluation," Unpublished, Stanford University and the University of Cal-
       ifornia at Berkeley.
PFLEIDERER, PAUL C. AND PETER REISS [1983], "Testing the APT with Arbitrage
      Portfolios," Unpublished, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University.
REINGANUM, MARC R. [1081], "Misspecificitiou of Capital Asset Pricing: Empirical
      Anomolies Based on Earnings Yields and Market Values," Journal of Financial
        Economics, Vol. 9, pp. 19-46.

                                          4
       ———[1981], "The Arbitrage Pricing Theory: Some Empirical Results," Journal
       of Finance. Vol. 36, pp. 313-321.
ROLL, RICHARD W. [1077], "A Critique of the Asset Pricing Theory's Tests—Part I: On
       Past and Potential Testability of the Theory," Journal of Financial Economics,
       Vol. 4. pp. 120-176.
              [1078], "Ambiguity When Performance Is Measured By The Securities Mar-
       ket Line," Journal of Finance, Vol. 33, pp. 1051-69.
            —[1083], On Computing Mean Returns and the Small Firm Premium," Jour-
       nal of Financial Economics, Vol. 12, pp. 371-386.
ROLL, RICHARD W. AND STEPHEN A. Ross [1980], "An Empirical Investigation of
       the Arbitrage Pricing Theory," Journal of Finance. Vol. 35. pp. 1073-1103.
         -——-[1084], "A Critical Reexamination of the Empirical Evidence on the Arbi-
       trage Pricing Theory: A Reply," Journal of Finance, Vol. 39, pp. 347-350.
ROSENBERG, BARR AND VINAY MARATHE [1079], "Tests of Capital Asset Pricing Hy-
      potheses." In , Research in Finance: A Research Annual, Greenwich, Connecticut:
        JAI Press.
ROSS. STEPHEN A. [1076], "The Arbitrage Theory of Capital Asset Pricing," Journal of
       Economic Theory, Vol. 13. pp. 341-60.
             --[1077]. "Risk.Return. and Arbitrage." In Irwin Friend and James L. Bick-
       sler, Risk Return in Finance. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Ballinger.
SHANKEN, JAY [1982], "The Arbitrage Pricing Theory: Is It Testable?," Journal of Fi-
     nance. Vol. 37. pp. 1129-40.
            [1084]. "Multivariate Tests of the Zero-Beta CAPM." Unpublished, Grad-
     uate School of Business Administration. University of California Berkeley.
SHARPE, WILLIAM F. [1963], "A Simplified Model for Portfolio Analysis," Management
        Science, Vol. 0. pp. 277-03.
  __________-
               [1964]. "Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium Under Con-
        ditions of Risk," Journal of Finance, Vol. 19. pp. 425-42.
               [1966], "Mutual Fund Performance." Journal of Business. Vol. 39. pp. 119-
        138.
      —--—[1067], "Linear Programming Algorithm for Mutual Fund Portfolio Selec-
     tion." Management Science, Vol. 13, pp. 490-510.
STAMBATJGH, ROBERT F. [1082], "On the Exclusion of Assets from Tests of the Two
     Parameter Model," Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 10, pp. 235-68.
TREYNOR, JACK L. [1965], "How to Rate Management of Investment Funds," Harvard
     Business Review, Vol. 43, pp. 63-75.
TREYNOR, JACK L. AND F. MAzUY [1066], "Can Mutual Funds Outguess the Market,"
      Harvard Business Review, Vol. 44, pp. 131-136.
VERRECHIA, RoBERT [1980], "The Mayers-Rice Conjecture: A Cou.nterexapmle," Journal
      of Financial Economics, Vol. 8, pp. 87-100.
WHITE, HALBERT [1080], "A Heteroscedasticity-Consistent Covariance Estimator and a
      Direct Test for Heteroscedasticity," Econometrica, Vol. 48, pp. 817-38.

                                          5
