                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      CONGLOMERATE INDUSTRY CHOICE AND PRODUCT DI˙FFERENTIATION

                                           Gerard Hoberg
                                          Gordon M. Phillips

                                         Working Paper 17221
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17221


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2011




This paper entirely replaces a previous version titled "Conglomerate Industry Spanning". We thank
Merih Sevilir, Denis Sosyura and seminar participants at Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus
University, Stanford University, Tilberg University, University of Illinois and the University of Mannheim
for helpful comments. All errors are the authors alone. All rights reserved. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Gerard Hoberg and Gordon M. Phillips. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Conglomerate Industry Choice and Product Di˙fferentiation
Gerard Hoberg and Gordon M. Phillips
NBER Working Paper No. 17221
July 2011, Revised February 2012
JEL No. G34,L1,L22,L25

                                              ABSTRACT

We use text-based computational analysis of business descriptions from 10-Ks to examine in which
industries conglomerates are most likely to operate and to understand conglomerate valuations. We
find that conglomerates are more likely to operate in industry pairs that are closer together in the product
space and in industry pairs that have profitable opportunities "between" them. Conglomerate firms
have lower stock market valuations than matched single-segment firms when their products are easier
to replicate with single-segment firms. Conglomerate firms have stock market premiums when they
have higher product differentiation and produce in more profitable industries. These findings are consistent
with successful conglomerate firms having higher product differentiation and lower cost entry into
profitable markets when operating in strategically chosen industry pairs.


Gerard Hoberg
Robert H. Smith School of Business
University of Maryland
4423 Van Munching Hall
College Park, MD 20742
ghoberg@rhsmith.umd.edu

Gordon M. Phillips
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
Citigroup Center
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
Gordon.Phillips@marshall.usc.edu
   Why do firms operate in multiple industries? This question has been the focus
of much research that takes the industries that firms operate in as given, and exam-
ines outcomes such as valuations and investment decisions. Existing explanations for
multiple industry production based on investment decisions include advantages of in-
ternal capital markets (Stein (1997)), agency problems (Lang and Stulz (1994) Berger
and Ofek (1995), Denis, Denis, and Sarin (1997), Scharfstein and Stein (2000)), con-
glomerate learning about ability (Matsusaka (2001)) and managerial talent that can
be used in different industries (Maksimovic and Phillips (2002)). This literature does
not examine why conglomerate firms span some industries and not others.

   We take a different approach in this study. We use fundamental product mar-
ket characteristics to analyze in which industries conglomerate firms produce. We
examine whether conglomerate firms may create value through operating in related
industries that allow for synergies, new products to be created and potential entry
into new markets. The idea we examine is simple and is related to that of Rhodes-
Kropf and Robinson (2008) who examine the importance of asset complementarities
in mergers. While Robinson and Rhodes-Kropf examine firm complementarities,
we examine potential industry complementarities. We ask whether certain industry
characteristics - distinct from vertical relatedness - make operating in two different
industries valuable? Are industries related in certain ways that make it likely that
firms will find it optimal to produce in multiple industries? Apple Computer is an
example of a firm that now produces in cell phones, computers, and digital music -
industries that are today very related to each other. It faces some firms that oper-
ate individually in each of these industries but more firms today are attempting to
operate in these related industries.

   We use text-based analysis of conglomerate and pure play business descriptions
from 10-Ks filed with the SEC to examine in which industries conglomerates are most
likely to operate and to explore conglomerate valuations in cross-section. Following
Hoberg and Phillips (2010a), we convert firm product text into a spatial represen-
tation of the product market. In this framework, each firm, and each industry, has
a product location based on words that allow measurement of how close product
markets are to each other. Our framework also allows an assessment of which in-


                                               1
dustries in the product market space are “between” any given pair of industries,
where “between” industries are industries that are closer to each industry of a given
industry pair than the industry pair is to each other. We control for other measures
of relatedness including vertical integration in assessing the impact of our text-based
measures of relatedness.

        We find that conglomerate pairs are more likely to operate in industry pairs
that are closer together in the product space, industry pairs that have profitable
opportunities between them, and in industries with lower within-industry product
similarity. Conglomerate firms are also less likely to produce in industries that span
other competitive, low-value industries. These findings are consistent with product
synergies, where conglomerates producing in two related profitable industries may
be able to enter profitable industries that are between them.

        We use text-based analysis to assess conglomerate valuation. Our primary contri-
bution is to redefine the universe of competitor single-segment firms used to construct
conglomerate valuation benchmarks, and then to use best-fit vocabulary matching
of 10-K business descriptions of single-segment firms to conglomerate firms assigning
differential weights to each single-segment firm. We also consider enhanced bench-
marks that additionally seek to match the conglomerate to single-segment firms along
five key accounting dimensions including profitability and growth. We present strong
evidence that our weighted benchmarks provide economically large improvements in
the accuracy of conglomerate reconstructions.

        Once we have these best matches, we then seek to explain differences between
the valuation of the matched firms and the actual conglomerate valuation. Our pri-
mary focus is then on understanding cross-sectional variation in conglomerate excess
valuations - not in assessing the average discount or premium of conglomerate firms.
1
    We find that, on average, conglomerates do not trade at a discount relative to
    1
     For articles on average or median discount of conglomerate firms see Wernerfelt and Mont-
gomery (1988), Lang and Stulz (1994), Berger and Ofek (1995), Comment and Jarrell (1995),
Servaes (1996), Lins and Servaes (1999), Rajan, Servaes, and Zingales (2000) and Lamont and Polk
(2002) find evidence of a diversification discount. Laeven and Levine (2007) find discount in finan-
cial conglomerates. However this average discount has been shown to be driven by self-selection
by Campa and Kedia (2002), Graham, Lemmon, and Wolf (2002), and Villalonga (2004b) and by
data problems by Villalonga (2004a) and merger accounting by Custodio (2010). See Maksimovic
and Phillips (2007) for a detailed survey.


                                                       2
text-matched single segment firms. However, this average effect masks important
cross-sectional variation. We find that conglomerates that are more difficult to re-
construct using pure plays tend to trade at modest premia and those conglomerates
that are most easy to replicate trade at discounts. We also find that conglomerate
valuation is higher when conglomerates span high-value industries. These findings
are consistent with conglomerate firms producing in related industries that have
product synergies when these segments are combined, and in industries that are
more difficult to enter for competing single-segment firms.

   The main contributions of our paper are two-fold. Our first main contribution is
to use word similarity from firm product descriptions to understand in which indus-
tries conglomerate firms choose to produce. We calculate several unique relatedness
measures across and within industries. We calculate within industry similarity to
measure how different firms are within SIC classifications and to capture potential
product differentiation. We also calculate pairwise industry relatedness to measure
the similarity of industries to each other. The final measure we calculate is the num-
ber of industries “between” two industries, where an industry is between two others
if it is closer in similarity to each of the two industries individually than they are to
each other. This last measure captures potential competition between two industry
segments and also the potential for multiple industry firms to introduce new products
at low cost in those product spaces between their operating segments.

   Our second main contribution is to further explain cross-sectional conglomerate
valuation. We use text-based analysis to form a more accurate matched set of pure-
play competitors such that each firm and each segment has its own allocated set
of competitors. This new “network” method of competition draws on a firm- and
segment-centric notion of competition analogous to a Facebook circle of friends. In
order to find competitor firms, we use the text similarity of firms to each reported
segment of the conglomerate firm and then weight these firms by how similar they
are to the overall multiple industry firm. We weight these firms differentially so that
similar firms receive a higher weight based on text-based distances. Both the set of
weights and overall goodness of fit of the pure-play competitors in matching the con-
glomerate firm provide information about the competitive structure a conglomerate


                                                 3
faces in its respective segments.

   Our measure of how difficult a conglomerate is to replicate using pure play firms
(which is derived based on the R2 from the vocabulary decomposition) is a more
accurate measure of the conglomerate’s overall competitive position. Firms that
cannot be easily replicated are highly differentiated, and likely face less competition
for their overall product offerings. We find that conglomerate firms that are more
difficult to replicate and that span high-value industries are more valuable than
conglomerates that are easier to replicate and span low-value industries.

   We add to the existing literature in two central ways. First, we examine which
industries conglomerates are more likely to operate within and we are the first to
explore the link between conglomerate structure and the overall industry structure
surrounding the each conglomerate. Previous research has examined the investment
decisions of conglomerate firms including Shin and Stulz (1998), Rajan, Servaes, and
Zingales (2000), Scharfstein and Stein (2000) and Maksimovic and Phillips (2002).
Maksimovic and Phillips examine how long-run industry characteristics effect ac-
quisition decisions by conglomerate and single-segment firms. Hann, Ogneva, and
Ozbas (2011) show that producing in different industries lowers a firm’s cost of cap-
ital consistent with a coinsurance effect. We examine which industry factors explain
the distribution of conglomerate industry segments.

   Second, with respect to conglomerate valuation, many authors have examined
whether diversified firms trade at an average discount relative to single-segment com-
petitors. While we do show that the average discount disappears by finding better
matched pure play firms, this is not our main contribution. Our main contribution
relative to this literature is to show that, cross-sectionally, the discount varies with
industry characteristics, especially the ability to easily replicate a conglomerate using
pure plays.

   Our paper proceeds as follows. In the next section we discuss our new measures of
industry relatedness and spanning and how our paper provides tests of the potential
for product market synergies by focusing on within and cross-industry similarity. In
Section 2, we present our methodology and how we calculate our new text based


                                                 4
measures of within and cross-industry similarity. Section 3 contains the results of
our tests of how industry relatedness and spanning affect conglomerate production.
Section 4 analyzes cross-sectional conglomerate valuation and Section 5 concludes.


I    Industry Relatedness and Spanning

We ask whether there are certain industry characteristics - distinct from vertical
relatedness - that make operating in two different industries valuable. The central
hypothesis we examine is whether the potential for product market synergies and
industry competition influence in which industries conglomerate firms produce. Our
foundation is similar to that of Rhodes-Kropf and Robinson (2008) and Hoberg and
Phillips (2010b) who examine whether asset complementarities and synergies are
important for mergers. Going beyond the previous analysis, we also consider the
role of opportunities and competition in surrounding and between industries.

    We consider whether the industries a given industry pair ”spans” influences
whether conglomerate firms produce within that industry pair. Industry spanning is
the idea that there may be a product space or industry that is more similar to each
industry in a given industry pair than the two industries in the pair are similar to
each other. In a spatial sense, such an industry lies between the two industries in the
pair. We hypothesize that a conglomerate is more likely to produce in a particular
industry pair if that pair spans other highly valued, less competitive industries. Pro-
ducing in such an industry pair may allow the multiple industry firm to more easily
enter and produce products in these highly-valued concentrated product markets.

    We generate industry pair characteristics using text-based analysis of business
descriptions from 10-Ks filed with the SEC. We then examine these industry charac-
teristics to understand in which industries conglomerates are most likely to operate
and to understand cross-sectional conglomerate valuation. We discuss the way we
gather and process these 10-K product descriptions in the next section. In this
section we introduce conceptually the variables we use to capture how industries
are related to each other. We consider these new measures in addition to existing
industry-relatedness measures including vertical integration.


                                                5
    We construct three new variables that allow us to assess how every pair of in-
dustries relates to one another. In particular, we measure how far apart industries
are in the product space, how heterogeneous their products are within-industry, and
the extent to which other industries lie between the given industry pair in the prod-
uct space. To construct industry relatedness measures, we begin by using the the
relatedness of each pairwise set of firms that operate either within an industry or
across any given industry pair. These product relatedness measures are constructed
for each pair of firms using the words from each firm’s business description from
their 10K filed with the SEC. We discuss the specific word relatedness measures we
use - the cosine similarity measure - later in the subsequent data and methodology
section.

    One crucial part of our analysis is to identify industry membership. Given that we
will be comparing our text-based measures with existing methods, we begin by using
the existing Compustat segment-level industry designations to identify which firms
are conglomerates and to assess conglomerate industry configurations. To construct
industry attributes, we focus on single-segment firms and omit the words from the
product descriptions from the conglomerate firms themselves, to avoid producing a
mechanistic relation. We then use the Compustat segment definitions to examine how
the observed conglomerate industry configurations relate to these text-based industry
attributes from single-segment firms. Because conglomerate segments are reported
using SIC codes, our initial analysis relates to industry configurations and their
incidence is based on three-digit SIC code industry definitions. In later analysis, we
relax this initial reliance on SIC-3 industry definitions when exploring conglomerate
valuations and benchmark reconstructions.2

    The first industry relatedness variable we calculate is Across Industry Similarity
(AIS). This measures how close industry i and industry j are in the product space.
Suppose industry i has Ni pure play firms, and industry j has Nj pure play firms.
Across industry similarity is the average textual cosine similarity of all pairwise
   2
     Due to the high dimensionality of the calculations underlying the initial industry spanning
tests, we do not consider alternative industry definitions for this part of our analysis as doing so
would render our calculations infeasible due to the exponential growth in the number of industry
pairwise permutations.



                                                       6
permutations of the Ni and Nj firms, where textual similarity is based on word
vectors from firm business descriptions (see Section II.C for a discussion of the cosine
similarity method). Simply put, it captures the proportion of product words the two
firms in a pair have in common. Each pair in a permutation includes one firm from
industry i and one from industry j and we average the cosine similarity measures
across all such pairs from the two industries. The AIS measure is meant to capture the
similarities between products that two industries produce. Industries that are closer
together share similar sets of words in their constituent firm product descriptions
and are potentially likely to share asset complementarities.

   Second, we measure Within Industry Similarity (WIS). Suppose industry i has
Ni pure play firms. Within industry similarity is the average cosine similarity of
the business descriptions for all pairwise permutations of these Ni firms. Firms
in industries with higher within industry similarity are likely to have less unique
products, and likely face more significant competition from their rivals due to the
absence of product differentiation. When assessing this measure for a given industry
pair, we compute WIS as the average within industry similarity of the two industries
i and j.

   Third, we also measure the fraction of other industries between a pair of industries
i and j, which we label Between Industries. Because our text based measures give all
firms, and hence all industries, a unique location on a high dimensional unit sphere,
we can use geometry to assess whether other industries lie in the space between a
given industry pair. This novel measure can be used to examine whether conglom-
erates benefit from business opportunities lying between their segments, perhaps
through asset complementarities. The AIS measure discussed above is instrumental
in computing the fraction of industries between a given pair. Where AISi,j denotes
the Across Industry Similarity of industries i and j, we define a third industry k as
being between industries i and j if the following relationship holds.

                   AISk,i ≤ AISi,j       AND        AISk,j ≤ AISi,j                 (1)

The fraction of industries between a given pair of industries i and j is therefore the
number of industries k (excluding i and j) satisfying this condition divided by the

                                                7
total number of industries in the database in the given year (excluding i and j). We
also consider a dummy variable identifying industry pairs that have zero industries
lying between them.

   We use these measures to test the following three hypotheses:

   H1: Cross-Industry Similarity: Conglomerate firms are more likely to produce in
two industries that have high cross-industry similarity. These firms are likely easier
to manage and have more potential synergies.

   We test this hypothesis by examining the number of conglomerate firms that
operate in each pairwise set of industries and examine whether this number of con-
glomerate firms is increasing in the pair’s across industry similarity (AIS).

   H2: Within-Industry Similarity:     Conglomerate firms are less likely to produce
in industries that have high within industry similarity, or industries with high com-
petition.

   We test this hypothesis by examining whether the number of conglomerate firms
operating in a pair is decreasing when the industry pair has a high within industry
similarity (WIS).

   H3: Between-Industry Spanning: Conglomerate firms are more likely to operate
in an industry pair when the pair of industries spans more high-value, less competitive
industries.

   We examine the fraction of industries that are between each pairwise combination
of industries and test whether conglomerate firms producing in a particular pairwise
combination increase when the industries spanned or between these industries are
highly valued and less competitive.

   H4: Conglomerate Valuations and Spanning:         Conglomerate valuation will in-
crease the harder the conglomerate firm is to replicate with pure-play single-segment
firms. Conglomerate valuation will increase relative to benchmark valuation if it
spans industries that are highly valued.




                                                8
II      Data and Methodology

In this section we describe our conglomerate database, the construction of key text-
based variables used to examine where conglomerates produce in the product space,
and our identification of pure-play, single-segment conglomerate competitors.


A     The COMPUSTAT Industry Sample

We construct our COMPUSTAT sample using the industrial annual files to identify
the universe of publicly traded firms, and the COMPUSTAT segment files to identify
which firms are conglomerates, and the industry of each segment. We define a
conglomerate as a firm having operations in more than one SIC-3 industry in a given
year. To identify segments operating under a conglomerate structure, we start with
the segment files, which we clean to ensure we are identifying product-based segments
instead of geographic segments. We keep conglomerate segments that are identified
as business segments or operating segments. We only keep segments which report
positive sales. We aggregate segment information into 3 digit SIC codes and only
identify firms as conglomerate firms when they report two or more three digit SIC
codes. We identify 22,252 unique conglomerate firm years from 1996 to 2008 (we limit
our sample to these years due to required coverage of text-based variables), which
have 62,058 unique conglomerate-segment-years. We also identify 56,491 unique pure
play firm-years (firms with a single segment structure).

     When we examine how conglomerates change from year to year, we further re-
quire that a conglomerate exist in the previous year. This requirement reduces our
sample to 18,589 unique conglomerate years having 53,126 segment-years. Because
we use pure play firms to assess industry characteristics that might be relevant to
the formation of conglomerates, we also discard conglomerate observations if they
have at least one segment operating in an industry for which there are no pure play
benchmarks in our sample. We are left with 15,373 unique conglomerate firm-years
with 40,769 unique segment conglomerate firm-years. This final sample covers 2,552
unique three digit SIC industry-years. As there are 13 years in our sample, this is
roughly 196 industries per year.


                                               9
        We also consider a separate database of pairwise permutations of the SIC-3
industries in each year. We use this database to assess which industry pairs are
most likely to be populated by conglomerates that span the given pair of industries.
This industry-pair-year database has 312,240 total industry pair x year observations
(roughly 24,018 industry pair permutations per year).


B        The Sample of 10-Ks

The methodology we use to extract 10-K text follows Hoberg and Phillips (2010a) and
Hoberg and Phillips (2010b). The first step is to use web crawling and text parsing
algorithms to construct a database of business descriptions from 10-K annual filings
on the SEC Edgar website from 1996 to 2008. We search the Edgar database for
filings that appear as “10-K,” “10-K405,” “10-KSB,” or “10-KSB40.” The business
descriptions appear as Item 1 or Item 1A in most 10-Ks. The document is then
processed using APL for text information and a company identifier, CIK.3 Business
descriptions are legally required to be accurate, as Item 101 of Regulation S-K re-
quires firms to describe the significant products they offer, and these descriptions
must be updated and representative of the current fiscal year of the 10-K.


C        Word Vectors and Cosine Similarity

We employ methods used in Hoberg and Phillips (2010a) and Hoberg and Phillips
(2010b) to construct word vectors and measure similarity. The first step is to form
word vectors for each firm based on the text in product descriptions of each firm.

        To construct each firm’s word vector, we first omit common words that are used
by more than 5% of all firms. We then consider the universe of all product words in
the 10-K universe in each year. Let Mt denote the number of such words. For a firm
i in year t, we define its word vector Wi,t as a binary Mt -vector, having the value
one for a given element when firm i uses the given word in its year t 10-K business
description. We then normalize each firm’s word vector to unit length, resulting in
    3
    We thank the Wharton Research Data Service (WRDS) for providing us with an expanded
historical mapping of SEC CIK to COMPUSTAT gvkey, as the base CIK variable in COMPUSTAT
only contains the most recent link.



                                                 10
the normalized word vector Ni,t .

    Importantly, each firm is represented by a unique vector of length one in an Mt -
dimensional space. Therefore, all firms reside on a Mt -dimensional unit sphere, and
each firm has a known location. This spatial representation of the product space
allows us to construct variables that more richly measure industry topography, for
example, to identify other industries that lie between a given pair of industries.

    The cosine similarity for any two word vectors Ni,t and Nj,t is their dot product
hNi,t · Nj,t i. Cosine similarities are bounded in the interval [0,+1] when both vectors
are normalized to have unit length, and when they do not have negative elements,
as will be the case for the quantities we consider here. If two firms have similar
products, their dot product will tend towards 1.0 while dissimilarity moves the cosine
similarity toward zero. We use the “cosine similarity” method because it is widely
used in studies of information processing (see Sebastiani (2002) for a summary of
methods). It measures the angle between two word vectors on a unit sphere.


D     Conglomerate Competitors

We use our text-based analysis of firms to redefine and augment traditional iden-
tification of conglomerate competitors, which allows us to construct new measures
of excess conglomerate valuation. As a baseline calculation, we begin by following
the existing literature (Lang and Stulz (1994) and Berger and Ofek (1995)) and we
consider existing pure-play single-segment firms as identified the Compustat segment
tapes as the set of competitors for each segment of a conglomerate. We refer to this
set of competitors as the Compustat set of rivals, and this set includes single-segment
firms with the same 3-digit SIC code as the reported Compustat segment. We then
consider several enhancements. First, rather than computing valuation ratios as
the simple median of all candidate single-segment rivals for a given conglomerate
segment, we weight each single segment firm using information from a vocabulary
decomposition of the conglomerate relative to the vocabulary used by all pure play
candidate rivals in their business descriptions. Firms with more words in common
with the conglomerate will thus have higher weights.



                                                11
    Our second augmentation is to expand the set of “pure-play” single-segment
rivals by adding the single-segment firms that are in the conglomerate’s VIC-7.06
industry as defined in Hoberg and Phillips (2010a). These firms have a high product
word cosine similarity score relative to the conglomerate firm and are likely rivals.
Importantly, the VIC-7.06 industry classification is equally as coarse as are SIC-3
industries, so our results are not due to any changes in industry coarseness. The
number of potential competitor benchmarks for each conglomerate segment Nit,bench
is thus either as large (if no pure play VIC-7.06 peers exist) or larger (if pure play
VIC-7.06 peers do exist) than the Compustat set of rivals. We refer to this method
as the “SIC+VIC Universe” universe.

    After identifying the potential competitors for each segment, we again weight
the potential firms based on the vocabulary decomposition to construct conglomer-
ate valuation benchmarks and excess valuation measures. We also consider further
enhancing the weighting scheme of the set of potential competitors so that pure
play benchmarks can match the conglomerate on accounting characteristics includ-
ing profitability and sales growth. We discuss these valuation metrics and how we
use them to construct excess valuation measures for each conglomerate firm fully
in Section IV when we examine the cross-sectional and time-series dimensions of
conglomerate valuation.


E    Conglomerate Restructuring

We examine whether our spatial industry variables can explain how conglomerates
restructure over time, and we classify restructuring in four different ways. Because
we consider the role of industry topography, the unit of observation for these vari-
ables is a pair of segments operating within a conglomerate. We define “Segment
Pair Disappears” as a dummy equal to one if the given pair does not exist in the
conglomerate’s structure in the following year. We then define “Segment Pair Likely
Sold or Closed” as a dummy equal to one if the given pair does not exist in the con-
glomerate’s structure in the following year, and the conglomerate has fewer segments
in year t + 1 relative to year t. We define “Segment Pair Likely Reclassified” as a
dummy equal to one if the given pair does not exist in the conglomerate’s structure

                                               12
in the following year, and the conglomerate has at least as many segments in year
t+1 relative to year t. Finally, we define “Segment Pair Likely Sold Off” as a dummy
equal to one if the given pair does not exist in the conglomerate’s structure in the
following year, and the conglomerate was the target of an acquisition of at least ten
percent of its assets in year t + 1. We define an analogous set of variables to assess
conglomerate segment pairs that newly appear in year t that were not part of the
conglomerate in year t − 1.


F    Control Variables and Vertical Integration

In addition to our three new industry similarity and relatedness variables, we include
control variables for industry size, vertical relatedness, and a dummy identifying
which industries are in the same two-digit SIC code. As we aim to examine conglom-
erate incidence rates across industry pairs, controlling for industry size is important.
For example, if conglomerates formed by randomly choosing among available pure
play firms in the economy, then the incidence of conglomerate spanning pairs would
be related to the product of the fraction of firms residing in industries i and j. There-
fore we define the Pair Likelihood if Random variable as the product (Fi xFj ), where
Fi is the number of pure play firms in industry i divided by the number of pure play
firms in the economy in the given year.

    We consider the Input/Output tables to assess whether conglomerates tend to
span vertically related industry pairs. The inclusion of this control is motivated by
studies examining vertically related industries and corporate policy and structure
including Fan and Goyal (2006), Kedia, Ravid, and Pons (2008), and Ahern and
Harford (2011). We consider the methodology described in Fan and Goyal (2006) to
identify vertically related industries. Based on three-digit SIC industries, we use the
“Use Table” of Benchmark Input-Output Accounts of the US Economy to compute,
for each firm pairing, the fraction of inputs that flow between each pair.

    Finally, we consider a dummy variable set equal to one if a given pair of three
digit SIC industries lies in the same two-digit SIC industry.




                                                13
G     Summary Statistics

Table I displays summary statistics for our conglomerate and pure play firms, and
industry pair databases. Panel A shows that conglomerate firms are generally larger
than the pure play firms in terms of total value of the firm, and they also generally
operate in markets that are more concentrated, as measured by their VIC-7.06 HHI.

    Panel B of the table compares randomly drawn pairs of SIC-3 industries to the
SIC-3 industries comprising a conglomerate configuration. The panel shows that a
randomly drawn pair of three digit SIC industries has 0.147 conglomerates having
segments operating in both industries of the given pair. Hence, the majority of
randomly chosen industries do not have conglomerates spanning them. The average
across industry similarity of random pairs is 0.017, which closely matches the average
firm similarity reported in Hoberg and Phillips (2010a). This quantity is nearly
double for actual conglomerates at 0.032, indicating that conglomerates are far less
diversified than previously thought. This conclusion is reinforced by comparing the
fraction of all other industries lying between the given pair, which is 32.5% for random
pairs, and just 9.7% for actual conglomerates. Conglomerate industry pairs reside
in regions of the product space that are substantially closer together than randomly
chosen industries. The average within industry similarity, intuitively, is much higher
at 0.086. This quantity is somewhat lower at .073 for actual conglomerates.

                               [Insert Table I Here]


    Table II displays the bivariate Pearson correlation coefficients for our key indus-
try pair variables. The key variable we examine in the next section is the number of
spanning conglomerate pairs. The first column of this table shows that this variable
is positively related to across industry similarity, and negatively related to within in-
dustry similarity and the fraction of industries between a given pair. Although these
univariate results hold for across industry similarity and within industry similarity,
multivariate results vary for the fraction of industries between variable (discussed
later). This is related to the relatively high observed pairwise correlation of -69.1%
between this variable and across industry similarity. Intuitively, industries that are
further away likely have more industries residing between them. Our later results

                                                14
will show that conglomerates are more likely to span industry pairs that have con-
centrated or high value industries residing in the product space between the given
pair, but not when competitive or low value industries do.

   The table also shows that the average HHI variable and the within industry
similarity variable are modestly correlated at -48.7%. This result is consistent with
findings in Hoberg and Phillips (2010a), and confirms that concentrated product
markets generally have more product differentiation. Aside from these modest to high
correlations, Table II shows that the other variables we consider have relatively low
correlations. This fact, along with our very large database of 312,240 observations,
indicates that multicollinearity is unlikely to be a concern in our analysis.

                              [Insert Table II Here]


   Table III displays the mean values of our three key text variables for various
conglomerate industry pairings. One observation is an industry pair permutation of
an actual conglomerate. In Panel A, we find that conglomerates populate industries
with across industry similarity of .0304, which is 79% higher than the 0.017 of ran-
domly chosen industry pairs. Conglomerates also tend to populate industries with
lower than average within industry similarity, and industries having a lower than
average number of other industries between them.

                              [Insert Table III Here]


   In Panel B, we report results for smaller conglomerates (two or three segments)
compared to those of larger conglomerates. The table suggests that larger conglom-
erates tend to cast a wider footprint across the product market space, as they have
lower across industry similarity. They also tend to reside in industries with more
industries residing between them, and industries that have higher within industry
similarity. In Panel C of Table III, we observe that most conglomerates (30,525) are
stable from one year to the next, although 3,259 reduce in size by one segment, and
600 reduce in size by two or more segments. Analogously, 4,741 increase in size by
one segment, and 1,644 increase in size by two segments.

   In Panel D, we observe that vertically related conglomerates have average across

                                               15
industry similarities that are close to the average for all conglomerate pairs. This
finding mirrors findings in Hoberg and Phillips (2010a), who show that industry
classifications based on business descriptions do not correlate with vertical relation-
ships (rather they focus on horizontal distances or economies of scope). In contrast,
across industry similarities are somewhat higher for industries having the same two
digit SIC code, as SIC codes are measures of horizontal relatedness. Both vertical
industries and those in the same two-digit SIC code also have fewer than average
industries between them.


III     Results: Conglomerate Spanning

In this section we examine whether we can predict whether conglomerates produce
in particular industry pairs. We test whether across industry similarity and within
industry similarity matter for the number of conglomerate firms producing in a par-
ticular industry pair.

   Table IV presents OLS regressions where each observation is a pair of three digit
SIC industries in a year derived from the set of all pairings of observed SIC-3 indus-
tries in the given year in the COMPUSTAT segment tapes. The dependent variable is
the Number of Conglomerates Spanning Pair, which is the number of conglom-
erates having segments in both industries associated with the given pair. Panel A
displays results based on the entire sample of industry pairs. Panel B displays results
for various subsamples that divide the overall sample based on the competitiveness
or the valuations of industries lying between the industry pair.

                              [Insert Table IV Here]


   Panel A shows that higher cross industry similarity increases the number of con-
glomerate firms producing in a particular industry, while average within industry
similarity decreases the conglomerate firms producing in a particular industry. Be-
cause within industry similarity and the average HHI are moderately correlated, we
examine their effects separately. The table shows that conglomerates broadly tend
to span more concentrated markets, ie, those with higher product differentiation and


                                               16
higher concentration. However, within industry similarity matters more and we in-
clude only this variable henceforth. Panel A also shows that the fraction of industries
between a given pair also matters, and its sign depends on the characteristics of the
industries between.

   Panels B and C show that when high value and concentrated industries are be-
tween, conglomerates span the pair more often. The opposite is true for competitive
low value industries. This result shows how industry boundaries can be crossed
and redrawn presumably by using asset complementarities to span technologies that
might permit entry into previously concentrated product markets.

   Table V examines how industry characteristics influence which industry pairs are
added to conglomerates in a given year. We consider raw segment additions for
growing or stable conglomerates, and we also consider the SDC mergers and acquisi-
tions database. This allows us to separately consider segments likely added through
growth, possible reclassification, or those potentially acquired in a transaction. One
observation is one pair of segments in an existing conglomerate in year t. We require
the conglomerate firm itself to exist in year t and year t + 1.

   The dependent variable varies by Panel. The dependent variable in Panel A is
the Number of Newly Added Conglomerates Spanning Pairs, which is the
number of conglomerates having new segments in both industries associated with a
given pair in a given year (where the conglomerate did not have this segment in the
previous year). In Panel B, we restrict attention to new segments in conglomerates
that previously had fewer segments in the previous year. Intuitively, these new
segments were likely added through acquisition or organic investment. In Panel
C, we restrict attention to new segments in conglomerates that previously had the
same or more segments in the previous year. Intuitively, these new segments were
likely added through reclassification of existing segments into different industries
(akin to a change of focus in product offerings). In Panel D, we restrict attention to
new segments in conglomerates that were the acquirer in an acquisition in the SDC
database for a transaction amounting to at least ten percent of the firm’s assets. The
independent variables include various measures of the product market features of the
industry pair, and within the industries comprising the pair.

                                               17
                               [Insert Table V Here]


   The results in Panel A of Table V show that segment pairs are likely to be added
if the across industry similarity is high. This result also has the largest coefficient if
the industries between two industry pairs are highly concentrated and highly valued
(and the lowest coefficient when the converse is true). This result is consistent with
conglomerate firms using two related industries to maximize asset complementari-
ties and to produce products in highly concentrated industries. We also see that
conglomerate firms are more likely to add segments when the fraction of industries
between the conglomerate pair high and the average within similarity is low. These
findings are present especially in concentrated and highly-valued industry pairs.

   The results in Panels B and D show that conglomerate segments are likely to be
obtained through growth or acquisition in these same concentrated and highly valued
industries. Conglomerate firms add segments in these industries when the industry
pair has high across industry similarity, a high fraction of industries between the
industry pair, and low average within industry similarity.

   The results in this table are consistent with conglomerates choosing to expand into
industries where (a) they face less competition, (b) have more high valued industries
lying between the industry pair, (c) have high cross industry similarity, and (d) low
within industry similarity. The results are consistent with conglomerates choosing
to expand into industries with the potential for new products and related-industry
synergy gains.

   Table VI examines how industry characteristics influence which industry pairs
disappear from conglomerates. Using raw segment changes and the SDC mergers
and acquisitions database, we examine when the segment pair is likely sold or closed
as well as potentially reclassified. One observation is one pair of segments in an
existing conglomerate in year t. We require the conglomerate firm itself to exist in
year t and year t + 1.

   The dependent variable again varies by Panel. In Panel A, the dependent variable
is Segment Pair Disappears, which is a dummy equal to one if the given pair
does not exist in the conglomerate’s structure in the following year. In Panel B, the

                                                 18
dependent variable is Segment Pair Likely Sold or Closed, which is a dummy
equal to one if the given pair does not exist in the conglomerate’s structure in the
following year, and the conglomerate has fewer segments in year t + 1 relative to
year t. In Panel C, the dependent variable is Segment Pair Likely Reclassified,
which is a dummy equal to one if the given pair does not exist in the conglomerate’s
structure in the following year, and the conglomerate has at least as many segments
in year t + 1 relative to year t. In Panel D, the dependent variable is Segment Pair
Sold Off, which is a dummy equal to one if the given pair does not exist in the
conglomerate’s structure in the following year, and the conglomerate was the target
of an acquisition of at least ten percent of its assets in year t + 1.

                               [Insert Table VI Here]


   The results in Panels A and B of Table VI show that segment pairs are less likely
to be sold or closed if the across industry similarity is high. This result also has the
largest coefficient if the industries between two industry pairs are highly concentrated
and highly valued (and the lowest coefficient when the converse is true). This result
is consistent with conglomerate firms using two related industries to maximize asset
complementarities and to produce products in highly concentrated industries.

   The results in Panel C show that segment pairs are more likely to be reclassified
when there are other industries between them. This result is consistent with these
pairs reclassifying in order to potentially enter the markets between the given pair.
For example, because the given conglomerate has technologies that produce goods
on either side of the between industry, it is likely that the given conglomerate has
access to potential low cost entry into the between industry.

   Given these strong results on which industries conglomerate firms choose to pro-
duce in and their link to potential strategic gains relating to concentration and
industry valuation, we now turn to the question of how industry composition affects
the cross-sectional variation in conglomerate valuation.




                                                 19
IV          Conglomerate Valuation

In this section, we explore whether information in firm product descriptions can be
used to construct more informative pure-play or single-segment benchmarks. We con-
sider both product market identification and the weighting method of single-segment
firms when reconstructing conglomerate benchmarks based on pure play firms. Fol-
lowing the existing literature, we then compare actual conglomerate valuations to
the valuation of our pure play benchmarks.


A         Existing Methods

Although we depart significantly from the literature in some of our conglomerate
valuation methods, we begin by considering a modified algorithm based on Lang and
Stulz (1994) (LS) and Berger and Ofek (1995) (BO).4 LS and BO begin by defining a
universe of candidate pure plays for each conglomerate segment. In BO, this universe
is initially defined as all pure plays operating in the firm’s four digit SIC industry.
However, if the number of firms in this universe is less than five, then the pure plays
in the given segment’s three-digit industry are used. Finally, coarseness is increased
to the two digit or even the one digit level until a universe of at least five pure
plays is identified. Because changing the level of coarseness can alter the economic
information contained in the benchmark (due to economies of scope or irrelevant
peers), we exclusively use three-digit SIC industries as our starting point following
the broader literature on industry analysis in Finance. However, we can report that
using variable levels of coarseness as used in BO produce materially similar results.

        The second step following BO’s framework is to compute the firm value to sales ra-
tio for each pure play firm in each segment’s universe, and then compute the median.
The given segment’s imputed value is then the segment’s actual sales multiplied by
this median ratio. Medians are used to reduce the impact of outliers, as firm value
to sales ratios can become extreme, especially when firms have low sales or high
growth options. Finally, the imputed value of the conglomerate firm is the sum of
    4
   Many studies including Campa and Kedia (2002) and Villalonga (2004b) use a BO-based
method.



                                                   20
the imputed values of the given conglomerate’s segments. Excess value is the natural
logarithm of the conglomerate’s imputed firm value divided by the conglomerate’s
actual firm value. This calculation can also be done using assets as an alternative to
sales. A negative excess value, intuitively, suggests that the conglomerate is valued
less than it might otherwise be valued if it were to operate under separate pure-play
structures. We refer to this method as the “Berger+Ofek Baseline” method.


B    Unconstrained Text-Based Methods

We note three key limitations of the LS and BO methods. A first is the equal treat-
ment of all firms in a given segment’s pure play universe in the median calculation.
This assumption can reduce accuracy, as additional information exists regarding the
nature of the products each pure play produces, and their comparability to a given
conglomerate. Methods that weight more relevant pure plays more heavily should
perform better. A second limitation is the use of SIC codes to identify the universe
of relevant pure play benchmarks. Methods that enhance the set of pure plays be-
yond traditional SIC boundaries, if the additional pure plays are relevant, should
perform better. A third limitation of the LS and BO method is the focus on a single
accounting characteristic such as sales or assets. Candidate pure play firms likely
vary along many other dimensions that can also explain valuation differences. For
example, some pure plays might have very high sales growth, and might not be rele-
vant as a benchmark for a given mature conglomerate. Henceforth, we refer to these
three limitations as the “equal weighting limitation”, the “limited universe limita-
tion”, and the “single characteristic limitation”, respectively. Text-based methods
offer a solution to all three limitations. In this section, we first examine vocabulary
decompositions that directly address the first two limitations. We address the third
limitation in the next section.

    Although we consider many text-based methods, we adopt the approach of chang-
ing one degree of research freedom at a time. Our most basic text-based conglomerate
reconstruction method therefore holds fixed the set of pure-play benchmarks used in
BO (those in the same three-digit SIC code). However, we use a textual decomposi-
tion to determine which pure plays use product vocabulary that best matches that

                                               21
of the conglomerate. This decomposition provides us with a set of weights, which we
use to replace the BO equal-weighted median calculation with a weighted median cal-
culation. To determine the weights, we use least squares to decompose the business
description of the conglomerate into parts observed in the pure play firms. Using the
same notation from Section II, Mt denotes the number of unique words in the corpus,
i denotes a given conglomerate being reconstructed, t denotes the year of the given
conglomerate observation, and Ni,t is the conglomerate’s (Mt x 1) normalized word
vector. Further suppose that the given conglomerate-year observation has Nit,bench
candidate benchmark pure play firms to use in its reconstruction. Each benchmark
has its own normalized word vector. Let BEN CHit denote a (Mt x Nit,bench ) matrix
in which the normalized word vectors of the benchmark pure plays are appended as
columns. We thus identify the set of pure play weights (wit ) that best explains the
conglomerate’s observed product market vocabulary as the solution to the following
least squares problem.
                           M IN (Nit − BEN CHit · wit )2                          (2)
                             wit

The solution to this problem (wit ) is simply the regression slopes associated with a
no-intercept regression of the conglomerate’s observed word usage Nit on the word
usage vectors of the Nit,bench pure plays. Importantly, unlike the BO method where
pure plays are treated equally, this method assigns greater weight to pure plays
whose product vocabulary best matches that of the conglomerate. Imputed value is
therefore computed by first computing the weighted median value to sales ratio for
all Nit,bench pure plays using the weights wit . We then multiply the resulting value
to sales ratio by the conglomerate’s total sales to get the conglomerate’s imputed
value, and excess value is then equal to the natural logarithm of the imputed value
to actual firm value ratio. We refer to this most basic text reconstruction, which
addresses the “equal weighting limitation”, as the “SIC Universe: Unconstrained”
method.

   We next consider an analogous method with a single enhancement that also
addresses the “limited universe limitation”. In this case, we add to the pure play
universe by adding pure play firms that are in the conglomerate’s VIC-7.06 industry
as defined in Hoberg and Phillips (2010a). These firms have products that are similar


                                              22
to the conglomerate’s product description, and the VIC-7.06 industry classification
is equally as coarse as are SIC-3 industries. The calculation follows as described
above, except in this case the number of benchmarks Nit,bench is as large (if no pure
play VIC-7.06 peers exist) or larger (if pure play VIC-7.06 peers do exist). We refer
to this method as the “SIC+VIC Universe: Unconstrained” method.


C     Constrained Text-Based Methods

We next consider the third limitation, the “single characteristic limitation”. The LS
and BO method has an underlying assumption that a single firm characteristic, for
example sales or assets, is a sufficient statistic to explain a pure play’s firm value.
Because asset valuations are forward looking and depend on fundamentals (such as
profitability), this limitation is quite severe. We consider a constrained least squares
approach to construct a pure-play based imputed value that holds any number of
accounting characteristics fixed to those of the conglomerate itself.

    Using the same notation, suppose a conglomerate has Nit,bench candidate pure play
firms. Suppose the researcher identifies Nchar accounting characteristics they wish to
hold fixed when computing imputed valuations. In our case, we consider Nchar = 5,
and account for the following five accounting characteristics: Sales Growth, Log Age,
OI/Sales, OI/Assets, and R&D/Sales. Let Cit denote a Nchar x 1 vector containing
the conglomerate’s actual characteristics for these five variables. Let Zit denote a
Nit,bench x Nchar matrix in which one row contains the value of these five character-
istics for one of the pure play benchmark candidates. We then consider the set of
weights wit that solve the following constrained optimization:

                M IN (Nit − BEN CHit · wit )2 such that Zit0 wit = Cit               (3)
                  wit


The solution to this problem (wit ) is simply the slopes associated with a no-intercept
constrained regression of the conglomerate’s observed word usage Nit on the word
usage vectors of the Nit,bench pure plays. The closed form solution for the weights is:

          wit = (BEN CHit0 BEN CHit )−1 (BEN CHit0 Nit − Zit λ), where               (4)

λ = [Zit0 (BEN CHit0 BEN CHit )−1 Zit ]−1 [Zit0 (BEN CHit0 BEN CHit )−1 BEN CHit0 Nit −Cit ]

                                                23
Intuitively, this set of weights identifies the set of pure plays that use vocabulary
that can best reconstruct the conglomerate’s own vocabulary, and that also exactly
match the conglomerate on the Nchar characteristics. We refer to this method as the
“SIC+VIC Universe: Constrained” method.


D     Accounting for Segment Sales

The LS and BO method computes imputed values segment-by-segment, and there-
fore utilizes information contained in reported segment-by-segment sales. To the
extent that sales explains valuations better than other characteristics, this informa-
tion might be useful. The basic text-based methods described above do not use
segment-by-segment sales, and instead rely on the weights obtained from the textual
reconstruction to derive imputed value. We believe that it is an empirical question
as to whether textual weights or sales weights best explain valuations. However, it is
important to explore this question. We therefore consider a method that is identical
to the “SIC+VIC Universe: Constrained” method described above, except that we
add an additional set of constraints based on the segment sales to ensure that the
imputed value is weighted by sales across segments as is the case for the BO method.

    Consider a conglomerate having Nit,seg segments, and let Sit denote the Nit,seg x 1
vector of sales weights (one element being a given segment’s sales divided by the total
sales of the conglomerate). To compute imputed values that impose segment sales-
based weights, we make two modifications to the constrained optimization. First, we
append the vector Sit to the vector Cit . Second, we create a Nit,bench x Nit,seg matrix
of ones and zeros. A given element is one if the pure play associated with the given
row is in the industry space corresponding to the given segment of the conglomerate
associated with the given column. This matrix is populated based on how the pure-
play benchmarks are selected. If the benchmark is selected due to its residing in a
three digit SIC industry of a given segment, then the given pure play firm is allocated
to that segment. If the benchmark was selected due to its residing in the VIC-7.06
industry of the conglomerate itself, then it is allocated to the segment whose SIC-
benchmarks it is most similar (as measured using the cosine similarity method).
We then append this Nit,bench x Nit,seg matrix of ones and zeros to the matrix Zit .

                                                24
The solution to the resulting constrained optimization is a set of new weights wit
that has the property that the sum of weights allocated to each segment equals
the given segment’s sales divided by the total conglomerate sales ratio. Therefore,
imputed values can be computed segment by segment. We refer to this method as
the “SIC+VIC Universe: Constrained, Segment-by-Segment” method.


V      Results: Conglomerate Valuation

In this section, we first assess the quality of conglomerate reconstruction using the
several different reconstruction methods discussed earlier. We focus on the accuracy
of valuation relative to the observed conglomerate valuations, and we also readdress
the question regarding whether or not conglomerates trade at a discount relative to
what they might trade at under a non-conglomerate structure. We conclude this
section by examining hypotheses regarding which types of conglomerates have high
or low valuations, and explore conglomerate valuations in cross section.


A    Methodological Validation

Following the methodology discussion in Section IV, we examine excess valuations
using five different conglomerate reconstruction methods. In particular, we con-
sider the Berger and Ofek (1995) benchmark, and four text based methods aimed at
addressing key limitations in the BO method. Table VII displays average excess val-
uations, and mean squared error statistics based on these five methods. Mean excess
value calculations are useful to explore if conglomerates trade at discounts (negative
excess valuations) or premia (positive excess valuations), and mean squared error
statistics are useful to compare the relative valuation accuracy of valuation methods.
A method with a lower MSE generates excess valuations that are closer to the mean
excess valuation, and are therefore more accurate. Following convention in the liter-
ature in Panels B and C, we discard an excess value calculation if it is outside the
range {−1.386, +1.386} (in actual levels instead of natural logs this range is { 14 , 4}),
to reduce the effect of outliers. Therefore, the observation counts available for each
valuation method vary slightly. In particular, more accurate valuation methods gen-


                                                 25
erate excess valuations outside this range less often, and thus have higher observation
counts. The table reports mean excess value, MSE statistics, and observation counts
for excess value calculations based on sales (first three columns) and assets (last three
columns).

   Following conventions in the literature, we apply many screens to the conglom-
erate sample included in this part of our study. In particular, we require lagged
COMPUSTAT data for our control variables, we drop firms with sales less than $20
million, firms with zero assets, and firms for which summed segment sales disagrees
with the overall firm’s sales by more than 1%. We also require that 10-K text data
is available, and also that a sufficient number of pure play firms exist in segment
industries to compute excess valuations. In Panel A of VII we include all observa-
tions. In Panel B, following the convention in the literature, we restrict attention
to excess values less than 400% and greater than 25% (screen applied separately for
each method). In Panel C, we omit all firm-years for a conglomerate in which its
estimated excess value is outside this range using any calculation method we consider
(as this allows a comparison that holds the sample size fixed).

                              [Insert Table VII Here]


   Panel A of Table VII shows that more refined text-based valuation methods
generate smaller conglomerate discounts. For excess valuations based on sales, the
8.2% discount for the Berger and Ofek benchmark in row one declines to just 1.2%
using the text-based method that addresses all three limitations. The most basic text-
based benchmark, which holds fixed the same SIC-universe of pure play candidates,
results in a decline in the excess value discount to 5.8%. Therefore, just changing the
weighting of single segment firms alone is partially but not fully responsible for our
ability to explain the discount. Row 3 of Panel A expands the universe to include
VIC-7.06 pure play rivals of the conglomerate. This expansion reduces the discount
to 4.6%. Finally, using the five key accounting characteristics in Row 4 reduces the
discount to 1.2%. In row 5 of Panel A, we see that further constraining the weights
to match segment-specific sales ratios increases the discount to just 1.8%.

   When excess valuation is based on assets in the fourth column, we see that the

                                                26
discount of -2.7% using the Berger and Ofek benchmark declines analogously to
nearly zero (0.1%) using the constrained text-based benchmark in row four. We
conclude that our ability to explain the benchmark is due to three factors: (1) Using
weights based on textual decompositions, (2) improving the benchmark candidates
to include both SIC and VIC peers, and (3) constraining the benchmark to have
similar accounting characteristics relative to the conglomerate being reconstructed.

   Columns two and four, which report mean squared error statistics, strongly sup-
port the conclusion that the constrained model based on the enlarged SIC+VIC
universe offers the most accurate conglomerate pricing. When based on sales, the
mean squared error in row 4 of .320 is 32.4% smaller than the mean squared error
of .474 associated with the Berger and Ofek benchmark. When based on assets, this
improvement is 27.7%.

   In Panels B and C, we omit excess valuations outside the interval {−1.386, +1.386}.
Panel B omits just the method-specific conglomerate-year observations in which ex-
cess valuations are outside this range and Panel C omits the firm if any of the five
valuation method places the value outside this range. The results are similar to Panel
A. We see the discount in excess value disappearing using our text-based methods. In
Panel C in particular, the excess value discount entirely disappears for both the sales
based and the asset based methods. We also see large decreases in mean squared
error using our text-based methods. The results in Panel C are especially clean
because the sample size is held fixed across methods.

   We conclude that improving conglomerate benchmarks alone can explain the pre-
viously reported conglomerate discount, and dramatically improve valuation accu-
racy. The intuition behind this result squares well with the original intent: a portfolio
of pure plays that matches the conglomerate in operations and assets should be a
valid benchmark to the conglomerate itself. Our results therefore do not support the
conclusion that conglomerate firms trade at discounts. These findings are in line with
other recent studies that draw the same conclusion using other methods (see Campa
and Kedia (2002), Villalonga (2004b), and Graham, Lemmon, and Wolf (2002)).

   In Table VIII, we assess whether conglomerates reconstructed using the various


                                                27
methods discussed above have similar characteristics as the conglomerates them-
selves. As the objective of these methods is to rebuild an identical replica of what
the conglomerate would look like under a non-conglomerate structure, better bench-
marks should match the conglomerate along more dimensions. For example, they
should have similar sales growth, should be equally as mature, should be as profitable,
and they should have similar investment intensities.

   To address this question, we first compute implied characteristic values using the
same methods used to compute imputed valuations in the excess value valuations.
For example, the implied Sales Growth of a Berger and Ofek (baseline) benchmark is
computed as the sales weighted average of the segment-by-segment computed median
sales growth of the pure plays in each segment’s three digit SIC industry. For a text-
based benchmark, the weighted median sales growth is the implied sales growth of
the conglomerate.

                             [Insert Table VIII Here]


   Table VIII reports correlations between the actual conglomerate characteristic
and the implied characteristic for each characteristic noted in the first column using
each valuation method noted in the remaining columns. Comparing correlations be-
tween the single-segment constructed benchmarks and the actual conglomerate firms
using the Berger and Ofek benchmark to the text-based benchmarks reveals that the
text-based benchmarks strongly outperform the Berger and Ofek baseline in terms
of matching characteristics. The simplest text based methods that do not constrain
accounting characteristics (columns two and three) have higher correlations than the
Berger and Ofek constructed conglomerate benchmark. For example, the 28.9% cor-
relation between the OI/Assets of the actual conglomerate and the Berger and Ofek
benchmark increases dramatically to (35.7% to 42.1%) even using unconstrained
text-based weights. As indicated in the methodology section, the text-based weights
are purely a function of the vocabulary used by the pure plays and the conglomerate,
and are not mechanistically related to the accounting numbers that these methods
are better able to match. In the last two columns, not surprisingly, we observed that
Pearson correlations rise dramatically when we use the text-based constrained opti-


                                               28
mization. As these weights use five key accounting characteristics to better fit each
conglomerate’s mapping, it is not surprising that these characteristic correlations are
higher. We conclude that text based measures offer substantial improvements over
existing methods.

   It is also natural to ask which type of pure play firms are weighted more than
others when reconstructing conglomerates and giving differential weights to compo-
nent single-segment firms. Panel A of Table IX explores this question and displays
average characteristics for firms assigned weights in the highest and lowest quartile
using the text-based conglomerate benchmarks. Panel B further examines how the
weights on the single-segment benchmark firms vary when we examine how well the
vocabularies of the pure plays fit the vocabulary of the conglomerate (we define the
“Difficulty of Pure Plays to Replicate the Conglomerate” as one minus the R2 from
the vocabulary decomposition).

   The first three columns of Panel A are based on the “SIC+VIC universe (uncon-
strained)” method. This method is text based and uses an enhanced set of eligible
pure plays (SIC and VIC peers) to reconstruct the conglomerates. In the second
three columns in Table IX, we repeat the same exercise using the “SIC+VIC universe
(constrained)” method, which also holds fixed key accounting variables as discussed
earlier.

                              [Insert Table IX Here]


   Panel A shows shows that pure play firms receiving higher weights using text de-
compositions tend to be older, are more mature firms, and have lower sales growth.
These firms also have less research and development, and are more profitable than
those pure plays assigned lower weights. Because mature firms have lower valua-
tion ratios, this might explain why conglomerates appear undervalued using earlier
methods.

   The results in the latter three columns are similar to those in the first three
columns, but notably sharper. For example, the average difference in age is nearly
7.5 years using the constrained text method, compared to just 4.4 years using the
unconstrained text method. We conclude that equal weighting all pure plays, as was

                                               29
done using the Berger and Ofek benchmark, will overweight high growth firms and
thus generate the inappropriate conclusion that conglomerates are undervalued. Our
results in the next section formally confirm this conjecture.

    Panel B Table IX provides a similar comparison of characteristics but splits the
sample based on which firms have above or below median “Difficulty of Pure Plays to
Replicate” measures (1 - R2 from the textual decomposition regression in equation
(3)). A conglomerate that is difficult to replicate has an R2 of zero and a “Difficulty
of Pure Plays to Replicate” value of 1. This constrained regression is run once per
conglomerate-year, as this provides us with the weights used to construct the excess
values year by year as discussed in the previous section. This same calculation thus
provides one difficulty to replicate statistic for each conglomerate in each year..

    Panel B shows that conglomerates with concentrated industries and high-value
industries between their segments have the sharpest correlations between difficulty
to replicate and the fractions of industries lying between the pair. This finding
adds to our earlier evidence that conglomerates spanning these high value industries
generating more product market synergies, as these same synergies can explain why
the pure plays cannot replicate the conglomerate as easily.


B    Determinants of Conglomerate Valuations

In this section, we examine whether conglomerate valuations vary in cross section.
As discussed in our hypotheses section (Section I), we focus on examining whether
conglomerates that are harder to replicate and face less competition have higher
valuations relative to our pure-play based benchmarks. To explore this question, we
regress conglomerate excess valuation on the text-based variables that capture these
factors.

    We regress conglomerate-year excess valuations on the “Difficulty of Pure Plays
to Replicate” variable, along with the fraction of industries between the conglomerate
industry segments, our concentration measures as discussed above, and our across
and within industry similarity measures. We also include controls for document
length, vertical relatedness, and a number of accounting measures used in the existing


                                                30
literature.

   Our variable for the “Difficulty of Pure Plays to Replicate” captures how easily
the conglomerate can be reconstructed using the set of pure play firms that exist in
its markets. The intuition underlying this calculation is that a conglomerate that
is more difficult to replicate is more protected and differentiated, and hence faces
less of a competitive threat. For example, any asset complementarities or product
market synergies created through its conglomerate structure cannot be easily raided
by any new conglomerates that might form based on existing pure plays.

   The fraction of industries between the conglomerate industry segment captures
the potential gains a conglomerate can reap by expanding its product offerings into
these between markets. Average across industry similarity captures the potential
for synergies between industries. Within industry similarity and the average con-
centration of a conglomerate’s pure play markets capture the competition that a
conglomerate firm faces withing its pure-play markets.

                               [Insert Table X Here]


   Table X displays the results of OLS panel data regressions in which one observa-
tion is one conglomerate in one year, and the dependent variable is the excess valu-
ation using the constrained text-based valuation method (Panel A) and the Berger
and Ofek (1995) valuation method (Panel B). t-statistics are shown in parentheses,
and standard errors are adjusted for clustering by firm.

   Our first key finding is that the difficulty of pure plays to replicate variable is
positive and highly statistically significant in both panels. This is our main result.
Conglomerates that are harder to replicate have high valuations relative to pure play
benchmarks. As this variable captures the uniqueness of the conglomerate’s products
relative to the pure play benchmarks, one would not expect its affect on valuation
to be negated out in the difference as was the case for the average HHI variable.
This finding, which is robust at the 1% level of significance in all rows, is consistent
with these firms earning higher rents due to the inability of other firms to enter their
product markets. Hence the product market synergies or asset complementarities
that the given firm enjoys under the conglomerate structure are not vulnerable. Our

                                                31
control variables indicate that conglomerates are also valued more when they have
more investment (R+D and Capital Expenditures), when they are more profitable,
and when they are larger. Conglomerates are also less valuable when their segments
are vertically related.

   We also find that the reported R2 s are higher in Panel B than in Panel A. This
result arises because our text-based valuation model is a better fit as shown previously
than the Berger and Ofek method. If reconstructed benchmarks are perfect, fewer
variables should be capable of explaining valuations in the cross section. The table
also shows that the level of significance of our key variable, difficulty of pure plays
to replicate, is quite similar across panels.

   Other findings in the table is that traditional segment-by-segment average within
segment similarity and the average concentration ratio (Conglomerate Average Con-
centration)are not significantly related to excess valuations in the full model in Row
(1), although they are both significant when the Difficulty to Replicate variable is
excluded in rows (3) and (5). These results are not surprising because the pure play
firms used to construct the excess valuation benchmark enjoy the same level of con-
centration on average. Therefore, the excess valuation, which is a difference, would
come close to negating any effect of this concentration variable on average.

   Table XI displays the economic magnitudes of our findings regarding the diffi-
culty of pure plays to replicate variable. In each year, we sort firms into quintiles
based on this variable, and we compute the average excess valuation for each group.
We also compute the average residual excess valuation, where residuals are from a
regression of excess valuation on all of the variables in Table X with the exception
of the difficulty to replicate variable. The table shows that raw excess valuations are
modestly higher for the highest quintile (+5.4% using the text-based model) relative
to the lowest quintile (-2.3% ). This effect is magnified for average residual excess
valuations (+9.1% versus -4.8% ). We conclude that the impact of a conglomerate’s
difficulty to reconstruct is meaningful, and that conglomerates that are more difficult
to replicate trade at modest premia relative to their pure play benchmarks.

                               [Insert Table XI Here]


                                                32
   Our last table examines conglomerate excess valuation for subsamples based on
which industries conglomerate firms operate within. Panel A of Table XII consid-
ers conglomerates with high-value industries (above median) between their segment
pairs, and Panel B examines conglomerate excess value for conglomerates with low-
value industries (below median) between their segment pairs.

                             [Insert Table XII Here]


   The results in Panel A, as compared to Panel B, show that the “Difficulty of
Pure Plays to Replicate” variable is significant in both panels but significantly larger
for high-value industries. We can also see that the fraction of industries between is
positive and significant for high-value industries but insignificant for conglomerates
with low-value industries between their industry pairs. As in Table X, the difficulty to
replicate variable subsumes other product market variables, as this is a comprehensive
measure of how differentiated the conglomerate is from potential rivals in all of its
markets.

   Overall these results, combined with those in Table X, are consistent with con-
glomerates having higher valuations when their products are difficult to replicate
with the best possible single-segment peers. Our results are also consistent with
conglomerates trading at a discount when their products are very similar to those
produced by single-segment peers. The results are consistent with conglomerates
trading at premia and adding value when they are able to generate synergies and
produce products that are not produced by single-segment peers.


VI      Conclusions

We use text-based analysis of conglomerate and pure play business descriptions from
10-Ks filed with the SEC to examine in which industries conglomerates are most
likely to operate and to understand cross-sectional conglomerate valuation. We find
that conglomerate firms are more likely to operate in industry pairs that are closer
together in the product space, in industry pairs that have profitable opportunities
“between” them, and in industries with lower within industry product similarity.


                                                33
These findings are consistent with product synergies, from related industry produc-
tion and also from conglomerates producing in related industries being able to enter
profitable industries that lie between them.

   We also find that conglomerate firms are less likely to produce in industries with
high within industry similarity and in industries that span competitive industries.
These findings are consistent with conglomerate firms choosing to produce in the
more concentrated industries with higher profitability.

   We examine the cross-sectional valuation effects of conglomerate industry pro-
duction. Using text-based analysis we redefine benchmark single-industry segment
“pure-play” firms for each industry segment of conglomerate firms using product-
word vocabulary matching. We also use text based analysis to weight these pure-play
benchmarks to match the conglomerate firm on multiple accounting characteristics
in addition to product word matching.

   We find that on average conglomerates do not trade at a discount relative to
text-matched single segment firms. More importantly, this average effect masks
important cross-sectional variation. We find that conglomerates that are more diffi-
cult to reconstruct using pure-play firms tend to trade at modest premia and those
conglomerates that are easier to replicate trade at discounts. These findings are
consistent with higher valued conglomerate firms producing in related highly-valued
industries that have product synergies.




                                               34
References
Ahern, Kenneth, and Jarrad Harford, 2011, The importance of industry links in merger waves,
  University of Michigan and University of Washington Working Paper.
Berger, Phillip, and Eli Ofek, 1995, Diversification’s effect on firm value, Journal of Financial
  Economics 37, 39–65.
Campa, Jose, and Simi Kedia, 2002, Explaining the diversification discount, Journal of Finance 57,
  1731–1762.
Comment, Robert, and Gregg Jarrell, 1995, Corporate focus and stock returns, Journal of Financial
  Economics 37, 61–87.
Custodio, Claudia, 2010, Mergers and acquisitions accounting can explain the diversification dis-
  count, Arizona State University Working Paper.
Denis, David, Diane Denis, and Atulya Sarin, 1997, Agency problems, equity ownership and cor-
  porate diversification, Journal of Finance 52, 135–160.
Fan, Joseph, and Vidhan Goyal, 2006, On the patterns and wealth effects of vertical mergers,
  Journal of Business 79, 877–902.
Graham, John, Michael Lemmon, and Jack Wolf, 2002, Does corporate diversification destroy
  value?, Journal of Finance 57, 695–720.
Hann, Rebecca, Maria Ogneva, and Oguzhan Ozbas, 2011, Corporate diversification and the cost
  of capital, University of Maryland and University of Southern California Working Paper.
Hoberg, Gerard, and Gordon Phillips, 2010a, New dynamic product based industry classifications
  and endogenous product differentiation, University of Maryland Working Paper.
       , 2010b, Competition and product market synergies in mergers and acquisitions: A text
  based analysis, forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.
Kedia, Simi, Abraham Ravid, and Vicente Pons, 2008, Vertical mergers and the market valuation
  of the benefits of vertical integration, Rutgers Business School Working Paper.
Laeven, Luc, and Ross Levine, 2007, Is there a diversification discount in financial conglomerates?,
  Journal of Financial Economics 85, 331–367.
Lamont, Owen, and Christopher Polk, 2002, Does diversification destroy value? evidence from the
  industry shocks, Journal of Financial Economics 63, 51–77.
Lang, Larry, and Rene Stulz, 1994, Tobin’s q, corporate diversification, and firm performance,
  Journal of Political Economy 102, 1248–1280.
Lins, Karl, and Henri Servaes, 1999, International evidence on the value of corporate diversification,
  Journal of Finance 54, 2215–2240.
Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon Phillips, 2002, Do conglomerate firms allocate resources ineffi-
 ciently across industries? theory and evidence, Journal of Finance 57, 721–767.
     , 2007, Conglomerate Firms and Internal Capital Markets, Handbook of Corporate Finance:
  Empirical Corporate Finance (North-Holland).
Matsusaka, John, 2001, Corporate diversification, value maximization, and organizational capabil-
 ities, Journal of Business 74, 409–431.
Rajan, Raghuram G., Henri Servaes, and Luigi Zingales, 2000, The cost of diversity: the diversifi-
  cation discount and inefficient investment, Journal of Finance 55, 35–80.
Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew, and David Robinson, 2008, The market for mergers and the boundaries
  of the firm, Journal of Finance 63, 1169–1211.
Scharfstein, David, and Jeremy Stein, 2000, The dark side of internal capital markets: Segment
  rent seeking and inefficient investments, Journal of Finance 55, 2537–2564.


                                                        35
Sebastiani, Fabrizio, 2002, Machine learning in automated text categorization, ACM Computing
  Survey 34, 1–47.
Servaes, Henri, 1996, The value of diversification during the conglomerate merger wave, Journal of
  Finance 51, 1201–1225.
Shin, Hyun-Han, and Rene Stulz, 1998, Are internal capital markets efficient, Quarterly Journal of
  Economics.
Stein, Jeremy, 1997, Internal capital markets and the competition for corporate resources, Journal
  of Finance 52, 111–133.
Villalonga, Belen, 2004a, Diversification discount or premium? new evidence from business infor-
  mation tracking series, Journal of Finance 59, 479–506.
       , 2004b, Does diversification cause the diversification discount, Financial Management 33,
  5–27.
Wernerfelt, Birger, and Cynthia Montgomery, 1988, Diversification, ricardian rents, and tobin’s q,
 Rand Journal of Economics 19, 623–632.




                                                     36
                                        Table I: Summary Statistics

Summary statistics are reported for our sample of conglomerate and pure play firms (Panel A), Industry Pairs and
conglomerates (Panel B), and Conglomerate Segment Pairs (Panel C) for our sample from 1996 to 2008. The
variables in Panel A include the VIC-7.06 HHI and the total firm value (book debt plus market value of equity).
The variables in Panel B include product market measures describing an industry pair. The Number of
Conglomerates Spanning Pair is the number of conglomerates having segments in both industries associated
with the given pair. Across Industry Similarity is the average pairwise similarity between firms in one of the
industries in the pair, and firms in the other industry. The Fraction of Industries Between Pair is the fraction
of all other SIC-3 industries residing in the product market space “between” or closer in product space than the
two industries comprising the pair. Zero Industries Between is a dummy equal to one if no industries are
between i and j. To compute Average Within Industry Similarity, we first compute the average pairwise
similarity of firms in industry i and j, and average the two measures. The Average HHI is computed analogously
by averaging the VIC-7.06 HHI of firms in each industry, and taking the average of the two. The Pair Likelihood
if Random is a control variable equal to the fraction of all pure play firms in industry i, multiplied by the fraction
of all pure play firms in industry j (multiplied by 10,000 for convenience). The Same 2-digit SIC Dummy is a
dummy equal to one of industries i and j share the same two digit SIC code. Vertical Relatedness is the average
fraction of input the two industries in an industry pair obtain from one another (from the input-output tables).
The variables in Panel C identify changes in conglomerate structures using the Compustat segment definitions and
the SDC acquisition database. One observation is a pair of segments in an existing conglomerate in year t, and we
require that the conglomerate exist in year t and t + 1.
                                                                          Std.
     Variable                                                  Mean       Dev.      Minimum Median       Maximum

                        Panel A: Conglomerates (15,373 obs) and Pure-Plays (56,491 obs)
     Firm Value (Conglomerates)                                 12430   48462   0.483         1228       1036340
     Firm Value (Pure-Plays)                                    2450    18863   0.003         215.       1038648
     VIC HHI (Conglomerates)                                    0.140   0.219   0.006         0.059      1.000
     VIC HHI (Pure-Plays)                                       0.111   0.153   0.006         0.058      1.000
                 Panel B: Industry Pairs (312,240 obs)         and Conglomerates (15,373      obs)
     Number of Conglomerates Spanning Pair (Ind. Pairs)        0.147      0.855     0.0       0.0        57.0
     Across Industry Similarity (Ind. Pairs)                   0.017      0.010     0.000     0.014      0.169
     Across Industry Similarity (Conglomerates)                0.032      0.019     0.000     0.025      0.138
     Fraction of Industries Between Pair (Ind. Pairs)          0.325      0.257     0.000     0.267      0.992
     Fraction of Industries Between Pair (Conglomerates)       0.097      0.133     0.000     0.042      0.992
     Within Industry Similarity (Ind. Pairs)                   0.086      0.038     0.000     0.081      0.433
     Within Industry Similarity (Conglomerates)                0.073      0.030     0.010     0.066      0.188
     Same 2-digit SIC Dummy (Ind. Pairs)                       0.018      0.133     0.000     0.000      1.000
     Same 2-digit SIC Dummy (Conglomerates)                    0.228      0.371     0.000     0.000      1.000
     Vertical Relatedness (Ind. Pairs)                         0.003      0.014     0.000     0.000      0.536
     Vertical Relatedness (Conglomerates)                      0.027      0.066     0.000     0.006      0.536




     Variable                                          Obs                 Percentage          Std. Dev.

                   Panel C: Change in Conglomerate Segment Pair Variables (32,181 obs)
     Segment    Pair   Disappears                      4,566               14.2%               34.9%
     Segment    Pair   Likely Sold or Closed           3,415               10.6%               30.8%
     Segment    Pair   Likely Reclassified             1,096               3.4%                18.1%
     Segment    Pair   Likely Sold Off                 330                 1.0%                10.1%




                                                                37
                                                                   Table II: Pearson Correlation Coefficients

     Pearson Correlation Coefficients are reported for our sample of 312,240 observations of three digit SIC industry pairs from 1996 to 2008. The variables include various measures of the
     product market topography between the industry pair, and within the industries comprising the pair. Please see Table I for a description of the variables.
                                                         Number of                        Zero                                                              Pair             Same
                                                         Spanning        Across           Industries       Fraction of     Within           Aver-           Likelihood       2-digit
                                                         Conglom.        Industry         Between          Industries      Industry         age             if               SIC
      Row Variable                                       Pairs           Similarity       Dummy            Between         Similarity       HHI             Random           Dummy

                                                                              Correlation Coefficients
      (1)   Across Industry Similarity                   0.229
38




      (2)   Zero Industries Between Dummy                0.160           0.446
      (3)   Fraction of Industries Between Pair          -0.132          -0.691           -0.137
      (4)   Within Industry Similarity                   -0.044          0.184            0.058            -0.092
      (5)   Average HHI                                  -0.011          -0.176           -0.042           0.088           -0.487
      (6)   Pair Likelihood if Random                    0.144           -0.009           0.020            -0.002          -0.020           -0.031
      (7)   Same 2-digit SIC Dummy                       0.231           0.315            0.200            -0.135          -0.030           0.020           0.012
      (8)   Vertical Relatedness                         0.200           0.165            0.078            -0.124          -0.049           0.055           0.028            0.155
                                 Table III: Conglomerate Summary

Summary statistics showing various mean characteristics across various subsamples of industry pairs from 1996 to
2008. Industries are based on three-digit SIC industries. Results are based on our sample of 312,240 industry pair x
year permutations, and 40,769 observed conglomerate industry pair x year observations. In Panel A, we display
summary statistics for all observed conglomerate pairs, and we compare them to the statistics of randomly drawn
industry pairs. In Panel B, we display summary statistics for conglomerates of varying size. In Panel C, we show
results for conglomerates that are growing, stable, or shrinking, as noted in the first column. In Panel D, we show
results for vertically integrated segments, and segments in the same two-digit SIC code. Please see Table I for a
description of the variables displayed.
                                           Across        Within                      Fraction of
                                           Industry      Industry      Average       Industries
     Sub Sample                            Similarity    Similarity    HHI           Between       # Obs.

                                                Panel A: Overall
     All Conglomerates                     0.0296        0.0768        0.1150        0.1293        40,769
     Randomly Drawn SIC-3 Industries       0.0167        0.0862        0.1183        0.3255        312,240

                                        Panel B: By Conglomerate Size
     2 Segments                            0.0341        0.0738        0.1192        0.0867        6,365
     3 Segments                            0.0311        0.0750        0.1164        0.1132        11,672
     4-5 Segments                          0.0289        0.0786        0.1130        0.1366        15,794
     6+ Segments                           0.0247        0.0785        0.1133        0.1790        6,938

                           Panel C: Shrinking, Stable, and Growing Conglomerates
     Shrink by 2+ Segments                 0.0268        0.0788        0.1097        0.1490        600
     Shrink by 1 Segment                   0.0295        0.0779        0.1119        0.1296        3,259
     Stable Conglomerate                   0.0301        0.0769        0.1160        0.1260        30,525
     Add 1 Segment                         0.0282        0.0760        0.1117        0.1414        4,741
     Add 2+ Segments                       0.0262        0.0739        0.1135        0.1485        1,644

                              Panel D: Vertical and Same SIC-2 Conglomerates
     Vertically Related Segments           0.0319        0.0717        0.1212        0.0739        15,007
     Same SIC-2 Segments                   0.0471        0.0829        0.1085        0.0291        8,015




                                                               39
                                                                     Table IV: Where Conglomerates Exist
     OLS regressions with standard errors clustered by year for our sample of 312,240 industry pairs from 1996 to 2008. One observation is one pair of three digit SIC industries in a year
     derived from the set of all pairings of observed SIC-3 industries in the given year in the COMPUSTAT segment tapes. The dependent variable is the Number of Conglomerates
     Spanning Pair, which is the number of conglomerates having segments in both industries associated with the given pair. Panel A displays results based on the entire sample of
     industry pairs. Panel B displays results for various subsamples based on the competitiveness or the valuations of industries lying between the industry pair. Panel C displays results
     based on subsamples of valuations and competitiveness. The independent variables include various measures of the product market features of the industry pair and within the
     industries comprising the pair. Please see Table I for a description of the independent variables. Panel regressions are estimated with year fixed effects and standard errors are
     clustered by year (t-statistics are in parentheses).
                                                                                 Fraction of                Avg.                      Pair
                                                                 Across          Industries    Zero         Within       Aver-        Likeli-       Same          Vertical
                                                                 Industry        Between       Industries   Industry     age          hood if       2-digit       Relat-        # Obs. /
      Row Sample                                                 Similarity      Pair          Between      Similarity   HHI          Random        SIC Code      edness        RSQ

                                                                                   Panel A: Full Sample
      (1)   All Industry Pairs                                   14.060          0.060         0.410        -1.347                    0.084         0.943         8.669         312,240
                                                                 (19.98)         (4.85)        (6.20)       (-13.90)                  (9.32)        (18.94)       (7.00)        0.128
      (2)   All Industry Pairs                                   12.809          0.045         0.423                     0.181        0.085         0.973         8.869         312,240
                                                                 (18.94)         (3.45)        (6.40)                    (4.05)       (9.42)        (19.14)       (7.13)        0.125

                                                                              Panel B: Univariate Subsamples
      (3)   Concentrated Industry Pairs                          27.374          0.249                      -1.034                    0.086         0.638         3.715         154,324
40




                                                                 (11.15)         (6.32)                     (-18.74)                  (6.65)        (8.57)        (7.56)        0.110
      (4)   Competitive Industry Pairs                           12.730          -0.050                     -1.625                    0.076         1.044         8.033         154,321
                                                                 (16.76)         (-1.89)                    (-11.18)                  (6.07)        (20.31)       (7.67)        0.103
      (5)   High Firm Value Industry Pairs                       21.110          0.190                      -1.260                    0.063         1.199         5.695         154,326
                                                                 (12.96)         (5.51)                     (-11.80)                  (6.19)        (19.43)       (4.14)        0.100
      (6)   Low Firm Value Industry Pairs                        11.380          -0.010                     -1.453                    0.120         0.743         8.491         154,319
                                                                 (15.52)         (-1.43)                    (-10.86)                  (5.91)        (12.26)       (12.13)       0.124

                                                                              Panel C: Bivariate Subsamples
      (7)   Concentrated and High Value Pairs                    38.414          0.425                      -0.865                    0.066         0.779         3.207         65,904
                                                                 (6.04)          (4.29)                     (-12.71)                  (3.99)        (5.53)        (4.11)        0.113
      (8)   Competitive and High Value Pairs                     19.416          0.160                      -1.534                    0.062         1.294         6.165         88,422
                                                                 (12.14)         (3.11)                     (-10.37)                  (5.93)        (16.84)       (3.93)        0.097
      (9)   Concentrated and Low Value Pairs                     22.061          0.146                      -1.153                    0.113         0.595         3.937         88,420
                                                                 (8.88)          (4.20)                     (-13.12)                  (4.06)        (7.94)        (7.39)        0.114
      (10) Competitive and Low Value Pairs                       8.544           -0.258                     -1.813                    0.124         0.817         10.600        65,899
                                                                 (9.38)          (-14.40)                   (-9.73)                   (4.70)        (13.45)       (8.77)        0.127
                               Table V: New Conglomerate Segments
OLS regressions which examine the number of new conglomerate segments in each three-digit SIC codes pairs in
the given year in the COMPUSTAT segment tapes. Panel A counts the number of new conglomerates producing in
both industries of a given three-digit pair. In Panel B, new segments are from conglomerates that previously had
fewer segments in the previous year. In Panel C, new segments are from conglomerates that previously had the
same or more segments in the previous year. Panel D restricts new segments to conglomerates that were the
acquirer in an acquisition in the SDC database for a transaction amounting to at least ten percent of the firm’s
assets. The independent variables include product market features of the industry pair. Please see Table I for a
description of the independent variables. Panel regressions are estimated with year fixed effects and standard errors
are clustered by year (t-statistics are in parentheses).
                                              Fraction     Avg.        Pair        Same
                                 Across       Industries   Within      Likeli-     2-digit      Vertical
                                 Industry     Between      Industry    hood if     SIC          Relat-      Obs.
 Row Sample                      Similarity   Pair         Simil.      Random      Code         edness      /RSQ

                                 Panel A: Dep. Var = New Segment Pairs
 (1)    All Industry Pairs      2.409          0.010    -0.268      0.017      0.124     0.756              312,240
                                (5.56)         (3.23)   (-4.41)     (3.86)     (4.69)    (2.61)             0.052
 (2)    Concen. + High Value    6.016          0.065    -0.160      0.016      0.130     0.519              65,904
                                (4.13)         (3.11)   (-4.78)     (2.50)     (2.61)    (1.96)             0.051
 (3)    Concen. + Low Value     2.348          -0.009   -0.337      0.014      0.155     0.541              88,422
                                (7.02)         (-0.84)  (-4.49)     (3.42)     (5.85)    (2.08)             0.046
 (4)    Compet. + High Value    3.051          0.021    -0.176      0.019      0.076     0.758              88,420
                                (4.15)         (2.63)   (-4.39)     (3.56)     (2.58)    (2.91)             0.038
 (5)    Compet. + Low Value     1.416          -0.036   -0.341      0.024      0.111     0.829              65,899
                                (3.16)         (-3.69)  (-3.75)     (2.77)     (3.60)    (2.45)             0.049
               Panel B: Dep.   Var = New      Segment Pairs Likely Obtained through Growth
 (6)    All Industry Pairs  1.994    0.009                  -0.213     0.014     0.101          0.614       312,240
                            (4.92)   (3.84)                 (-3.99)    (3.61)    (4.29)         (2.37)      0.048
 (7) Concen. + High Value   4.249    0.042                  -0.125     0.014     0.130          0.415       65,904
                            (4.36)   (3.37)                 (-4.06)    (2.30)    (2.61)         (1.60)      0.046
 (8) Concen. + Low Value    1.826    -0.010                 -0.272     0.012     0.125          0.479       88,422
                            (5.26)   (-1.01)                (-4.14)    (3.25)    (5.74)         (2.18)      0.043
 (9) Compet. + High Value   2.384    0.016                  -0.134     0.015     0.062          0.602       88,420
                            (3.63)   (2.29)                 (-4.20)    (3.05)    (2.50)         (2.76)      0.033
 (10) Compet. + Low Value   1.260    -0.028                 -0.272     0.022     0.087          0.640       65,899
                            (3.17)   (-3.11)                (-3.31)    (2.67)    (3.06)         (2.07)      0.046
              Panel C: Dep. Var = New Segment              Pairs Likely From Reclassification
 (11) All Industry Pairs      0.415     0.001              -0.054     0.002     0.023           0.142       65,899
                              (6.92)    (0.64)             (-5.93)    (5.21)    (5.54)          (3.38)      0.011
 (12)   Concen. + High Value  1.767     0.023              -0.035     0.002     0.000           0.105       65,904
                              (2.61)    (2.23)             (-3.94)    (3.38)    (0.10)          (1.97)      0.010
 (13)   Concen. + Low Value   0.521     0.001              -0.065     0.002     0.030           0.062       88,422
                              (4.12)    (0.33)             (-5.33)    (4.13)    (4.13)          (1.32)      0.011
 (14)   Compet. + High Value  0.667     0.005              -0.042     0.003     0.014           0.156       88,420
                              (3.71)    (2.11)             (-4.75)    (5.47)    (1.95)          (2.86)      0.009
 (15)   Compet. + Low Value   0.156     -0.008             -0.069     0.002     0.023           0.190       65,899
                              (2.24)    (-3.20)            (-4.40)    (2.83)    (4.78)          (2.90)      0.010
                 Panel D: Dep. Var = New Segment           Pairs Linked to SDC Acquisitions
 (16) All Industry Pairs         0.239        0.002        -0.019      0.001       0.004        0.073       312,240
                                 (3.99)       (2.09)       (-3.13)     (2.43)      (1.79)       (2.31)      0.007
 (17) Concen. + High Value       0.605        0.007        -0.009      0.001       -0.001       0.036       65,904
                                 (2.44)       (2.22)       (-3.20)     (1.81)      (-0.35)      (1.24)      0.005
 (18) Concen. + Low Value        0.260        0.001        -0.021      0.001       0.006        0.046       88,422
                                 (4.19)       (0.46)       (-2.88)     (2.36)      (1.78)       (1.53)      0.007
 (19) Compet. + High Value       0.278        0.002        -0.012      0.001       0.003        0.040       88,420
                                 (2.41)       (1.32)       (-3.27)     (3.49)      (1.07)       (2.27)      0.004
 (20) Compet. + Low Value        0.176        -0.002       -0.033      0.001       0.005        0.091       65,899
                                 (2.18)       (-0.72)      (-2.91)     (1.52)      (2.03)       (1.35)      0.007




                                                                 41
                                    Table VI: Which Segments Exit
Logit regressions with standard errors clustered by year for our sample of 32,181 industry pairs from 1997 to 2008.
One observation is one pair of segments in an existing conglomerate in year t. The conglomerate firm itself has to
exist in year t and year t + 1. The dependent variable varies by Panel. In Panel A, the dependent variable is
Segment Pair Disappears, which is a dummy equal to one if the given pair does not exist in the conglomerate’s
structure in the following year. In Panel B, the dependent variable is Segment Pair Likely Sold or Closed,
which is a dummy equal to one if the given pair does not exist in the conglomerate’s structure in the following year,
and the conglomerate has fewer segments in year t + 1 relative to year t. In Panel C, the dependent variable is
Segment Pair Likely Reclassified, which is a dummy equal to one if the given pair does not exist in the
conglomerate’s structure in the following year, and the conglomerate has at least as many segments in year t + 1
relative to year t. In Panel D, the dependent variable is Segment Pair Sold Off, which is a dummy equal to one
if the given pair does not exist in the conglomerate’s structure in the following year, and the conglomerate was the
target of an acquisition of at least ten percent of its assets in year t + 1. Please see Table I for a description of the
independent variables. All regressions are estimated with year fixed effects and standard errors are clustered by
year (t-statistics are in parentheses).
                                               Fraction     Avg.         Pair         Same
                                  Across       Industries   Within       Likeli-      2-digit      Vertical
                                  Industry     Between      Industry     hood if      SIC          Relat-       Obs.
 Row Sample                       Similarity   Pair         Simil.       Random       Code         edness       /RSQ

                              Panel A: Dep. Var = Segment Pair Disappears
 (1)   All Pairs                   -6.557      0.282     0.362      0.004      -0.043              -1.724       32,181
                                   (-2.94)     (1.75)    (0.32)     (0.67)     (-1.23)             (-4.13)      0.015
 (2)   Concen. + High Value        -17.662     -0.047    -2.029     0.013      -0.146              -0.213       7,387
                                   (-2.83)     (-0.15)   (-1.20)    (1.53)     (-1.16)             (-0.17)      0.015
 (3)   Compet. + High Value        -10.653     -0.120    0.498      -0.004     -0.135              -2.493       6,976
                                   (-3.45)     (-0.13)   (0.31)     (-0.43)    (-2.15)             (-2.27)      0.024
 (4)   Concen. + Low Value         -15.653     0.024     0.259      0.006      -0.131              1.076        8,706
                                   (-2.40)     (0.09)    (0.13)     (0.51)     (-1.50)             (0.60)       0.011
 (5)   Compet. + Low Value         -3.574      2.919     0.896      -0.014     0.005               -1.192       5,636
                                   (-0.78)     (1.33)    (0.68)     (-0.69)    (0.09)              (-2.17)      0.013
                         Panel   B: Dep. Var   = Segment Pair Likely Sold or Closed
 (6)   All Pairs           -8.521    -0.004    1.166      0.008       -0.137                       -1.692       32,181
                           (-3.14)   (-0.02)   (0.98)     (1.17)      (-2.37)                      (-3.48)      0.009
 (7) Concen. + High Value  -22.566   -0.507    -1.110     0.015       -0.424                       0.124        7,387
                           (-3.18)   (-2.03)   (-0.50)    (1.67)      (-2.43)                      (0.19)       0.011
 (8) Compet. + High Value  -14.508   -1.009    0.065      -0.003      -0.221                       -2.499       6,976
                           (-2.46)   (-0.99)   (0.04)     (-0.24)     (-1.91)                      (-1.99)      0.016
 (9) Concen. + Low Value   -14.934   -0.262    1.662      0.009       -0.198                       1.336        8,706
                           (-2.09)   (-0.94)   (1.01)     (0.83)      (-2.92)                      (0.91)       0.007
 (10) Compet. + Low Value  -6.072    1.303     2.356      -0.004      -0.082                       -1.312       5,636
                           (-0.88)   (0.67)    (1.22)     (-0.20)     (-0.91)                      (-1.55)      0.007
                     Panel C: Dep. Var = Segment Pair Likely Reclassified
 (11) All Pairs                   0.755      0.945     -2.311    -0.015               0.179        -1.317       32,181
                                  (0.20)     (2.78)    (-1.27)   (-1.44)              (3.40)       (-1.47)      0.011
 (12) Concen. + High Value        -1.966     1.155     -3.873    -0.002               0.415        0.383        7,387
                                  (-0.20)    (1.98)    (-1.81)   (-0.16)              (1.73)       (0.11)       0.017
 (13) Compet. + High Value        -0.059     2.191     1.589     -0.008               0.141        -1.939       6,976
                                  (-0.01)    (1.58)    (0.52)    (-0.43)              (1.04)       (-1.63)      0.012
 (14) Concen. + Low Value         -15.880    0.860     -4.737    -0.009               -0.011       0.853        8,706
                                  (-1.18)    (1.54)    (-1.44)   (-0.30)              (-0.05)      (0.26)       0.011
 (15) Compet. + Low Value         1.570      5.747     -4.486    -0.072               0.154        -0.346       5,636
                                  (0.20)     (1.95)    (-1.50)   (-1.99)              (0.85)       (-0.66)      0.013
                                 Panel D: Dep. Var = Segment Pair Sold Off
 (16) All Pairs                   -2.326       0.186        -0.229       0.004        0.085        0.120        32,181
                                  (-0.25)      (0.54)       (-0.07)      (0.29)       (0.31)       (0.12)       0.004
 (17) Concen. + High Value        -27.734      -0.305       -8.540       0.021        0.655        2.888        7,387
                                  (-1.61)      (-0.73)      (-1.18)      (2.51)       (1.26)       (0.71)       0.009
 (18) Compet. + High Value        11.600       0.115        1.604        0.010        -0.385       -2.983       6,976
                                  (0.84)       (0.04)       (0.37)       (0.33)       (-0.97)      (-0.80)      0.006
 (19) Concen. + Low Value         2.023        -0.258       3.912        -0.009       0.046        0.726        8,706
                                  (0.15)       (-0.24)      (0.77)       (-0.26)      (0.15)       (0.21)       0.007
 (20) Compet. + Low Value         -0.911       10.004       -0.353       -0.552       0.147        0.945        5,636
                                  (-0.04)      (2.43)       (-0.07)      (-1.15)      (0.39)       (0.39)       0.004

                                                                  42
                                                 Table VII: Quality of Excess Valuation Calculations Across Methods
     This table displays comparative summary statistics regarding conglomerate valuations and valuation accuracy across several different methods for computing conglomerate valuations.
     All of the conglomerate valuation methods we consider are based on reconstructions of a conglomerate firm using the valuation ratios of existing pure play firms operating in the same
     industries as each segment. A conglomerate’s excess value is the natural logarithm of its firm value divided by the implied firm value using the pure play reconstruction. Panel B
     discards an excess value calculation if it is outside the range {−1.386, +1.386} to reduce the affect of outliers (screen applied separately for each valuation method). Panel C discards
     the observation if any one of the five valuation methods generates a value outside this range (this holds the sample size fixed). The Excess value column reports the average
     sample-wide excess valuation using the valuation method reported in the first column. The MSE Excess Value is the mean squared error of excess valuations using the given
     valuation method (lower values indicate more accurate valuations). The observation counts column reports the number of conglomerates used to compute the average and MSE of
     the excess values. We report these three columns using excess valuation metrics computed using sales to value ratios (first three columns) and asset to value ratios (second three
     columns). The final column, Standard Deviation of Weights is computed for the text-based valuation methods, where the text is used to compute differential weights for the pure
     play firms used to compute excess values. For a detailed description of the valuation methods, please see Section IV. The first method, Berger+Ofek Baseline is a replication of the
     calculation used in Berger and Ofek (1995), where each segment is valued by computing the median firm value to sales ratio of pure play firms operating in the three digit SIC code of
     each segment, and then multiplying this median by the segment’s reported sales. Adding these implied segment valuations gives the overall conglomerate’s implied value and is the key
     benchmark compared to the actual conglomerate firm value used to compute excess valuation. The HP: SIC Universe: Whole Firm, Unconstrained uses text-based weights to
     reconstruct the conglomerate. The median firm value to sales ratio is computed using a weighted median calculation, where the weights are given by the text decomposition regression
     (conglomerate vocabulary is decomposed into the text of the available pure plays to construct a more precise product market replica). The HP: SIC+VIC Universe: Whole Firm,
     Unconstrained method extends this method by expanding the set of available pure plays for the text decomposition regression to include pure plays residing in the same VIC-7.06
     industry as the conglomerate. The HP: SIC+VIC Universe (wf ): Whole Firm, Constrained extends the method further using constrained regression, where the best-fit
     text-based reconstruction uses constrained regression methods to require that the reconstructed conglomerate matches the actual conglomerate on five key characteristics: Sales
     Growth, Log Age, OI/Sales, OI/Assets, and R&D/Sales. The HP: SIC+VIC Universe: Constrained, Segment-by-Segment method is analogous, but also requires that the
     pure plays allocated to each segment contribute to total sales of the reconstructed firm according to the actual sales ratios of the conglomerate.
                                                                                Excess          MSE                           Excess         MSE
                                                                                Value           Excess Val.    # Obs.         Value          Excess Val.     # Obs.         Std. Dev.
      Row Benchmark                                                             (Sales          (Sales         (Sales         (Assets        (Assets         (Assets        Weights
                                                                                Based)          based)         based)         Based)         based)          based)
43




                                                                                         Panel A: Raw Data
      1     Berger+Ofek Baseline (ss)                                      -0.082              0.474          12714        -0.027       0.288                10916
      2     HP: SIC Universe (wf): Unconstrained                           -0.058              0.463          12714        -0.038       0.268                12714          0.041
      3     HP: SIC+VIC Universe (wf): Unconstrained                       -0.046              0.402          12733        -0.008       0.242                12733          0.031
      4     HP: SIC+VIC Universe (wf): Constrained                         -0.012              0.320          12773        -0.001       0.208                12773          0.047
      5     HP: SIC+VIC Universe (ss): Constrained, Segment-by-Segment     -0.018              0.377          12675        0.020        0.282                10902          0.058
                                                 Panel B: Restrict to Excess Valuations       to interval [-1.386,+1.386] (Berger and Ofek)
      6     Berger+Ofek Baseline (ss)                                    -0.069       0.334          11892         -0.066                    0.212           8761
      7     HP: SIC Universe (wf): Unconstrained                         -0.047       0.342          11912         -0.033                    0.216           8805           0.041
      8     HP: SIC+VIC Universe (wf): Unconstrained                     -0.038       0.314          12079         -0.014                    0.194           8823           0.031
      9     HP: SIC+VIC Universe (wf): Constrained                       -0.012       0.252          12213         -0.009                    0.166           8844           0.047
      10    HP: SIC+VIC Universe (ss): Constrained, Segment-by-Segment   -0.012       0.281          12053         -0.017                    0.191           8744           0.058
                                                              Panel C: Uniformly Restrict to interval [-1.386,+1.386]
      11    Berger+Ofek Baseline (ss)                                           -0.065          0.306          11152          -0.049         0.183           7716
      12    HP: SIC Universe (wf): Unconstrained                                -0.040          0.308          11152          -0.018         0.190           7748           0.041
      13    HP: SIC+VIC Universe (wf): Unconstrained                            -0.028          0.274          11152          -0.001         0.171           7766           0.030
      14    HP: SIC+VIC Universe (wf): Constrained                              0.004           0.210          11152          0.002          0.143           7778           0.045
      15    HP: SIC+VIC Universe (ss): Constrained, Segment-by-Segment          0.000           0.244          11152          -0.003         0.169           7720           0.056
                                               Table VIII: Characteristic Correlations (Conglomerate vs. Benchmark)
     The table displays Pearson Correlation coefficients between actual conglomerate characteristics and implied characteristics using several different conglomerate valuation methods. The
     characteristic being analyzed is identified in the first column, and the remaining columns present correlations using the valuation methods noted in the column headers. The last two
     columns are based on constrained text regressions where the reconstructed conglomerate matches as closely as possible the actual conglomerate on five key characteristics: Sales
     Growth, Log Age, OI/Sales, OI/Assets, and R&D/Sales. These correlations are not 100% because the conglomerate reconstruction is based on a weighted median calculation.
                                                                                                                                                                Text-based
                                          Berger                       Text-based                    Text-based                   Text-based                    SIC+VIC
                                          + Ofek                       SIC only                      SIC+VIC                      SIC+VIC                       Constrained
      Row Variable                        (Baseline)                   No Constr.                    No Constr.                   Constrained                   (Seg by Seg)

                                                                       Correlation Coefficients
      1     Assets                        0.110                        0.194                         0.291                        0.409                         0.399
44




      2     Sales                         0.156                        0.229                         0.385                        0.387                         0.315
      3     OI/Sales                      0.375                        0.425                         0.479                        0.850                         0.675
      4     OI/Assets                     0.289                        0.357                         0.421                        0.832                         0.690
      5     R&D/Sales                     0.473                        0.673                         0.705                        0.908                         0.821
      6     Tobin’s Q                     0.366                        0.442                         0.469                        0.551                         0.502
      7     Sales Growth                  0.241                        0.270                         0.309                        0.825                         0.683
      8     VIC HHI                       0.325                        0.430                         0.535                        0.516                         0.387
      9     Log Age                       0.268                        0.298                         0.436                        0.924                         0.731
                                                         Table IX: Which Pure Plays Match with Conglomerates?
     The table displays summary statistics for groups of pure play firms used with high versus low weights to reconstruct conglomerates (Panel A), and conglomerates with high and low
     difficulty to replicate using pure plays (Panel B). In Panel A, summary statistics are displayed for pure plays in the lowest quartile of fitted weights, and for those in the highest
     quartile. The table uses two text-based reconstructions: HP: SIC+VIC Universe: Whole Firm, Unconstrained, and HP: SIC+VIC Universe: Whole Firm,
     Constrained. Table VII presents details on these text-based weight methods. Summary statistics are computed by first sorting all pure play benchmarks for each conglomerate in
     each year into quartiles based on each pure play’s computed weight from the textual decomposition and then averaging the characteristic for all firms in the lowest and highest
     quartiles, respectively. In Panel B, summary statistics are displayed for conglomerates with above and below median difficulty to replicate using pure plays and within the four
     subsamples as noted in the section headers. For both panels, t-statistics adjusted for clustering at the firm level test whether the means are different.
                                                                  Panel A: Benchmark Portfolio Weights vs Characteristics
                                              SIC+VIC Universe: Whole Firm, Un-constrained                                SIC+VIC Universe: Whole Firm, Constrained
                                          Lowest                  Highest                 t-statistic             Lowest                   Highest                 t-statistic
                                          Weights                 Weights                 of                      Weights                  Weights                 of
      Row Variable                        Quartile                Quartile                Difference              Quartile                 Quartile                Difference

      1     Assets                        3466.56                 4723.34                 6.52                    3564.72                  4934.27                 6.85
      2     Sales                         1563.12                 2147.15                 9.49                    1580.38                  2213.75                 10.53
      3     oi/sales                      0.07                    0.08                    6.59                    0.07                     0.08                    8.00
      4     oi/assets                     0.07                    0.07                    0.55                    0.07                     0.07                    1.20
      5     R+D/sales                     0.11                    0.09                    -14.15                  0.11                     0.09                    -14.20
      6     Tobin’s Q                     2.05                    1.92                    -4.84                   2.04                     1.88                    -6.50
      7     Sales Growth                  0.17                    0.16                    -9.10                   0.18                     0.16                    -17.92
      8     VIC-7.06 HHI                  0.08                    0.07                    -12.58                  0.08                     0.07                    -9.48
45




      9     Firm Age                      25.32                   29.19                   18.63                   24.06                    30.32                   29.14


                                                              Panel B: Difficulty of Pure Plays to Replicate vs Characteristics
                                          Lowest                  Highest                 t-statistic             Lowest                   Highest                 t-statistic
                                          Difficulty              Difficulty              of                      Difficulty               Difficulty              of
      Row Variable                        to Replicate            to Replicate            Difference              to Replicate             to Replicate            Difference

                                            Conglomerates with Concentrated Industries Between                       Conglomerates with Competitive Industries Between
      10    Fraction of Ind. Between      0.142                   0.224                  5.951                    0.046                    0.054                 1.940
      11    Across Ind. Similarity        0.023                   0.019                  -7.193                   0.041                    0.032                 -7.913
      12    Within Ind. Similarity        0.063                   0.047                  -8.153                   0.091                    0.063                 -12.133
      13    VIC HHI                       0.053                   0.082                  10.054                   0.029                    0.059                 17.454
                                             Conglomerates with   High Value Industries Between                       Conglomerates with   Low Value Industries Between
      14    Fraction of Ind. Between      0.079                   0.203                   10.213                  0.071                    0.131                   6.561
      15    Across Ind. Similarity        0.035                   0.023                   -11.465                 0.034                    0.024                   -9.119
      16    Within Ind. Similarity        0.084                   0.058                   -11.289                 0.073                    0.050                   -10.204
      17    VIC HHI                       0.032                   0.068                   15.182                  0.047                    0.075                   11.201
                                                                    Table X: Conglomerate Excess Valuations
     This table presents OLS regression estimates of conglomerate excess value on text-based variables. One observation is one conglomerate from 1997 to 2008. The dependent variable is
     the conglomerate’s excess valuation using the best text-based reconstruction (Panel A) or using the Berger and Ofek reconstruction (Panel B) as the dependent variable. The best
     text-based reconstruction is the “HP: SIC+VIC Universe: Constrained” model as illustrated in Table VII. The independent variables include five text based variables, and four control
     variables used in the literature (R&D/Sales, CAPX/Sales, OI/Sales, and Log Assets). All variables are winsorized at the 1%/99% level . The Difficulty of Pure Plays to Replicate
     variable is one minus the R2 from the text decomposition regressions used to rebuild each conglomerate. The Fraction of Industries Between Pair is the fraction of all other SIC-3
     industries residing in the product market space “between” the two industries comprising the pair. Across Segment Similarity is the average textual similarity of pure play firms
     operating in the same three digit SIC segments as the conglomerate. Within Segment Similarity is the average similarity of pure play firms operating within the industries
     occupied by the given conglomerate. Conglomerate Average Concentration is the weighted average VIC-7.06 HHI of all firms used to reconstruct the given conglomerate. Log
     Document Length is a control variable equal to the natural logarithm of the number of words in the given conglomerate’s product description. Year fixed effects are included in each
     regression. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering by firm.
          Difficulty      Fraction                                    Conglom.
          of Pure         of             Across        Within         Average        Log           Vertical
          Plays to        Indust.        Segment       Segment        Concen-        Document      Relat-         R&D/           CAPX/         OI/            Log           # Obs. /
      Row Replicate       Between        Similarity    Similarity     tration        Length        edness         Sales          Sales         Sales          Assets        RSQ

                                                       Panel A: Excess Value (Text-based Constrained Valuation Model)
      (1)    0.389        0.060          0.156         -0.229         0.009          -0.023        -0.286         1.263          0.473         0.604          0.045         9,201
             (7.04)       (0.87)         (0.28)        (-0.80)        (0.04)         (-1.14)       (-1.18)        (6.11)         (7.09)        (8.59)         (9.14)        0.101
      (2)    0.406                       .                            .              -0.026        -0.338         1.287          0.467         0.603          0.044         9,201
             (7.59)                                                                  (-1.35)       (-1.44)        (6.42)         (7.08)        (8.58)         (9.07)        0.100
      (3)                 0.120                        .                             -0.075        -0.282         1.212          0.453         0.600          0.039         9,201
                          (1.92)                                                     (-3.97)       (-1.19)        (5.97)         (6.97)        (8.50)         (7.95)        0.088
      (4)                 .              -0.888                       .              -0.073        -0.259         1.147          0.453         0.594          0.040         9,201
46




                                         (-1.98)                                     (-3.88)       (-1.08)        (5.53)         (6.98)        (8.41)         (8.07)        0.088
      (5)                 .                            -0.616                        -0.068        -0.309         1.102          0.459         0.600          0.040         9,201
                                                       (-2.48)                       (-3.58)       (-1.31)        (5.29)         (6.99)        (8.48)         (8.20)        0.089
      (6)                 .                            .              0.508          -0.067        -0.355         1.144          0.463         0.597          0.040         9,201
                                                                      (2.06)         (-3.48)       (-1.51)        (5.58)         (7.03)        (8.47)         (8.17)        0.088

                                                            Panel B: Excess Value (Berger + Ofek Valuation Model)
      (7)    0.542        -0.007         0.045         -0.720         -0.473         0.057         0.054          2.392          0.688         1.118          0.063         8,951
             (7.96)       (-0.08)        (0.07)        (-2.19)        (-1.52)        (2.33)        (0.18)         (9.96)         (7.57)        (12.43)        (10.78)       0.199
      (8)    0.549                       .                            .              0.056         0.003          2.454          0.688         1.113          0.063         8,951
             (8.23)                                                                  (2.41)        (0.01)         (10.55)        (7.58)        (12.36)        (10.84)       0.198
      (9)                 0.099                        .                             -0.012        0.022          2.314          0.659         1.105          0.055         8,951
                          (1.31)                                                     (-0.54)       (0.08)         (9.77)         (7.32)        (12.18)        (9.49)        0.179
      (10)                .              -1.273                       .              -0.007        0.116          2.222          0.664         1.096          0.056         8,951
                                         (-2.37)                                     (-0.29)       (0.39)         (9.26)         (7.38)        (12.11)        (9.68)        0.180
      (11)                .                            -1.130                        0.005         0.077          2.122          0.681         1.106          0.058         8,951
                                                       (-3.94)                       (0.21)        (0.26)         (8.85)         (7.55)        (12.25)        (9.88)        0.182
      (12)                .                            .              0.348          -0.008        -0.041         2.264          0.665         1.102          0.056         8,951
                                                                      (1.10)         (-0.33)       (-0.14)        (9.53)         (7.36)        (12.18)        (9.52)        0.179
                                                           Table XI: Economic Magnitudes and Excess Valuation
     This table displays average excess valuation statistics for quintiles based on the difficulty of pure plays to replicate variable. The Difficulty of Pure Plays to Replicate is one minus
     the R2 from the text decomposition regressions used to rebuild each conglomerate. For each quintile, we report the average difficulty variable, and average raw excess valuations based
     on both the text-based and Berger and Ofek methods in the first three columns. The best text-based reconstruction is the “HP: SIC+VIC Universe: Constrained” model as illustrated
     in Table VII. The residual excess valuations are residuals from a regression of excess valuation on all of the variables included in Table X excluding the Difficulty to Replicate variable.
     These residual excess valuations thus reflect the conditional impact of the difficulty to replicate on the excess valuation.
                                                               Raw                      Raw                       Residual                 Residual
            Difficulty to                                      Excess                   Excess                    Excess                   Excess
            Replicate                Difficulty to             Valuation                Valuation                 Valuation                Valuation
            Quintile                 Replicate                 (text-based)             (Berger+Ofek)             (text-based)             (Berger+Ofek)             Obs.

                                                                                  Summary Statistics by Quintile
47




            Lowest Difficulty        0.630                     -0.045                   -0.035                    -0.059                   -0.058                    2,331
            Quintile 2               0.729                     -0.003                   -0.043                    0.002                    -0.009                    2,339
            Quintile 3               0.795                     -0.007                   -0.093                    -0.000                   -0.027                    2,337
            Quintile 4               0.858                     -0.004                   -0.094                    0.015                    -0.008                    2,339
            Highest Difficulty       1.028                     0.047                    -0.029                    0.085                    0.107                     2,333
                                                  Table XII: Conglomerate Excess Valuations (Various Subsamples)
     The table presents OLS regression estimates of conglomerate excess value on our text based variables. One observation is one conglomerate from 1997 to 2008. We consider various
     subsamples as noted in the panel headers. The dependent variable is the conglomerate’s excess valuation using the “HP: SIC+VIC Universe: Constrained” model as illustrated in
     Table VII. The independent variables include five text based variables, and four control variables used in the literature (R&D/Sales, CAPX/Sales, OI/Sales, and Log Assets). All
     variables are winsorized at the 1%/99% level . The Difficulty of Pure Plays to Replicate variable is one minus the R2 from the text decomposition regressions used to rebuild each
     conglomerate. The Fraction of Industries Between Pair is the fraction of all other SIC-3 industries residing in the product market space “between” the two industries comprising
     the pair. Across Segment Similarity is the average textual similarity of pure play firms operating in the same three digit SIC segments as the conglomerate. Within Segment
     Similarity is the average similarity of pure play firms operating within the industries occupied by the given conglomerate. Conglomerate Average Concentration is the weighted
     average VIC-7.06 HHI of all firms used to reconstruct the given conglomerate. Log Document Length is a control variable equal to the natural logarithm of the number of words in
     the given conglomerate’s product description. All regressions contain time fixed effects. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering by firm.
          Difficulty      Fraction                                   Conglom.
          of Pure         of            Across         Within        Average       Log            Vertical
          Plays to        Indust.       Segment        Segment       Concen-       Document       Relat-        R&D/           CAPX/         OI/           Log            # Obs. /
      Row Replicate       Between       Similarity     Similarity    tration       Length         edness        Sales          Sales         Sales         Assets         RSQ

                                                  Panel A: Excess Value (Conglomerates with High Value Industries Between)
48




      (7)    0.473        0.098         -0.084         -0.396        -0.120        -0.015         0.238         1.426          0.507         0.567         0.047          4,178
             (5.08)       (1.13)        (-0.09)        (-0.96)       (-0.32)       (-0.55)        (0.68)        (4.70)         (6.61)        (6.44)        (7.12)         0.111
      (8)                 0.183                        .                           -0.075         0.200         1.391          0.486         0.561         0.041          4,178
                          (2.34)                                                   (-2.97)        (0.60)        (4.70)         (6.49)        (6.39)        (6.20)         0.097

                                                  Panel B: Excess Value (Conglomerates with Low Value Industries Between)
      (9)    0.323        -0.107        -1.726         -0.089        -0.214        -0.036         -0.544        0.784          0.455         0.640         0.043          4,172
             (5.11)       (-1.10)       (-1.83)        (-0.23)       (-0.74)       (-1.40)        (-1.73)       (2.61)         (3.79)        (5.20)        (6.79)         0.092
      (10)                0.062                        .                           -0.073         -0.520        0.806          0.455         0.664         0.036          4,172
                          (0.74)                                                   (-2.96)        (-1.67)       (2.70)         (3.86)        (5.36)        (5.80)         0.079
