                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 THE EFFECTS OF HEALTH SHOCKS ON EMPLOYMENT AND HEALTH INSURANCE:
          THE ROLE OF EMPLOYER-PROVIDED HEALTH INSURANCE

                                           Cathy J. Bradley
                                           David Neumark
                                           Meryl I. Motika

                                        Working Paper 17223
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17223


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2011




Bradley, Neumark, and Motika’s research was supported by NCI grant number R01-CA122145, “Health,
Health Insurance, and Labor Supply.” We thank Pamela Farley Short for helpful comments on an earlier
draft. We also thank Dr. Mark Pauly and an anonymous reviewer for their helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Cathy J. Bradley, David Neumark, and Meryl I. Motika. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Health Shocks on Employment and Health Insurance: The Role of Employer-Provided
Health Insurance
Cathy J. Bradley, David Neumark, and Meryl I. Motika
NBER Working Paper No. 17223
July 2011, Revised August 2012
JEL No. I18,J22,J38

                                           ABSTRACT

We study how men’s dependence on their own employer for health insurance affects labor supply
responses and loss of health insurance coverage when faced with a serious health shock. Men with
employment-contingent health insurance (ECHI) are more likely to remain working following some
kinds of adverse health shocks, and are more likely to lose insurance. With the passage of health care
reform, the tendency of men with ECHI as opposed to other sources of insurance to remain employed
following a health shock may be diminished, along with the likelihood of losing health insurance.


Cathy J. Bradley                                  Meryl I. Motika
Department of Healthcare Policy and Research      Department of Economics
Virginia Commonwealth University                  3151 Social Science Plaza
830 E. Main Street                                University of California-Irvine
Richmond, VA 23219                                Irvine, CA 92697-5100
cjbradley@vcu.edu                                 mmotika@uci.edu

David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu
Background: Employment-contingent health insurance (ECHI) has been criticized for tying

insurance to continued employment. Our research sheds light on two central issues regarding

employment-contingent health insurance: whether such insurance “locks” people who experience

a health shock into remaining at work; and whether it puts people at risk for insurance loss upon

the onset of illness, because health shocks pose challenges to continued employment.

Objective: To determine how men’s dependence on their own employer for health insurance

affects labor supply responses and health insurance coverage following a health shock.

Data Sources: We use the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) surveys from 1996 through 2008

to observe employment and health insurance status at interviews two years apart, and whether a

health shock occurred in the intervening period between the interviews.

Study Selection: All employed married men with health insurance either through their own

employer or their spouse’s employer, interviewed in at least two consecutive HRS waves with

non-missing data on employment, insurance, health, demographic, and other variables, and under

age 64 at the second interview. We limited the sample to men who were initially healthy.

Data Extraction: Our analytical sample consisted of 1,582 men of whom 1,379 had ECHI at the

first interview, while 203 were covered by their spouse’s employer. Hospitalization affected 209

men with ECHI and 36 men with spouse insurance. A new disease diagnosis was reported by

103 men with ECHI and 22 men with other insurance. There were 171 men with ECHI and 25

men with spouse employer insurance who had a self-reported health decline.

Data Synthesis: Labor supply response differences associated with ECHI – with men with

health shocks and ECHI more likely to continue working – appear to be driven by specific types

of health shocks associated with future higher health care costs but not with immediate increases

in morbidity that limit continued employment. Men with ECHI who have a self-reported health
                                                                                                    3
decline are significantly more likely to lose health insurance than men with insurance through a

spouse.

Conclusion: Men with employment-contingent health insurance are more likely to remain

working following some kinds of adverse health shocks, and are more likely to lose insurance.

With the passage of health care reform, the tendency of men with ECHI as opposed to other

sources of insurance to remain employed following a health shock may be diminished, along

with the likelihood of losing health insurance.



Key Messages

         Informs policies regarding the effects of employment-based health insurance on labor
          supply and continuity of health insurance among those experiencing health shocks.
         Men with employer-provided health insurance appear to experience a form of job lock –
          or “employment lock” – following a health shock because of the ECHI incentives. Prior
          estimates of “job lock” may understate the true effects of ECHI because they are
          confounded by a health shock’s negative impact on employment.
         Those with ECHI are more likely to lose health insurance following some types of health
          shocks.


Keywords

Health shocks, health insurance, employment

JEL codes

D1, I18, J22




                                                                                                   4
1. Introduction

       The merits and shortcomings of the U.S. system of health insurance, which is primarily

employer-based for citizens under age 65, have been debated since its widespread adoption

during and following World War II. There has been a resurgence of this debate with the passage

of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA). Employer-based health insurance has

often been criticized for constraining employment decisions or creating “job lock.”[1-5]

       A goal of the ACA is to provide continuous health insurance coverage when an

individual is diagnosed with a serious disease that raises future costs of health care. Although

the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) allows employees to continue

their employer-based health insurance coverage after they stop working, former employees pay

the full cost of group coverage for a policy that is usually limited to 18 months – making

COBRA a prohibitively expensive option for many and only a temporary measure for those who

can afford the full cost of coverage. Our research in this paper informs the debate about two

central issues regarding employer-based health insurance: whether such insurance “locks” people

who experience a health shock into remaining at work; and whether it puts people at risk for

insurance loss upon the onset of illness, because health shocks pose challenges to continued

employment.

       An unpublished study using Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) data reports that

nearly one in five individuals reporting fair or poor health lost coverage over a two-year

period.[6] A qualitative study jointly conducted by the Kaiser Family Foundation and the

American Cancer Society reported 20 case studies of cancer patients who faced financial

difficulty as a result of gaps in the health insurance system.[7] One of the themes that emerged




                                                                                                   5
was “people who depend on their employer for health insurance may not be protected from

catastrophically high health care costs if they become too sick to work” (p. 1).

       Using primary data collected from a sample of Detroit women diagnosed with breast

cancer, Bradley et al. found that women with insurance through their employer (“employment-

contingent health insurance,” or ECHI) are significantly more likely to remain employed relative

to women whose insurance is not provided by their employer, and that ECHI reduces the

negative impact of cancer on weekly hours worked.[8] The incentive ECHI creates to remain

employed following a health shock should be stronger for men because fewer men are able to

switch to their spouse’s policy.[8] Consistent with this prediction, Tunceli et al.[9] report the

tendency to remain employed after getting cancer if one has ECHI is strongest for men.

       While past research has focused on women, in this paper we focus on men. The effects

of ECHI on men’s behavior are particularly interesting because men are much more likely to get

their health insurance through their employer than are women. We compare the responses to

health shocks of those who depend on their own employer for health insurance – who have ECHI

– with the responses of those who obtain their health insurance through their spouse’s employer.

Men with ECHI are very similar to men who depend on their wives for health insurance,

implying that differences in how these two groups of men respond to health shocks may provide

a good quasi-experiment to estimate the effects of dependence on one’s employer for health

insurance.i Nonetheless, we also experiment with different comparison groups in order to obtain

a sample of men who are solely dependent on their job for health insurance without the option to

switch to a spouse’s policy, compared to men who are not dependent on their job for health

insurance. In addition, we estimate the effects of different types of health shocks by

distinguishing between shocks that raise the future value of health insurance but do not cause an



                                                                                                    6
immediate reduction in functioning, and shocks that impose both immediate costs and morbidity

on the worker. This distinction helps us to measure the employment effects of ECHI without the

confounding effects of morbidity, which would tend to dampen ECHI’s incentives to remain

working.

2. Empirical Approach

       We use data from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) on employed married men

with health insurance either through their own employer or their spouse’s employer. In the HRS,

we observe employment and health insurance status at interviews two years apart, and whether a

health shock occurred in the intervening period between the interviews.

       The first outcome is remaining employed following a health shock, and the second

outcome is loss of health insurance following a health shock. The outcomes are modeled as

functions of health shocks (HS), health insurance source prior to the shock (ECHI or spouse’s

employer), control variables, and unobserved influences (ε). We estimate the probability of

employment (E) using

       Pr (Ei2 = 1| Ei1 = 1, INSi1 = 1, HSi1 = 0, ECHIi1, HSi12, Xi),                          (1)

where the ‘i ‘ subscript denotes individuals, and the ‘1’, ‘2’, or ‘12’ subscripts denote the first

interview (period 1), second interview (period 2), or the intervening period.

       The condition Ei1 = 1 implies that the respondent was employed at period 1, the condition

INSi1 = 1 implies that he had insurance in period 1, and the condition HSi1 = 0 implies that he

was healthy as of period 1, reflecting our sample selection rules. The control variables in X

include individual, spouse, and job characteristics.

       This equation is estimated as a linear probability model. In addition to entering each of

the variables linearly, we include interactions between HS and ECHI, using:



                                                                                                      7
        Ei2 = α + β1HSi12·ECHIi1 + β2HSi12·(1 − ECHIi1) + β3ECHIi1 + Xiγ + εi2.                 (2)

        In this model, β1 captures the effect of a health shock on employment for those with

ECHI initially, and β2 captures the effect of a health shock on employment for those without

ECHI initially. The difference (β1 – β2) is then the difference-in-difference estimate, identifying

how the effect of a health shock on employment transitions is influenced by ECHI. β3 captures

differences in employment transitions between those with and without ECHI, and without a

health shock, to account for unmeasured differences between workers with ECHI and insurance

through the spouse’s employer (non-ECHI) that are correlated with remaining employed.

        Equation (2) is a re-parameterization of the more standard difference-in-difference

specification

        Ei2 = α + β1’HSi12 + β2’ECHIi1 + β3’HSi12·ECHIi1 + Xiγ + εi2,                           (3)

where β3’ is the conventional difference-in-difference estimator. The formulation in equation (2)

yields direct estimates of the effects of health shocks for the two groups. The models are

equivalent, with the same differentials or effects captured in different combinations of the

coefficients.

        We estimate the same type of model to study insurance loss where the same parameters

capture how the source of health insurance influences the effect of a health shock on the loss of

insurance.

        In all estimations, we control for individual, job, and spouse characteristics. Individual

characteristics include age (20 to 39, 40 to 59, 60 to 64), education (high school or less, some

college, college degree or higher), race (white or other), and household income.ii Job

characteristics include indicators for whether the job involves a lot of physical activity or stress.iii

We control for part-time employment, employment in the public sector, and firm size. We also



                                                                                                      8
include a dummy variable indicating that one or more dependents are insured through the

respondent’s ECHI.

       Finally, we add variables to capture the employment situations of spouses at the first

interview. We include dummy variables for spouses not working, working part-time, or retired,

which are related to the dependency of the household on the respondent’s employment, and we

include a control for the spouse’s self-reported health status. There are also controls for whether

the spouse is older than 65 and if the spouse is insured by the respondent’s health insurance plan,

both of which address the need to maintain health insurance for the spouse.

2.1 Misclassification bias

       We categorize men by whether they have ECHI or have health insurance through a

spouse. However, Madrian[10] reported that 36% of men with their own health insurance have the

option to switch to their spouse’s policy. This type of measurement error would tend to dampen

the estimated differential in the labor supply response to a health shock when using ECHI to

classify whether one is dependent on one’s own job for health insurance.

       We therefore experimented with alternative comparison groups and specifications of

ECHI. First, we restrict the sample to married men with non-missing information on their wife’s

insurance (this reduced the sample size by about 15%). Men with and without ECHI are

included in this sample. We assume that employed women with employer-provided health

insurance have the option of covering their husbands. The HRS does not specifically ask

respondents without employer insurance if they can cover their husbands, and instead only asks

if health insurance is available through their employer. Using this information, and assuming

that if health insurance is available they could cover their husband, we construct an alternative

comparison – between men who either rely on their wife’s health insurance or have the option to



                                                                                                    9
switch to their wife’s health insurance to men with ECHI and no option to switch to a wife’s

plan. Next, we estimate these models with the inclusion of single men, assumed to have no other

insurance option if they have ECHI. And last, we further restrict the sample to men with ECHI

and then compare those with and without the option to switch to their wife’s health insurance

(results not reported; available upon request).

2.2 Confounding with morbidity

        Morbidity from the health shock can confound the estimation of how incentives to

maintain health insurance affect labor supply responses to ECHI. A way to avoid this type of

bias in the estimation of “employment lock,” and thereby to focus on how the health shock

affects the labor supply response stemming solely from concerns about loss of insurance, is to

distinguish between health shocks that cause immediate comorbidity and those that do not. An

additional advantage of this approach is that misclassification of the dependence on employment

for insurance, if it exists, is likely to be similar across different types of health shocks, so this

misclassification should not bias estimates of differential labor supply responses based on ECHI

depending on the type of health shock.

        We therefore focus, in some of our analyses, on a narrower definition of health shocks –

in particular, health shocks entailing a new diagnosis only, without either hospitalization or a

self-reported decline in health. This analysis isolates health shocks that do not entail an increase

in morbidity that could affect a person’s ability to remain employed, but which entail increased

future health care costs and hence the value of health insurance. Doing so provides a cleaner test

of the hypothesis that health insurance locks people into employment. In contrast, health shocks

that entail increases in morbidity (such as hospitalizations or self-reported declines in health)

may reduce the likelihood of employment independently of ECHI’s incentives. Increases in



                                                                                                        10
morbidity that affect employment directly are most likely to trigger large self-reported declines

in health, whereas new diagnoses without a large self-reported decline seem most likely to

constitute mainly a “health cost” shock.

       A second implication of dependence on employment for health insurance is that those

with ECHI may be at greater risk of losing insurance when they experience a health shock that

increases morbidities, because such health shocks interfere with work. Thus, we report analyses

focusing on those with only an increase in morbidity (a self-reported decline in health),

hypothesizing that these kinds of shocks are more likely to result in loss of health insurance.

3. Data

       We use the HRS surveys from 1996 through 2008. We selected all observations for

which the respondent was interviewed in at least two consecutive HRS waves with non-missing

data for the employment, insurance, health, demographic, and other variables we use. We

excluded the 1992 and 1994 waves because it is impossible to distinguish current versus former

employer as the source of health insurance. We narrowed the age range to 64 years or younger

at the second interview to avoid respondents eligible for Medicare.iv We then selected the subset

of observations in which the respondent was married, employed, and had employment-based

health insurance (from their employer or union or their spouse’s employer or unionv) in the first

interview of the pair. Respondents were excluded if they were insured by a former employer,

any government plan (e.g., Medicare, Medicaid, military insurance), or a privately-purchased

policy, or were uninsured at the time of the first interview.

       We restricted the sample to healthy men. We selected pairs of observations in which, at

the first observation in the pair, the respondent had not previously been diagnosed with lung

disease, cancer, stroke, diabetes, angina, or congestive heart failure. We excluded observations



                                                                                                    11
of individuals who had been hospitalized more than once or for more than one night in the past

two years, or who described their health status as poor or fair in the past two years. An

examination of this initially healthy sample isolates the effects of a new health event rather than

an exacerbation of a chronic condition or accumulation of new health conditions.

       We define three types of adverse health events, henceforth referred to as health shocks.

Given that self-reported health status is recorded as excellent, very good, good, fair, or poor, we

define a health self-report decline (SRD) as a shift from “excellent,” “very good,” or “good”

health status in the first interview to “fair” or “poor” health status in the second. The second

shock we use is a new diagnosis of cancer, lung disease, angina, congestive heart failure, or

stroke, reported at the second interview. Our third health shock measure is hospitalization on at

least two occasions or for at least two nights between the first and second interview. In addition,

we look separately at health shocks consisting of only new diagnoses or only self-reported health

declines in the same period, for reasons discussed earlier. For those respondents who ultimately

report a health shock, we select the pair of observations bracketing this adverse health event,

because the incidence of health shocks in the sample is low. For those respondents who never

report a health shock, we randomly select one pair of observations.

       We define the ECHI group as those with primary health insurance from the current

employer or union as of the first interview. The non-ECHI comparison group includes those

with insurance through their spouse’s employer or union.vi

       We start with 39,896 consecutive-wave pairs of interviews on 10,258 men. When we

restrict the sample to those who are under age 65 at the second interview, and married and

employed with health insurance through their own employer or their spouse’s employer as of the

first interview, we are left with 2,160 observations. After limiting the sample to men who



                                                                                                   12
initially reported good or better health, who had no prior diagnosis of any of the listed diseases,

and who had not reported a hospitalization of more than one night or more than one

hospitalization in the prior two years, we have 1,709 observations. Excluding respondents with

missing data on the variables required for our analysis, we arrive at the final sample of

individuals, consisting of 1,582 men of which 1,379 had ECHI at the first interview, while 203

were covered by their spouse’s employer (Table 1).

       Table 1 also reports the number of men who experienced health shocks, by insurance

source. The most common health shock is hospitalization, which affected 209 men with ECHI

and 36 men with spouse insurance. A new diagnosis of the diseases listed above was reported by

103 men with ECHI and 22 men with other insurance. There were 171 men with ECHI and 25

men with spouse employer insurance who had a self-reported health decline.

       Table 2 provides information on the relationships between alternative possible health

shock measures, including the individual diseases that make up new diagnoses. Rates of

hospitalization and self-reported decline (SRD) vary by diagnosis. About 11% of respondents

who are not diagnosed with lung disease, cancer, stroke, angina, or congestive heart failure self-

report a decline in health status, with the rate more than doubling for those with a new diagnosis

of one type or another. Cancer and strokes have the highest rates of hospitalization and SRD.

These differences match our expectations concerning the different diseases; some diagnoses have

little immediate impact on contemporaneous morbidity or quality of life, while strokes are

immediately debilitating or life-threatening.

       Thus far, we define the sample in terms of health shocks experienced by men. However,

if their spouse also experienced a health shock, then men with ECHI might be more likely to

remain at work to cover their spouses. Alternatively, men with insurance through their spouses



                                                                                                  13
might change their employment behavior to increase health insurance coverage, when their

spouses experience a health shock. In either case, correlations between men’s health shocks and

health shocks to their spouses could lead to biased estimates of the effects of interest. To isolate

the effects of health shocks to the men in our sample, we also restricted the sample to men whose

spouses did not experience health shocks between the first and second interview (using the same

definitions as described above, applied to the spouses). These restrictions resulted in a 26%

reduction in sample size. When we re-estimated our models using this more restricted sample,

the results were qualitatively similar to results from models using the sample selected without

regard to spouse health. Therefore, we report results from our original larger sample.

4. Results

4.1. Descriptive statistics

        Table 3 reports descriptive statistics by health shock and insurance source. Among men

with ECHI at the first interview, 82% are employed at the second interview, the same percentage

as for men with insurance through the spouse’s employer. Most men with ECHI retain their

health insurance through this source (76%) as of the second interview, and a few become

uninsured (3%). About a quarter (24%) of men with insurance through the spouse’s employer at

the first interview gain ECHI by the second interview and only 2% become uninsured. Most

men with ECHI cover their spouse (65%) and many also cover other dependents (38%).vii Men

with ECHI rather than insurance through their spouse, are, at the first interview, less likely to be

employed part-time (p < .01), and more likely to work for larger employers (p < .01) and in

stressful jobs (p < .01). Men with ECHI are more likely to have spouses who do not work, who

work part-time, who are retired, and who are in poor health (p < .01 in all cases).




                                                                                                  14
        Relative to healthy men, the univariate comparisons suggest that health shocks involving

either hospitalization or self-reported declines reduce employment (p < .01). Men who have

some kinds of health shocks are more likely to have physical jobs as of the first interview (p <

.05). Men with lung disease or hospitalizations are more likely to have older spouses (p < .01).

Spouses of men with some types of health shocks are less likely to work part-time (p < .05 or

.01) and, in the case of self-reported declines, more likely to be in poor health (p < .01).

Respondents who experienced self-reported health declines were more likely to be nonwhite (p <

.05) and had lower incomes and education levels (both with p < .01).

4.2. Employment transitions

        Table 4 reports difference-in-difference estimates of the effects of specific disease-related

health shocks on remaining employed for those with ECHI versus insurance from a spouse’s

employer. The first-difference estimates indicate that men with ECHI who are newly diagnosed

with cancer are as likely to be employed at the second interview as are otherwise similar healthy

men. In contrast, for men with insurance through a spouse, those with a cancer diagnosis are

more likely to be employed at the second interview, although the difference is not statistically

significant. Thus, the difference-in-difference estimate is negative and statistically insignificant.

In contrast, the estimates for those newly diagnosed with lung disease indicate that those with

ECHI are relatively more likely to remain employed after these health shocks. The point

estimate of the effect of the health shock is negative and relatively large for those with insurance

through the spouse (non-ECHI). The difference-in-difference estimate is positive, meaning that

men who have ECHI and are newly diagnosed with lung disease are more likely to be employed

than men with insurance through their spouse’s employer. Despite the estimated differential

being very large (28.7 percentage points), it is not statistically significant.



                                                                                                   15
        Broader definitions of health shocks are reported in columns (3) and (4). In these

estimations, we find fairly consistent evidence that those with health shocks – whether they have

ECHI or insurance through their spouse’s employer – are less likely to remain employed, as

expected. Moreover, for those with ECHI, the evidence of declines in employment is

statistically significant for hospitalizations. Nonetheless, the magnitudes of the simple-

difference estimates of the effects of health shocks on the two insurance groups are similar, and

as a result we do not find statistically significant difference-in-difference estimates indicating

that those with health shocks are more likely to remain employed if they have ECHI. These

latter estimates are near zero and alternate in sign, suggesting that the true effect may be near

zero.

        In column (5), however, we find evidence consistent with the hypothesis that ECHI locks

those with health shocks into employment. For those with a new diagnosis only, the estimated

employment effect for those with ECHI is positive and significant (a 19.8 percentage point

differential, p < .01). This evidence is consistent with the conjecture that new diagnoses in the

absence of hospitalization pose less of a barrier for those with ECHI to keep working. In the

absence of a health shock, 18% of older men routinely leave employment over a two-year period

(Table 3). However, among those with a new diagnosis only and ECHI, the health shock does

not affect employment. The net result, as reflected in the difference-in-difference estimates, is

that men with an adverse health shock that raises the value of health insurance without increasing

morbidity are more likely to remain employed if they had ECHI prior to the shock. The

difference-in-difference estimate is large and positive – 30 percentage points – and statistically

significant (p < .05). For reasons explained earlier, we regard the evidence in column (5) as




                                                                                                     16
providing the cleanest test of the hypothesis that ECHI locks men into employment, because it

isolates the effect of future health care costs and avoids the confounding effect of morbidity.

4.3. Insurance

        Table 5 explores the extent to which employed men with different initial sources of

health insurance remain insured following a health shock. For both hospitalizations and self-

reported declines in health, the difference-in-difference estimates indicate that those with health

shocks who have ECHI are more likely to lose their health insurance (p < .05 for hospitalization,

and p < .01 for self-reported health declines). The difference-in-difference estimates are to some

extent driven by the positive simple difference estimates for those with insurance through the

spouse, which are statistically significant. These positive simple difference estimates imply that,

among those with insurance through the spouse, those with health shocks are more likely to

remain insured. Because the insurance comes through the spouse, the health shock itself poses

no barrier to remaining insured. On the other hand, given the health shock, it is not surprising

that these couples take steps to retain the health insurance through the spouse’s employer.

        When we look at new diagnoses in isolation, which should capture those with shocks that

increase the value of health insurance but do not increase morbidity, we find no evidence that

health shocks lead to insurance loss. This is not surprising given the (relative) absence of an

increase in morbidity, coupled with the increased future value of health insurance that boosts the

relative employment of those with ECHI and this kind of health shock. However, when we

isolate those who have a self-reported health decline only – for whom we can better isolate the

effects of morbidity on insurance loss – we find that those with ECHI are significantly more

likely to lose health insurance.viii

4.4 Alternative estimations



                                                                                                   17
       In our alternative estimations where we experimented with different comparison groups

and specifications of ECHI, the difference-in-difference estimates were statistically insignificant

in estimations predicting employment and insurance loss (results not reported; available upon

request). We do not believe these findings alter our main conclusions for four reasons. First,

there is an unknown degree of measurement error with regard to classifying potential insurance

sources. The HRS does not specifically ask women if they have the option to cover their

husband on their insurance policy unless they are actually insured through their employer.

Therefore, we cannot say for certain that having employer-based health insurance available is the

same as being able to add a husband to the policy. Second, health insurance policies differ in

generosity of coverage, premiums, co-pays, and flexibility to choose providers, so policies held

by the husband may not be equivalent to policies held by the wife.

       Third, it is likely that men do not perceive their wife’s job as a viable source for health

insurance. The older women covered by the HRS have, or had, fairly weak attachments to the

labor force, and older women who are employed may work for firms with inferior benefits.

Therefore, the availability of an option for health insurance outside of one’s own ECHI does not

necessarily imply a reduction in employment lock because the alternative policy may be

undesirable (particularly following a new health shock when relationships with new health care

providers will be established and new services will be required). In a prior published paper,[8] we

show that women with ECHI, regardless of whether their husband is offered health insurance, are

more likely to be employed in the periods following breast cancer diagnosis relative to a group of

similar women with insurance through a spouse who are not offered insurance through their own

employer.




                                                                                                     18
       We see the absence of significant difference-in-difference estimates for insurance loss in

the alternative estimations with different comparison groups as reinforcing the view that the men

in our sample generally do not regard the insurance their wives get through their jobs as a viable

source of insurance. If wives’ policies were a viable option, then when we reclassified men’s

dependence on their own employment for health insurance based on whether their wives are

offered health insurance on their jobs, the difference-in-difference estimate of the probability of

insurance loss associated with a health shock and ECHI should increase, rather than diminishing.

We regard the finding that this estimate diminishes as bolstering the ECHI/non-ECHI distinction

to study employment lock or job-lock for men. However, this specification may not be equally

appropriate for women, for whom the offer of health insurance through a husband’s job may be a

viable substitute for ECHI through her own employer, because of better jobs and benefits and

more permanent labor force attachment of men. In a study of women newly diagnosed with

breast cancer, we found that, among women with ECHI, those who had the option to switch to

their husband’s insurance reduced labor supply by more than married women without the option

to switch to their husband’s insurance.[11]

5. Discussion and Conclusions

       This study informs policies regarding employment-based health insurance along two

dimensions – labor supply and continuity of health insurance. Men with employer-provided

health insurance appear to experience a form of job lock – or “employment lock” – following a

health shock because of the incentives that employment-contingent health insurance (ECHI)

creates. In addition, those with ECHI are more likely to lose health insurance following some

types of health shocks.




                                                                                                  19
       Prior published papers on health shocks, employment, and source of insurance find

related evidence for men and women with cancer,[8-9] whereas in this paper we do not find such

evidence for cancer-related health shocks. The variation in results should not be viewed as

surprising. The samples are small and the studies use different definitions of health shocks,

choices of control groups, and study periods. Unfortunately, there is not a readily-available

secondary dataset where the incidence of illness in working-age people is sufficiently high to

definitively study the influence of ECHI on labor supply following a health shock in large,

representative samples. Therefore, the only feasible research strategy is to assemble evidence

from disparate data sources, in an effort to see if a consistent and cohesive story emerges.

       An important contribution of this paper is the finding that differences in labor supply

responses are driven by specific types of health shocks. Health shocks associated with higher

health care costs in the future but not with immediate increases in morbidity have a positive

effect on labor supply for those with ECHI. We interpret this evidence as reflecting labor supply

responses to health shocks that increase expected future health care costs, but do not introduce

contemporaneous health problems. This finding has implications for the job lock literature as

well. Research on job lock that does not distinguish between health shocks with and without

immediate morbidity may understate the extent to which ECHI “locks” some workers into a job

with health insurance.

       Two limitations are noteworthy. First, we study a sample of married, employed, and

initially-insured individuals. Given the socioeconomic characteristics of married versus single

older adults, and given that marriage often implies the availability of multiple sources of

insurance, the HRS participants we study are less vulnerable to loss of employment and loss of

insurance than the population at large. Nonetheless, this sample provides a research design that



                                                                                                   20
allows us to isolate the effects of the source of health insurance more convincingly than if we

compared the experiences of married, employed, adults with ECHI to those who were not

married or were either uninsured or on public insurance. Moreover, most people in the age range

we study are married. Second, the HRS is confined to older individuals and our findings may not

be applicable to those who are younger, although we view this as a minor drawback for studying

the influence of health shocks, which are much more prevalent among older people.

       Our study indicates that, for some specifications of health shocks, ECHI encourages

continued employment of men following a health shock. Access to alternative sources of health

insurance may reduce this employment lock after a health shock. On the one hand, an enhanced

ability to continue health insurance coverage without working could deliver health benefits, if

men who would otherwise be constrained to keep working are instead better able to take the time

to recover and to receive appropriate health care. On the other hand, this is a potential cost of

less reliance on employment for health insurance; like any policy that provides resources to those

not working, there are potential work disincentives.




                                                                                                    21
Endnotes
       i
            The similarity may reflect the fact that men whose jobs provide health insurance are

more likely to be highly-skilled men with higher incomes, while men who rely on their spouses

for health insurance may also be relatively high-earning men, owing to assortative mating in

marriage markets.
       ii
             In separate estimations, we included dummy variables for each two-year age group

between 55 and 64, and for age under 55 years (an age range with few observations). The results

were virtually unchanged.
       iii
             We dichotomize these into all/almost all of the time, most of the time, or some of the

time versus none or almost none of the time.
       iv
             Most HRS respondents are near the upper end of this age range, although occasionally

spouses of the target population are much younger.
       v
             As union membership is commonly tied to employment with a particular firm, it seems

reasonable to assume that losing or changing jobs affects union-provided as well as employer-

provided insurance. For this reason, we treat union insurance as ECHI. However, the union-

insured workers make up less than 2% of the sample, and excluding them does not meaningfully

change the results.
       vi
             As a short-hand, we refer to these two types of insurance as coming through the

employer or the spouse’s employer.
       vii
             The small share of spouses covered by ECHI (6%) when the respondent is in the non-

ECHI group could reflect either both people in the couple having employer insurance and for

some reason each being on the other employer’s plan, or reporting error.




                                                                                                      22
       viii
              Because COBRA is available to those who experience a health shock, our evidence on

responses to health shocks with regard to either remaining employed to retain insurance, or

insurance loss, should be biased toward the null hypothesis of no differential effect of health

shocks for those with ECHI.




                                                                                                  23
References

1. Cooper PF, Monheit AC. Does employment-related health insurance inhibit job mobility?
Inquiry 1993; 30(4): 400-416.

2. Gruber J, Madrian BC. Health insurance and job mobility: the effects of public policy on job-
lock. Ind Lab Relat Rev 1994; 48(1): 86-102.

3. Kapur K. The impact of health on job mobility: a measure of job lock. Ind Lab Relat Rev
1997; 51(2): 282-297.

4. Adams SJ. Employer-provided health insurance and job change. Contemp Econ Policy 2004;
22(3): 357-369.

5. Stroupe K, Kinney E, Kniesner T. Chronic illness and health insurance-related job lock. J Pol
Anal Manage 2000; 20(3): 525-544.

6. Montz E, Seshamani M. Insurance insecurity: families are losing employer-sponsored
insurance coverage. Available from URL: http://www.HealthReform.gov/reports/insurance/
insuranceinsecuritypdf.pdf. [Accessed 2011 Jan 15].

7. Schwartz K, Martin K, Schmidt C. Spending to survive: cancer patients confront holes in the
health insurance system. Kaiser Family Foundation 2009; (7851).

8. Bradley C, Neumark D, Luo Z, et al. Employment-based health insurance, illness, and labor
supply of women: evidence from married women with breast cancer. Health Econ 2006; 16(7):
719-734.

9. Tunceli K, Short PF, Moran JR, et al. Cancer survivorship, health insurance, and employment
transitions among older workers. Inquiry 2009; 46(1): 17-32.

10. Madrian BC. Employment-based health insurance and job mobility: is there evidence of job-
lock? Q J Econ 1994; 109(1): 27-54.

11. Bradley C, Neumark D, Barkowski S. Does employer-provided health insurance constrain
labor supply adjustments to health shocks? New evidence on women diagnosed with breast
cancer. National Bureau of Economic Research. Working paper #18060. Available from URL:
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18060 . [Accessed 2012 Aug 15].




                                                                                               24
Table 1. Men under age 65, Health and Retirement Study, 1996 – 2008
Sample inclusion criteria                                                                       Observations
Consecutive-wave observationsa                                                                    39,896
Individuals                                                                                       10,258
Aged 18 to 64 years at 2nd interviewb                                                              5,253
Married at 1st interview                                                                           4,354
Employedc at 1st interview                                                                         2,770
Respondent ECHI or insurance through spouse employer (non-ECHI)d                                   2,160
at 1st interview
No fair or poor health or hospitalization for more than 1 night or more                             1,709
than 2 occasions in the two years prior to first interview, and no
previous diagnosis of cancer, lung disease, angina, or congestive heart
failure
No non-valid missing data for required variables                                                    1,582
Men with ECHI at 1st interview                                                                      1,379

New diagnosis of an includede disease                                                                103
Hospitalizedf between 1st and 2nd interview                                                          209
Decline in health self-reportg between 1st and 2nd interview                                         171
Men with insurance through spouse employer (non-ECHI) at 1st                                         203
interview
New diagnosis of an includede disease                                                                 22
Hospitalizedf between 1st and 2nd interview                                                           36
Decline in health self-reportg between 1st and 2nd interview                                          25
a
  An observation is defined as two consecutive interviews with the same individual.
b
  ‘1st interview’ and ‘2nd interview’ refer to the pair of interviews that make up an observation.
c
  Working for pay with positive earnings.
d
  ECHI or insurance through the spouse’s employer includes current employer or union-based health insurance. It
excludes privately-purchased or former employer-based insurance in addition to Medicare, Medicaid, and other
government-provided health insurance. “ECHI” refers to insurance from the respondent’s employer or union.
e
  Included diseases are cancer, lung disease, angina, congestive heart failure, and stroke.
f
  Hospitalized for at least 2 nights or on 2 occasions since the 1 st interview.
g
  Health decline defined as a drop from excellent, very good, or good at the 1st interview to fair or poor at the 2nd
interview.
Table 2. Probability of health shock by disease
                                                               % Decline in self-
  New diagnosis              N          % Hospitalized             report                 % Neither          % Both
Nonea                      1,457            13%                     11%                     78%                2%
Any diagnosisb              125             46%                     26%                     43%               14%
Cancer                       72             53%                     26%                     38%               17%
Congestive heart              2              0                        0                    100%                 0
failure
Stroke                       11                73%                     36%                    18%              27%
Lung disease                 35                29%                     20%                    57%               6%
Angina                        9                33%                     33%                    44%              11%
a
  Did not report diagnosis of cancer, stroke, angina, congestive heart failure, or lung disease, during the relevant
period.
b
  Reported diagnosis of cancer, stroke, angina, congestive heart failure, or lung disease, during the relevant period.
Table 3. Sample characteristics a
                                    Insurance source                                     Health shock
                                   Spouse
                                  employer
                                 (non-ECHI) ECHI                  Healthy Cancer            Lung         Hospb    SRDc
N                                    203        1,379             1,140     72               35           245      196
                                     (1)         (2)               (3)      (4)              (5)          (6)      (7)
Employed at 2nd                     82%         82%               84%      85%              80%         76%***   75%***
interview
Health insurance at 2nd interview                 ***
   Uninsured                      2%               3%               3%          0            3%           3%       6%
   ECHI                          24%              76%              70%         71%          63%          66%      67%
   Spouse                        64%               4%              11%         14%          11%          13%      13%
   Government                     1%               2%               2%         4%            3%           2%       3%
   Privately purchased            0%               2%               2%         1%             0           2%       3%
   Other                          9%              12%              12%         10%          20%          14%      10%
ECHI covers spouse                6%            65%***             58%         50%          57%          57%      59%
ECHI covers other                 1%            38%***             34%         28%          34%          32%      30%
Age
   Age under 40                    0               1%               1%          0             0           0         0
   Age 40-59                     70%              67%              67%         61%          60%          68%      72%
   Age 60-63                     30%              32%              32%         39%          40%          32%      28%
Nonwhite                          9%               9%               8%         14%           6%          11%     14%**
Education                                                                                                         ***
   High school or less           61%              60%              57%         61%          68%          61%      77%
   Some college                   5%               5%               6%         4%            6%           4%       4%
   College degree                34%              35%              37%         35%          26%          35%      19%
Annual income                                      **                                                             ***
   Under $20k                     1%               1%               1%         1%             0           1%       1%
   $20k-$75k                     37%              47%              44%         36%          60%          47%      60%
   Over $75k                     62%              52%              55%         63%          40%          52%      39%
Physical job                     33%              35%              34%         31%         51%**         31%     42%**
Stressful job                    54%            64%***             62%         64%          54%          63%      64%
Public sector job                 4%               5%               5%         3%            3%           4%       4%
Part-time job                    14%            4%***               5%         3%            9%           5%       6%
Employer size                                     ***
   Under 25 employees            32%              13%              16%         14%          17%          16%      15%
   25-99                         17%              10%              11%         7%            6%           9%      13%
   100 or more                   51%              77%              73%         79%          77%          75%      72%
Spouse
   Employed                      96%            60%***             65%         65%          60%            64%     60%
   Part-time work                10%            20%***             21%        11%**         14%         11%***   12%***
   Retired                        2%            14%***             12%         15%          11%           16%*     11%
   Poor health                    7%            15%***             13%          7%          14%            16%   20%***
   Over 65                        2%              4%                3%          4%        14%***         7%***      4%
Notes: ECHI=employment contingent health insurance.
Significance: * p<.1 ** p<.05 *** p<.01 (columns (2) vs. (1) and columns (4)-(7) vs. (3)).
a
  Except where specified, all characteristics refer to the 1 st interview.
b
  Hospitalized for at least two nights or on two separate occasions between 1st and 2nd interviews.
c
  Decline in self-report of health from good or better to fair or poor.
Table 4. Probability remain employed,a first differences and difference-in-differenceb from
linear probability models, initially-employed married men under age 65 with employer-
provided health insurance
                                               Lung                        New       New diagnosis
                                Cancer       disease    Hospitalized diagnosis             only
                                   (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)
 ECHI×health shock               -0.005        0.048       -0.084*        -0.015        0.198***
                                (0.085)      (0.098)       (0.049)       (0.064)         (0.059)
 Non-ECHI×health shock           0.103        -0.239        -0.050        -0.034          -0.098
                                (0.081)      (0.216)       (0.084)       (0.098)         (0.144)
 Diff-in-diff                    -0.108        0.287        -0.034        0.019          0.296**
                                (0.093)      (0.223)       (0.076)       (0.093)         (0.145)
 N                               1,212         1,175         1,385        1,265            1,192
 Treated                           72           35           245           125              52
Notes: ECHI=employment contingent health insurance; non-ECHI=health insurance through spouse’s employer.
Significance: * p<.1 ** p<.05 *** p<.01.
a
  “Employed” is defined as working for pay.
b
  First difference is (health shock employment – healthy employment) for the specified group (ECHI or non-
ECHI). Diff-in-diff is the difference between these effects.
c
  Controls for first interview age under 40 or 40-59, nonwhite, some college, college degree or more, income
under $20k, income more than $75k, physical job, stressful job, physical job×health shock, stressful job×health
shock, firm size (25-100 or >100 employees), part-time work (fewer than 35 hours), spouse not working, spouse
part time, spouse retired, spouse had bad health (fair/poor versus excellent/very good/good), spouse over 65,
spouse covered by respondent’s employer-based insurance, dependents covered by respondent’s employer-based
insurance, and year dummies.
Table 5. Probability remaining insured, first differences and difference-in-differencea from linear probability models,
initially-employed married men under age 65 with employer-provided health insurance
                                                                                                                         New
                                                                                       New           Self-report       diagnosis       Self-reported
                                    Cancer        Lung disease Hospitalized          diagnosis        decline            only          decline only
                                     (1)             (2)           (3)                  (4)              (5)              (6)               (7)
 ECHI×health shock                 0.027**           0.033             -0.004         0.033**           0.026             0.033            0.027
                                   (0.013)          (0.024)           (0.024)         (0.014)          (0.022)          (0.022)           (0.025)
 Non-ECHI×health shock               0.048          0.064**           0.042*          0.051**        0.098***             0.039          0.102***
                                   (0.030)          (0.028)           (0.024)         (0.026)          (0.028)          (0.030)           (0.034)
 Diff-in-diff                       -0.021           -0.032          -0.046**          -0.018        -0.072***           -0.006          -0.074**
                                   (0.030)          (0.023)           (0.022)         (0.022)          (0.026)          (0.018)           (0.032)
 N                                   1,212           1,175              1,385           1,265           1,336             1,192            1,270
 Treated                              72               35               245             125              196               52               130
Notes: ECHI=employment contingent health insurance; non-ECHI=health insurance through spouse’s employer. Controls are the same as in Table
4.
Significance: * p<.1 ** p<.05 *** p<.01.
a
  First difference is (health shock insured status – healthy insured status) for the specified group (ECHI or non-ECHI). Diff-in-diff is the difference
between these effects.
