                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   MONETARY RULES AND COMMODITY
                    SCHEMES UNDER UNCERTAINTY




                         Stanley Fischer




                     Working Paper No. 1722




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 1985




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                            NBER Working Paper #1722
                                                            October 1985




                           Monetary Ri1es and Corrinodity
                            Schens Under Uncertainty




                                    ABSTRACT




     The paper sets out a simple monetary model and uses it to compare

alternative monetary systems. Money may be either fiat or gold. Both gold

supply and velocity are uncertain. Asset demands are derived from expected

utility maximization. I demonstrate the basic argument against a commodity

money ——   that   it   wastes resources, show why the optimal growth rate of money

nay be zero, and compare the behavior of the economy under constant
                                                                                money
stock, constant price level, and constant gold price rules.               Expected utility
is typically highest under the constant price level rule.




                                                            Stanley Fischer
                                                            Depar-rent of Economics
                                                            Room E52-280a
                                                            M.I.T.
                                                            CaiTbridge,   MZ 02139
                                                         September 1985


          MONETARY RULES AND COMMODITY MONEY SCHEMES TINDER UNCERTAINTY1




                                 Stanley Fischer
       Commodity money schemes appeal to deep historical roots and the legend

of a golden age. It is thus inevitable that the call for the gold standard

is heard at times of price level instability. But the argument for a

commodity money faces two fundamental difficulties: anything that commodity

money schemes can accomplish can be done more cheaply in a related fiat money

system2; and commodity money systems have not met the test of survival.

       Changes in the relative price of gold have long been recognized as

injecting unnecessary variability into the nominal prices of other

commodities in a simple gold standard system that holds the nominal price of

gold constant. Irving Fisher in 1920, following several earlier economists

whom he credits, proposed that the gold standard be operated with a variable

dollar price of gold such that the dollar price of commodities be maintained

constant. Robert Hall (1982) resuscitated the Fisher scheme, in addition

proposing an alternative commodity standard with few historical antecedents.

       In this paper I set out a simple monetary model and use it to analyze

the   welfare economics of alternative monetary systems. Asset demand

functions are obtained from utility maximization, making explicit welfare

calculations possible. The set—up is that o± an overlapping generations


1Department of Economics, MIT, and NBER. This paper was prepared for a
special issue of the Journal of Monetary Economics honoring Karl Brunner. I
am grateful to Rudi Dornbusch for helpful discussions. Research support was
provided by the National Science Foundation.
See Fischer (1972), Barro (1979) and Black (1981).
model, in which agents can hold gold as as asset and may hold either a gold

or a fiat money. I demonstrate the basic argument against a commodity money

scheme, show why the optimal growth rate of money may be zero rather than the

inverse of the interest rate, and then compare the behavior of the economy

under a money stock rule, a constant price level rule, and a monetary policy

that stabilizes the nominal price of gold: this last is a gold standard with

further discussion of commodity money schemes and              monetary   rules.

       Gerald Nickelsburg (1985) and Thomas Sargent and Neil Wallace (1983)

have   used overlapping generations models to study the welfare economics of

commodity money schemes. Sargent and             Wallace   concentrate on the asset rather

than   transactions    role of money (McCallum, 1983). Nickelsburg addresss

several of the     same issues   as I do in this paper. Our models differ in that

he uses a Glower constraint to generate a demand for money rather than the

transactions cost approach I use, and            that   he does not include uncertainty.



I. A Fiat Money System

       In the basic model, individuals of generation t are born at t—1 and.

receive an endowment, W1, and perhaps a transfer payment, H1t1, from the

government. They use these resources to invest in physical capital, gold,

and money balances. Capital yields a real return Rt, which may be stochastic

and   which is assumed independent of other disturbances. Gold holding
provides returns in the form       of    both utility and     capital   gains. Money saves

on transactions costs and may yield capital gains or losses.

       The utility obtained by generation t is:

(1)    TJ( )   = (1-'-a)Ct +   ln Gt —    in   Tt.
Utility is linear in consumption and logarithmic in holdings of gold and in
 time spent transacting. Transactions time in turn is an increasing function

of consumption and decreasing in real balances:

(2) Tt = e aC (Mxt)
Here         is the value of money, the inverse of the price of consumption goods

in ternis of money:

             =
        xt       i/Pt
Strong assumptions such as the functional forms of u( ) and                           T( )   are made for

tractability.

       Substitution of (2) in (1) gives the derived utility function:

  (3) u( )        =C         +     in        +
                                                         (Mxt)
The coefficient                  may vary over time. Shifts in y can be regarded as

changes in the transactions techno1ogy. Thether an increase in y increases

or decreases utility depends on the magnitude of MtXt, which will itself be a

function of y.

       The period t—1 budget constraint is:

                                        =
  (4) W1 +          H1tiXti                 Kt
                                                 +            + XtiMt
where Kt is purchases of capital,                             and Mt are demands for gold and nominal

balances respectively, H1                        is   transfer payments in the form of money made

to individuals          in   the   first     period      of life, and        is   the real (in terms of
goods) price of gold. In period t:

  ()   C     =
                 RtKt
                        +
                             Gt + XtMt           +
                                                      Ht2Xt
    are transfer payments in the form of money made to individuals in. the


3Linearity of the utility function in consumption ensures that the demand
functions for assets are dominated by expected rates of return rather than
expectations of the marginal utility of consumption.
1Uncertainty about the transactions technology could also affect a. This
would have more pervasive effects on portfolio decisions in period t—1 than
does uncertainty about y.
                                                            —4--




second period of life.

       With Rt,           and X uncertain, the individual maximizes expected utility,

First order conditions are:




 (6)                - Rq1       I
                                      ÷          =




         t-   [xt
                    - RtXti]          ÷ _____        =


where expressions of the form                            indicate the expectation at (t—i) of Z..

Rewriting (6) and (7) in the form of demand functions:


  (6)'    ct = ________________
                1Rq1 —
               —            t—1-Yt
                                —
                    t_i   t t—1           t—1   t
The absence of scale effects from the demand function is a result of the

constancy of the marginal utility of consumption, in part due to the

separability of consumption and real balances in the transactions cost

function.

       In equilibrium                 and        are each equal to the respective supplies of

the assets. Because changes in the net supply of gold are assumed to come

from outside the economy, (Gt —
                                                     Gti)   does not appear in the budget

constraints (4) and (5). Assuming that Rt is independently and identically

distributed, t_iRt = R for all t. Then (6)' and (7)' give the asset pricing

relationships:


  "   ' —1 =1 r                   +


  ()     X1     =   1      t—it
                           Mt
                                          +
                                                tlt
                                                             —5—



 Hence



  (10)             =         1       r
                            —fl-- L R'T                 __
                                                        G




  11j     Xti
                   —    1 V
                             L
                                 1

                               T t—1
                                               1t+i—1 Tt+i
                                                  M
                             o R                    t+i

The price of gold will fluctuate over time if the stock of gold fluctuates;

the absolute       price level fluctuates because of                    both technological shocks and

changes    in   the stock of money.

        Substitution of the demand functions (6)' and (7)', and the                      budget
constraints       (4) and (5) in the utility function (3) gives expected utility in

the fiat system, as:




                                         +
 (12) t_1UF(t) =
                            R(Wt1            H1t1 X1) +           1(H2 x)   —   —




                            +    in           +             in   Mt +       in X)


II. A Commodity Money System

        In the pure commodity money system, gold serves instead of fiat money.

The iuaxiraand is now:




(13)     E(Ct +        in        +           in   (Qm


where       is the non—monetary gold stock and Gm the monetary gold stock.
                                                                   —0—




 Gold   can be transformed costlessly from one form to the other by the young,
but    monetary gold cannot simultaneously be held in                            directly utility—yielding
 form (i.e., as jewelry). Assuming there are no transfer payments, second

period consumption is:

 (14) Ct =           Rt(w_i
                                    —
                                            —i G ÷
with
           Gt =               +

        Maximization           of expected utility gives:

 (15) G=                               -
                                   — t—i't
          G in   =            t—1       t
 (16)      t         Rq1 —
implying

          Gin_t_ltGfl_
          t
             —
                   t                                           G


The price of gold is accordingly:

                                                       v
                 =   1   rr    1             '
                                                  t+i—1 t+i
(17)                     LL                          G
                          oR                             t+i
with gold as numeraire,                          is the inverse of the general price level, which

now shifts in accordance with changes in both the supply of gold and the

transactions technology.

        Expected utility in the commodity money system is:

(18)      t_1UG(t) = RWt1 -                      —             ÷   (     +   in

                         +          in                   ÷          in       +
                                                                                 (y     in


In the next section we compare expected utility in the fiat and commodity

money systems.
                                                           —7-




 III.    The Basic Case Against a Commodity Money

        The basic case against a commodity money is that fiat money is cheaper

to produce. The point is seen most clearly by assuming the stocks of gold

and money are each constant, at G and M respectively. Then in the fiat money

system:

                =
(19)                q

                —
                —
                    1            t—lTt+i
'''                         L.
                            0        R
where r = R —           1   is the expected real interest rate. In the absence of

technology shocks,

         t—11t+i
and

(20') x1 =


        In   the commodity money system, by contrast:
                                 I
(21)     _1 =q=—
The value of the gold stock will be higher in the commodity money system:

indeed for the unitary elastic demands generated by the underlying utility

function the value of gold in the commodity system is exactly equal to the

value o± money and gold in the fiat system. But that increase in value is

insufficient to compensate for the loss of gold as a commodity. The utility

cost of the commodity system is:

(22) UF(t) - UG(t) =                     - ln -a-—   > 0

        The loss in utility is higher, the larger the proportion of gold stock

that is used as money, that is, the higher is y. Although costs of
                                            -8—



production are not formally included in the model, the utility loss from

using a commodity money is equivalent to the loss caused by the diversion of

factors of production to gold mining.



IV. The Optimum Quantity of Money

       Continuing to assume away the presence of uncertainty, we examine the

optimum      quantity    of money argument in the fiat money model. Since gold is in

this model entirely separable, we assume for this section that capital and

money are the only assets. We consider only constant growth rate rules for

money.

       Let

(23) Mt =       (1)t
                                            2
Thus Mt -
               Mti   =
                         t_i   =      1
                                   H1 ÷ Hti
where Hti1 and Ht12 are nominal transfer payments to the young and old,
respectively.
       In equilibrium in this stationary economy the value of money will be
falling at the same rate as the price level is rising. Accordingly, from the

demand function (7)':


       M (1÷)t =           (1)t
Thus


(24) MX  -MX                   I
     0 0   t t-
       Obviously as the growth rate of money falls, equilibrium holdings of

real balances increase. As the growth rate of money approaches the negative

of the real interest rate, real balances approach infinity. However, it is
                                                          —9—




 riot   necessarily optimal to drive real balances to infinity, for as real

 balances rise, capital accumulation is affected (Drazen (1979)).

         To see this, assume all transfer payments are made to the young. Then,

 generation t's utility is:

             =
                 RW1
                            + RM1X1 —              y + y in MtXt
and using (24)
                                2
             t                yRp.
                           (R(1+)-1)
This derivative is zero when the growth rate of money is zero and utility is

                                               t
accordingly at a maximum                                  < 0) when     is zero.
                                           2          0
                                        OL
        The optimum quantity result does not hold because capital accumulation

is reduced by the first period lump sum                     taxes.    Capital accumulation is equal
to

             =             + RpMtiXti -
                                               Mtxti
that is, the endowment plus transfer payments minus the amount of endowment
used up in purchasing real balances.
Thus,

        K =      W         + (RL —   (1--i))y
         t           t—1

and

        —>0
        oI

        Reductions         in the growth rate of money reduce capital accumulation.

There is of course the benefit that the value of real balances increases,

providing more utility, but in this case the two effects exactly balance when

the growth rate of money is zero.
                                                           -10-


        It should    accordingly be expected that utility will rise when the growth

rate of money is reduced if transfer payments are made to the old. In that

case,

           =          +       pMtXt - y      +   y in
               RW1
and


               - y[r[R(1+)-1]            +


It    is certainly optimal to reduce the growth rate of money below zero. But

it is not optimal             to   go all the way to infinite cash balances, for the

optimal    growth rate is
                          2
               =
(26)               -(i)
which exceeds the optimum quantity formula
               r


It is optimal to stop short of satiating the economy with cash balances to

ensure that not too much capital is displaced.



V.      Stabilizing the Price Level

        We now restore uncertainty and examine alternative monetary rules,

starting with a price stabilization rule. Whether it is optimal to stabilize

the price level depends on the stochastic properties of -y. We continue to

omit gold. Now assume first that,

(27)       = y(1 +                                c > —1

where      is a white noise process. The specification (27) implies that each

generation knows its own technology shock, and thus velocity, when it makes

its portfolio decisions.

       With y described by (27), and a constant money stock, M,
                                                  —11—




 (28) x1        =   11      +   ti
 The price level is proportional to the money stock and fluctuates inversely

with                Jensen's inequality implies that the expected price level rises

with the variance of €,              but it is clear that the behavior of X, the value of

money, is the relevant concern. With the value of money expected to return

to its mean, the expected rate of inflation is higher when                  is high and

vice versa.

        With r1     stochastic,      the expected utility of generation t is (again

ignoring gold), from (1 2):


(29) t_i5(t) = RWt_i +               (ln        + yt[t   11n(! ÷

Uncertainty about the future price level therefore reduces the welfare of

generation t compared with a situation in which there are no shocks to y.

Constant M corresponds here to an inactive monetary policy.

        Now consider a monetary policy that completely stabilizes the price

level. The simplest such policy is

(30)        =


which accomodates the quantity of money to the quantity demanded. Then,

(31) x=
and the price level is completely stable. Taking into account the transfer

payments that        have   to be made, expected utility for generation t is:

(32) _1Upp(t) = RW_1             +         —       —
                                                         + Y1n1    ytin r

where       is utility when prices are fixed.

        The difference between utility under a constant price level and a

constant money supply is:
                                            —12—



                                                                    1+c t-1
                  -              =
                                       t-1 t-2
                                             -         + y
                                                                         +



The difference depends on the realizations of                and t—2          As a base case
            =          =   0.
assume
                t-2             In that case generation t would prefer next period's

price level to be stabilized. If the realization of                 is       high, then again

generation t—1 would prefer the prospect of a stable price level. But if

     is low, this generation suffers negative transfer payments under the

fixed price rule and loses its expected capital gains on money because prices

are being stabilized. Such a generation would prefer a stable money stock.

     Of course, it is only for analytic convenience that each period is

assumed to be a generation long. Although not strictly accurate, we may

rather think of.each individual as living through many periods, with his or

her expected utility independent of conditions in any particular period:

that would suggest as a welfare criterion the expectation of utility taken

sufficiently far back in time that generation t has no special information on

which to judge its prospects. For the stochastic technology, (27), that

comparison could be made at period t—3. In this case the fixed price rule,

which implies zero expected transfers, would be preferred.

     The result that uncertainty about             makes individuals worse off is,

surprisingly, not robust. Two examples make the point. Suppose first that

          y(1 +   c)
so that generation t does not know the value of              at the time it makes its

portfolio decisions. Then            is constant, independent of c (because it is

the demand of the young generation that determines the value of money) and

expected utility will be unaffected by the uncertainty.

    Alternately, suppose that
                                                          —13—



 (34) y = y(i        +        +

 with         once again i.i.d., which implies

 () x1 =                  +       t1)
 Then under the constant money rule we obtain

 (36) 1U(t)' =            RWt     1÷ 1y(1n y-i)            +              ln(! +
                     = RWt        i+                yi         l(y(1÷Et÷ec1)1n(! +

        For   discussion purposes suppose                        =   0.   Then if 9 is positive,

uncertainty about             is likely to increase the expected utility of the t'th

generation. When              is high, leading the t'th generation to put a high value

on real balances, the value of money tends to be high. And because the last

expectation in (36) is convex in                         for 9 > 0, the uncertainty makes

individuals better off than they would be if                              were identically zero.

        Given (35) as the process for y, and once again setting                           =        the
value of money would be constant at l/r, and the difference in utility

between the fixed price and fixed money rules is:


                         - _1U(t)'        =
                                                (_— E) +
                                                                             1   +9c
                                              t_i                         1+9rct )]

For a given value of                    and with 9 positive, this tends to be negative.

Thus with 9 positive the fixed quantity role outperforms the fixed price rule

from the viewpoint of generation t at time t—1. The reason is the convexity

of the utility function in                for 9 > 0.

     Interestingly, though, generation (t—i) might well prefer a fixed price
                                         -14-



    rule before it iiows the value of     .     The difference betwen the expected

    utilities under the two rules taken at t—3 is equal to


    3[y(1÷ec1)ln(1+ec1) - y(1+Et)ln(1+
                                     R

    For e close to or larger than one (e is not limited to be less than i) this

    expression is positive. Thus ex ante a fixed price rule may be preferred,

    but once some uncertainty has been resolved, the fixed money rule may appear

    preferable.

         At this stage of course it would be desirable to have in the model more

    pervasive effects of monetary uncertainty than merely on the demand for

    money. In particular, price level variability induces variability in both

    the level of output and its allocation, because of the slow adjustment of

    prices.5 A heavier penalty on price level variability, equivalent in this

    model to ex ante uncertainty about prices, would of course make the fixed

    price rule more attractive relative to the fixed money rule. Despite the

    above interesting result that price level uncertainty may increase expected

    utility under certain conditions, the presumption should still be in the

    opposite direction.



    VI. Stabilizing the Nominal Price of Gold

         Section II showed why the use of a commodity as money is typically
-
    dominated by use of a fiat money. The nominal price of gold can be

    stabilized by using it as money or by manipulating the money stock for that

    purpose. This is what Black (1981) means by a gold standard with zero

    reserves. We now return to the full model with gold and fiat money,

    starting, by describing the behavior of the gold stock.


    5Such effects are discussed in Brunner and Meltzer (1971).
                                               —15—




 (38) Gt = ____

where u is a white noise process u             > —1. The gold stock follows

approximately a logarithmic random walk.

      From the pricing equation for gold, (10), we obtain
                =


The price of gold in terms of commodities thus varies over time with the

supply. From equation (3) it is clear that the uncertainty in the supply of

gold reduces expected utility; the price uncertainty when gold is merely a

commodity is derivative of the quantity uncertainty and exerts no independent

effects on utility.

      Suppose now that monetary policy instead of being passive or stabilizing

the aggregate price level aims to stabilize the exchange rate between money

and gold, the nominal price of gold. Let              be the nominal price of gold:

            =


Monetary policy now has to stabilize             at Q, or to set


(40) x=—-.
For convenience we set Q = 1.         We thus want the monetary policy such that
=      Note that no gold is being used for monetary purposes.

      The policy will have to depend on the stochastic structure of both

and        Assume that       is given by (27). We require

      ____          1    1     ,   t+i—11t+i
                    R L it_1¼
      rGt
                      o R           Mt÷.
The rule
                                              —16—



                   I
(41)          = _____

for    all t will produce constancy in the nominal price of gold.6

       The rule is to expand the money stock with the gold stock, the

proportion depending on the technology parameter t— When the demand for

money at any given expected rate of inflation is high (i.e. when

large)   the money stock is larger. Essentially (41) is a simple accommodating

policy, combining rule (30) that stabilizes the price level with a policy

that mimics the movements in the gold stock.

       Under this gold standard rule (with zero reserves), expected utility for

generation t is:



                            =          + L             -
       (42)
                   uGs(t)       RWt1         [(i+c1)       (1+Et2)(1+ut)]+(lnGti)_yt

                                                        1 +u
                                                            t+ 1
                                 + 1n        + 1            r

Comparing (42) with (29), adjusting for the omission of terms in                  in (29),

                                                                     =
the gold standard policy appears preferable for                          C_2 U SO long as
the variance of u is small compared with that of                   Further   comparison with

(32), however, shows that a policy of stabilizing the price level is likely

to produce greater expected utility than gold price stabilization. Viewed at

least three periods ahead, price level stabilization dominates gold price

stabilization.


6 essential assumption in deriving (41) is that Ut fl (38) is not serially
correlated.
7Between (29) and (42), note that (Et/R) in the former is replaced by
(ut÷l/r) in the latter. The difference results from the fact that shocks to
G are permanent and those to y are transitory.
                                            -17—



      This analysis provides no support for the gold standard rule - keep the

 nominal price of gold constant —     for   monetary policy. It is possible though
 that correlation between u÷i and             could make a case for the gold
 standard. If the gold stock was expected to be high when            was high, then

 following the gold standard rule would be utility increasing.

 However, there is no reason to expect such a correlation.



VII. OMITTED FACTORS.

      One benefit of commodity reserve money schemes not included in the above

analysis is that they operate automatically. In this paper the monetary

authority is able to fix the price level exactly. It can also determine the

price of gold exactly by changing the stock of money, Of course these feats

are not possible in practice.

     The inability of the monetary authority to achieve its targets exactly

could be included in the above model by assuming that the money stock

deviates randomly from the level of the base set by the monetary authority.

This would not materially affect the comparison among       the   different fiat

money schemes, including the constant growth rate rule.

     It would however affect the comparison between schemes that involve

fixing the q.uantity of money and those that endogenize money, such as

interest rate fixing or commodity reserve schemes. There are three issues in

the commodity reserve schemes. Beyond the resource costs of such schemes and

the problem of changing relative prices of the commodities and goods in

general —   both   analyzed above — a full comparison would have to include the

possible breakdown of the scheme. As Flood and Garber (1985) have

emphasized, a scheme that produces intermittent absolute stability punctuated

by breakdowns may be worse than one that produces less short run stability
                                      -18-



but is more likely to survive.

     The Irving Fisher gold standard with variable nominal price of gold is a

commodity money scheme that attempts to stabilize the price level. It would

thus achieve the same price level behavior as the monetary policy of Section

V. s a commodity money system, the Fisher plan has the advantage over the

normal gold standard of being much less likely to break down because of

secular changes in the relative price of gold. It has the disadvantage that

lags in price data collection make it less automatic —— and more likely to be

the subject of speculative attacks ——than a pure gold standard scheme.

Further, as Section V shows, the price level can be stabilized through

monetary policy without having to hold reserves of gold. The benefits of the

Fisher scheme would then result from its automaticity and the possibility ——

though not the likelihood —— that its operation is easier to enforce than
that of a monetary policy not tied to a commodity reserve that is given the

goal of price level stabilization.8



VIII. Summary

     Commodity money systems are dominated by related fiat money systems.

The positive case for a genuine commodity money would have to be constructed

by arguing that their autornaticity ensures better implementation of the goals

of policy than would be achieved under the superior fiat system. That issue

has not been analyzed in this paper, but it is doubtful the case can be made

once it is recognized that commodity schemes have always broken down.

     The paper also addresses the issue of the choice between fixed money

stock and fixed price level rules, is an equilibrium economy. The former is

typically though not always less desirable than the latter. A fixed money


8Nickelsburg (1985) is skeptical about the viability of the Fisher
scheme.
                                                  —19—



 (growth) rule does in practice have the benefit that it is relatively easy to

 monitor and    that   blame   for   inevitable divergences from targets can be

 assigned. Since the monetary authority has less control over the price

 level, it can more easily escape detection if it misbehaves under a price

 level rule. That is one of several reasons many economists have given for

preference, a money stock rule. But it is an extremely poor reason.

      Academics, Karl Brunner among them, have analyzed central banks as

maximizing institutions, whose preference for obscurity of purpose and

methods maximizes the easy life. The academic analysis of policy that

insists on simple criteria for policy evaluation may also be seen as a

iaaxiiuizing choice, which minimizes the amount of time that academics have to

spend evaluating policy and the small details of institutional change that

central bankers us to justify their actions.

     In this regard      Karl Brunner has      set an example, in both analyzing

general   principles of monetary policy and           ——   through the Shadow Open Narket
Committee, his    own research,      and   in advising     United States and   European
policy-makers   ——
                     willingly   immersing   himself in the details of     policy
implementation. For him        economics    has   been   both intellectual stimulation and
a tool to try    to improve the world.
                                     -20-



                                 REFERENC ES

Barro, Robert J. (1979) "Money and the Price Level under the Gold Standard",
     Economic Journal, (March), pp. 13—33.

Black, Fischer (1981) "A Gold Standard with Double Feedback and Near—Zero
     Reserves", unpublished manuscript, Sloan School, M.I.T.

Brunner, Karl, and Meltzer, Allan H. (1971) "The Uses of Money: Money in the
     Theory of an Exchange Economy", American Economic Review 61(5): 784—
     805.

Drazen, Allan (1979) "The Optimal Rate of Inflation Revisited", Journal of
     Monetary Economics 5(2): 231—24.8.

Fischer, Stanley (1972) "Money, Income, Wealth, and Welfare", Journal of
     Economic Theory, (April), pp. 289—311.

Fisher, Irving (1920) Stabilizing the Dollar, Macmillan.

Flood, Robert and Garber, Peter (1985) "Real Aspects of Collapsing Exchange
     Rate Regimes", National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
     #1603.

Hall, Robert E. (1982) "Explorations in the Gold Standard and Related
     Policies for Stabilizing the Dollar", in R.E. Hall (ed.) Inflation:
     Causes and Effects, University of Chicago Press.

McCalluin, Bennett T. (1983) "Comments on Sargent and Wallace", Journal of
     Monetary Economics 12, 1 (July), 163—188.

Nickelsburg, Gerald (1985) "Monetary Policy and Commodity Market Equilibria",
     Journal of Monetary Economics, 15(1) (January), pp. 81-94.

Sargent, Thomas J. and Neil Wallace (1983) "A Model of Commodity Money",
     Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 1 (July) 189—196.
