NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CYCLES, GAPS, AND THE SOCIAL VALUE OF INFORMATION
George-Marios Angeletos
Luigi Iovino
Jennifer La'O
Working Paper 17229
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17229

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2011

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by George-Marios Angeletos, Luigi Iovino, and Jennifer La'O. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Cycles, Gaps, and the Social Value of Information
George-Marios Angeletos, Luigi Iovino, and Jennifer La'O
NBER Working Paper No. 17229
July 2011
JEL No. C7,D6,D8
ABSTRACT
What are the welfare effects of the information contained in macroeconomic statistics, central-bank
communications, or news in the media? We address this question in a business-cycle framework that
nests the neoclassical core of modern DSGE models. Earlier lessons that were based on “beauty contests”
(Morris and Shin, 2002) are found to be inapplicable. Instead, the social value of information is shown
to hinge on essentially the same conditions as the optimality of output stabilization policies. More
precise information is unambiguously welfare-improving as long as the business cycle is driven primarily
by technology and preference shocks—but can be detrimental when shocks to markups and wedges
cause sufficient volatility in “output gaps.” A numerical exploration suggests that the first scenario
is more plausible.

George-Marios Angeletos
Department of Economics
MIT E52-251
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
angelet@mit.edu
Luigi Iovino
Department of Economics
MIT E52-391
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
liovino@MIT.EDU

Jennifer La'O
Booth School of Business
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637-1610
jenlao@chicagobooth.edu

1

Introduction

Market participants pay close attention to public signals regarding the state of the economy, like
those embodied in central-bank communications, macroeconomic statistics, surveys of consumer
confidence, or news in the media. Given how noisy these signals can be, the market’s heightened
response to them often feels “excessive”. In an influential AER article, Morris and Shin (2002) have
argued that this is due to the sunspot-like role that public news play in environments with dispersed
information: by helping agents coordinate their choices, noisy public signals can have a destabilizing
effect on the economy, contributing to higher volatility and lower welfare.
Motivated by these observations, this paper seeks to understand the welfare effects of information
within the context of business cycles. To this goal, we abandon the “beauty-contest” framework used
by Morris and Shin (2002) and much of the subsequent literature.1 Although the findings of this
work are customarily interpreted in a macroeconomic context, the lack of micro-foundations in this
prior work renders such interpretations largely premature. By contrast, we employ a micro-founded
framework that nests the neoclassical backbone of modern DSGE models. In so doing, we develop
a clean theoretical benchmark for the welfare effects of information within the context of business
cycles—one that provides a novel, and sharp, answer to the question of interest.
Framework. We follow the New-Keynesian paradigm in allowing for product differentiation
and monopolistic competition. We nevertheless abstract from nominal rigidities, thereby focusing,
a fortiori, on flexible-price allocations. We do so because this is always an excellent benchmark for
normative questions: the welfare properties of sticky-price allocations hinge on the welfare properties
of the underlying flexible-price allocations. Finally, we allow for multiple type of shocks, including
shocks to technologies and preferences, as well as shocks to monopoly markups and labor wedges.
This last modeling choice brings our analysis close to the pertinent DSGE paradigm (Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Evans, 2005, Smets and Wouters, 2007). Most importantly, it helps accommodate
two distinct notions of fluctuations. Technology and preference shocks capture fluctuations that
involve no variation in the “output gap” between flexible-price and first-best allocations. By contrast,
shocks to markups and labor wedges capture fluctuations that are tied to market distortions and
that manifest with variation in the aforementioned “output gap”. This distinction is known to be
a key determinant of both the desirability of output-stabilization policies and the welfare costs of
the business cycle: see, inter alia, Goodfriend and King (1997), Rotemberg and Woodford (1997),
Adao, Correia and Teles (2003), Khan, King and Wolman (2003), Benigno and Woodford (2005),
and Gali, Gertler, and Lopez-Salido (2007). As we show in this paper, this distinction is also central
to understanding the welfare effects of information.
Turning to the information structure, we let agents observe, not only noisy signals of the exogenous shocks, but also noisy indicators of the endogenous economic activity. This is key to both
1

This includes three sequels in AER: a critique by Svensson (2005), a response by Morris et al. (2005), and a

recent article by James and Lawler (2011).

1

the robustness and the applicability of our insights. Macroeconomic statistics and financial prices
are noisy indicators of the choices and opinions of other agents. The information that these signals contain regarding the underlying structural shocks is thus endogenous to equilibrium behavior.
This gives rise to informational externalities which, in general, can have important implications for
the normative properties of the economy (Amador and Weill, 2010, 2011; Vives, 2008, 2011). Our
analysis takes care of these complications and permits us to interpret public information as a signal
of either the exogenous shocks or, more realistically, of the endogenous state of the economy.
Results. Our first result decomposes equilibrium welfare in terms of discrepancies, or “gaps”,
between equilibrium and first-best allocations. This decomposition, which extends related results
from complete-information models (e.g., Woodford, 2003b, Gali, 2008), is instrumental in characterizing the welfare effects of either the underlying shocks or the available information. Under
complete information, the aforementioned discrepancies obtain only because of product and labormarket distortions. With incomplete information, they obtain also because of noise in the available
information. Either way, the consequent welfare losses manifest at the macro level as volatility in
the aggregate output gap, and in the cross section as excess dispersion in relative prices.
Consider now the case where the business cycle is driven by technology and preference shocks.
If information were complete, these shocks would cause efficient fluctuations: both the volatility
of aggregate output gaps and the excess dispersion in relative prices would have been zero. It
follows that, when information is incomplete, the welfare effects of information hinge entirely on
the impact of noise: any correlated noise contributes to volatility in aggregate output gaps, while
any idiosyncratic noise contributes to excess dispersion in relative prices.
As more precise public information motivates agents to pay less attention to their private information, the dispersion in relative prices falls, contributing to higher welfare. However, as agents pay
more attention to public information, aggregate output gaps may become more volatile, contributing to lower welfare. The overall effect thus looks ambiguous at first glance. Nonetheless, we show
that the beneficial effect on price dispersion necessarily outweighs any potentially adverse effect on
aggregate volatility, guaranteeing that welfare necessarily improves with more information.
This result holds true despite the coordinating role of public information. The aggregate demand externalities that are embedded in our business-cycle framework induce a form of strategic
complementarity that is akin to the one in the “beauty contests” studied by Morris and Shin (2002)
and subsequent work. Nonetheless, the welfare lessons of this prior work are inapplicable: public
information is found to be welfare improving no matter the degree of strategic complementarity.
Two observations are key to understanding these findings. First, the negative welfare effect
of public information within “beauty contests” a la Morris and Shin (2002) hinges entirely on the
presumption that its coordinating role is socially undesirable. By contrast, the coordinating motives
that originate from aggregate demand externalities and that are thus embedded in conventional
DSGE models like ours are fully warranted from a social perspective. Second, as long as the
underlying market distortions are state-invariant, these distortions do not interfere with the response
2

of the economy to any noisy information about the underlying preference and technology shocks.
The first observation explains why the insights of Morris and Shin (2002) are inapplicable; the second
explains why information about technology and preference shocks is necessarily welfare improving.
With these insights in mind, we next study the social value of information when the business
cycle is driven by shocks to monopoly power and labor-market wedges—that is, by shocks that
interfere with the level of market inefficiency. For this case, we show that more noise reduces the
welfare losses associated with the volatility of aggregate output gaps and the excess dispersion in
relative prices. In this sense, information is detrimental for welfare.
At the same time, information has a countervailing effect though the mean level of economic
activity: by reducing the uncertainty faced in equilibrium, more precise information brings the mean
value of aggregate output closer to the optimal one, contributing to higher welfare. The strength
of this countervailing effect, however, depends on the severity of the market distortion: the smaller
the level of the distortion, the smaller the benefits of any given reduction in it. We thus show that,
for the case of inefficient fluctuations, the overall effect of public information on welfare is negative
as long as the mean level of monopoly or other market distortions is not too large.
A simple punchline thus emerges: the welfare effects of information hinge essentially on the same
conditions as the optimality of flexible-price allocations. Our results thus provide a direct mapping
from the view one may hold regarding the need for output stabilization to the inference one should
make regarding the welfare effects of information regarding the state of the economy, whether this
information is provided by policy makers, statistical agencies, the media, or the markets.
A numerical exercise is used to shed further light. In line with our theoretical results, the sign
of the welfare effects of information is pinned down by the relative contribution of technology and
markup shocks. Nonetheless, aggregate demand externalities—and the strategic complementarity
obtains from them—emerge as a key determinant of the magnitude of these effects. Finally, when
the contribution of the various shocks in our model is matched to the one estimated by Smets and
Wouters (2007) for the US economy, technology shocks are sufficiently prevalent that the social
value of information is positive: more information improves welfare.
Related literature. Our paper adds to a large literature that followed the influential contribution of Morris and Shin (2002). Much of this work—including Svensson (2005), Angeletos and Pavan
(2007, 2009), Morris and Shin (2007), Cornand and Heinemann (2008), Myatt and Wallace (2009),
and James and Lawler (2011)—continues to employ the same abstract game as Morris and Shin,
or certain variants of it. By contrast, our paper studies the welfare effects of information within
the class of micro-founded DSGE economies that rest at the core of modern macroeconomic theory.
The discipline imposed by the micro-foundations of this particular class of economies explains the
sharp contrast between our results and those of the aforementioned work.
The framework we use is borrowed from Angeletos and La’O (2009); similar micro-foundations
underlie, inter alia, Woodford (2003a) and Lorenzoni (2010). This prior work shows how dispersed
information can have profound implications on the positive properties of the business cycle. Here,
3

we shift focus to the normative question of how information impacts welfare. We thus complement
Hellwig (2005) and Roca (2010), which are concerned with the same question but focus on monetary
shocks—shocks that matter only when prices are sticky and monetary policy fails to offset them.
Related are also Amador and Weill (2010, 2011) on the interaction between public information and
social learning, as well as Angeletos and La’O (2011) and Wiederholt and Paciello (2011) on optimal
monetary policy with informational frictions. We elaborate on these relations in Sections 7 and 9.
Finally, the methodological approach we take in this paper builds on Angeletos and Pavan (2007).
That paper was the first to highlight that, in general, the welfare effects of information hinge on the
relation between equilibrium and efficient allocations, and to indicate the potential importance of
different types of shocks. Nevertheless, the analysis of that paper was confined within an abstract
class of linear-quadratic games. By contrast, the contribution of the present paper is squarely on
the applied front. To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first to study the welfare effects
of information along the flexible-price allocations of a canonical, micro-founded DSGE model.
Layout. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces our framework.
Section 3 characterizes the equilibrium and Section 4 decomposes welfare. Sections 5 and 6 study
the welfare effects of information for the cases of, respectively, technology/preference shocks and
markup/labor-wedge shocks. Section 7 extends the analysis from signals of the exogenous shocks to
signals of the endogenous state of the economy. Section 8 conducts a suggestive numerical exercise.
Section 9 concludes with a translation of our results to sticky-price models, and with a discussion
of directions for future research.

2

The model

Our framework builds on Angeletos and La’O (2009), adding incomplete information to the flexibleprice allocations of an elementary DSGE model. As in Lucas (1972), there is a continuum of
“islands”, which define the “geography” of information: information is symmetric within islands, but
asymmetric across islands. Each island is inhabited by a continuum of firms, which specialize in the
production of differentiated commodities. Finally, there is a representative household, or “family”,
consisting of a consumer and a continuum of workers, one worker per island. Islands are indexed
by i ∈ I = [0, 1]; firms and commodities by (i, j) ∈ I × J; and periods by t ∈ {0, 1, 2, ...}.
Each period has two stages. In stage 1, workers and firms decide how much labor to, respectively,
supply and demand in their local labor market, and local wages adjust so as to clear any excess
demand. At this point, workers and firms know their local fundamentals, but imperfect information
regarding the fundamentals and the level of economic activity in other islands. After employment
and production choices are sunk, workers return home and the economy transitions to stage 2. At
this point, all information that was previously dispersed becomes publicly known, and centralized
markets operate for the consumption goods. This two-stage structure permits us to introduce
dispersed information while maintaining the convenience of a representative consumer.
4

Households. The utility of the representative household is given by
U=

∞
X



Z
n
β U (Ct ) − Si,t V (ni,t )di,
t

I

t=0

where
U (C) =

C 1−γ
1−γ

V (n) =

and

n1+
.
1+

n is an island-specific
with γ,  ≥ 0. Here, ni,t is labor effort on island i during stage 1 of period t, Si,t

shock to the disutility of labor, and Ct is aggregate consumption. The latter, which also defines the
numeraire used for wages and commodity prices, is given by the following nested CES structure:
Z

c
Si,t
(ci,t )

Ct =

ρ−1
ρ

 ρ
ρ−1
di

I
c is an island-specific shock to the utility of the goods produced by island i and c
where Si,t
i,t is a

composite of the goods produced by island i, defined by
Z
ci,t =

(cij,t )

ηit −1
ηit


dj

1
ηit

,

J

with cij,t denoting the quantity consumed in period t of the commodity j from island i. Here, ρ
identifies the elasticity of substitution across the consumption composites of different islands, while
ηit identifies the elasticity of substitution across the goods produced within a given island i.
As will become clear shortly, ρ controls the strength of aggregate demand externalities (the
sensitivity of optimal firm profits to aggregate output), while η controls the degree of monopoly
power. The pertinent literature often imposes (implicitly) that ρ = η, thereby confounding the
notion of demand externalities with the notion of monopoly power. By contrast, we let ρ 6= η so
that we can separate these two distinct notions. Finally, by letting η be random and abstracting from
any heterogeneity within islands, we introduce a pure form of markup shocks that cause variation
in equilibrium allocations without affecting first-best allocations.
Households are diversified in the sense that they own equal shares of all firms in the economy.
The budget constraint of household h is thus given by the following:
Z Z
Z Z
Z
pij,t cij,t djdj + Bt+1 ≤
πij,t didj + (1 − τi,t )wit ni,t di + Rt Bt + Tt ,
I

J

I

J

I

Here, pij,t is the period-t price of the commodity produced by firm j on island i, πij,t is the period-t
profit of that firm, wit is the period-t wage on island i, Rt is the period-t nominal gross rate of
return on the riskless bond, and Bh,t is the amount of bonds held in period t.
The variables τi,t and Tt are exogenous to the representative household and the firms, but satisfy
the following restriction at the aggregate:
Z
Tt =

τit wit nit di.
I

5

One can thus readily interpret τit as an island-specific tax on labor income and Tt as the resulting
aggregate tax revenues that are distributed back to households in lump-sum transfers. Alternatively,
we can consider a variant of our model with monopolistic labor markets as in Blanchard and Kiyotaki
(1987), in which case τit could re-emerge as an island-specific markup between the wage and the
marginal revenue product of labor. In line with much of the DSGE literature, we interpret 1 − τit
more generally as a “labor wedge” or a “labor-market distortion”.
The objective of each household is simply to maximize expected utility subject to the budget
and informational constraints faced by its members. Here, one should think of the worker-members
of each family as solving a team problem: they share the same objective (family utility) but have
different information sets when making their labor-supply choices. Formally, at the beginning of
stage 1 the household sends off its workers to different islands with bidding instructions on how to
supply labor as a function of (i) the information that will be available to them at that stage and
(ii) the wage that will prevail in their local labor market. In stage 2, the consumer-member collects
all the income that the worker-members have earned and decides how much to consume in each of
the commodities and how much to save (or borrow) in the riskless bond.
Firms. The output of firm j on island i during period t is given by
yij,t = Ai,t nij,t
where Ai,t is the productivity in island i and nij,t is the firm’s employment.2 The firm’s realized
profit is given by πij,t = pij,t yij,t − wi,t nij,t . Finally, the objective of the firm is to maximize its
expectation of U 0 (Ct )πij,t , the representative consumer’s valuation of its profit.
Markets. Labor markets operate in stage 1, while product markets operate in stage 2. The
corresponding clearing conditions are as follows:
Z
nij,t dj = ni,t ∀i
and

cij,t = yij,t ∀(i, j)

J

Asset markets also operate in stage 2, when all information is commonly shared. This guarantees
that asset prices do not convey any information. The sole role of the bond market in the model is
then to price the risk-free rate. Moreover, because our economy admits a representative consumer,
allowing households to trade risky assets in stage 2 would not affect any of the results.
Shocks and information. Each island is subject to multiple shocks: technology shocks are
captured by Ait , preference shocks by Sitn and Sitc , markup shocks by ηit , and labor-wedge shocks
by τit . These shocks have both aggregate and idiosyncratic components.
2

The assumption of linear returns to labor is consistent with the idea that, at business-cycle frequencies, the

variation in the stock of capital is negligible and that the rate of capital utilization is proportional to hours. In any
event, this assumption is only for expositional simplicity: the results extend directly to decreasing returns. In fact,
they also extend to increasing returns, provided that the curvature that is introduced in the typical firm’s problem
by the downward slopping demands is enough to preserve the convexity of that problem and, in so doing, to also
preserve the uniqueness of the equilibrium.

6

Turning to the information structure, we note that, once all agents meet in the centralized commodity market that takes place in stage 2, they can aggregate their previously dispersed information
and can therefore reach common knowledge about the aforementioned shocks. Nonetheless, such
common knowledge may be missing in the beginning of the period, when firms and workers have to
make their employment and production choices.
Our specification of the information structure is otherwise flexible enough to allow for multiple
private and public signals, some of which could be the product of noisy indicators of aggregate economic activity. We nevertheless restrict the information structure to be Gaussian in order to obtain
a closed-form characterization of equilibrium allocations and welfare. Without this restriction, our
results can be re-interpreted as local approximations, pretty much as in Woodford (2003) and most
other log-linearized DSGE models. We spell out the details of this Gaussian specification in due
course, making clear the particular results that depend on it.
Aggregates and equilibrium. We henceforth normalize nominal prices so that the “ideal”
price index is constant:
Z
Pt ≡



p1−ρ
it di

1
1−ρ

= 1.

We also define aggregate output Yt and employment Nt as follows:
Z
 ρ
Z
ρ−1
ρ−1
ρ
c
Yt ≡
Sit yit di
and Nt ≡ nit di.
Our definition of aggregate output is thus consistent with the usual reinterpretation of the DixitStiglitz framework that lets the differentiated commodities be intermediate inputs in the production
of single final consumption good. Finally, an equilibrium is defined as a collection of wages, commodity prices, and employment, production, and consumption plans such that (i) wages clear the
local labor markets that operate in each island during stage 1; (ii) commodity prices clear the centralized product markets that operate during stage 2; (iii) employment and production levels are
optimally chosen conditional on the information that is available in stage 1; and (iv) consumption
levels are optimally chosen conditional on the information that is available on stage 2.

3

Equilibrium and first-best allocations

To characterize the equilibrium, consider the behavior of firms and workers in a given island i and
a given period t.3 When firms decide how much labor to employ and how much to produce during
stage 1, they understand that they are going to face a downward-slopping demand in stage 2. They
therefore seek to to equate the local wage with the expected marginal revenue product of their labor,
targeting an optimal markup over marginal cost. Workers, on their part, equate their disutility of
effort with the expected marginal value of the extra income they can provide their family. It follows
3

The characterization of the equilibrium follows from Angeletos and La’O (2009). The contribution of the present

paper rests in the welfare analysis of the subsequent sections.

7

that the period-t equilibrium production levels of any given island i are pinned down by the following
condition:
Sitn V 0



yit
Ait




= (1 − τi,t )

ηit − 1
ηit

"



Sitc U 0 (Yt )

Eit



yit
Yt

− 1 #
ρ

Ait ,

(1)

To interpret this condition, note that the LHS is the marginal disutility of effort, while the RHS is
the product of the labor wedge, times the reciprocal of the monopoly markup, times the expected
marginal value of the marginal product of labor. This condition therefore equates private costs and
benefits. Finally, note that expectations are taken over Yt : firms and households alike are uncertain
about the ongoing aggregate economic activity because, and only because, information is dispersed.
For comparison, the first-best allocation satisfies the following condition:
Sitn V 0



yit
Ait


=

Sitc U 0 (Yt )



yit
Yt

− 1

ρ

Ait .

(2)

It follows that equilibrium allocations can deviate from first-best allocations, not only because of
monopoly power and labor-market distortions, but also because of errors in expectations of aggregate
output—and hence because of the noise in the available information. Our subsequent analysis will
therefore explore how the resulting welfare losses vary with the precision of the available information.
Before proceeding to this, however, it is worth highlighting a certain isomorphism between our
business-cycle framework and the class of coordination games studied by Morris and Shin (2002)
and others. Assuming a Gaussian information structure, we can restate condition (1) as follows:

where fit ≡

1
+γ

log yit = const + (1 − α) fit + α Eit [log Yt ]
i
h

c
Sit
ηit −1
is a composite of the underlying shocks and
log A1+
(1
−
τ
)
n
i,t
it S
ηit

(3)

it

α≡

1
ρ
1
ρ

−γ
+

< 1.

(4)

The general equilibrium of our economy can therefore be interpreted as the PBE of a “beauty contest”
among the different islands of the economy, with an island’s best response given by condition (3)
and the corresponding degree of strategic complementarity given by α.
At first glance, this isomorphism might suggest that the welfare lessons of Morris and Shin (2002)
apply to our framework and more generally to conventional business-cycle models; we explain why
this is not the case in the following sections. At the same time, this isomorphism captures an
important truth: the incentives of the typical economic agent—whether a firm, a worker, or a
consumer—crucially depend on expectations of the aggregate choices of all other agents.
This kind of interdependence—a form of strategic complementarity—is embedded in any modern
DSGE model and reflects the combination of at least two kinds of general-equilibrium effects. On
the one hand, an increase in macroeconomic activity raises the demand faced by each firm, which
other things equal stimulates firm profits, production, and employment. On the other hand, an
8

increase in income discourages labor supply and raises real wages which, other things equal, has
the opposite effect on firm profits, production, and employment. The former effect formalizes the
familiar Keynesian notion of aggregate demand externalities; the latter captures the reaction of
wages on the labor-supply side. The overall feedback is thus positive (α > 0) if and only if the
demand-side effect dominates—a property that seems likely to hold in practice and rests at the
heart of Keynesian thinking. Although not required for our key results,4 we henceforth impose this
restriction in order to simplify the exposition.
Assumption. The equilibrium features strategic complementarity in the sense that local output
increases with beliefs of aggregate output (that is, α > 0).

4

Welfare

We now move to the core of our contribution, starting with a decomposition of the channels through
which the various structural shocks, and the available information about them, affect welfare.
Take any feasible allocation and let yit and Yt denote the associated local and aggregate levels
of output. As standard, welfare is defined by the ex-ante utility of the representative household.
Since Ct = Yt and nit = yit /Ait , this implies that welfare is given by the following:
"∞
 #

Z
X 
yit
t
di
W≡E
β U (Yt ) − Sit V
Ait
t=0

∗ and Y ∗ denote the (full-information) first-best levels of, respectively, local and aggregate
Next, let yit
t

output. Define then the local and aggregate output gaps by the following:
∗
log ỹit ≡ log yit − log yit

and

log Ỹt ≡ log Yt − log Yt∗

Finally, let θit ≡ log (Ait , Sitc , Sitn ), and let Θt denote the cross-sectional average of θit . We impose
the following joint restriction on these shocks and the allocation under consideration.
Assumption. The aggregate variables (Θt , log Yt ) and the local variables (θit , log yit ) are jointly
Normal, and the latter are i.i.d. across i conditional on the former.
As will become clear shortly, this joint log-normality restriction is automatically satisfied by the
equilibrium allocation as long as the underlying information structure is Gaussian. The next result,
however, provides us with a convenient characterization of welfare that holds true irrespectively of
whether the allocation under consideration is an equilibrium one or not and that obtains in any
given allocation. This characterization is exact as long as the aforementioned assumption holds,
but can also be interpreted more generally as a second-order approximation.
4

As shown in the Appendix, our decomposition of welfare in the next section (Proposition 1) and our key welfare

lessons (Theorems 1 and 2) hold true even if α < 0.

9

Proposition 1. Welfare is given by
"
#
X

W=E
β t Wt∗ ∆t exp − 12 (1 + )(1 − γ)Λt
t

where Wt∗ is the period-t utility that obtains at the first best, ∆t captures the first-order welfare
losses that obtain from suboptimality in the mean level of aggregate output, and Λt captures the
second-order welfare losses that obtain from uncertainty.5
For the first-order losses, we have that
∆t = ∆(δt ) ≡

U (δt ) − V (δt )
U (1) − V (1)

where δt is the ratio between E[Yt |Θt−1 ], the mean (predictable) level of aggregate output that obtains
in the allocation under consideration, and the one that would have maximized welfare.
For the second-order losses, we have that
Λt = Λ(Σt , σt ) ≡ Σt +

1
σt
1−α

where α < 1 is defined as in (4) and where
Σt ≡ Var[Ỹt |Θt−1 ]

and

σt ≡ Var[ỹit |Θt ]

measure, respectively, the volatility of aggregate output gaps and the cross-sectional dispersion of
local output gaps (or, equivalently, the excessive dispersion in relative prices).
This proposition generalizes related results that have been established in canonical, completeinformation, macroeconomic models (e.g., Woodford, 2003b, Gali, 2008). The only key difference is
that welfare losses relative to the first best may now originate, not only in markup and labor-wedge
shocks, but also in noisy information. This difference, however, does not interfere with the insight
that any type of welfare loss can conveniently be represented in terms of the associated gaps between
equilibrium and first-best allocations. Establishing the robustness of this simple, but important,
insight to imperfect information is the first key result of our paper.
To elaborate on the origins of these welfare losses, let us henceforth focus on equilibrium allocations and, to start, suppose that there are no shocks at either the macro or the micro level. In this
case, there is no variation in output gaps at either the aggregate or the cross section (Σt = σt = 0),
guaranteeing that all second-order welfare losses vanish (Λt = 0). Yet, first-order losses obtain as
long as there is a positive markup or a positive labor wedge (in which case δt < 1 and Wt∗ ∆t < Wt∗ ).6
Next, consider the welfare implications of uncertainty. To start, suppose that information about
the underlying shocks is perfect—the conventional scenario in the pertinent literature. In this case,
5

By uncertainty here we mean both the one associated with the underlying structural shocks and the one associated

with the noise in the available information.
6
When γ < 1, Wt∗ is positive and ∆t is strictly concave in δt . When instead γ > 1, Wt∗ is negative and ∆t is
strictly convex. Either way, however, the product Wt∗ ∆t is strictly concave and reaches its unique maximum at δ = 1.

10

the response of equilibrium allocations to productivity and taste shocks is efficient. This is the
familiar result that flexible-price allocations are efficient in standard New-Keynesian models when
the business cycle is driven only by productivity or taste shocks. It follows that the gap between
equilibrium and first-best allocations can vary, whether in the aggregate or in the cross-section, only
when there are shocks to monopoly markups and/or to labor wedges. Any aggregate variation in
monopoly markups and labor wedges is then manifested in Σt , the volatility of aggregate output
gaps, while any idiosyncratic variation in such markups and wedges is manifested in σt , the inefficient
component of the dispersion in relative prices.
Finally, consider the case where information about the underlying shocks is imperfect. In this
case, Σt and σt continue to capture the volatility and dispersion effects of any markup and laborwedge shocks, to the extent that these shocks are present and the economy reacts to them. However,
this effect now interacts with the incompleteness of information about these shocks. For example,
less information has the potential of reducing both Σt and σt to the extent that it dampens the
response of equilibrium allocations to the underlying markup and labor-wedge shocks. Intuitively,
if agents have little information about this kind of shocks, they will “fail” to react to them, which
is undesirable from a private perspective but desirable from a social perspective.
At the same time, less information has the potential of raising Σt to the extent that it dampens
the response of equilibrium allocations to the underlying productivity and taste shocks. Intuitively,
if agents have little information about this kind of shocks, they will again “fail” to react to them–but
now this failure increases the gap between equilibrium and first best and hence is socially undesirable.
Finally, any noise in information by itself can contribute to variation in either aggregate or local
output gaps, whether this information regards markup and labor wedge shocks, or productivity and
taste shocks. Noise by itself can thus play a role akin to markup or labor-wedge shocks.
Furthermore, how the aforementioned effects will get manifested in Σt and σt is bound to depend
on whether information is public or private—or, equivalently, on whether the associated noise is
correlated or idiosyncratic. For example, an increase in the precision of the public information is
likely to reduce the noise-driven dispersion in relative prices by motivating people to shift their
attention away from private sources of information. At the same time, the volatility of aggregate
output gaps may actually increase as people pay more attention to noisy public news—and perhaps
the more so if, because of the underlying aggregate demand externalities, such public signals end
up playing a coordinating role akin to sunspots.
This discussion suggests that, in general, the effects of information on volatility, dispersion, and
welfare are likely to hinge on (i) the nature of the underlying shocks, (ii) the extent to which information is public or private, and (iii) the strength of aggregate demand externalities, as summarized
in α. We explore, and qualify, these intuitions in the subsequent sections.

11

5

Shocks to technologies and preferences

In this section we study the welfare effects of information for the special case in which the business
cycle is driven only by preference and technology shocks. In particular, we impose that ηit = η̄ and
τit = τ̄ for all islands, dates, and states, thereby ruling variation in either the monopolistic markup
or the labor wedge. This helps us capture more generally the scenario in which the business cycle
would have been efficient—in the sense that the output gap would be constant—had information
been complete. It is this scenario that rests at the heart of the “divine coincidence” in modern
New-Keynesian models; and it is this scenario that we focus on in this section.
To obtain closed-form solutions, we henceforth impose a Gaussian information structure. We also
start with the case where agents observe only signals of the exogenous shocks. Finally, to simplify
the exposition, we focus on technology shocks; the analysis for preferences shocks is identical modulo
a change in notation/interpretation.
The log of local productivity, ait ≡ log Ait , is given by
ait = āt + ξit ,
where āt ≡ log Āt is the aggregate productivity shock and ξit is an idiosyncratic productivity shock.
The latter is Normally distributed with unconditional mean 0 and variance σξ2 ≡ 1/κξ , orthogonal
to āt , and i.i.d. across islands and time. Aggregate productivity, on the other hand, is given by
āt = χt + νt ,
where χt = χ(āt−1 , āt−2 , ...) ≡ E[āt |āt−1 , āt−2 , ...] is the component of the current productivity
shocks that is predictable on the basis of past productivity shocks, and νt is a Normal innovation,
i.i.d. over time, independent of any other shock, and with mean 0 and variance σa2 ≡ 1/κa .
Note that local productivity ait is itself a private signal of aggregate productivity āt . Each
agent (or island) may have other sources of private information about the underlying productivity
shock. We summarize all the private (local) information of island i regarding the current aggregate
productivity shock āt in a sufficient statistic xit such that
xit = āt + uit ,
where uit is idiosyncratic noise, Normally distributed, orthogonal to āt and i.i.d. across i and t,
with mean 0 and variance σx2 ≡ 1/κx . In addition to this private information, every agent has also
access to public information about the aggregate shock āt . This public information is summarized
in a statistic zt such that
zt = āt + εt ,

(5)

where εt is noise, Normally distributed with mean 0 and variance σz2 ≡ 1/κz , and orthogonal to all
other variables. The scalars κx and κz parameterize the precisions of available private and public
12

information regarding the underlying productivity shock; the question of interest therefore reduces
to the comparative statics of equilibrium welfare with respect to κz .
The above log-normal structure permit us to obtain a closed-form solution to both first-best and
equilibrium allocations. In particular, it is easy to check that the first best satisfies7
∗
log yit
= Ψāt + ψ(ait − āt )

where Ψ ≡

1+
+γ

and

log Yt∗ = Ψāt

(6)

measures the response of equilibrium output to aggregate productivity shocks, while

ψ ≡ (1 − α)Ψ ≡

1+
+1/ρ

measures the response to idiosyncratic shocks. The equilibrium, on the other

hand, satisfies
log yit = ϕa ait + ϕx xit + ϕz zt + ϕ−1 āt−1 ,

(7)

where ϕa , ϕx , ϕz , and ϕ−1 are positive scalars that are determined by α, Ψ, and the information
structure (see the Appendix for a detailed proof and the characterization of these coefficients). The
corresponding aggregate level of output is given by
log Yt = Φāt + ϕz εt + ϕ−1 āt−1 ,

(8)

where Φ ≡ ϕa + ϕx + ϕz is positive but lower than Ψ.
The fact that Φ < Ψ means that incomplete information dampens the response of the economy
to the underlying aggregate productivity (or taste) shocks. This property is akin to how incomplete
information dampens the response of nominal prices to monetary shocks in Woodford (2003), Nimark
(2008), and Lorenzoni (2010). But whereas the results of those papers rest entirely on the failure
of monetary policy to replicate flexible-price allocations, the fact we document here underscores
how incomplete information may distort the response of the economy to technology and preference
shocks even when prices are flexible—or, equivalently, when prices are sticky but monetary policy
succeeds in replicating flexible-price allocations, which is actually the optimal thing to do as long
as the business cycle is driven only by these kind of shocks.8
This subdued response of equilibrium allocations to the underlying productivity shocks means
that the aggregate output gap is now variable and negatively correlated with these shocks, or
equivalently positively correlated with the business cycle: the booms and recessions caused by these
shocks are too shallow relative to the first best. At the same time, the noise in the public signal
zt (or more generally any correlated errors in people’s beliefs about aggregate economic activity)
add independent variation in output gaps: a fraction of the booms and recessions is now driven by
pure noise. Both of these effects contribute towards volatility in aggregate output gaps. Finally,
the idiosyncratic noise in the private signals xit (or more generally any idiosyncratic errors in the
aforementioned beliefs) causes variation in local output gaps in the cross-section of the economy,
7

The formulas in conditions (6) through (8) are correct up to constants that are spelled out in the Appendix but

are omitted in the main text for expositional simplicity.
8
The positive implications of these insights are explored in Angeletos and La’O (2009), while the optimality of
flexible-price allocations in the presence of informational frictions is studied in Angeletos and La’O (2011).

13

contributing to inefficent dispersion in relative prices. The welfare effects of public information
therefore hinge on the comparative statics of Σt and σt , which we study next.
Proposition 2. (i) An increase in the precision of public information reduces relative-price dispersion and has a non-monotone effect on the volatility of aggregate output gaps:
∂σt
< 0 necessarily
∂κz

and

∂Σt
> 0 iff κz < κ̂
∂κz

where κ̂ ≡ (1 − α)κx − κ0 .
(ii) A stronger demand externality (stronger complementarity) raises the volatility of aggregate
output gaps and has a non-monotone effect on relative-price dispersion:
∂σt
< 0 iff α > α̂
∂α

and

∂Σt
> 0 necessarily
∂α

where α̂ ∈ (1/2, 1).
To understand part (i), note that an increase in the precision of public information induces firms
and workers to reduce their reliance on their private signals, which in turn reduces the contribution
of idiosyncratic noise to cross-sectional dispersion in local output choices and relative prices. At the
same time, because these agents increase their reliance on noisy public news, the contribution of the
noise in these news to aggregate output gaps is ambiguous. On the one hand, the increase in the
precision of public information means that the level of this noise is smaller, which tends to reduce
Σt for any given reaction to this noise. On the other hand, people are now reacting more to this
information, which tends to raise Σt for any given level of noise. Which effect dominates depends
on how large the noise is: when the precision of public information is small enough, a (marginal)
increase in it ends up contributing to more volatile output gaps.
The perverse effect of public information on aggregate output gaps depends, in part, on the
coordinating role that public information plays in our framework: firms and households use the
available public signals, not only predict the underlying fundamentals, but also to coordinate their
choices. Furthermore, as people do so, aggregate output ends up moving away from the first best.
Formalizing this last insight, part (ii) documents that a higher α raises Σt : the stronger the
underlying aggregate demand externalities and the associated coordinating role of public information, the greater the volatility of the resulting output gaps. At the same time, one can show that
the overall volatility of equilibrium output actually falls with α. This qualifies the precise sense
in which the coordinating role of public information contributes to macroeconomic volatility: it is
only the output gap, not output per se, that becomes more volatile as α increases.
This finding opens the door to the possibility that more precise public information ends up
reducing welfare by raising the volatility of output gaps. Nonetheless, part (ii) of the above proposition also establishes that more precise public information helps dampen the excess dispersion in
relative prices, which contribute to higher welfare. As it turns, this second, beneficial effect on relative price dispersion always dominates any potentially perverse effect on volatility. What is more,
the overall positive effect on welfare is higher the higher α.
14

Proposition 3. An increase in the precision of public information necessarily reduces the joint
welfare losses of the volatility and dispersion in output gaps:
∂Λt
<0
∂κz

(9)

Furthermore, the corresponding welfare benefit of public information increases with the degree of
strategic complementarity:
∂ 2 Λt
<0
∂κz ∂α

(10)

This result contrasts sharply Morris and Shin (2002), where the social value of information turns
negative when the degree of complementarity is sufficiently large. In the class of economies we are
concerned with, a higher α means, not only a stronger coordinating motive and thereby more volatile
output gaps, but also a lower contribution of this volatility to welfare losses relative to that of crosssectional dispersion. As a result, the reduction in dispersion σt that obtains with more precise
public information is more valuable when α is higher, which in turn helps this effect dominate the
potentially perverse effect that public information may have on volatility Σt . In fact, not only is the
overall effect necessarily positive, but it is also increasing in the degree of strategic complementarity.
By contrast, the relative welfare contribution of volatility and dispersion are invariant to the degree
of strategic complementarity in Morris and Shin (2002).9 Their result therefore applies only to
economies in which coordination motives are misalligned with social preferences—a scenario that
does not apply to the flexible-price allocations of a canonical DSGE model.
An alternative, and perhaps more powerful, intuition to our results is also the following. Suppose
there are no market distortions such as externalities, monopoly power, and labor wedges—or that
the right policy instruments are in place to correct them. In this case, the equilibrium is first-best
efficient when information is complete (commonly shared), but ceases to be so once information
is incomplete (dispersed); the noise in the available information causes equilibrium allocations to
diverge from their first-best counterparts. Nevertheless, equilibrium allocations remain constrained
efficient in the sense that they coincide with the solution to a planning problem where the planner
can dictate any allocation he wishes subject to the same resource and informational constraints as
the market.10 Note then that, by Blackwell’s theorem, this planner cannot possibly be worse off with
more information—if that were the case, he could simply have ignored the additional information.
It is then immediate that, as long as the equilibrium attains the same allocations as this planner,
equilibrium welfare has to increase with more precise public information.
This principle leaves outside economies where monopoly power or other market distortions create
a discrepancy between equilibrium and constrained efficient allocations. Nonetheless, as long as this
9

Translating this to our context, this is the same as imposing an ad hoc welfare objective in which Σt and σt

enter Λt symmetrically (as if α were zero), even though the equilibrium features a coordination motive (a positive
α). With such an ad hoc objective, we would also have obtained that the perverse effect of public information on Σt
dominates in some cases.
10
See Angeletos and La’O (2009, 2011) for a definition and a proof of this kind of constrained efficiency.

15

discrepancy takes the form of a fixed (state-invariant) wedge between the relevant marginal rates of
substitution and transformation, the social value of public information is bound to remain positive.
This is because a fixed wedge affects the mean level of economic activity, but does not interfere with
the response of the economy to either the underlying business-cycle disturbances or the available
information about them.
Mapping this insight to our earlier welfare decomposition, this means that the aforementioned
wedge implies positive first-order welfare losses (∆t < 1), but these losses are invariant to the
precision of the available public information (∂∆t /∂κz = 0). The effects we documented for secondorder welfare losses therefore directly translate to overall welfare: an increase in the precision of
public information necessarily improves welfare, and the more so the higher the α.
Symmetric results hold if we consider the effects of private rather than public information. In
particular, a higher κx can raise σt , the inefficient dispersion in relative prices, as agents pay more
attention to private signals. At the same time, a higher κx necessarily reduces Σt , the volatility of
aggregate output gaps, as agents shift their attention away from public news. Finally, the latter effect
always dominates, guaranteeing that welfare increases with the precision of private information. Our
findings can thus be summarized as follows.
Theorem 1. Suppose the economy is hit only by shocks to technologies and preferences. Depending
on whether it is public or private, more precise information can have an adverse effect on either the
volatility of the output gap or the dispersion in relative prices—but not on both at the same time.
All in all, welfare necessarily increases with the precision of either public or private information.

6

Shocks to markups and wedges

We now shift focus from technology and preference shocks to shocks in monopoly markups and labor
wedges. The distinctive characteristic of this type of shocks is that they are a source of inefficient
fluctuations under complete information.
Indeed, suppose for a moment that information were complete. If a benevolent planner had
access to the necessary policy instruments, he or she would completely eliminate the fluctuations
generated by shocks to monopoly markups and labor wedges. With flexible prices, this could be
achieved only with a state-contingent subsidy on aggregate output (or some other regulatory or tax
instrument that induces the same incentives). With sticky prices, monetary policy may also play a
similar role. Either way, to the extent that the available policy instruments cannot perfectly offset
these shocks, the residual fluctuations generated by these shocks contribute to welfare losses relative
to the first best. It is this kind of fluctuations that are the focus of this section.
To explore how incomplete information interacts with the magnitude and the welfare consequences of this kind of fluctuations, we now shut down technology and preference shocks. For
expositional simplicity, we further focus on the case of markup shocks alone. The case of laborwedge shocks is identical, modulo a change of notation/interpretation.
16

Let µit ≡ log



ηit
1−ηit



denote the log of the local markup of island i in period t. This is given by
µit = µ̄t + ξit ,

where µ̄t captures an aggregate markup shock and ξit is a purely idiosyncratic shock. The latter
is Normally distributed with mean 0 and variance σξ2 , orthogonal to µ̄t , and i.i.d. across islands.11
The aggregate markup shock, on the other hand, is given by
µ̄t = χt + νt ,
where χt = χ(µ̄t−1 , µ̄t−2 , ...) ≡ E[µ̄t |µ̄t−1 , µ̄t−2 , ...] is the component of the current markup shock
that is predictable on the basis of past public information and νt is a Normal innovation, with mean
0 and variance σµ2 ≡ 1/κµ , i.i.d. over time. Finally, the information structure is the same as the
one we assumed for the case with productivity shocks, except that the shocks themselves have a
different meaning: the private and public information are summarized in, respectively,
xit = µ̄t + uit

and

zt = µ̄t + εt ,

where uit is idiosyncratic noise, with variance σx2 ≡ 1/κx , while εt is aggregate noise, with variance
σε2 ≡ 1/κz . The precision of public information is thus parameterized, once again, by κz .
Clearly, the first best is invariant to markup shocks (and to any information thereof). The
equilibrium, however, responds to these shocks (and to any information thereof). The above lognormal structure then permits us, once again, to obtain a closed-form solution to the equilibrium
allocations and the associated gaps. In particular, the complete-information equilibrium satisfies
log yit = Ψ0 µ̄t + ψ(µit − µ̄t )

and

log Yt∗ = Ψ0 µ̄t

1
< 0 measures the response of equilibrium output to aggregate markup shocks,
where Ψ0 ≡ − +γ
1
while ψ ≡ (1 − α)Ψ ≡ − +1/ρ
< 0 measures the response to idiosyncratic markup shocks. The

incomplete-information equilibrium, on the other hand, satisfies
log yit = ϕµ µit + ϕx xit + ϕz zt + ϕ−1 āt−1 ,
where ϕµ , ϕx , ϕz , and ϕ−1 are negative scalars that are determined by α, Ψ0 , and the information
structure (see the Appendix for a detailed proof and the characterization of these coefficients). The
corresponding aggregate level of output is given by
log Yt = Φ0 µ̄t + ϕz εt + ϕ−1 µ̄t−1 ,
where Φ0 ≡ ϕa + ϕx + ϕz is negative but higher (i.e., smaller in absolute value) than Ψ0 .
Not surprisingly, local output decreases with either the local markup or any information about
the aggregate markup. As a result, aggregate output decreases with either the true aggregate
11

For expositional simplicity, we henceforth ignore the restriction that µit cannot be negative.

17

markup or any correlated error in people’s beliefs about it. This captures a simple but important
fact. Market distortions such as monopoly power and labor wedges have a powerful effect in the
economy, not only due to their direct impact on individual payoffs and incentives, but also because
of a powerful general-equilibrium feedback: a firm that expects the rest of the economy to experience
an increase in monopoly power or other market distortions will find it optimal to reduce its own
employment and production even if its own monopoly power or other local fundamentals remain
unchanged. In this sense, the mere expectation of an inefficient recession may suffice for triggering
an actual inefficient recession.
Turning now attention to how the available information impacts the magnitude of such inefficient
fluctuations, we observe that the incompleteness of information dampens the response of aggregate
output to the true aggregate markup shocks. This is similar to the property we observed earlier
for the case of productivity shocks, except for one important difference. Whereas in that case
this dampening effect contributed towards more volatile output gaps, now it contributes to the
opposite: because the first best is now constant, dampening the response of equilibrium output to
the underlying markup shocks helps stabilize the output gap.
This indicates that raising the precision of public information may now have an adverse effect on
the volatility of the aggregate output gap, despite the reduction in the level of noise. At the same
time, raising the precision of public information is likely to induce agents to reduce their reliance on
any private information about the underlying aggregate distortions, which in turn may help reduce
any inefficient dispersion in relative prices. We verify these intuitions in the next proposition, where,
for comparison to the case of productivity shocks, we study the comparative statics of Σt and σt with
respect to both the precision of public information and the strength of the coordinating motives.
Proposition 4. (i) An increase in the precision of public information reduces the dispersion in
relative prices and raises the volatility of the aggregate output gap:
∂σt
<0
∂κz

and

∂Σt
>0
∂κz

(ii) A stronger aggregate demand externality (stronger complementarity) reduces both the dispersion in relative prices and the volatility in aggregate output gaps:
∂σt
<0
∂α

and

∂Σt
<0
∂α

The intuition behind part (i) was already discussed. To understand part (ii), note first that a
stronger coordination motive (higher α) induces people to react less to private information, which
dampens the impact of idiosyncratic noise on equilibrium allocations and thereby reduces the excess
dispersion in relative prices. This effect is thus the same as in the case of productivity shocks. By
contrast, the effect of α on the volatility of output gaps is different for essentially the same reason
that the effect of public information is also different. As in the case of productivity shocks, a higher
α amplifies the contribution of noise to output gaps. Yet, unlike the case of productivity shocks, a
18

higher α helps stabilize output gaps by raising the anchoring effect of the common prior and thereby
dampening the overall response of the output gap to the underlying markup shocks (formally, Ψ0
falls with α). This effect is strong enough to guarantee that Σt falls with α. Thus, in the case of
markup shocks, stronger coordination motives help stabilize output gaps.
Returning to the social value of public information, the conflicting effects on volatility and
dispersion raises the possibility that the joint effect on welfare is ambiguous. The next proposition
establishes that this is not the case: the adverse effect on volatility necessarily dominates.
At the same time, public information now impacts welfare, not only through volatility and
dispersion, but also through the suboptimality of the mean level of output. The overall welfare
effect of public information thus hinges on the comparative statics of both Λt and ∆t .
Proposition 5. An increase in the precision of public information necessarily increases the secondorder welfare losses that obtain from volatility and dispersion:
∂Λt
>0
∂κz
The joint effect of public information on volatility and dispersion is therefore the exact opposite
than in the case of productivity shocks. At the same time, public information now impacts welfare,
not only through volatility and dispersion, but also through the mean level of output.
Proposition 6. An increase in the precision of public information necessarily reduces the inefficiency in the mean level of output and therefore reduces the associated first-order welfare losses:
∂(Wt∗ ∆t )
>0
∂κz
This finding can be explained as follows. When firms and workers face more uncertainty about
the underlying aggregate shocks, the mean level of equilibrium output tends is lower. This effect is
present irrespectively of whether the shocks are in preferences and technologies or in markups and
labor wedges; it follows from convexity in preferences and technologies. However, the normative
consequences of this effect hinge on the nature of the underlying shocks. In the case of productivity or
taste shocks, the impact of uncertainty on equilibrium reflects social incentives: a benevolent planner
would have reacted to the increase in uncertainty in exactly the same way as the equilibrium. This
explains why δt is invariant to the precision of public information in the case of productivity or taste
shocks. By contrast, in the case of markup or labor-wedge shocks, the impact of this uncertainty
on the equilibrium is stronger than the socially optimal one. By reducing this uncertainty, more
precise public information then helps reduce the associated inefficiency in the mean level of output,
and thereby also to reduce first-order welfare losses.
By the envelope theorem, one may expect the gains from raising the mean level of output to be
small when δt is close enough to 1: when the distortion is small, a marginal change in this distortion
has a trivial welfare effect. This intuition suggests that the welfare losses due to volatility and
19

dispersion are likely to dominate as long as the mean distortion is not too large. Finally, as in the
case with productivity shocks, we expect the effects of private information to be symmetric to those
of public. We verify these intuitions in the following theorem.
Theorem 2. Suppose that the economy is hit only by shocks to monopoly markups and labor wedges.
There exists a threshold δ̂ ∈ (0, 1) such that welfare decreases with the precision of either public or
private information if and only if δt > δ̂.
To interpret this result, recall that δt is the ratio of Et−1 [Yt ] to the level of output that would
have maximized welfare. Hence, as long as δt < 1, the condition δt > δ̂ means, in effect, that the
average value of the aggregate output gap is not too large. Furthermore, note that δt is a decreasing
function of the mean value of the monopoly markup and the labor wedge. By contrast, the threshold
δ̂ ∈ (0, 1) is invariant to the monopoly markup and the labor wedge.12 Thus, whether one measures
the distortion by the underlying wedges or the resulting output gaps, the message remains the same:
in the case of inefficient fluctuations, more precise information reduces welfare as long as the mean
distortion is small enough.13

7

Macroeconomic statistics

The preceding analysis has studied the welfare effects of information under a particular specification
of the information structure: we summarized the available information in exogenous signals of the
shocks hitting the economy. While standard practice in the related literature, this specification is
not best suited for practical questions. Consider, in particular, the following question: how does
welfare depend on the quality of the macroeconomic statistics publicized by the government, or of
the financial news disseminated by the public media? Unfortunately, such sources of information
are not direct signals of the exogenous shocks hitting the economy. Rather, they are only noisy
indicators of the behavior of other agents—they are signals of the endogenous state of the economy.
To capture this fact, we modify the preceding analysis as follows. In addition to (or in place of)
any exogenous signals of the underlying shocks, firms and workers can now observe a noisy public
indicator of the ongoing level of aggregate output. This indicator is given by
ωt = log Yt + εt

(11)


where εt ∼ N 0, σω2 represents classical measurement error and σω > 0 parameterizes the level
of this measurement error. The results are identical if we consider other indicators of aggregate
economic activity, such as noisy public signals of aggregate employment and consumption, or a
survey of opinions regarding any of these macroeconomic variables. The scalar κω ≡ σω−2 can thus
12
13

See the Appendix for the exact characterization of both δ̂ and δt .
Clearly, this condition is automatically satisfied if the government has access to a subsidy or some other policy

instrument that permits to eliminate any predictable distortion and thereby to induce δt = 1 (> δ̂).

20

be interpreted more generally as the precision, or quality, of the available macroeconomic statistics
and of any other public information regarding the endogenous state of the economy.
No matter whether the underlying shocks are in preference and technologies or in markups and
labor wedges, the aforementioned macroeconomic indicator will serve, in equilibrium, as a signal
of these shocks: variation in equilibrium output signals variation in the underlying fundamentals.
However, the informational content of this indicator—formally, the signal to noise ratio—depends
crucially on agents’ behavior. It follows that, pretty much as in other rational-expectations settings
(e.g., Lucas, 1972, Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980), the equilibrium must now be understood as a fixed
point between the information structure and the equilibrium allocations.
In general, this fixed-point problem can be intractable. However, the combination of a powerform specification for preferences and technologies and a log-normal specification for the exogenous
shocks guarantees the existence of a log-linear Rational Expectations equilibrium.
To understand this, suppose that the economy is hit only by productivity shocks. Take any
allocation for which local output can be expressed as a log-linear function of the local shocks and
the private information, and let ϕa and ϕx denote the corresponding sensitivities of local log output.
That is, suppose
log yit = ϕa ait + ϕx xit + ht ,
where ht is an arbitrary function of time, of the past aggregate productivity shocks, and of any
other variable that is common knowledge as of the beginning of period t. Then, aggregate output
is given by log Yt = (ϕa + ϕx )āt + ht and, since ϕa , ϕx and ht are commonly known, observing the
statistic ωt is equivalent to observing a signal of the form
ωt0 ≡

ωt − ht
= āt + ε0t ,
ϕa + ϕx

where ε0t ≡

1
ϕa +ϕx εt .

This is akin to the exogenous public signal we had assumed in the preceding analysis, except for one
important difference: the errors in this signal are inversely proportional to the sum ϕa + ϕx and,
in this sense, the precision of this signal is endogenous to the allocation under consideration. This
captures a more general principle: the signal-to-noise ratio in macroeconomic statistics is pinned
down by the sensitivity of equilibrium allocations to the underlying shocks to fundamentals.
Notwithstanding this important qualification, note that that this endogenous signal is Gaussian,
just as the exogenous ones. It follows that the available public information can be summarized in a
Gaussian sufficient statistic whose precision is given by the sum of the precisions of the exogenous
and endogenous signals. In effect, this means that our preceding analysis goes through once we let
κz = κ̃z + (ϕa + ϕx )2 κω ,

(12)

where κ̃z measures the precision of the exogenous public signal and κω parameterizes the quality
of macroeconomic statistics. We conclude that the equilibrium is now the fixed point between the
allocation described in condition (7) and the precision of information described in (12).
21

With these observations at hand, we can now determine the social value of macroeconomic
statistics simply by studying how κz varies with κω . This is because the derivative of welfare with
respect to κω is equal to the derivative of welfare with respect to κz , which can be read off directly
from Theorems 1 and 2, times the derivative of κz with respect to κω .
Clearly, if the sum ϕa + ϕx were fixed, κz would increase one-to-one with κω . That is, if
the response of equilibrium output to the underlying productivity shocks were invariant to the
information structure, an increase in the quality of macroeconomic statistics would translate oneto-one to an increase in the precision of the public information. Any increase in κz , however,
implies a reduction in the equilibrium value of ϕx : as the available public information becomes more
precise, firms and households alike pay less attention to private information. By itself, this effect
contributes to a lower signal-to-noise ratio in the observed macroeconomic statistic and therefore
to a lower equilibrium value for κz : as people pay less attention to their private signals, the efficacy
of social learning falls. Nonetheless, this effect is never strong enough to offset the aforementioned
direct effect of κω on κz . To see this, suppose, towards a contradiction, that the overall effect were
negative. If that were the case, agents would have found it optimal to put more weight on their
private signals, which would have implied more social learning. Both the direct and the indirect
effects would then have contributed to an increase in κz , contradicting the original claim.
We conclude that an increase in the quality of macroeconomic statistics necessarily increases κz ,
which in turn permits us to translate all the results of the preceding analysis to the more realistic
scenario in which public information regards indicators of aggregate economic activity rather than
direct signals of the underlying structural shocks. The same is true for the case of markup shocks,
modulo a re-interpretation of the shocks and the signals—the welfare effects of κz are now different,
but the positive relation between κz and κω holds true no matter whether the underlying shocks
are in technologies, markups or other fundamentals.
Proposition 7. Theorems 1 and 2 continue to hold if the precision of public information is reinterpreted as the quality of macroeconomic statistics.
This result need not hinge on the details of the available macroeconomic statistics: we could
replace the aforementioned signal of aggregate output with a signal of aggregate employment or
consumption, a survey of people’s forecast of these macroeconomic outcomes, or any combination of
the above. This result may nevertheless depend on the absence of private forms of social learning.
By this we mean the following. Suppose that, in addition to the aforementioned publicly observable
macroeconomic statistics, each island also observes a noisy private signal of the output or employment level of a neighboring island, or some other private signal of the actions of other agents in
the economy. This renders the private information that is available to each agent endogenous to
the choices of other agents, pretty much as in the case of public information above. But now note
that an improvement in the quality of the macroeconomic statistics may reduce the efficacy of these
private forms of social learning: as each agent pays more attention to these public signals and less to
22

his private information, the signal-to-noise ratio in the aforementioned private signals deteriorates.
This deterioration, in turn, tends to have the exact opposite effect on welfare than the improvement
in macroeconomic statistics: it contributes towards lower welfare in the case of productivity shocks,
and towards higher welfare in the case of markup shocks.
This possibility, which is at the core of Amador and Weill (2010, 2011), qualifies the robustness
of Proposition 7. Nonetheless, note that Theorems 1 and 2 characterize the welfare effects of the
available information no matter where this information originates from. Therefore, even if one
seeks to study environments that endogenize either the collection or the aggregation of information,
our results remain indispensable: the welfare implications of any change in the environment that
involves, directly or indirectly, a change in the available information hinges on the effects we have
documented in Theorems 1 and 2.14

8

A numerical exploration

Our framework is too stylized to permit a serious quantitative analysis.15 This qualification notwithstanding, we now consider a numerical exercise that permits us to further explore the determinants
of the social value of information within the context of business cycles.
To this goal, we let the economy be hit by both productivity and markup shocks. Both shocks
are log-normally distributed: āt ∼ N (0, σa2 ) and µ̄t ∼ N (0, σµ2 ), where σa and σµ parameterize
the volatilities of the two shocks.16 The local productivity and markup shocks are log-normally
distributed around the corresponding aggregates and, for simplicity, comprise the entire private
information of an island. Finally, the public information consists of a noisy statistic of aggregate

output, defined again as in (11): ωt = log Yt + εt , where εt ∼ N 0, σω2 is a measurement error and
σω > 0 is its standard deviation.
This statistic now reveals information about both types of shocks: there exist scalars λa , λµ , λε ∈
R+ and λ0 ∈ R such that, in equilibrium,
ωt = λ0 + λa āt − λµ µ̄t + λε εt
14

(13)

For example, this observation is key to understanding how the insights of Amador and Weill (2010, 2011) may

apply to the class of business-cycle economies we are interested in: those papers point out why more precise public
information might slow down private learning, but it is only the analysis of our paper that informs one how this will
affect output gaps, relative price dispersion, and overall welfare in a canonical business-cycle model. A similar point
applies to the design of optimal policy when information is endogenous (see the discussion in the end of Section 9).
15
Among other simplifications, we have ruled out from all forms of dynamic interdependence, such as investment
and adjustment costs, thereby also abstracting from how current economic activity depends on expectations of future
economic activity. Furthermore, we have assumed that the state of the economy become common knowledge by the
end of each period, thereby abstracting from the rich informational dynamics that can emerge when learning takes
place slowly over time. While none of these simplifications is likely to impact the essence of our theoretical insights,
they are certainly relevant for quantitative questions.
16
Adding persistence to these shocks has small effects on our results. One should only interpret σa and σµ as the
volatilities of the innovations in these shocks.

23

where āt and µ̄t are the aggregate productivity and markup shocks. A higher ωt is thus interpreted
partly as a signal of higher productivity and partly as a signal of lower markup. Either way,
the impact on aggregate employment and output is positive: positive news about macroeconomic
activity are bound to stimulate the economy irrespectively of whether these news reflect a higher
aggregate productivity, a lower market distortion, or even a positive measurement error. The welfare
consequences, however, crucially depend on the nature of the underlying shocks.
Parameterization. We interpret a period as a year and target a standard deviation of aggregate
output growth equal to 0.02, which is consistent with US data. Together with the rest of the
preference and technology parameters, this target pins down the overall volatility of the underlying
shocks, but leaves undetermined the relative contribution of the two different types of shocks. We
will later discuss how an estimate of the relative contribution of productivity and markup shocks
can be obtained on the basis of the pertinent literature. To start with, however, we prefer to stay
agnostic about this relative contribution. We thus proceed as follows. First, we measure the relative
importance of the two shocks with the following statistic:
R≡

(Ψσa )2
,
(Ψσa )2 + (Ψ0 σµ )2

To interpret R, suppose for a moment that information were complete. Aggregate output would
then be given (up to a constant) by log Yt = Ψāt + Ψ0 µ̄t and R would thus coincide with the
fraction of the volatility of aggregate output that is driven by productivity shocks. We thus think
of R ∈ [0, 1] as a measure of the relative importance of the two different types of shocks: a higher R
means that a larger fraction of the business cycle is efficient. We then let R take any value in [0, 1]
and, for any given value of R, we choose σa2 and σµ2 , the volatilities of the shock innovations, so as
to match both the particular value of R and the target value of the standard deviation of output.
Next, to calibrate the standard deviation of the measurement error in the signal of aggregate
output, we look at the BEA releases of quarterly GDP. For a given quarter, the BEA publishes
different estimates of GDP as more information becomes available. We assume that the last estimate
is the true value of GDP. We set σω = 0.02, which is close to the standard deviation of the error
between the first and the last release found in the literature (e.g., Fixler and Grimm, 2005).
Next, we need to parameterized the idiosyncratic noise in private information. Clearly, this is
challenging, because there is no obvious way to measure private information. We partly bypass this
problem by imposing that private information consists only of the local productivity and markup
shocks; this restriction is motivated by the idea that, for most firms and households, private information is likely to be limited to their idiosyncratic circumstances. The precision of private information
is then pinned down by the variance of the innovations in the idiosyncratic shocks.17
17

Another possibility would be to calibrate the private information to match the heterogeneity observed in surveys

of forecasts. This approach, however, has its own problems because it is unclear how reliable these surveys are. Given
the limited scope of the numerical exercise we conduct here, we leave further exploration of this issue to future work.

24

Even that last option, however, is not obvious how to implement. One of the main difficulties
is that different assumptions about the markup charged by a firm imply different estimates of its
Total Factor Productivity (TFP). To get a rough estimate of the idiosyncratic risk in TFP, we can
refer to the NBER-CES Manufacturing Database, which computes a measure of TFP for all 6-digit
NAICS manufacturing industries in the US is 2005. This gives an estimate of the standard deviation
of idiosyncratic TFP growth of 0.06. One may argue using a higher value to take into account the
fact that the firms in the NBER-CES dataset are a more homogeneous and less volatile subset
of all the firms in the US economy. Looking at sales would also suggest a bigger number for the
idiosyncratic risk faced by a firm. For the markups, on the other hand, we follow the international
economics literature (e.g., Tybout, 2003, Epifani and Gancia, 2010) and use the standard deviation
of price-cost margins (that is, sales net of expenditures on labor and materials) as a proxy for the
idiosyncratic variation in market power. Doing so yields an estimate of the standard deviation of
idiosyncratic markups of about 0.1.
Based on these observations, and lacking a better alternative, we choose 0.08 as our baseline value
for the standard deviation of both types of idiosyncratic shocks. Together with our restriction that
private information coincides with the local shocks, this means that the noise in private information
regarding the aggregate state of the economy is roughly four times as large as the noise in public
information. This sounds plausible, given that the main sources of information about aggregate
economic activity are likely to be public. Svensson (2005) uses a similar argument to motivate his
assumption that public information is likely to be far more precise than private information. In any
event, our numerical findings do not appear particularly sensitive to the value of σξ .
Turning to the remaining parameters of the model, consider  and γ. The former gives the inverse
of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply. The latter is typically interpreted as either the inverse of
the elasticity of intertemporal substitution or the coefficient of relative risk aversion. Nevertheless,
as emphasized by Woodford (2003), the main role of γ in a model without capital is to control the
income elasticity of labor supply.18 Accordingly, we follow Woodford (2003) and set  = .3 and
γ = .2. These values are such that the complete-information version of our model (which is, in
effect, the basic RBC model without capital) replicates the empirical regularity that output and
employment move closely together over the business cycle, while real wages are almost acyclical. We
also set the average markup to 0.15, which is roughly consistent with estimates for the US economy.
The last parameter to set is the degree of strategic complementarity, α. In our model, α identifies
the elasticity of individual output to aggregate output for given local fundamentals; more generally,
it captures the sensitivity of actual economic activity to expectations of economic activity. Causal
observation suggests that this elasticity is high. Unfortunately, however, we are not aware of any
estimate of this kind of elasticity—nor is it of course clear if the particular micro-foundations we
18

To see this, take the representative-agent version of our model. Labor supply is then given by nt = wt Ct−γ ,
1/

which reveals the key role played by the parameters  and γ. That been said, γ also determines risk aversion, which
plays evidently a role in the welfare effects of any kind of uncertainty. We return to this point below.

25

have considered here capture the complementarities that may be present in reality because of the
far richer pattern of specialization, trade, and aggregate demand externalities.
Lacking a clear benchmark, we opt to set ρ = 1, which together with our choice of  and γ implies
a degree of strategic complementarity α = 0.6. The motivation behind this choice is the following.
Depending on how one interprets the islands of our model—as industries, classes of intermediate
inputs, or even individual firms—one could argue that these goods are either complements (ρ < 1)
or substitutes (ρ > 1). By setting ρ = 1 (Cobb-Douglas), we take the middle ground. Nonetheless,
given the uncertainty we face about the appropriate calibration of the strength of aggregate demand
externalities and the degree of strategic complementarity, we will later consider the sensitivity of our
numerical findings to a wide range of values for α. As anticipated by our earlier theoretical results,
the precise value of α is irrelevant for qualitative effects—but it is important for magnitudes.
Results. With the aforementioned parameterization at hand, the exercise we conduct is to compute the welfare consequences of eliminating the measurement error in the available macroeconomic
statistic. More specifically, keeping all other parameters constant, we compute the welfare gain or
loss of moving the economy from σω = .02 (our baseline value for the level of noise in macroeconomic
statistics) to σω = 0 (which means, in effect, perfect public information). This welfare gain or loss
is computed in consumption-equivalent units (i.e., as a fraction of the mean level of consumption)
and is normalized by a measure of the welfare cost of the business cycle as in Lucas (1987).19
Figure 1 illustrates how the welfare effects of perfecting the macroeconomic statistics vary as
one varies R, the relative contribution of productivity and markup shocks. The solid line in this
figure represents the total welfare effect. The other two lines decompose the total welfare effect
between the effect that obtains via the impact of information volatility and dispersion (i.e., via Λt )
and the one that obtains via the impact of information on mean level of output (i.e., via ∆t )
In line with Theorem 1, we see that reducing the measurement error in the macroeconomic
statistics—equivalently, increasing the precision of the available public information—improves welfare when productivity shocks drive a large enough fraction of the business cycle (i.e., for high values
of R). Furthermore, the welfare gains can be non trivial, at least relative to a Lucas-type measure
of welfare cost of the business cycle: when productivity shocks drive the business cycle, the welfare
gains of reducing the noise in macroeconomic statistics are roughly equal to the welfare gains of
removing aggregate consumption risk.
As for the case where the business cycle reflects mostly variation in monopoly markups or other
19

More specifically, the norm we use is the consumption-equivalent welfare gain of eliminating the risk in aggregate

consumption when information is complete and fluctuations are driven by productivity shocks. We choose such a
normalization for two reasons. First, by abstracting from capital and choosing a low value for γ in order to match
the cyclical behavior of the economy, we have underestimated risk aversion and, in so doing, we have underestimated
the welfare effects of any type of uncertainty. And second, the welfare effects of aggregate uncertainty are known to
be notoriously small within the class of elementary DSGE models we are working with. Our normalization seeks to
bypass these two issues by focusing on relative rather than absolute welfare effects. Enrichments of the model that
increase the welfare costs of the business cycle are likely to increase as well the welfare effects we document here.

26

1.5

welfare gainslosses

1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5

total welfare effect
volatility and
dispersion effects

-1.0

level effect

-1.5
0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

R, relative contribution of technology shocks

Figure 1: Welfare effects from eliminating the measurement error in the macroeconomic statistic as
a function of R, the fraction of the business cycle that is driven by productivity shocks.
market distortions (i.e., for small values of R), recall from Theorem 2 that information reduces
welfare if and only if its joint detrimental effect on volatility and dispersion outweigh the beneficial
one on the predictable (mean) level of economic activity. Figure 1 then reveals that this is indeed
the case for the parameterization under consideration.
To clarify this issue, the dashed and dotted lines in Figure 1 separate the welfare effect that
obtains via the impact of information on the mean level of output from the one that obtains via
its impact on volatility and dispersion. The latter effect is positive if and only if R > 12 , that is,
if and only if productivity shocks explains at least a half of the business-cycle volatility in output.
The effect via the mean level of output, on the other hand, is positive if and only if R < 1, that is,
as long as there are markup shocks. Furthermore, this is decreasing in R, the relative contribution
of productivity shocks, and vanishes at R = 1. It follows that there exists a threshold R̂ <

1
2

such

that the total welfare effect is positive if and only if R > R̂.
Clearly, the threshold R̂ is determined by the conflict between the beneficial effect that more
precise public information has on the mean level of output and the adverse effect it has on output
volatility and price dispersion when markup shocks are sufficiently prevalent. As anticipated in our
earlier discussion of Theorem 2, the strength of the former effect crucially depends on how big the
mean distortion is: the further away output is from its optimal level, the bigger the welfare gains
from a given marginal increase in output.
The role of the mean level of market distortions is illustrated Figure 2. The left panel in that
figure repeats the exercise of Figure 1 after resetting the mean markup to zero—or, equivalently, after
introducing a subsidy that undoes the mean monopolistic distortion. The impact of information on
the mean level of output now has a trivial welfare effect, implying that the total welfare effect is
pinned down almost entirely by the one via volatility and dispersion.
27

1.5

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5
welfare gainslosses

welfare gainslosses

1.5

0.0
-0.5

total welfare effect

0.0

total welfare effect

-0.5

volatility and

volatility and
dispersion effects

dispersion effects

-1.0

-1.0
level effect

level effect

-1.5
0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

-1.5

1.0

0.2

R, relative contribution of technology shocks

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

R, relative contribution of technology shocks

Figure 2: Welfare effects when the mean monopolistic distortion is reset to zero (left panel) or to a
sufficiently large level (right panel).
Conversely, if we let the mean distortion to be sufficient severe—which, in our numerical example,
translates to a mean markup above 36%—then the impact on the mean level of output is so strong
that the welfare effect becomes positive for all R. This is the case illustrated in the right panel
of Figure 2. We conclude that, other things equal, a sufficiently large mean distortion suffices for
information to be welfare-improving even when the business cycle is driven entirely by variation
in monopoly markups and other market distortions. If one takes into account tax distortions, this
scenario might actually be empirically relevant.
Turning attention to the sensitivity of our findings to other parameters, Figure 3 studies the
comparative statics of the threshold value R̂ at which the welfare effects of information change sign,
from negative for R < R̂ (where the markup shocks are sufficiently prevalent) to positive for R > R̂.
As evident in this figure, the threshold R̂ tends to increase with either a higher  or a higher γ.
This is because an increase in either  or γ tends to increases the welfare costs of volatility and
dispersion relative to those of the mean distortion in output, which in turn means that the former
end up playing a more important role in determining the total welfare effects of information. At the
same time, we see that, for given  and γ, this threshold is almost entirely invariant to α, the degree
of strategic complementarity (or, equivalently, the strength of aggregate demand externalities).
This last property underscores, once more, the contrast between our results and those of Morris
and Shin (2002). In the “beauty contests” studied by them and much of the subsequent literature,
the welfare effect of public information turns negative once the degree of strategic complementarity
is sufficiently high and public information is sufficiently noisy. By contrast, in the class of businesscycle economies we are interested in, the degree of strategic complementarity appears to play no
noticeable role in determining the sign of the welfare effects of information: whether information
improves welfare or not depends on the relative contribution of the different shocks, not on the

28

high Γ HΓ=.5L
high Ε HΕ=.5L

baseline HΓ=.2, Ε=.3L

0.5

low Ε HΕ=.1L

low Γ HΓ=0L

`
threshold R

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1
0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

Α, degree of strategic complementarity

Figure 3: Sensitivity of the threshold R̂ for the relative contribution of productivity shocks at which
the welfare effects of information change sign, from negative for R < R̂ to positive for R > R̂.
strength of the aggregate demand externalities and the consequent coordination motives.20
That been said, the degree of strategic complementarity emerges as a key determinant of the
magnitude of the welfare effects. This is evident in Figure 4, which studies the sensitivity of the
welfare effects under the two extreme scenarios where the business cycle is driven either only by
productivity shocks (R = 1, left panel in the figure) or only by markup shocks (R = 0, right panel).
In either case, the absolute value of the welfare effects is increasing in α: stronger coordination
motives are associated with bigger welfare gains when the business cycle is driven by productivity
shocks, and with bigger welfare losses when the business cycle is driven by markup shocks. Intuitively, this is because a higher α implies that firms and workers’ decisions are more sensitive to
the uncertainty they face about aggregate economic activity, which in turn amplifies the impact of
noise on equilibrium allocations and thereby on welfare. Conversely, the welfare effects vanish as α
approaches zero, for in that case expectations of aggregate economic activity—and hence any information either about the latter or about the underlying aggregate shocks—become entirely irrelevant
for either equilibrium or welfare.21
Figure 4 also illustrates the sensitivity of the welfare effects to  and γ. Whether the business
cycle is driven by productivity shocks (left panel) or markup shocks (right panel), the welfare effects
increase in absolute value when we reduce either  or γ, that is, when the economy becomes more
elastic to the underlying shocks. Yet, notwithstanding the uncertainty we face regarding the relevant
20
21

As it turns out, the same is true for the level of noise: the threshold R̂ is largely invariant to σω .
Note, however, that α = 0 is a knife-edge case. As long as α is either positive or negative, these expectations

become crucial. As a result, the welfare effects of information turn out to be qualitatively the same irrespectively
of whether α is positive or negative. For instance, suppose we take the extreme case in which the good of different
islands are perfect substitutes, in which case ρ = ∞ and α = −2/3 < 0. The welfare effects are then qualitatively
identical to those of Figure 1, although they are smaller in magnitude.

29

low Γ HΓ=0L

3.0

0.0

high Ε HΕ=.5L

baseline HΓ=.2, Ε=.3L

-0.2

high Γ HΓ=.5L

-0.4

low Ε HΕ=.1L

2.0

welfare losses HR=0L

welfare gains HR=1L

2.5

1.5
1.0
0.5

-0.6
-0.8
low Ε HΕ=.1L

-1.0

low Γ HΓ=0L

-1.2

baseline HΓ=.2, Ε=.3L

-1.4

high Ε HΕ=.5L

high Γ HΓ=.5L

0.0
0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.2

Α, degree of strategic complementarity

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

Α, degree of strategic complementarity

Figure 4: Sensitivity of welfare effects to α, γ, and . Left panel corresponds to R = 1 (productivity
shocks), right panel corresponds to R = 0 (markup shocks).
range of values for α, the impact of  and γ seems to be small relative to that of α.
Figure 5 concludes our numerical exploration by examining the sensitivity of the welfare effects
to σω and σξ . Not surprisingly, raising σω amplifies the welfare effect of eliminating the measurement
error in macroeconomic statistics: the larger the noise in macroeconomic statistics, the larger the
welfare gains of eliminating that noise in the case of productivity shocks, and the larger the welfare
losses in the case of mark up shocks. The impact of σξ , on the other hand, appears to be nonmonotonic in the case of productivity shocks. Furthermore, the magnitude of the welfare effects
is not particularly sensitive to σξ as long as the latter exceeds 0.2, our baseline value for σω .
Since it seems unlikely that the noise in private information can be smaller than the noise in
public information, this suggests that the effects we document are not particularly sensitive to this
parameter for which we have very little knowledge. That been said, we would like to emphasize,
once more, the limitations of our numerical exercise and the challenge of obtaining reliable estimates
of either the information structure or the degree of strategic complementarity. This seems a fruitful
direction for future research.
Like our theoretical exercise, our numerical exploration has so far remained agnostic about the
relative contribution of the different types of shocks. In so doing, we have sought to provide a direct
mapping from one’s view regarding the efficiency of the business cycle to one’s inference about the
social value of information. Putting such priors aside, one may seek an estimate of the relative
contribution of different business-cycle disturbances in the pertinent empirical literature.
Thus consider Smets and Wouters (2007). The latter fit a DSGE model to the US economy and,
among other things, estimate the contribution of different shocks to output volatility. At the one
year horizon, a combination of their markup and labor-wedge shocks explains only half as much of
output volatility as productivity shocks. Although their model is far richer than ours, and hence
not directly comparable, their estimates suggest that we could have used R = 2/3 as a plausible

30

0.0

welfare losses HR=0L

welfare gains HR=1L

1.5

1.0

0.5

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

0.0
0.005

0.010

0.015

0.020

0.025

0.005

0.030

0.010

0.015

0.020

0.025

0.030

ΣΩ , noise in macro statistic

ΣΩ , noise in macro statistic

welfare losses HR=0L

welfare gains HR=1L

1.24
1.22
1.20
1.18
1.16
1.14
0.00

-0.4
-0.5
-0.6
-0.7

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

0.30

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

0.30

ΣΞ , noise in private info

ΣΞ , noise in private info

Figure 5: Sensitivity of welfare effects to σω (top two panels) and σξ (bottom two panels). In each
case, the left panel corresponds to R = 1 (only productivity shocks), right panel corresponds to
R = 0 (only markup shocks).
benchmark in the numerical exercise of the preceding section.22 Given that the threshold R̂ that
determines the sign of the welfare effects appears to be comfortably below 1/2, we conclude that
R > R̂ seems the most likely scenario. Therefore, notwithstanding the objections one may have
either about our exercise or the precise meaning of the shocks identified in estimated DSGE models,
the benchmark that emerges is one where productivity shocks are sufficiently prevalent that welfare
improves with more precise information.

9

Discussion

The key lesson of our paper is that the social value of information hinges on the nature of the underlying shocks and the efficiency of the resulting fluctuations. Withholding the release of macroeconomic statistics, practicing “constructive ambiguity”, or otherwise constraining the information that
is available to the public makes sense when, and only when, a sufficiently high fraction of the business
cycle is driven primarily by shocks that move the “output gap”. For a plausible parameterization of
our framework, this was not the case: more information was found to be welfare-improving.
22

Clearly, a preferred alternative would be to (i) augment their model with the information structure we have

considered here, (i) estimate the augmented model on US data, and (iii) use this to quantify the welfare effects of
information. Such an exercise, however, is well beyond the scope of this paper and is left for future research.

31

Our analysis was based on the flexible-price allocations of an elementary DSGE model. As
mentioned already, our focus on flexible prices was not accidental: studying the normative properties
of flexible-price allocations is always the key step towards understanding the normative properties
of sticky-price allocations. This principle, which is a cornerstone of the modern theory of optimal
monetary policy, is also the key to the sharpness of the results we have delivered in this paper.
Needless to say, our results continue to apply if we introduce sticky prices but focus on monetary
policies that replicate flexible-price allocations. Furthermore, for the case of technology or preference
shocks, one can show that these policies are actually optimal (Angeletos and La’O, 2011). It follows
that, for this particular case, our results extend directly to sticky prices as long as monetary policy
is optimal. In the case of markup or labor-wedge shocks, on the other hand, flexible-price allocations
are no more efficient and the optimal policy typically involves partial stabilization of the associated
output gaps. Our results can then be interpreted as applying to the residual fluctuations that obtain
once monetary policy, or other policy instruments, offset part of the underlying distortionary shocks.
These observations indicate how our results can be translated to richer settings with sticky
prices. But they also underscore that this translation ought to hinge on the optimality of monetary
policy—or lack thereof. More concretely, suppose that the economy is hit only by technology
shocks, but, contrary to what would have been optimal, monetary policy fails to replicate flexibleprice allocations. In this case, the suboptimal response of monetary policy to the underlying shocks
introduces random variation in realized markups and output gaps. This opens the possibility that
more precise information about the underlying productivity shocks may now be detrimental. In
short, a suboptimal monetary policy might induce an otherwise innocuous productivity shock to
have the same welfare implications as a distortionary markup shock.
By focusing on flexible-price allocations, we have deliberately abstracted from such confounding
effects. By contrast, the suboptimality of monetary policy is playing a central role in the otherwise complementary work of Hellwig (2005) and Roca (2010). These papers assume sticky prices
and study the welfare effects of information regarding exogenous shocks to the quantity of money.
Clearly, monetary shocks that are unknown at the time firms set their prices cause equilibrium
output to fluctuate away from the first best. To the extent that monetary policy fails to insulate
the economy from such shocks, more precise public information can simply help the market do
what monetary policy should have done in the first place: once these shocks become known at the
time firms set their prices, prices adjust one-to-one to these shocks, guaranteeing that the shocks
have no effect on real allocations and welfare. These observations help explain the results of the
aforementioned two papers and the difference between their contribution and ours.
Putting aside the possibility of suboptimal monetary policy, preference and technology shocks
can trigger inefficient fluctuations to the extent that market frictions impact the response of flexibleprice allocations to the aforementioned shocks. For example, Blanchard and Gali (2007) show how
this is a natural implication of the combination of search frictions and real-wage rigidities in the
labor market. Intuitively, such rigidities make the labor wedge correlated with the technology shock.
32

A similar argument applies to credit-market frictions: see Buera and Moll (2011) for an analysis
of how different forms of credit frictions manifest in different types of cyclical wedges. In the light
of our results, one would then expect the welfare effects of information to hinge on how strongly
the wedges covary with the technology shocks and thereby on the severity of the market frictions.
Further exploring these ideas is left for future research.
Another interesting issue emerges if the available information interferes with the ability of a
policy maker to stabilize the economy. James and Lawler (2011) make a related point within the
context of the Morris-Shin “beauty contest”. Translating this insight in the context of business
cycles hinges, once again, on the nature of the underlying shocks and the resulting “output gaps”.
To recap, although our analysis abstracts from a variety of issues that may interact in intriguing
ways with the question of interest, it helps resolve the apparent confusion regarding the applicability
of earlier results in the literature, and lays down a clean micro-founded benchmark for understanding
the welfare effects of information within the context of business cycles—a benchmark that may help
guide future work on the welfare consequences of informational frictions.
Our results may indeed prove instrumental towards different exercises than the particular one
we conducted in this paper. Consider, for example, how informational frictions may impact the
design of optimal policy. Ongoing work in this direction includes Angeletos and La’O (2011) and
Wiederholt and Paciello (2011). Although the contributions of these papers are distinct, our findings
help understand the key forces operating behind some of their results. In particular, Angeletos and
La’O’s result that the optimal policy seeks to improve the aggregation of information through
prices and macroeconomic statistics hinges on the fact that information is socially valuable when
the business cycle is efficient. Similarly, Wiederholt and Paciello’s result that monetary policy
seeks to induce agents to pay less attention to markup shocks hinges on the fact that information
becomes detrimental in the case of such shocks. More generally, characterizing the social value
of information—which was the contribution of our paper—is a key step towards answering any
normative question that involves either an exogenous or an endogenous change in the available
information.

33

Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1. Welfare is given by
hX
i
W=E
β t Wt
where

"
Wt ≡ Et−1

Yt1−γ
−
1−γ

1
1+

Z

Sitn



yit
Ait

#

1+
di

measures the period-t utility flow. Clearly, the comparative statics of welfare with respect to the
information structure are pinned down by those of Wt . We henceforth focus on the latter.
To simplify the exposition, we ignore the consumption taste shocks Sitc ; the proof extends to this
case only at the cost of more tedious derivations. Furthermore, to simplify the notation, we drop
the time index t. Finally, we let E(X) and V (X) short-cuts for the conditional expectation and
variance of a random variable X given the public information that is available at the end of period
t − 1 (which include all the period t − 1 shocks). Similarly Cov(X, Z) denotes the corresponding
conditional covariance of X and Z, and Cov(X, Z|Θ) their covariance once we condition, not only
the end-of-period public information of last period, but also on the current aggregate shocks Θ.
The log-normality assumption allows us to rewrite the first component of W (the one that
corresponds to consumption) as follows:


E Y 1−γ = [E (Y )]1−γ exp − 21 γ (1 − γ) V (log Y )
n
Similarly, letting qi ≡ A1+
i /Si , denoting with Q the cross-sectional mean of qi , and noting that
 ρ−1  ρ
ρ−1
R ρ
Y ≡
yi di
, we can express the second component of W (the one that corresponds to

leisure) as follows:
Z
E

Sitn



yit
Ait

1+

!
di

Z
=E

yi1+
di
qi


=

[E (Y )]1+
exp(G)
Q

where
G ≡

1
1
2 (1 + )V (log Y ) + 2 V (log Q) − (1 + )Cov (log Y, log Q)


+ 21  + ρ1 (1 + )V (log yi |Θ) + 12 V (log qi |Θ) − (1 + )Cov (log yi , log qi |Θ)

We infer that
W =

1
1−γ

1−γ

[E (Y )]


exp − 12 γ (1 − γ) V (log Y ) −

1
1+

[E (Y )]1+
exp(G)
Q

with G defined as above.
Next, let us define Ŷ as the value of E (Y ) that maximizes the aforementioned expression for W ,
taking as given Q, G, and V (log Y ). Clearly, this is given by the solution to the following condition:

Ŷ 1+
Ŷ 1−γ exp − 21 γ (1 − γ) V (log Y ) =
exp(G)
Q
34

(14)

We can then restate W as follows:
(


E (Y ) 1−γ
1
W = 1−γ
−
Ŷ

1
1+



E (Y )

1+ )

Ŷ

Ŷ 1+
exp(G)
Q

If E(Y ) happens to equal Ŷ , then W = Ŵ , where
Ŵ ≡

+γ
(1−γ)(1+)

Ŷ 1+
exp(G).
Q

(15)

Letting
δ≡

E(Y )

U (δ) − V (δ)
∆≡
=
U (1) − V (1)

and

Ŷ

1
1−γ − 1 δ 1+
1−γ δ
1+
,
+γ
(1−γ)(1+)

we conclude that
W = ∆Ŵ .

(16)

∆ therefore identifies the wedge between actual welfare and the welfare that would have obtained
if a planner had an instrument that permitted him to scale up and down the allocation under
consideration by a factor δ and could choose this factor so at to maximize welfare.23
Next, from (14) we have that
n
1

o
1
Ŷ = Q +γ exp − +γ
G + 12 γ (1 − γ) V (log Y ) ,
which together with (15) gives
Ŵ =

1−γ
+γ
+γ
(1−γ)(1+) Q

n
exp G −

1+
+γ


o
G + 12 γ (1 − γ) V (log Y )

Equivalently,
Ŵ =

1−γ
+γ
+γ
Q
(1−γ)(1+)

n
o
exp − 21 (1−γ)(1+)
Ω̂)
+γ

(17)

where
Ω̂ ≡

2
1+ G

+ γV (log Y )

1
= ( + γ)V (log Y ) + 1+
V (log Q) − 2Cov (log Y, log Q)


1
+  + ρ1 V (log yi |Θ) + 1+
V (log qi |Θ) − 2Cov (log yi , log qi |Θ)

Now, note that the first-best levels of output are given by the fixed-point to the following:
1
log yi∗ = (1 − α) +γ
log qi + α log Y ∗ .
23

To see this more clearly, note that ∆ is strictly concave in δt and reaches its maximum at δ = 1 when γ < 1,

whereas it is strictly convex and reaches its minimum at δ = 1 when γ > 1. Along with the fact that Ŵ > 0 when
γ < 1 but Ŵ < 0 when γ > 1, this means that Ŵ ∆ is always strictly concave in δ and δ = 1 is always the maximal
point.

35

It follows that, up to some constants that we omit for notational simplicity,
log Y ∗ =

1
+γ

log Q

1
log yi∗ − log Y ∗ = (1 − α) +γ
(log qi − log Q)

and

Using this result towards replacing the terms in Ω̂ that involve qi and Q, we get
2

∗
∗
Ω̂ = ( + γ)V (log Y ) + (+γ)
(1+) V (log Y ) − 2( + γ)Cov (log Y, log Y )


(+γ)2
+γ
∗
∗
+  + ρ1 V (log yi |Θ) + (1+)(1−α)
2 V (log yi |Θ) − 2 1−α Cov (log yi , log yi |Θ)

(18)

Furthermore, the first-best level of welfare is given by
W∗ =

1−γ
+γ
+γ
Q
(1−γ)(1+)

n
o
∗
exp − 21 (1−γ)(1+)
Ω
)
+γ

where Ω∗ obtains from Ω̂ once we replace yi and Y with, respectively, yi∗ and Y ∗ . We conclude that
o

n
∗
(19)
Ω̂
−
Ω
Ŵ = W ∗ exp − 12 (1−γ)(1+)
+γ
Finally, using the definitions of Ω̂ and Ω∗ together with the fact that 1 − α =
Ω̂ − Ω∗
+γ

+γ
+1/ρ ,

we have

= {V (log Y ) + V (log Y ∗ ) − 2Cov (log Y, log Y ∗ )}
+

1
{V (log yi |Θ) + V (log yi∗ |Θ) − 2Cov (log yi , log yi∗ |Θ)}
1−α

which together with the definitions of Σ and σ gives us
1
Ω̂ − Ω∗
=Σ+
σ.
+γ
1−α
Combining this result with (16) and (19), and letting
Λ≡Σ+

1
σ,
1−α

we conclude that

W = W ∗ ∆ exp − 12 (1 + )(1 − γ)Λ ,
which completes the proof.
Equilibrium with productivity shocks. Suppose the equilibrium production strategy takes a
log-linear form:
log yit = ϕ0 + ϕa ait + ϕx xit + ϕz zt + ϕ−1 āt−1 ,
for some coefficients (ϕa , ϕx , ϕz , ϕ−1 ). Aggregate output is then given by
log Yt = ϕ0 + X + ϕ−1 āt−1 + (ϕa + ϕx ) āt + ϕz zt

36

(20)

where
X≡

1
2



ρ−1
ρ


V ar(log yit | log Yt ) =

1
2



ρ−1
ρ



ϕ2a ϕ2x
ϕa ϕx
+2
+
κξ
κx
κx



adjusts for the curvature in the CES aggregator. It follows that Yt is log-normal, with
Eit [log Yt ] = ϕ0 + X + ϕ−1 āt−1 + (ϕa + ϕx ) Eit [āt ] + ϕz zt
V arit [log Yt ] = (ϕa + ϕx )2 V arit [āt ]

(21)
(22)

where, by standard Gaussian updating,
Eit [āt ] =
V arit [āt ] =

κx
κz
κa
χt +
xit +
zt
κa + κx + κz
κa + κx + κz
κa + κx + κz
1
κa + κx + κz

(23)
(24)

Because of the log-normality of Yt , the fixed-point condition (1) reduces to following:

where Ψ ≡

1+
+γ

log yit = (1 − α)(Ψait − Ψ0 λ) + αEit [log Yt ] + Γ
(25)
h

i
1
> 0, Ψ0 ≡ +γ
> 0, λ ≡ − log η̄−1
(1 − τ̄ ) ≈ µ̄ + τ̄ > 0 is the overall distortion
η̄

caused by the monopoly markup and the labor wedge (which are both constant because we are
herein focusing on the case with only productivity shocks), and




Γ = 12 α ρ1 − γ V arit [log Yt ] = 12 α2 ρ1 +  V arit [log Yt ] > 0
Next, combining (25) with (21) and (23), we obtain
log yit = Γ − (1 − α)Ψ0 λ + (1 − α) Ψait + α (ϕ0 + X + ϕ−1 āt−1 + ϕz zt )


κa
κx
κz
+α (ϕa + ϕx )
χt +
xit +
zt
κa + κx + κz
κ0 + κx + κz
κa + κx + κz
For this to coincide with our initial guess in (20) for every event, it is necessary and sufficient that
the coefficients (ϕ0 , ϕa , ϕx , ϕz , ϕ−1 ) solve the following system:
ϕ0 = Γ − (1 − α)Ψ0 λ + α(ϕ0 + X)
κa
ϕ−1 = αϕ−1 + α (ϕa + ϕx )
κa + κx + κz
ϕa = (1 − α) Ψ
κx
ϕx = α (ϕa + ϕx )
κa + κx + κz
κz
ϕz = αϕz + α (ϕa + ϕx )
κa + κx + κz
The unique solution to this system is given by the following:
ϕa = (1 − α) Ψ > 0,
ϕ−1 =

ϕx =

(1 − α) κx
αΨ > 0,
κa + (1 − α) κx + κz

κa
αΨ > 0,
κa + (1 − α) κx + κz

and

37

ϕz =

κz
αΨ > 0,
κa + (1 − α) κx + κz

ϕ0 = −Ψ0 λ +

1
1−α

(αX + Γ)

Proof of Proposition 2. Using the characterization of the equilibrium allocation in the preceding
proof along with that of the first best in (6), we can calculate the equilibrium values of the volatility
of the aggregate output gaps and of the cross-section dispersion of local output gaps as follows:
Σ=

(Φ − Ψ)2
α2 (κa + κz )
ϕ2z
+
=
Ψ2
κz
κa
((1 − α)κx + κz + κa )2
σ=

ϕ2x
α2 (1 − α)2 κx
=
Ψ2
κx
((1 − α)κx + κz + κa )2

Taking the derivative of Σ with respect to the precision of public information gives
∂Σ
(1 − α)κx − (κa + κz ) 2 2
=
α Ψ ,
∂κz
((1 − α)κx + κz + κa )3
which is positive if and only if κz < (1 − α)κx − κ0 , while taking the derivative of σ gives
α2 (1 − α)2 κx
∂σ
= −2
Ψ2 ,
∂κz
((1 − α)κx + κz + κa )3
which is necessarily negative.
Finally, taking the derivatives with respect to the degree of strategic complementarity, we obtain
∂Σ
2 (κa + κz ) (κx + κz + κa )
2
=
3 αΨ
∂α
((1 − α)κx + κz + κa )
which is necessarily positive, and

∂σ
2α (1 − α) κx Ψ2
= α2 κx − (2α − 1) (κx + κz + κa )
,
∂α
((1 − α)κx + κz + κa )3
which is positive if and only if

2α − 1
κx
<
2
α
κx + κz + κa
Note that the RHS of the above condition is a number between 0 and 1. Next, let g(α) denote the
LHS and note that g : (0, 1] → R is strictly increasing in α, with g(1/2) = 0 and g(1) = 1. It follows
that there exists a unique α̂ ∈ (1/2, 1) such that the above condition is satisfied—and therefore σ
is locally increasing in α—if and only if α < α̂.
Proof of Proposition 3. Using the results from the proof of Proposition 2, we have that
Λt = Σt +

α2 Ψ2
1
σt =
1−α
((1 − α)κx + κz + κa )

from which it is immediate that second-order losses are decreasing in the precision of either public
or private information. (Note that this would be true even if α were negative.) Furthermore,
∂ 2 Λt
2α (κx + κz + κa ) Ψ2
=−
∂κz ∂α
((1 − α)κx + κz + κa )3
which is negative (as long as α > 0).
38

Proof of Theorem 1. The distortion in the mean level of output is given by
δt =
where

η̄−1
η

h

η̄−1
η



i 1
+γ
(1 − τ̄ )
<1

is the monopoly wedge (the reciprocal of the markup) and 1 − τ̄ is the labor wedge.

Since δt , and hence also ∆t , is invariant to the information structure, the welfare effects of public
information are pinned down by comparative statics of Λt alone, which were established before. It
follows that welfare necessarily increases with the precision of either public or private information.
Equilibrium with markup shocks. This follows very similar steps as the characterization of
equilibrium in the case with productivity shocks. Suppose equilibrium output takes a log-linear
form:
log yit = ϕµ + ϕµ µit + ϕx xit + ϕz zt + ϕ−1 µ̄t−1 ,
for some coefficients (ϕµ , ϕx , ϕz , ϕ−1 ). This guarantees that aggregate output is log-normal, which
in turn implies that the fixed-point condition (1) now reduces to
log yit = (1 − α)(Ψā − Ψ0 µit ) + αEit [log Yt ] + Γ
where Ψ, Ψ0 , and Γ are defined as in the case with productivity shocks. Following similar steps as
in that case, we can then show that the unique equilibrium coefficients are given by the following:
(1−α)κx
αΨ0 < 0,
ϕx = − κµ +(1−α)κ
x +κz

ϕµ = − (1 − α) Ψ0 < 0,

κ

µ
ϕ−1 = − κµ +(1−α)κ
αΨ0 > 0
x +κz

and

κz
ϕz = − κµ +(1−α)κ
αΨ0 < 0,
x +κz

ϕ0 = Ψā +

1
1−α

(αX + Γ)

Proof of Proposition 4. With only markup shocks, first-best allocations are constant. The
volatility of aggregate output gaps and the dispersion of local output gaps are thus given by the
following:
2
α2 κµ κz + ((1 − α) κµ + (1 − α) κx + κz )2
ϕ2z
Φ2
Σ=
+
=
Ψ0
2
κz
κµ
κµ (κµ + (1 − α) κx + κz )
σ=

2 α (1 − α)2 (2κµ + (2 − α) κx + 2κz )

ϕ2µ ϕ2x
ϕµ ϕx
(1 − α)2
0 2
+
+2
=
Ψ0 +
Ψ
κξ
κx
κx
κξ
((1 − α)κx + κz + κµ )2

Next, taking the derivatives with respect to the precision of public information, we obtain

(2 + α) (1 − α)κx + (κz + κµ ) (2 − α)
∂Σ
0 2
=
α
Ψ
∂κz
((1 − α)κx + κz + κµ )3
which is necessarily positive, and
2
2 (1 − α)2 (κµ + κx + κz )
∂σ
=−
α Ψ0 ,
3
∂κz
((1 − α)κx + κz + κµ )
which is necessarily negative.
39

Finally, taking the derivatives with respect to the degree of strategic complementarity, we obtain
2
2 (1 − α) (κµ + κx + κz )2
∂Σ
Ψ0
=−
3
∂α
((1 − α)κx + κz + κµ )
which is necessarily negative, and
2
∂σ
= 2 (1 − α) Ψ0 H,
∂α
where
H≡

α2 (1 − α) κ2x − α (−2 + 3α) κx ((1 − α)κx + κz + κµ ) + (1 − 3α) ((1 − α)κx + κz + κµ )2
3

((1 − α)κx + κz + κµ )

−

1
κξ

Note that κx ≥ κξ , because x is the sufficient statistic of the information contained both in the own
κx
κz +κµ ,

shock and in other source of private information. Letting k ≡
H ≤
=

we thus have that

α2 (1 − α) κ2x − α (−2 + 3α) κx ((1 − α)κx + κz + κµ ) + (1 − 3α) ((1 − α)κx + κz + κµ )2
3

1
κz + κµ



k)2

−(1 +
k ((1 − α)k + 1)3



((1 − α)κx + κz + κµ )
(1 + k)2
= −
κx ((1 − α)k + 1)3

Since the latter is clearly negative, we conclude that

∂σ
∂α

−

is also negative.

Proof of Proposition 5. From the preceding characterization of Σ and σ, we have that
Λ=
It follows that

2
2 (1 − α)κx + κz + (1 − α2 )κµ
1−α
Ψ0
Ψ0 +
κξ
κµ ((1 − α)κx + κz + κµ )
∂Λ
α2 (Ψ0 )2
=
>0
∂κz
((1 − α)κx + κz + κµ )2

(26)

(1 − α)α2 (Ψ0 )2
∂Λ
=
> 0,
∂κx
((1 − α)κx + κz + κµ )2

(27)

which proves that second-order welfare losses necessarily increase with the precision of either public
or private information. (Note that this would be true even if α were negative.)
Proof of Proposition 6. To study the impact of information on first-order losses ∆t , we first
need to compute δt . Using the equilibrium characterization and after some tedious algebra, we can
show that the predictable component of aggregate output, Et−1 [Yt ], satisfies the following condition:

 (Et−1 [Yt ])1+
(Et−1 [Yt ])1−γ exp − 21 γ (1 − γ) V (log Y ) = exp χt − log(1 − τ̄ ) + 12 D
exp(G̃)
Q

40

1
κx

where
G̃ ≡

1
2 (1

+ )V (log Y ) +

1
2



+

1
ρ



(1 + )V (log yi |Θ)

D ≡ V ar (µit |µ̄t ) + 2 (1 + ) Cov (yit , µit |µ̄t )


ϕµ ϕx ϕµ + ϕx + ϕz
1
1
=
+ 2 (1 + )
+
+
+
κξ
κµ
κξ
κx
κµ


1−α
α2
1
1
1
− 2 (1 + )
−
Ψ0
=
+
+
κξ
κµ
κξ
κµ κµ + (1 − α) κx + κz
From (14), on the other hand, we infer that the optimal Ŷt solves the following condition:
 Ŷ 1+
Ŷt1−γ exp − 21 γ (1 − γ) V (log Y ) = t
exp(G̃)
Q
Combining these results, we infer that
δt ≡
and therefore

Et−1 [Yt ]
Ŷt



= exp −Ψ0 χt − log(1 − τ̄ ) + 21 D ,

∂D
α2 (Ψ0 )2
∂δt
= − 12 δt Ψ0
=
(1 + ) δt > 0
∂κz
∂κz
((1 − α) κx + κz + κµ )2

(28)

∂D
(1 − α)α2 (Ψ0 )2
∂δt
= − 12 δt Ψ0
=
(1 + ) δt > 0.
(29)
∂κx
∂κx
((1 − α) κx + κz + κµ )2
It follows that, as long as δt < 1, an increase in the precision of either public or private information
reduces the mean distortion—it brings δt closer to 1—and thereby also reduces first-order welfare
losses. (Once again, this result holds true irrespectively of whether α is positive or negative.)
Proof of Theorem 2. To obtain the overall welfare effect, recall that welfare is given by

Wt = Wt∗ ∆t exp − 21 (1 + )(1 − γ)Λt
Consider first the case of public information. From the above, we have that


 1
∂Λt
∂Wt
∂∆t ∂δt
∗
1
= Wt exp − 2 (1 + )(1 − γ)Λt
− 2 ∆t (1 + )(1 − γ)
∂κz
∂δt ∂κz
∂κz
From (26) and (28), we have that
∂δt
∂Λt
=
(1 + )δt
∂κz
∂κz
It follows that


∂Λt
∂Wt
= Wt∗ exp − 12 (1 + )(1 − γ)Λt
Ht
∂κz
∂κz

where
Ht ≡
=
=

∂∆t
(1 + )δt − 12 (1 − γ)(1 + )∆t
∂δt
h

 
i
(1−γ)(1+)
1−γ
1−γ
1+
1+
2(1
+
)
δ
−
δ
−
(1
+
)δ
−
(1
−
γ)δ
t
t
t
t
2(+γ)
h
i
(1−γ)(1+)
(1 + )δt1−γ − (1 + 2 + γ)δt1+ ,
2(+γ)
41

and therefore
∂Wt
=
∂κz

 1
(1−γ)(1+)
∗
2(+γ) Wt exp − 2 (1

+ )(1 − γ)Λt

i
∂Λt h
δt (1 + ) − (1 + 2 + γ)δt+γ
∂κz

Note then that the sign of Wt∗ is the same as that of (1 − γ), which together with the facts that
∂Λt
∂κz

> 0 and δt > 0 implies that the sign of

We conclude that

∂Wt
∂κz

is the same as the sign of (1 + ) − (1 + 2 + γ)δt+γ .

∂Wt
< 0 iff δt > δ̂,
∂κz

where

δ̂ ≡

1+
1 + 2 + γ



1
+γ

∈ (0, 1).

Consider next the case of private information. From (27) and (29), we have that
∂δt
∂Λt
=
(1 + )δt ,
∂κx
∂κx
pretty much as in the case of public information. It follows that


 1
∂∆t ∂δt
∂Λt
∂Wt
∗
1
= Wt exp − 2 (1 + )(1 − γ)Λt
− ∆t (1 + )(1 − γ)
∂κx
∂δt ∂κx 2
∂κx

∂Λt
= Wt∗ exp − 21 (1 + )(1 − γ)Λt
Ht
∂κx
where Ht is defined as before. By direct implication,
∂Wt
< 0 iff δt > δ̂,
∂κx
where δ̂ is the same threshold as the one in the case of public information.
Proof of Proposition 7. Consider the case where the economy is hit only by productivity shocks.
From the analysis in the main text, we have that the equilibrium must satisfy
κz = κ̃z + (ϕa + ϕx )2 κω ,
From the analysis of the equilibrium with productivity shocks in the beginning of this appendix, we
have that
ϕa + ϕx =

κa + κx + κz
(1 − α)Ψ,
κa + (1 − α) κx + κz

Combining, we conclude that the equilibrium value of κz is pinned down by the following fixed
point:
κz = F (κz )
where

F (κz ) ≡ κ̃z +

κa + κx + κz
κa + (1 − α) κx + κz
42

2

(1 − α)2 Ψ2 κω

Note that F is continuous and decreasing in κz , with F (0) > 0. It follows that there exists a
unique solution to κz = F (κz ), which means that the equilibrium is unique. Furthermore, since F
is increasing in κω , the equilibrium value of κz is also increasing in κω . Along with the facts that
κω impacts welfare only through κz and that welfare is increasing in κz , this proves that welfare is
increasing in κω .
The same arguments apply to the case of markup shocks, modulo a change in notation/interpretation.

References
[1] Adao, Bernardino, Isabel Correia, and Pedro Teles (2003), “Gaps and Triangles,” Review of Economic
Studies 70(4), 699-713.

[2] Amador, Manuel, and Pierre-Olivier Weill (2010), “Learning from Prices: Public Communication and
Welfare,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

[3] Amador, Manuel, and Pierre-Olivier Weill (2011), “Learning from Private and Public Observations of
others actions,” Stanford/UCLA mimeo.

[4] Angeletos, George-Marios, and Jennifer La’O (2009), “Noisy Business Cycles,” NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 2009, 24, 319-378.

[5] Angeletos, George-Marios, and Jennifer La’O (2011), “Dispersed Information over the Business Cycle:
Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy,” MIT/Chicago Booth mimeo.

[6] Angeletos, George-Marios, and Alessandro Pavan (2007), “Efficient Use of Information and Social Value
of Information,” Econometrica 75(4), 1103-1142.

[7] Angeletos, George-Marios, and Alessandro Pavan (2009), “Policy with Dispersed Information,” Journal
of the European Economic Association 7(1), 11-60.

[8] Benigno, Pierpaolo, and Michael Woodford (2004), “Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy: A LinearQuadratic Approach,” in M. Gertler and K. Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003, vol. 18,
Cambridge: MIT Press, 271-333.

[9] Buera, Francisco, and Benjamin Mall (2011), “Aggregate Implications of a Credit Crunch,”
UCLA/Princeton University mimeo.

[10] Blanchard, Olivier J., and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki (1987), “Monopolistic Competition and the Effects of
Aggregate Demand,” American Economic Review 77(4), 647-666.

43

[11] Blanchard, Olivier J., and Jordi Gali (2007), “Real Wage Rigidities and the New Keynesian Model,”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 39S, 35-66.

[12] Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (2005), “Nominal Rigidities and the
Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy 113, 1-45.

[13] Cornand, Camille, and Frank Heinemann (2008), “Optimal Degree of Public Information Dissemination,” Economic Journal 118, 718-742.

[14] Epifani, Paolo, and Gino Gancia (2011), “Trade, markup heterogeneity and misallocations,” Journal of
International Economics 83(1), 1-1.

[15] Fixler, Dennis J., and Bruce T. Grimm (2005), “Reliability of the NIPA Estimates of U.S. Economic
Activity,” Survey of Current Business 85, 8-19.

[16] Gali, Jordi (2008), Monetary Policy, Inflation and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New
Keynesian Framework, Princeton University Press.

[17] Gali, Jordi, Mark Gertler and J. David Lopez-Salido (2007), “Markups, Gaps, and the Welfare Effects
of Business Fluctuations,” Review of Economics and Statistics 89(1), 44-59.

[18] Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert King (1997), “The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the Role of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, Cambridge, MIT Press.

[19] Grossman, Sanford, and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1980), “On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient
Markets,” American Economic Review 70(3), 393-408.

[20] James, Jonathan, and Phillip Lawler (2011), “Optimal Policy Intervention and the Social Value of
Public Information,”American Economic Review 101(4), 1561-74.

[21] Hellwig, Christian (2005), “Heterogeneous Information and the Welfare Effects of Public Information
Disclosures,” UCLA mimeo.

[22] Khan, Aubhik, Robert King, and Alexander Wolman (2003), “Optimal Monetary Policy,” Review of
Economic Studies 70, 825-860.

[23] Lorenzoni, Guido (2010), “A Theory of Demand Shocks,” American Economic Review 99(5), 2050-2084.
[24] Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1972), “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,” Journal of Economic Theory
4, 103-124.

[25] Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1987), Models of Business Cycles, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[26] Mackowiak, Bartosz, and Mirko Wiederholt (2009), “Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational Inattention,”
American Economic Review, 99, 769-803.

44

[27] Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin (2002), “The Social Value of Public Information,” American
Economic Review 92, 1521-1534.

[28] Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin (2007), “Optimal Communication,” Journal of the European
Economic Association 5, 594-602.

[29] Myatt, David P., and Chris Wallace (2009), “On the Sources and Value of Information: Public Announcements and Macroeconomic Performance,” Oxford University mimeo.

[30] Nimark, Kristoffer (2008), “Dynamic Pricing and Imperfect Common Knowledge,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 55, 365-382.

[31] Roca, Mauro (2010), “Transparency and Monetary Policy with Imperfect Common Knowledge,” IMF
Working Paper.

[32] Rotemberg, Julio, and Michael Woodford (1997), “An Optimization-Based Econometric Model for the
Evaluation of Monetary Policy,’ ” in O.J. Blanchard and S. Fischer (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 1997, Cambridge, MIT Press.

[33] Rotemberg, Julio, and Michael Woodford (1991), “Markups and the Business Cycle,” in O.J. Blanchard
and S. Fischer (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1991, Cambridge, MIT Press.

[34] Smets, Frank, and Rafael Wouters (2007), “Shocks and Frictions in U.S. Business Cycles: A Bayesian
DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review 97(3), 586-606.

[35] Svensson, Lars E. O. (2005), “Social Value of Public Information: Morris and Shin (2002) Is Actually
Pro Transparency, Not Con,” NBER Working Paper 11537.

[36] Tybout, James R. (2003), “Plant- and Firm-level Evidence on the ‘New’ Trade Theories,” in E. Kwan
Choi and James Harrigan, eds., Handbook of International Trade, Oxford: Basil-Blackwell.

[37] Vives, Xavier (2008), Information and Learning in Markets, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
[38] Vives, Xavier (2011), “Endogenous Public Information and Welfare,” IESE Business School mimeo.
[39] Wiederholt, Mirko, and Luigi Paciello (2011), “Exogenous Information, Endogenous Information, and
Optimal Monetary Policy,” Northwestern/EIEF Mimeo.

[40] Woodford, Michael (2003a), “Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Effects of Monetary Policy,” in P.
Aghion, R. Frydman, J. Stiglitz, and M. Woodford, eds., Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in
Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

[41] Woodford, Michael (2003b), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

45

