                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     COMPETING WITH COSTCO AND SAM'S CLUB:
                    WAREHOUSE CLUB ENTRY AND GROCERY PRICES

                                      Charles J. Courtemanche
                                            Art Carden

                                        Working Paper 17220
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17220


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2011




We are grateful to the editor, referees, Benjamin Anderson, Kenneth Snowden, and seminar participants
at the University of Nebraska at Omaha, the University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Samford
University, Rhodes College, the College of Charleston, Charleston Southern University, Johns Hopkins
University, the 2010 Missouri Valley Economic Association meetings, the 2010 Southern Economic
Association meetings, and the 2011 Association of Private Enterprise Education meetings for valuable
comments. We also thank Keith Becker and Sameer Warraich for excellent research assistance and
Wal-Mart’s External Reporting Team for directing us to public company financial documents on Sam’s
Club. Thach Truong, Kelly Gillean, and Dylan Chambers assisted with data collection. Julia Clapper
proofread the manuscript. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Charles J. Courtemanche and Art Carden. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Competing with Costco and Sam's Club: Warehouse Club Entry and Grocery Prices
Charles J. Courtemanche and Art Carden
NBER Working Paper No. 17220
July 2011, Revised January 2013
JEL No. L11,L13,L81,R10

                                            ABSTRACT

Prior research shows grocery stores reduce prices to compete with Walmart Supercenters. This study
finds evidence that the competitive effects of two other big box retailers – Costco and Walmart-owned
Sam's Club – are quite different. Using city-level panel grocery price data matched with a unique
data set on Walmart and warehouse club locations, we find that Costco entry is associated with higher
grocery prices at incumbent retailers, and that the effect is strongest in cities with small populations
and high grocery store densities. This could be explained by a segmented-market model, or by incumbents
competing with Costco along non-price dimensions such as product quality or quality of the shopping
experience. We find no evidence that Sam’s Club entry affects grocery stores’ prices, consistent with
Sam’s Club’s focus on small businesses instead of consumers.


Charles J. Courtemanche
Georgia State University
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
ccourtemanche@gsu.edu

Art Carden
Department of Economics and Business
Rhodes College
2000 N. Parkway
Memphis TN 38112
cardena@rhodes.edu
                                            INTRODUCTION

        How do incumbent grocers change their prices in response to entry by mass-market

merchandisers? This paper presents evidence that incumbent grocers charge higher prices in

response to competition from the discount wholesaler Costco. This is consistent with

incumbents electing not to compete on price and instead focusing on appealing to less price-

sensitive consumers, perhaps by offering higher quality products or a more pleasant shopping

experience. The data suggest that Sam’s Club, meanwhile, does not affect grocery store prices.

        Ellickson (2007:45) points out three major changes in grocery retail during the twentieth

century. The first was the rise of the chain store in the early 1900s. The second was the

introduction and diffusion of the supermarket in the middle of the century. The third was the

“adoption of technology-intensive distribution systems in the 1980s and 1990s” (Ellickson

2007:45). To this we might add a trend that accelerated in the 1990s: expansion by “big box”

discounters and wholesalers like Walmart, Costco, and Target into the grocery business. In

2010, Supermarket News reported that Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. was North America’s largest

grocery retailer, Kroger was North America’s second-largest, and Costco Wholesale Corp. was

North America’s third-largest.1 This has increased variety in the grocery business: citing data

from the Food Marketing Institute, Ellickson (2007:522) points out that “the number of products

offered per store increased from about 14,000 in 1980 to over 30,000 by 2004.”2

        Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. again topped the Fortune 500 in 2010. Costco—categorized by

Fortune as a “specialty retailer”—was ranked #25. Also in the top 50 were big box retailers

Home Depot (#29), Lowe’s (#42), and Best Buy (#45), and general merchandisers Target (#30)



1
  “SN’s Top 75 Retailers for 2010.” http://supermarketnews.com/profiles/top75/2010/index.html/, accessed
December 30, 2010.
2
  Carden (2012) surveys the history of mass-market retail in the twentieth century.

                                                       1
and Sears Holdings (#48). 2010 revenues for Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. were higher than 2010

revenue for these other firms combined.3

        Motivated by this trend toward nontraditional retail outlets, a growing body of research

examines the effects of Walmart on a number of outcomes, including prices (Basker 2005b;

Basker and Noel 2009; Volpe and Lavoie 2007; Hausman and Leibtag 2007, 2009), labor market

outcomes (Basker 2005a; Hicks 2007; Neumark et al. 2008; Dube et al. 2007; Basker 2006),

poverty (Goetz and Swaminathan 2006), small business activity (Sobel and Dean 2008), social

capital (Goetz and Rupasingha 2006; Carden et al. 2009a), leisure activities (Carden and

Courtemanche 2009), traditional values (Carden et al. 2009b), and obesity (Courtemanche and

Carden 2011).4 However, to our knowledge no previous research has used nationwide data to

explore the effects of other big box chains. We provide a first step toward filling this void.

        Basker (2005a), Volpe and Lavoie (2007), Hausman and Leibtag (2007, 2009), and

Basker and Noel (2009) all present evidence that Walmart discount stores and Supercenters

reduce market prices, either directly through their price advantages or indirectly through their

influence on competitors. Most relevant to our study is Basker and Noel (2009), who use 2001-

2004 American Chamber of Commerce Researchers Association Cost of Living Index (ACCRA

COLI) data to show that entry by a Walmart Supercenter drives down prices among competing

grocery stores. For these years they are able to determine the identity of the sampled stores,

allowing them to exclude Walmart stores from the price computations and thereby isolate

Walmart’s effect on competitors. Pooling prices from 24 grocery items, they estimate that an

additional Walmart Supercenter in a city reduce prices at incumbent retailers by 1-1.2%, with the

largest changes occurring among smaller and lower-end grocers.

3
 “Fortune 500.” http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune500/2010/, accessed December 30, 2010.
4
  Comprehensive reviews of the literature on Walmart can be found in Basker (2007), Hicks (2007), Carden et al.
(2009a), and Carden and Courtemanche (2009).

                                                        2
          The competitive response need not be to reduce prices, however, as segmented-market

models with a mix of brand-loyal and price-sensitive consumers have shown that in some cases

incumbents can raise prices in response to a low-cost entrant (Frank and Salkever 1992).

Moreover, incumbents could also compete on non-price margins like distribution services,

assortment, and convenience. For instance, Barber and Tietje (2004) studied entry by a Home

Depot and found that one of the incumbent hardware stores raised prices on some of its goods in

response.5 They suggest that “Home Depot’s superiority in pricing and assortment attracts a

significant market, but smaller retailers can secure niche markets by delivering higher levels of

ambiance and information” (Barber and Tietje 2004:98).

          Motivated by this theoretical ambiguity, we estimate the effects of Costco and Sam’s

Club on grocery prices using a unique dataset of warehouse club entry dates and locations

matched with city-level panel data on prices of a range of items from the ACCRA COLI.6 The

ACCRA COLI does not sample warehouse clubs, so our estimates capture the competitive

effects of Costco and Sam’s Club on prices charged by incumbent grocers in a market.

Controlling for Walmart Supercenters, product-by-year fixed effects, city fixed effects, and

lagged price, a new Costco increases competitors’ grocery prices by a statistically significant

1.4% in the short run and 2.7% in the long run, while the impact of a new Sam’s Club is small

and insignificant. The results also provide further evidence that Walmart Supercenters reduce

grocery prices.

          We then conduct a falsification test and a wide range of robustness checks in order to

increase confidence that the estimates reflect causal effects rather than spurious correlations. We

also stratify by product and product type and find that Costco’s effect is somewhat larger for the


5
    This paper is discussed by Betancourt (2004:36ff).
6
    ACCRA is now the Council for Community and Economic Research (www.c2er.org).

                                                     3
goods for which ACCRA’s data collection process allows product quality to vary across stores.

We interpret this as preliminary evidence that firms’ responses to Costco entry include some

competition along the quality dimension. Finally, we test for heterogeneity on the basis of

market characteristics and show that Costco has the strongest effects in cities with low

populations and a large number of grocery stores per capita.


                                      THEORY AND BACKGROUND

Retail Price Responses to Competitive Pressure

           An extensive literature explains patterns of entry, exit, and market structure.7 We focus

on incumbent grocers’ price responses to entry. At first glance, it seems that market entry would

drive down incumbents’ prices. Frank and Salkever (1992), however, present a model in which

pharmaceutical producers might raise prices in response to competitive entry under certain

conditions and explain the tendency of brand name drugs to raise rather than lower prices when

faced with generic competition after patent loss.8 In their segmented-market model, firms sell to

two kinds of buyers: loyal buyers (who are responsive only to the prices of the brand-name drug)

and cross-price-sensitive buyers (who are responsive to the prices of both the brand-name and

generic drugs). They show that brand-name producers might raise their prices in response to

generic entry when 1) entry raises demand for brand-name drugs, 2) brand-name drugs have

decreasing marginal costs, or 3) entry reduces the elasticity of the reduced-form demand curve

for the brand-name drug (Frank and Salkever 1992:169). They focus on the third condition, as it

is the most likely in the context of the market for pharmaceuticals. Intuitively, if low-cost

generics are likely to steal the cross-price-sensitive consumers regardless of the brand name

drug’s response, then the brand name drug’s pool of potential customers is effectively reduced to

7
    See e.g. Bresnahan and Reiss (1991), Ericson and Pakes (1995), and Sutton (1991 [2007], 1998 [2001]).
8
    Their model is discussed in detail on pages 168-170.

                                                          4
the less price-sensitive loyal buyers. In this case, raising prices to extract the most profit possible

from the loyal customers makes sense.

         Their model translates readily to the case of competitive entry by a discount mass-market

merchandiser in the retail environment. The incumbent grocer takes the place of the brand name

drug, while the entering big box store replaces the entering generic drug.9 Loyal buyers are those

who will not shop at the big box grocer regardless of its prices, as their preference for the

products, convenience, or shopping experience of the conventional grocery store is too strong.

Cross-price-sensitive buyers are those who could be induced to switch to the big box store if the

price difference is sufficient. Big box entry could therefore leave incumbents with a market of

relatively loyal, low-elasticity customers, leading to a price increasing response.


Differential Responses to Costco, Sam’s Club, and Walmart Supercenter Entry

         The above analysis considers only one generic mass-market merchandiser, whereas we

are interested in estimating the separate effects of three different stores – Costco, Sam’s Club,

and Walmart Supercenter – that might each impact the incumbent grocer’s reduced-form demand

curve differently. Frank and Salkever (1992) offer additional insights that can help us predict

these differential effects. As an extension of their model, they ask how the competitive effects

differ depending on the share of consumers in the brand-loyal side of the market as opposed to

the cross-price-sensitive side. They show that a conjecture made by Grabowski and Vernon

(1992) – that increasing the size of the price-sensitive part of the market would make the price

response more negative, and vice versa – holds under plausible assumptions. Intuitively, if there

is a relatively large number of loyal customers, the strategy of writing off the cross-price-

sensitive consumers and focusing on profit maximizing among the loyal customers is more

9 One has to assume that the incumbent grocer has some degree of market power in order for the brand-name drug
analogy to directly apply, but this seems like a reasonable assumption in an oligopolistic market such as groceries.

                                                          5
profitable. In contrast, if there are very few brand-loyal customers, continuing to sell to at least

some cross-price-sensitive individuals becomes necessary to stay in business, so raising prices is

not an option.

           In our context, the cross-price-sensitive portion of the market is likely larger on the

“Walmart versus grocery store” dimension than on the “warehouse club versus grocery store”

dimension since warehouse clubs represent a bigger change to the type of product available and

the general shopping experience. Compared to grocery stores and Walmart Supercenters,

warehouse clubs sell goods in bulk quantities and offer much less variation within each product

category, typically carrying a limited selection of name-brand or house-brand goods (e.g.

Member’s Mark at Sam’s Club and Kirkland’s at Costco) – perhaps only one brand of spaghetti

sauce, for example (Fox et al. 2004:S36).10 According to Beyman (2012), Sam’s Club carries

about 4,900 items, and Costco around 4,000; by comparison, the average grocery store carries

approximately 50,000 and the average Walmart about 100,000. Moreover, the shopping

experience at warehouse clubs is different – members pay a fee for access to goods stacked high

and sold in bulk quantities in low-amenity environments. Warehouse clubs are very Spartan in

their accommodations. They do not bag consumers’ purchases, and a club employee checks all

shoppers’ carts and receipts upon exit.

           Furthermore, differential competitive responses could exist even within the warehouse

club category. Sam’s Club and Costco differ in their business models: Sam’s targets small

business customers – as evidenced by their former slogan “We’re in Business for Small

Business” – while Costco offers low prices on higher-end goods aimed at upper-middle class




10
     Bates (1977 [2002]) offers an early discussion of the warehouse club format.

                                                           6
families.11,12 According to their 2009 10k form, Wal-Mart’s “focus for Sam’s Club is to provide

exceptional value on brand-name merchandise at ‘members only’ prices for both business and

personal use” (p. 3). Costco, by contrast, “operate[s] membership warehouses based on the

concept that offering our members low prices on a limited selection of nationally branded and

selected private-label products in a wide range of merchandise categories will produce high sales

volumes and rapid inventory turnover” (Costco 2009 10-K, p. 3). The different focuses are also

evident in Walmart’s 2009 annual report, which devotes a paragraph to Sam’s Club’s focus on

supplying small businesses.13 This discussion raises the possibility that Sam’s Club is primarily

a competitor for small business suppliers, whereas Costco is primarily a competitor for

conventional grocers. In this case, grocery stores may change prices in response to Costco entry

but not Sam’s Club entry.

        Costco and Sam’s Club also differ in terms of the products sold, which could translate to

further differences in competitive responses.14 Table 1 compares Costco and Sam’s Club sales

by category for 2009. The categories are not strictly comparable as the two stores use slightly

different terminology and slightly different definitions. For Costco, for example, “Food” is the

sum of their category “Food” (21%), which is defined as “including dry and institutionally

packaged foods,” and their category “Fresh Food” (12%), which is defined as “including meat,

bakery, deli, and produce.” Sam’s Club defines their category “Food” as “including dairy, meat,


11
   This is according to an author’s conversation with an associate at Sam’s Club. Vedder and Cox (2006: 119-120)
note that Walmart tends to serve shoppers in low-income areas while Costco tends to serve shoppers in higher-
income areas.
12
   BJ’s Wholesale Club, which operates primarily on the east coast, is another important player in the warehouse
club market. For reasons discussed in the data section, we do not include BJ’s in our empirical analysis and
therefore do not discuss it here either.
13
   http://walmartstores.com/sites/AnnualReport/2009/sams_club.html, accessed July 14, 2010.
14
   A quick Google search reveals several specific examples. For instance, while both offer pharmacy services,
Costco offers more coupons (sometimes by direct mail). Sam’s Club offers smaller packages and a “Click-N-Pull”
service that allows people to shop online and pick up their purchases. For electronics, Sam’s Club offers delivery
and installation for a fee while Costco offers television installation and technical support (Conover, 2012).

                                                         7
bakery, deli, produce, dry, chilled, and frozen packaged foods.”15 The data should be interpreted

with caution, but they suggest that Sam’s Club gets a much greater percentage of its sales from

“Sundries,” which it defines as “including snack foods, tobacco, alcoholic and nonalcoholic

beverages, paper goods, laundry and home care and other consumables” and which Costco

defines as “including candy, snack foods, tobacco, alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages and

cleaning and institutional supplies.” Hardlines and softlines—called “hardgoods” and

“softgoods” for Sam’s Club—provide a greater percentage of Costco’s sales than Sam’s Club’s.

Costco’s hardline goods “includ[e] major appliances, electronics, health and beauty aids,

hardware, office supplies, garden and patio, sporting goods, furniture, and automotive supplies”

while Sam’s Club’s hardgoods “includ[e] home improvement, electronics, office supplies,

outdoor living, grills, gardening, and furniture.” Costco’s softlines “includ[e] apparel,

domestics, jewelry, housewares, media, home furnishings, cameras, and small appliances” while

Sam’s Club’s “softgoods” includ[e] apparel, jewelry, housewares, mattresses, and small

appliances.”


Competition along Non-Price Dimensions

         So far, we have focused exclusively on competitive responses to entry along the price

dimension, holding constant all other aspects of the retail offer, such as product quality,

convenience, and amenities. However, it is possible that incumbent grocers could respond to

Costco, Sam’s Club, or Walmart Supercenter entry along one or more of these non-price

dimensions, in which case their prices could remain unchanged or rise. Changes in the elasticity

15
  The fact that Costco includes a separate category for “fresh food” suggests a different clientele. In an informal
conversation between one of the authors and an employee at one of the stores, the associate said that Sam’s Club
serves small businesses while Costco’s target customers are middle-class families. An employee of a store that
competes with both Sam’s Club and Costco pointed out that store design, convenience, and customer service are
important elements of his firm’s competitive strategy. Finally, an example is also suggestive. A friend of one of the
authors once asked his six-year-old son where he wanted to go for breakfast after church. The child’s reply:
“Costco.”

                                                         8
of demand for incumbents’ goods may come from changes in the composition of the retail offer.

Ellickson (2004, 2007) points out that large grocery chains compete on the basis of quality and

variety, which require substantial fixed investments in retail services. Retailers serving less

cross-price-sensitive consumers may be more likely to increase quality and variety in response to

entry by Costco. Discussing Schumpeter (1950) and Kirzner (1973), Boudreaux (1994) analyzes

price and quality adjustments in response to changing market conditions and notes that the

Schumpeterian entrepreneurial function (upsetting market conditions) and the Kirznerian

entrepreneurial function (adjusting production to the underlying pattern of preferences,

technology, and resources) are complements, not substitutes.

            In two papers on the structure of grocery retail, Ellickson (2004, 2007) argues that

grocery stores compete by offering greater variety, which requires investments in distribution

centers that increases quality by raising fixed costs, but not marginal costs (Ellickson 2004:524).

Incumbents incur larger fixed costs to build better distribution networks; according to Ellickson

(2004, 2007), this explains why larger markets have higher-quality products and greater selection

rather than more firms.16

            In sum, the effects of Costco, Sam’s Club, and Walmart Supercenter entry on grocery

store prices are theoretically ambiguous. Despite prior empirical evidence from Basker and Noel

(2009) that grocers reduce prices to compete with Walmart Supercenters, the competitive effects

of Costco and Sam’s Club could plausibly be quite different. Motivated by this theoretical

ambiguity, we next turn to empirical analysis.




16
     Ellickson (2006, 2007) notes that there is still a low-price, low-quality fringe in these markets.

                                                              9
                                                DATA

       Following Basker (2005b) and Basker and Noel (2009), we use price data from the

Council for Community and Economic Research’s (C2ER) ACCRA COLI. Through local

chambers of commerce, the ACCRA COLI computes quarterly market prices for a wide range of

grocery, energy, transportation, housing, health care, and other items by surveying retailers in

between 274 and 334 small geographic areas. For simplicity, we refer to each area as a “city”

throughout the rest of the paper, although some are actually multiple cities (i.e. Barre-

Montpelier, VT) or entire counties. As a robustness check we later show that the results are not

sensitive to dropping the multiple cities and counties from the sample.

       We examine the effects of Costco, Sam’s Club, and Walmart Supercenter on the prices of

the 23 grocery items the ACCRA COLI reported consistently during our sample period. These

products, which we describe in Table 2, span a variety of different categories: starches, fruits and

vegetables, meats, beverages, additives, and non-food items. We also conduct a falsification

exercise that tests for “effects” of these stores on the prices of 9 non-grocery items described in

Table 3 that big box retailers do not typically sell.

       Whether warehouse clubs and Supercenters are among the stores surveyed in the ACCRA

COLI is critical to the interpretation of the results. As noted by Basker and Noel (2009:982), the

sampling instructions specifically excluded membership clubs such as Costco and Sam’s Club,

so any estimated effect of these stores represents a response by competing grocers. The

instructions also discouraged the inclusion of Walmart Supercenters, saying that discount

retailers should not be sampled “unless upper-income professionals and executives really shop

there” (ACCRA 2000:1.3). However, Basker and Noel (2009:982) report that 14% of grocery

prices were nonetheless collected at Supercenters. Our estimated effect of Supercenters



                                                  10
therefore represents a weighted average of their price advantage and their effect on competitors.

Both because interpretation of the results is less clear for Supercenters and because prior research

has already estimated Supercenters’ competitive effects, we emphasize the results for Costco and

Sam’s Club in this paper. Including Supercenters as a control variable is still critical, however,

since Sam’s Clubs and Walmarts are often located together.

           We merge the ACCRA COLI price data with a newly-constructed database of big box

retailer and distribution center locations. Costco, Sam’s Club, and BJ’s Wholesale Club data

through May of 2003 were collected by Austan Goolsbee and Chad Syverson and generously

shared by Chad Syverson. We updated these warehouse club data through the end of 2008 using

the store locators on Costco.com and bjs.com, along with Sam’s Club opening dates since 2003

provided by Walmart Stores, Inc. We assembled Costco, Sam’s Club, and BJ’s Wholesale Club

distribution center locations and opening years by first searching Google Maps to find the

locations, and then contacting the distribution centers and local chambers of commerce to

determine entry years. Though our database therefore contains all three leading warehouse club

chains, we do not use the BJ’s Wholesale Club information in this paper since only one of the

cities in our matched sample experienced BJ’s Wholesale Club entry during the sample period.

Walmart Supercenter, discount store, distribution center, and food distribution center entry dates

and locations through January of 2006 were graciously provided online by Thomas Holmes and

used in Holmes (2008).17 We updated these Walmart data through the end of 2007 using the

store locators on Walmart.com along with press releases containing store and distribution center

opening dates.

           We also include other city- and county-level characteristics as controls in some

regressions. City population and land area from 2000 and median household income from 1999
17
     See http://www.econ.umn.edu/~holmes/data/WalMart/index.html.

                                                      11
come from the U.S. Census Bureau, accessed via Statistical Warehouse. The number of grocery

stores and warehouse clubs or supercenters besides our stores of interest in each county

(comparable city-level data are not available) are taken from the 1992, 1997, and 2002 Censuses

of Retail Trade and imputed for the remaining years through linear interpolations and

extrapolations.

       We construct our sample by matching the annual store, distribution center, and control

variables to fourth quarter ACCRA prices from 1994 to 2006. We use only one quarter per year

as for some stores and distribution centers we know the year but not the month of entry. Given

this limitation, the fourth quarter is the most natural choice in order to maximize the probability

that new stores in a particular year open before the prices are recorded. As a robustness check

we later show the results are similar if we instead match first quarter prices to store locations

from the end of the previous year. We exclude years before 1994 because in 1993 Costco

merged with Price Club while Walmart acquired PACE Wholesale Club; a large number of

Costcos and Sam’s Clubs therefore opened in 1993 and 1994 that were not actually new

warehouse clubs. The ACCRA COLI cities varied somewhat over time; we include the 289

cities surveyed in over half of the 13 years. Our sample consists of 70,604 product-city-year-

level observations for the main analysis and 27,657 for the falsification exercise.

       Tables 2-4 present the descriptive statistics for the variables used in the empirical

analysis. The sample mean grocery item price is $2.37, with average prices for the individual

products ranging from $0.59 per pound of bananas to $7.99 per pound of T-bone steak. The

average sample city has 0.2 Costcos, 0.7 Sam’s Clubs, and 0.7 Walmart Supercenters and a

population of about 200,000.




                                                 12
                                    EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS

       Our empirical analysis proceeds as follows. We begin by estimating the average effects

of Costcos, Sam’s Clubs, and Supercenters on the price of grocery items. Motivated by

approaches used in the literature, we develop a baseline fixed effects model that we validate

through a falsification test. We then evaluate the sensitivity of our baseline results through a

wide range of robustness checks. Next, we examine the timing of the effect by including leads

and lags, the former of which provides an additional test for endogeneity bias. Finally, we

explore the possibility of heterogeneity on the bases of product and market characteristics.


Baseline Model and Falsification Test

       Basker and Noel (2009) estimate the effect of Walmart Supercenter entry on competitors’

grocery prices using ACCRA COLI data from the third quarters of 2001-2004. Their preferred

specification regresses the natural log of price on the number of Walmart Supercenters in the city

along with city and product-by-year fixed effects. They also estimate cross-sectional, long

difference, and (in their appendix) instrumental variables models, but they favor the fixed effects

specification based on its utilization of all available information and its passage of a falsification

test. Our baseline model adopts Basker and Noel’s (2009) fixed effects approach but adds

Costco, Sam’s Club, and the annual lag of the log of price. We include lagged price because

Basker (2005b) documented the stickiness of price shocks in her earlier analysis of the effect of

Walmart on ACCRA COLI prices; presumably Basker and Noel (2009) did not also include

lagged price because of the short duration of their panel. Our regression equation is

                                                                        ,


                                               .                                                    1



                                                   13
where          is the natural log of price (in 2006 dollars) of product i in city c in year t;                   ,

            , and           indicate the number of Costcos, Sam’s Clubs, and Walmart Supercenters in

city c in year t;      ,      is the lagged natural log of product price; and the summation terms reflect

city fixed effects and product-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust

and adjusted for clustering at the city level.18

            The dynamic model (4) allows for the estimation of both short- and long-run effects. The

short run effects of Costcos, Sam’s Clubs, and Supercenters are given by                    ,    , and    .

Computing long-run effects requires considering that a store that entered prior to the current year

impacts contemporaneous price not only through contemporaneous number of stores but also

through lagged price. If, for instance, a new Costco enters, the immediate effect on price is                        ,

the additional effect the following year is             , the additional effect the year after is             , then

       , and so on. The total long-run effect of Costco is therefore given by the following

geometric series:


                                                                                                                         2
                                                              1

The long-run effects of Sam’s Club and Walmart Supercenter can also be computed by replacing

     with      and    .19

            The key identifying assumption in regression equation (1) is that changes over time in

unobservable city-level characteristics affecting prices are uncorrelated with changes in Costco,

18
   OLS coefficient estimators in models with lagged dependent variables can be inconsistent if the errors are serially
correlated (Keele and Kelly 2006). We tested for serial correlation by compressing the data into a two-dimensional
panel by computing average product prices in each city in each year, running an analogous regression to equation
(4), and then performing the Arrelano-Bond test using the Stata module “abar” (Roodman 2004). The test found
only weak evidence of first-order autocorrelation (significant at only the 5% level despite the large sample size).
When the extent of the autocorrelation is small, the bias is negligible in large samples (Keele and Kelly 2006). We
therefore estimate the model using OLS, and later conduct robustness checks to rule out the possibility that serial
correlation is driving our conclusions.
19
   See Basker (2005b) for further discussion of the derivation of long-run effects in this context.

                                                         14
Sam’s Club, and Supercenter presence. This assumption would be violated if, for instance, a

positive demand shock both increases a city’s grocery prices and makes it more attractive to big

box retailers. Basker and Noel (2009) provide evidence to support the strict exogeneity

assumption in fixed effects regressions with Supercenters from 2001-2004, but it is not clear that

this generalizes to regressions with three stores and a longer time period.

        We therefore conduct a falsification test where we re-estimate equation (1) using non-

grocery prices instead of grocery prices as the dependent variable. The non-grocery prices used

for this falsification exercise, listed in Table 3, are chosen to satisfy two conditions. First, they

are not directly affected by Costcos, Sam’s Clubs, or Supercenters. Under this assumption, any

“effect” of these stores on the non-grocery prices could not be causal, so if one is found this

would call into question the ability of the model to reveal causal effects on grocery prices as

well. The second condition is that the non-grocery prices are presumably influenced by the same

demand shocks as prices that are directly affected by Costcos, Sam’s Clubs, and Supercenters.

Under this assumption, null results for the non-grocery prices would suggest that omitted

demand shocks are not biasing the estimated effects of these stores on grocery prices. To

illustrate, consider one of our non-grocery prices: the price of a movie ticket. Since warehouse

clubs and Walmarts do not contain movie theatres, entry of these stores should not directly

impact movie theatre prices, so the first condition is plausible. Since an increase in the demand

for movies should drive up both the prices of movie theatre tickets and DVDs, the latter of which

are sold at warehouse clubs and Walmarts, the second condition is also reasonable.20



20
  These two conditions prevent several ACCRA COLI non-grocery prices from being viable candidates for the
falsification analysis. The first condition rules out ACCRA’s price of a tire rotation since many warehouse clubs
have tire and auto centers, as well as the prices of hair salon services and McDonald’s quarter pounders since
Walmart Supercenters often have hair salons and McDonald’s restaurants. The second condition rules out energy
and housing prices, since they are likely driven by different demand shocks than items sold at warehouse clubs or
Walmarts.

                                                        15
       Another potential concern with the baseline specification is multicollinearity, as Walmart

and Sam’s Club often co-locate. If most Sam’s Club and Supercenter openings are done

together, there might be insufficient variation to precisely identify the impacts of both stores in

the same model. Fortunately, this is not the case. 46 new Sam’s Clubs opened in our sample

cities during the sample period, and only in 11 cases did a Walmart Supercenter also open in the

same city in the same year. In 9 cases, the new Sam’s Club opened in a city that never had a

Walmart Supercenter at any point during the sample. In the remaining 26 cases, the new Sam’s

Club entered a city that either already had or would later get a Walmart Supercenter. 336

Walmart Supercenters opened during our sample period, 80 of which were in cities that never

had a Sam’s Club during the sample period. The vast majority of the others (240) had a Sam’s

Club prior to the Supercenter opening; this commonly occurred when the new Supercenter was a

converted discount store. To summarize, identification of the effects of Sam’s Clubs and

Supercenters comes from a mix of cases where one type of store exists without the other, and

when the two enter at different times. Our regression results will suggest that there are sufficient

numbers of both to obtain meaningful precision.

       We report the results for the baseline regression and falsification test in Tables 5. A new

Costco is associated with a statistically significant increase in grocery prices of 1.4% in the short

run and 2.7% in the long run. The effect of Sam’s Club, however, is small and insignificant.

Walmart Supercenters reduce prices by a statistically significant 0.9% in the short run and 1.7%

in the long run. Our Supercenter estimates are in line with those obtained by Basker and Noel

(2009). We take this as evidence that, even though our ACCRA COLI data do not allow for the

exclusion of Walmarts from the stores used to compute market prices, our estimates for

Supercenters mostly reflect a competitive effect rather than Walmart’s price advantage.



                                                 16
Importantly, the falsification test estimates small and insignificant effects of all three stores,

providing preliminary evidence to support the baseline model. We next further test the validity

of this specification by subjecting it to a number of robustness checks.


Robustness Checks

         This section evaluates the sensitivity of the results from our preferred regression. Our

robustness checks fall into five categories: additional control variables, alternate specifications

for the store variables, other methods of sample construction, longer lags of price, and

instrumental variables.

         The first category re-estimates equation (1) including four different sets of control

variables. First, we add interactions of each of the year fixed effects with city population. This

addresses potential endogeneity bias from highly populated cities both experiencing differential

price shocks and being more (or less) likely to attract big box retailers. Next, we add interactions

of the year fixed effects with median city income to capture differential trends in price between

high and low income areas. Third, we control for the county-level numbers of grocery stores and

warehouse clubs or supercenters (besides our stores of interest) to help verify that our estimates

reflect the effects of Costco, Sam’s Club, and Walmart rather than overall retail structure.21 This

also addresses the possibility that the effects may be partly due to grocers going out of business

when faced with competition from big box retailers. Finally, we consider a more general

approach to modeling differential trends by including city-specific time trends, created by

interacting each of the city fixed effects with linear year.


21
  In unreported regressions, we also added the number of Walmart discount stores to the model. Walmart discount
stores do not contain a full grocery section but do sell a limited range of (typically processed) foods, so it is
conceivable that they could affect market prices for some grocery items. We found it difficult to jointly identify the
effects of discount stores and Walmart Supercenters, as the vast majority of changes in discount store presence in
our sample reflected a conversion from a discount store to a Supercenter rather than a new discount store. We
therefore do not report the results, though the estimates for Costco and Sam’s Club remain similar.

                                                          17
       In the second category of robustness checks, we utilize various alternative specifications

for the Costco, Sam’s Club, and Supercenter variables. These include the number of stores per

100,000 residents or 100 square miles in the city, binary variables reflecting the presence of at

least one store in the city, and the number of stores in the county rather than the city. The first

three reflect other measures used in the Walmart literature, while the fourth could potentially

alter the results to the extent that big box retailers in outlying parts of a county draw customers

away from grocery stores within the city limits.

       The third category considers different sample construction rules. Recall that cities move

in and out of the ACCRA COLI sample over time, and that we use an unbalanced panel of the

cities included in over half of the sample years. We first restrict the sample to those cities

present in every year. The next two robustness checks drop the multiple cities and counties from

the sample and use the first quarter of the following year (1995-2007) rather than the fourth

quarter of the current year (1994-2006). We then consider a more drastic change to the sample:

instead of pooling the products, we compress the available information into one observation per

city per year by computing both simple and weighted (by the shares given in the ACCRA COLI)

average prices for the basket of grocery items.

       The first three robustness checks of the fourth category replace the lagged grocery price

variable with longer lags of 2, 3, and 4 years. This addresses the concerns that serial correlation

in the error term or measurement error in the price data may bias the coefficient estimator for

lagged price, and that some of the bias could spill over into the coefficient estimators for the

store variables. The correlation between unobservables that affect contemporaneous and lagged

price should weaken with longer lags, so confirming that the results are not sensitive to lag




                                                   18
length helps to alleviate this concern. We also run a regression that drops lagged price

completely.

        Our final category of robustness checks considers an entirely different identification

strategy. Instead of attempting to control for the sources of endogeneity bias through city fixed

effects, we attempt to purge the bias by using distance from the nearest Costco, Sam’s Club, and

Walmart food distribution centers (and their squares) as instruments for the three endogenous

variables. Distance to the nearest distribution center affects operating costs and therefore

provides a source of variation in a city’s store presence that is potentially uncorrelated with

demand-side characteristics influencing price levels. A concern with this approach, however, is

that distribution center and store presence may be jointly determined – a corporation may decide

to open a series of stores in a potentially profitable area along with a distribution center to

service those stores. Another limitation is that there is not enough variation over time in cities’

distances from distribution centers for the IV estimates to be meaningfully precise in models

with city fixed effects; we therefore do not include fixed effects in the reported IV regressions.

Because of these limitations, we prefer to use the IV analysis as a supplemental robustness check

rather than as our main approach. We also estimate the IV model adding population, population

density, and median income as controls in an attempt to compensate somewhat for the lack of

city fixed effects.

        To save space, we do not report the full set of results from the 20 robustness checks in

this paper but instead show them in Table A1 of the appendix. The findings regarding signs and

significance from the baseline regression – that Costcos significantly increase grocery prices,

Supercenters significantly decrease them, and Sam’s Clubs have no statistically detectable effect




                                                  19
– hold up well.22 Moreover, the magnitudes of the estimates are generally stable across the

different specifications (excluding the ones with alternate store variables, in which case the

magnitudes are not comparable because of the differences in scale). For instance, the long-run

effect of Costco on ln(price) is between 0.023 to 0.029 in all regressions with additional controls,

alternate sample construction, or longer lags of price. It is a larger (though imprecisely

estimated) 0.071 to 0.08 in the IV regressions.23


Timing

         We next examine timing by adding leads and lags of the three stores. A finding that

lagged Costco, Sam’s Club, and Supercenter presence impact grocery prices conditional on

current presence of these stores and lagged grocery prices would provide evidence that the

timing of the effect is less smooth than the relationship given by equation (5). If the leads of

Costco, Sam’s Club, and Supercenters impact grocery prices and cause the estimated effects of

contemporaneous stores to change, this would suggest the associations estimated in the

preceding sections do not reflect causal effects – price levels are likely determining store entry

instead of the other way around.

         Table 6 presents results from regressions including one, two, or three year lags of each of

the three stores, while Table 7 includes one, two, or three year leads. In unreported regressions

we verified the conclusions reached are similar with longer lags or leads or with lags and leads

included together. We find no evidence that the results from the preceding sections either mis-

specify the timing of the effect or reflect reverse causality. The lags for Costco, Sam’s Club, and


22
   There are only two cases in which signs or significance levels differ from those in the baseline regression. First,
in the regression with binary store variables, the effect of Costco is still positive but not quite statistically significant.
Second, in the regression with county-level store variables, the effect of Sam’s Club is positive and significant –
however, if we add county-specific linear time trends the effect again becomes small and insignificant.
23
   The IV estimators do not perform as well as the baseline fixed effects estimators in the falsification test, so we
consider the fixed effects results more reliable.

                                                             20
Supercenters are statistically insignificant in all cases and including them has little effect on the

coefficient estimates for contemporaneous stores. The leads of Costco presence are insignificant

and make virtually no difference in the estimate for current Costco presence. The leads for

Sam’s Clubs are significant in two regressions, but in all cases the conclusion of a small and

statistically insignificant association between contemporaneous Sam’s Clubs and grocery prices

persists. Future Supercenters are weakly significant in one of the three regressions and

insignificant in the other two, while in all three the estimated effect of current Supercenters

remains similar.


Heterogeneity by Product

       All regressions to this point have assumed the impacts of Costcos, Sam’s Clubs, and

Supercenters are the same across different products and markets. We relax this assumption in

the final two sections of the empirical analysis, by examining first whether the effects are

different for different product types and then whether they depend on the size and retail

landscape of the market.

       We stratify by product type by splitting the sample into six categories of grocery items:

starches, fruits/vegetables, meats, drinks, food additives, and non-food items, as classified in

Table 2. We also consider a broader classification, dividing the sample into only two groups:

products for which the ACCRA COLI specifies the brand to be sampled (cereal, peas, peaches,

sausage, tuna, coffee, soft drink, shortening, parmesan cheese, margarine, tissue, and dishwasher

detergent) and those for which it does not (bread, lettuce, bananas, potatoes, corn, steak, beef,

chicken, eggs, milk, and sugar). This categorization could potentially help explain the finding

that competitors compete with Costco by raising prices instead of lowering them: if grocery




                                                  21
stores respond to Costco entry by offering higher quality products, the price increase should be

stronger among products for which the brand is not specified and therefore quality is not fixed.

         Table 8 presents the results.24 In all eight categories, Costco increases prices,

Supercenters decrease prices, and Sam’s Club has no statistically detectable effect. There are,

however, some important differences in the magnitudes. Costco’s effect is strongest for

fruits/vegetables, meats, and drinks, while Supercenters’ effects are strongest for starches and

fruits/vegetables. Costco increases the prices of both items where the brand is specified and

those where the brand is not specified. Costco’s effect on items with unspecified brands is

larger, consistent with some competition alone the quality dimension, but the difference is

statistically insignificant (p-value of 0.32).25


Heterogeneity by Market Characteristics

         We close our analysis by examining if the effects of new Costcos, Sam’s Clubs, and

Supercenters differ depending on the city’s population or the number of grocery stores in the

county per 100,000 residents.26 Heterogeneity by population is possible since additional

warehouse clubs or Supercenters might exert less competitive pressure in large cities where they

represent a smaller shock to the market. Heterogeneity by grocery store density could work in

either direction. On one hand, grocery stores in underserved areas may not need to make

significant changes after warehouse clubs or Supercenters enter in order to continue earning

comfortable margins. In this case, the competitive effect would strengthen with grocery store


24
   Table A2 in the appendix presents regression results for each of the products separately.
25
   The difference between Sam’s Club’s effects on brand-specified and non-brand-specified items is also
insignificant (p-value of 0.79), while this difference is significant at the 10% level for Supercenters.
26
   We also considered tested for another possible source of heterogeneity -- the number of Costcos, Sam’s Clubs,
and Walmart Supercenters already in the market – by re-estimating our baseline regression (1) adding the squares of
the three stores. Table A3 in the appendix uses these estimates to predict the effects of the first, second, third, and
fourth stores to enter the average city. Costcos have a relatively constant effect across the distribution, while the
price reductions from Supercenters become slightly weaker with each store.

                                                          22
density. Alternatively, in fiercely competitive markets grocers may already be doing everything

they can to differentiate products and target particular types of consumers, in which case the

competitive effect would weaken with grocery store density.

        We test for heterogeneity on the basis of population by adding interactions of each store

with city population to equation (1) and obtaining new estimates. Based on these estimates, we

plot in Figure 1 the long-run marginal effects of Costcos, Sam’s Clubs, and Supercenters on

prices across the population distribution (up to approximately the 95th percentile of 1,000,000).

(In Figures A1-A3 of the appendix, we present more detailed graphs that also include short-run

effects and 95% confidence intervals.) Figure 1 shows that Costco increases competitors’ prices

most sharply in less populated areas. In the smallest cities Costco increases prices by about 2.8%

in the long run. This effect gradually diminishes as population increases, eventually reaching

about 0.5% in the largest cities. The impact of Sam’s Club appears to become more positive as

city population increases, but it is not statistically different from zero at any point in the

distribution. Competitors in the smallest cities reduce prices by 2.5% in the long run in response

to Supercenter entry. The reduction diminishes as city population rises, eventually reaching

0.4%.

        We examine heterogeneity on the basis of grocery store density by adding grocery stores

per 100,000 residents as well as its interaction with each of the three store variables to regression

equation (1). We display the estimated long-run marginal effects (up to the 95th percentile of 130

grocery stores per 100,000 residents) in Figure 2. (Figures A4-A6 in the appendix also show the

short-run effects and 95% confidence intervals.) Figure 2 shows that grocers increase prices

more dramatically when Costco enters markets that are already saturated with grocery stores.

The long-run effect is less than 1% if the grocery store density is very low, and rises to about



                                                  23
3.3% if the grocery store density is very high. The impact of Sam’s Club also increases with

grocery store density but is never significant. Supercenters’ competitive effects strengthen in

more saturated markets, as they lead to price reductions ranging from under 1% in cities with the

lowest grocery store densities to 2.7% in those with the highest.


                                          CONCLUSION

       Research by Basker and Noel (2009) has shown that competing grocers lower prices

when faced with competition from Walmart Supercenters. We provide evidence of very

different responses to competition from warehouse clubs. Using a panel of cities from the

ACCRA COLI and a dynamic fixed effects model, we find that Costco entry actually results in

higher prices among incumbent grocers, while competition from Sam’s Club has no statistically

detectable effect. We conducted a variety of tests to increase our confidence that these

relationships are causal, including a falsification test with non-grocery items; the addition of

control variables, city-specific time trends, and leads of store presence; and the consideration of

an instrumental variables strategy. We also examined heterogeneity on the bases of product

type, order of store entry, and market population and grocery store density. Costco’s effect is

strongest for items for which the brand is not specified, and in sparsely populated cities with

competitive grocery markets.

       Our results are consistent with the segmented-market theoretical framework offered by

Frank and Salkever (1992), work by Ellickson (2004, 2007) showing that firms compete on the

basis of quality, and Barber and Tietje’s (2004) argument that “big box” competitors might cause

traditional retailers to raise prices. They also illustrate how firms’ entrepreneurial and

managerial decisions are multi-dimensional. Grocery stores may elect not to compete with deep-

discount membership warehouses on the price dimension, instead focusing on the less price-


                                                 24
sensitive consumers or providing a higher quality shopping experience, higher-end products, or

greater convenience.

       More broadly, our work shows that not all big box chains are created equal. The big

box retail literature has focused almost exclusively on Walmart, examining its effects on a wide

range of outcomes including prices, labor market outcomes, small business activity, time use,

obesity, and social and cultural indicators. Our finding that Costco and Sam’s Club have very

different effects on competitors’ prices than Walmart Supercenters point to the need for future

research to look beyond Walmart when examining how the proliferation of big box retailers in

recent decades has impacted communities.

       Our results also have implications for antitrust policy. When considering grocery store

mergers, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) often defines the market in which supermarkets

compete to include only other supermarkets, ignoring cross-format substitution by consumers.

As one (reasonably representative) example, when reviewing the 1999 Kroger-Fred Meyer

merger the FTC justified this definition by claiming that,

       Supermarkets compete primarily with other supermarkets that provide one-stop shopping

       for food and grocery products. Supermarkets primarily base their food and grocery prices

       on the prices of food and grocery products sold at nearby supermarkets. Supermarkets do

       not regularly price-check food and grocery products sold at other types of stores and do

       not significantly change their food and grocery prices in response to prices at other types

       of stores. Most consumers shopping for food and grocery products at supermarkets are

       not likely to shop elsewhere in response to a small price increase by supermarkets (Clark,

       1).




                                                25
Our paper, together with Basker and Noel (2009), provides suggestive evidence of demand

spillovers that contradicts these claims and could help to inform market definitions in future

merger cases.

       Finally, our results have implications for the measurement of price levels. Hausman and

Leibtag (2009) note that the Consumer Price Index (CPI) does not account for prices at big box

grocers. Therefore, if grocery stores raise prices when Costco enters a market, conventional

price indices would suggest that the area’s cost of living actually increases, as they would

capture the small positive competitive response but not Costco’s deep discounts. On a national

level, then, standard measures would suggest that Costco causes inflation. This reinforces

Hausman and Leibtag’s (2009) argument that the CPI should be modified to account for the

changing retail landscape.


                                         REFERENCES

American Chamber of Commerce Research Association (2000). ACCRA Cost of Living Index

   Manual.

Barber, Clifford and Brian Tietje (2004). “A Distribution Services Approach for Developing

   Effective Competitive Strategies Against ‘Big Box’ Retailers,” Journal of Retailing and

   Consumer Services, 11: 98-107.

Basker, Emek (2005a). “Job Creation or Destruction? Labor-Market Effects of Wal-Mart

   Expansion,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 87: 174-183.

Basker, Emek (2005b). “Selling a Cheaper Mousetrap: Wal-Mart’s Effect on Retail Prices,”

   Journal of Urban Economics, 58: 203-229.

Basker, Emek (2006). “When Good Instruments Go Bad: A Reply to Neumark, Zhang, and

   Ciccarella,” University of Missouri Department of Economics Working Paper 07-06.


                                                26
Basker, Emek and Michael Noel (2009). “The Evolving Food Chain: Competitive Effects of

   Wal-Mart’s Entry into the Supermarket Industry,” Journal of Economics and Management

   Strategy, 18: 977-1009.

Bates, Albert (1977). “Warehouse Retailing: A Revolutionary Force in Distribution?”

   California Management Review, 20: 74-80. Reprinted in Anne Findlay and Leigh Sparks,

   eds. (2002), Retailing: Critical Concepts, v. III: Retail Practices and Operations. London:

   Routledge, pp. 3-13.

Betancourt, Roger (2004). The Economics of Retailing and Distribution. Northampton, MA:

   Edward Elgar Publishing, Inc.

Beyman, Michael (2012). “Does it Pay to Be a Warehouse Club Member?” Online:

   http://www.cnbc.com/id/47029484/Does_It_Pay_To_Be_A_Warehouse_Club_Member,

   accessed December 20, 2012.

Boudreaux, Donald (1994). “Schumpeter and Kirzner on Competition and Equilibrium,” in

  Peter Boettke and David Prychitko, eds. The Market Process: Essays in Contemporary

  Austrian Economics. Edward Elgar.

Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Peter C. Reiss (1991). “Entry and Competition in Concentrated

   Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 99(5): 977-1009.

Carden, Art (2012). “Retail Innovations in American Economic History: The Rise of Mass-

   Market Merchandisers.” Independent Institute Working Paper 78. Forthcoming in Randall

   Parker and Robert Whaples, eds. The Handbook of Major Events in Economic History.

   London: Routledge.

Carden, Art and Charles Courtemanche (2009). “Wal-Mart, Leisure, and Culture,”

   Contemporary Economic Policy, 27: 450-461.



                                               27
Carden, Art, Charles Courtemanche and Jeremy Meiners (2009a). “Does Wal-Mart Reduce

   Social Capital?” Public Choice, 138: 109-136.

Carden, Art, Charles Courtemanche, and Jeremy Meiners (2009b). “Painting the Town Red?

   Wal-Mart and Values,” Business and Politics, 11: Article 5.

Clark, Donald (2000). “United States of America Before Federal Trade Commission, In the

       Matter of The Kroger Co., a Corporation, and Freg Meyer, Inc., a Corporation,”

       Available http://ftc.gov/os/2000/01/krogermeyercmp.htm.

Conover, Raechel (2012). “The Great Debate: Sam’s Club or Costco?” Shine from Yahoo!

   September 24, 2012. Online: http://shine.yahoo.com/work-money/great-debate-sams-club-

   costco-122000438.html, accessed December 20, 2012.

Courtemanche, Charles and Art Carden (2011). “Supersizing Supercenters? The Impact of

   Walmart Supercenters on Body Mass Index and Obesity,” Journal of Urban Economics,

   69(2): 165-181.

Dube, Arindrajit., T. William Lester and Barry Eidlin (2007). “Firm Entry and Wages: Impact of

   Wal-Mart Growth on Earnings throughout the Retail Sector,” Institute of Industrial Relations

   Working Paper No. iirwps-126-05.

Ellickson, Paul (2006). “Quality Competition in Retailing: A Structural Analysis,” International

   Journal of Industrial Organization, 24(3): 521-540.

Ellickson, Paul (2007). “Does Sutton Apply to Supermarkets?” RAND Journal of Economics,

   38(1): 43-59.

Ericson, Richard and Ariel Pakes (1995). “Markov-Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework for

   Empirical Work,” Review of Economic Studies 62(1): 53-82.

Fox, Edward, Alan Montgomery and Leonard Lodish (2004). “Consumer Shopping and



                                               28
   Spending Across Retail Formats,” Journal of Business, 77: S25-S60.

Frank, Richard G. and David S. Salkever (1992). “Pricing, Patent Loss and the Market for

   Pharmaceuticals.” Southern Economic Journal 59(2):165-179.

Goetz, Stephan and Anil Rupasingha (2006). “Wal-Mart and Social Capital,” American Journal

   of Agricultural Economics, 88: 1304-1310

Goetz, Stephan and Hema Swaminathan (2006). “Wal-Mart and County-Wide Poverty,” Social

   Science Quarterly, 87: 211-226.

Grabowski, Henry and John Vernon (1992). “Brand Loyalty, Entry, and Price Competition in

   Pharmaceuticals after the 1984 Drug Act,” Journal of Law and Economics, 35: 331-350.

Hicks, Michael (2007). “Job Turnover and Wages in the Retail Sector: The Influence of

   Walmart,” Journal of Private Enterprise, 22: 137-159.

Harper, David (2003). Foundations of Entrepreneurship and Economic Development. London:

   Routledge.

Hausman, Jerry and Ephraim Leibtag (2007). “Consumer Benefits from Increased Competition

   in Shopping Outlets: Measuring the Effect of Wal-Mart,” Journal of Applied Econometrics,

   22: 1157-1177.

Hausman, Jerry and Ephraim Leibtag (2009). “CPI Bias from Supercenters: Does the BLS

   Know that Wal-Mart Exists?” In W. Erwin Diewert and John S. Greenlees, and Charles R.

Holmes, Thomas (2008). “The Diffusion of Wal-Mart and Economies of Density,” National

   Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper w13783.

Hollander, Stanley (1960). “The Wheel of Retailing.” Journal of Marketing, 25: 37-42.

Keele, Luke and Nathan Kelly (2006). “Dynamic Models for Dynamic Theories: The Ins and

   Outs of Lagged Dependent Variable Models.” Political Analysis, 14: 186-205.



                                              29
Kirzner, Israel (1973). Competition and Entrepreneurship. Chicago: University of Chicago

   Press.

Klein, Peter (2010). The Capitalist and the Entrepreneur: Essays on Organizations and

   Markets. Auburn, AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute.

Matsa, David A. (2011). “Competition and Product Quality in the Supermarket Industry,”

   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126: 1539-1591.

Neumark, David, Junfu Zhang, and Stephen Ciccarella (2008). “The Effects of Wal-Mart on

   Local Labor Markets,” Journal of Urban Economics, 63: 405-430.

Roodman, David (2004). “ABAR: Stata Module to Perform Arellano-Bond Test for

   Autocorrelation.” Boston College Department of Economics Statistical Software

   Components, Number S437501.

Schumpeter, Joseph (1950). Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. New York: Harper & Row.

Sobel, Russell and Andrea Dean (2008). “Has Wal-Mart Buried Mom and Pop? The Impact of

   Wal-Mart on Self Employment and Small Establishments in the United States,” Economic

   Inquiry, 46: 676-695.

Sutton, John (1991) [2007]. Sunk Costs and Market Structure: Price Competition, Advertising,

   and the Evolution of Concentration. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Sutton, John (1998) [2001]. Technology and Market Structure: Theory and History.

   Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Vedder, R. and W. Cox (2006). The Wal-Mart Revolution: How Big Box Stores Benefit

   Consumers, Workers, and the Economy. Washington, DC: The AEI Press.

Volpe III, Richard and Nathalie Lavoie (2007). “The Impact of Wal-Mart Supercenters on

   Grocery Prices in New England,” Review of Agricultural Economics, 30: 4-26.



                                             30
Table 1 – Costco and Sam's Club Sales By Category, 2009


                                               Costco              Sam's Club
Sundries                                        23%                  37%
Hardlines                                       19%                  16%
Softlines                                       10%                   5%
Food                                            33%                  30%
Services/Anciliary                              15%                  12%
Sources: Wal-Mart Stores 2009 10-K, p. 10; Costco 2009 Annual Report, p. 9.
Notes: Reports offer slightly different definitions of categories and use slightly
different terminology. Costco food sales is the sum of "food" and "fresh food"
percentages.




                                                          31
Table 2 – Grocery Item Prices (in 2006 dollars)

Category       Variable    Description                                        Mean (Std. Dev.)
All Items Pooled                                                               2.371 (1.748)
              Bread        Per oz, white bread                                 1.130 (0.230)
Starches
              Cereal       18 oz box of corn flakes; Kellogg’s or Post         3.162 (0.540)
              Lettuce      Head of iceberg                                     1.283 (0.222)
              Bananas      Per lb                                              0.593 (0.111)
Fruits and    Potatoes     10 lb sack                                          3.386 (0.910)
Vegetables    Peas         15 oz can, sweet; Del Monte or Green Giant          0.858 (0.148)
              Peaches      29 oz halves or slices; Hunts, Del Monte, or        1.957 (0.220)
                           Libby’s
              Corn         16 oz whole kernel frozen                           1.326 (0.238)
              Steak        Per lb, t-bone                                      7.986 (1.284)
              Beef         Per lb, ground                                      2.060 (0.475)
              Chicken      Per lb, whole uncut                                 1.164 (0.204)
Meats         Sausage      1 lb. package; Jimmy Dean or Owen                   3.829 (0.697)
              Eggs         Dozen large, grade A or AA                          1.196 (0.305)
              Tuna         6 oz chunk of light tuna; Starkist or Chicken of    0.859 (0.166)
                           the Sea
              Coffee       11.5 oz can; Maxwell House, Hills Brothers, or      3.588 (0.840)
                           Folgers
Beverages     Soft Drink   2 liter bottle; Coca Cola                           1.437 (0.214)
              Milk         Half-gallon, whole                                  2.068 (0.259)
              Sugar        4 lb cane or beat                                   1.940 (0.253)
Additives     Shortening   3 lb can; Crisco                                    3.691 (0.426)
              Parmesan     8 oz canister of grated parmesan cheese; Kraft      4.346 (0.675)
              Margarine    1 lb sticks, Blue Bonnet or Parkay                  0.913 (0.207)
              Tissue       Box of 175; Kleenex                                 1.607 (0.225)
Non-Foods
              Detergent    75 oz dishwashing powder; Cascade                   4.161 (0.808)




                                              32
Table 3 – Non-Grocery Item Prices (in 2006 dollars)

Variable            Description                                                   Mean (Std. Dev.)
All Items Pooled                                                                  15.693 (14.720)
Phone              Private residential line, basic monthly rate, fees and taxes    26.573 (4.742)
Haircut            Men’s barber shop haircut, no styling                           11.880 (2.029)
Dry Cleaning       Man's two-piece suit                                             9.402 (1.362)
Washer             Home service call, clothes washing machine; minimum             51.256 (8.957)
                   labor charge, excluding parts
Newspaper          Daily and Sunday home delivery, large-city newspaper,           16.191 (3.712)
                   monthly rate
Movie              First-run, indoor, evening, no discount                         8.110 (0.870)
Bowling            Price per line (game), Saturday evening non-league rate          3.324 (0.667)
Pizza              11-12 inch thin crust cheese pizza; Pizza Hut or Pizza Inn      11.433 (1.010)
Chicken            Thigh and drumstick; Kentucky Fried Chicken or Church’s          3.072 (0.348)




                                                33
Table 4 – Store, Distribution Center, and Control Variables

Variable             Description                                            Mean (Std. Dev.)
Costcos              Number of Costcos in the city                            0.183 (0.509)
                     Costcos per 100,000 residents in the city                0.127 (0.557)
                     Costcos per 100 square miles in the city                 0.355 (1.598)
                     Binary variable for any Costcos in the city              0.143 (0.350)
                     Number of Costcos in the county                          0.367 (1.344)
Sam’s Clubs          Number of Sam’s Clubs in the city                        0.706 (0.965)
                     Sam’s Clubs in the per 100,000 residents in the city     0.608 (0.884)
                     Sam’s Clubs per 100 square miles in the city             1.254 (2.035)
                     Binary variable for any Sam’s Clubs in the city          0.529 (0.499)
                     Number of Sam’s Clubs in the county                      0.932 (1.333)
Supercenters         Number of Walmart Supercenters in the city               0.730 (1.119)
                     Supercenters per 100,000 residents in the city            1.041 (1.835)
                     Supercenters per 100 square miles in the city             1.790 (3.194)
                     Binary variable for any Supercenters in the city         0.447 (0.497)
                     Number of Supercenters in the county                     1.073 (1.845)
Discount Stores      Number of Walmart discount stores in the city            0.923 (1.200)
Costco DC            Miles to nearest Costco distribution center            499.817 (334.292)
Sam’s DC             Miles to nearest Sam’s Club distribution center        260.890 (184.949)
Supercenter DC       Miles to nearest Walmart food distribution center      297.910 (319.851)
Population           City population (units of 100,000)                       2.253 (6.335)
Land                 City land area (units of 100 square miles)             104.505 (192.651)
Income               City median household income (units of 10,000)           3.469 (0.672)
Grocery Stores       Number of grocery stores in the county                  77.152 (173.277)
Warehouse            Number of warehouse clubs or supercenters in the         0.943 (1.970)
clubs/supercenters   county (after subtracting Costcos, Sam’s Clubs, and
                     Walmart Supercenters)




                                            34
Table 5 – Baseline Results and Falsification Test

                                                       Effect on Grocery Prices            Effect on Non-Grocery
                                                                                                   Prices
Costcos             Short-Run Effect                        0.014 (0.004)***                   0.002 (0.003)
                    Long-Run Effect                         0.027 (0.008)***                   0.007 (0.007)

Sam’s Clubs         Short-Run Effect                            0.003 (0.004)                   -0.0007 (0.003)
                    Long-Run Effect                             0.006 (0.007)                    -0.002 (0.007)

Supercenters        Short-Run Effect                       -0.009 (0.001)***                    -0.0008 (0.001)
                    Long-Run Effect                        -0.017 (0.003)***                     -0.002 (0.003)

Lagged Price                                                0.472 (0.009)***                   0.649 (0.010)***
Observations                                                     70604                              27657
Notes: Standard errors, which are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by city, are in parentheses. *** indicates
statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level. The “short-run effects” are the coefficient
estimates for the store variables; the “long-run effects” are the coefficient estimates for the store variables divided by
one minus the coefficient estimate for lagged price. All regressions include product*year and city fixed effects.




                                                           35
Table 6 – Lags

                                                     One Year Lag        Two Year Lag       Three Year Lag
Costcos             Coefficient Estimate            0.014 (0.007)**     0.013 (0.006)**     0.013 (0.006)**
                    Coefficient Estimate for Lag    -0.0001 (0.006)      0.004 (0.005)       -0.003 (0.006)

Sam’s Clubs         Coefficient Estimate             -0.003 (0.005)      -0.004 (0.005)      -0.003 (0.005)
                    Coefficient Estimate for Lag     0.008 (0.006)        0.008 (0.005)       0.006 (0.005)

Supercenters        Coefficient Estimate            -0.011 (0.003)***   -0.010 (0.002)***   -0.009 (0.002)***
                    Coefficient Estimate for Lag      0.002 (0.003)      -0.0003 (0.002)     -0.00004 (0.002)

Lagged Price                                        0.467 (0.009)***    0.460 (0.010)***    0.456 (0.010)***
Observations                                             65662               60487               55038
See notes for Table 5.


Table 7 – Leads

                                                     One Year Lead       Two Year Lead      Three Year Lead
Costcos             Coefficient Estimate             0.012 (0.006)*     0.015 (0.005)***    0.017 (0.005)***
                    Coefficient Estimate for Lead    0.004 (0.005)       -0.0006 (0.004)     0.0002 (0.004)

Sam’s Clubs         Coefficient Estimate             -0.0006 (0.006)     0.0007 (0.004)      0.003 (0.005)
                    Coefficient Estimate for Lead     0.005 (0.005)     0.008 (0.004)**     0.008 (0.004)**

Supercenters        Coefficient Estimate            -0.006 (0.002)***   -0.008 (0.002)***   -0.011 (0.002)***
                    Coefficient Estimate for Lead    -0.003 (0.002)*      -0.002 (0.002)      -0.001 (0.001)

Lagged Price                                        0.472 (0.009)***    0.471 (0.009)***    0.481 (0.009)***
Observations                                             70674               65798               60646
See notes for Table 5.


                                                             36
Table 8 – Product Categories

                                                           Costcos                                Sam’s Clubs                              Supercenters
                                                    Short-Run Long-Run                      Short-Run    Long-Run                    Short-Run    Long-Run
Starches (n=6146)                                     0.011        0.018                      0.010        0.016                     -0.017***    -0.027***
Fruits/Vegetables (n=18438)                         0.021***    0.037***                      0.007         0.012                    -0.013***    -0.022***
Meats (n=18433)                                     0.016***    0.028***                      0.004         0.007                    -0.009***    -0.015***
Drinks (n=9219)                                     0.017***    0.034***                      0.002        0.004                     -0.006***    -0.011***
Additives (n=12292)                                  0.010*       0.017*                     -0.0007       -0.001                    -0.007***    -0.012***
Non-Food Items (n=6146)                               0.008        0.010                      0.004        0.006                     -0.008***    -0.011***
Brand Specified (n=36871)                           0.013***    0.023***                      0.004         0.007                    -0.008***    -0.015***
Brand Not Specified (n=33803)                       0.017***    0.031***                      0.003         0.006                    -0.011***    -0.019***
All regressions include product x year fixed effects, city fixed effects, and lagged price. Standard errors are suppressed to save space; they are available upon
request. See other notes for Table 5.




                                                                                 37
Figure 1 – Long-Run Marginal Effects of Costcos, Sam’s Clubs, and Walmart Supercenters on ln(Price) by Population
     .01 .02 .03 .04
     0
     -.04 -.03 -.02 -.01




                           0   1       2      3      4        5       6      7                   8          9         10
                                             City Population (Units of 100,000)

                                   Effect of Costco                                      Effect of Sam's Club
                                   Effect of Walmart Supercenter


Coefficient estimates (standard errors): Lagged price 0.471 (0.009), Costcos 0.015 (0.007), Costcos*population -0.0018 (0.0015), Costcos*population2 0.00006
(0.00004), Sam’s 0.001 (0.006), Sam’s*population 0.002 (0.002), Sam’s*population2 -0.0001 (0.0001), Supercenters -0.013 (0.002), Supercenters*population
0.0015 (0.0007), Supercenters*population2 -0.00006 (0.00004).




                                                                             38
Figure 2 – Long-Run Marginal Effects of Costcos, Sam’s Clubs, and Walmart Supercenters on ln(Price) by Grocery Store
Density
    .01 .02 .03 .04
    0
    -.04 -.03 -.02 -.01




                          0   10   20   30     40   50     60    70   80    90 100 110 120 130
                                             Grocery stores per 100,000 residents

                                   Effect of Costco                                      Effect of Sam's Club
                                   Effect of Walmart Supercenter


Coefficient estimates (standard errors): Lagged price 0.471 (0.009), Costcos 0.004 (0.008), Costcos*stores 0.0002 (0.0002), Costcos*stores2 -8.27e-7 (6.70e-7),
Sam’s -0.003 (0.006), Sam’s*stores 0.0002 (0.0001), Sam’s*stores2 -3.70e-7 (6.88e-7), Supercenters -0.005 (0.003), Supercenters*stores -0.0001 (0.00007),
Supercenters*stores2 -4.70e-7 (2.61e-7).



                                                                               39
Appendix – Table A1 – Robustness Checks
                                                         Costcos                                         Sam’s Clubs                          Supercenters
                                                 Short-Run Long-Run                                Short-Run Long-Run                   Short-Run Long-Run
Panel A:       Population*year                   0.012*** 0.023***                                    0.003        0.006                -0.009*** -0.017***
Add            Income*year                       0.012*** 0.023***                                   0.003         0.007                -0.009*** -0.017***
Controls
               Additional stores                 0.013*** 0.025***                                    0.004        0.008                -0.009*** -0.017***
               Linear city trends                  0.014*       0.025*                               -0.006       -0.010                -0.010*** -0.018***
Panel B:       Per 100,000 capita                0.008*** 0.015***                                  -0.0002      -0.0004                -0.006*** -0.011***
Alternate      Per 100 square miles               0.008**      0.015**                                0.004        0.007                -0.007*** -0.014***
Store
Variables      Binary                              0.009        0.016                                 0.006        0.011                -0.021*** -0.041***
               County-level                      0.009*** 0.017***                                 0.008***     0.014***                -0.006*** -0.011***
               County-level; add county trends     0.009*       0.017*                               -0.002       -0.003                -0.006*** -0.012***
Panel C:       Balanced panel (n=26519)            0.011        0.022                               -0.0001      -0.0002                -0.007*** -0.014***
Alternate      Single cities only (n=60628)       0.012**      0.022**                                0.005        0.010                -0.009*** -0.016***
Samples         st
               1 quarter (n=69276)               0.011*** 0.020***                                    0.007        0.013                 0.011*** -0.017***
               Basket; simple average (n=3061)   0.013*** 0.023***                                    0.005        0.008                -0.009*** -0.014***
               Basket; weighted average (n=3061) 0.013*** 0.022***                                    0.004        0.006                -0.008*** -0.014***
Panel D:       Price in t-2                      0.018*** 0.029***                                   0.004        0.007                 -0.012*** -0.019***
Longer         Price in t-3                      0.017*** 0.027***                                   0.006        0.009                 -0.013*** -0.020***
Lags of
Price          Price in t-4                      0.017*** 0.025***                                   0.007        0.010                 -0.015*** -0.021***
               No lagged price                   0.025*** 0.025***                                   0.009         0.009                -0.014*** -0.014***
Panel E:       Baseline                          0.038*** 0.080***                                    0.013        0.028                -0.059*** -0.124***
IV                                                 [7.63]                                           [14.48]                               [16.45]
               Add population, density, and       0.034**      0.071**                                0.003        0.006                 -0.043**    -0.089**
               income                              [7.72]                                           [11.46]                                [4.93]
Notes: Standard errors, which are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by city, are suppressed to save space; they are available upon request. *** indicates
statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level. The “short-run effects” are the coefficient estimates for the store variables; the “long-run
effects” are the coefficient estimates for the store variables divided by one minus the coefficient estimate for lagged price. All regressions include product x year
fixed effects, city fixed effects, and lagged price. In Panel E, the first stage F statistics are in brackets.


                                                                                 40
Table A2 – Individual Products

                        Costcos                           Sam’s Clubs                         Supercenters
                Short-Run Long-Run                  Short-Run Long-Run                  Short-Run Long-Run
Bread              0.007        0.008                  0.012        0.015               -0.023*** -0.028***
Cereal             0.021        0.028                  0.017        0.023               -0.018*** -0.024***
Lettuce         0.060***     0.066***                  0.007        0.008               -0.017*** -0.026***
Bananas            0.012        0.013                  0.008        0.008               -0.017*** -0.018***
Potatoes           0.018        0.019               0.048***     0.050***               -0.020*** -0.020***
Peas             0.032**      0.038**                  0.012      0.014**               -0.017*** 0.020***
Peaches            0.013        0.018                  0.011        0.016                 -0.005*      -0.007*
Corn            0.040***     0.049***                 -0.011       -0.013               -0.022*** -0.027***
Steak              0.018        0.020                  0.001        0.001                -0.009**     -0.010**
Beef              0.025*       0.028*                0.035**     0.040***                -0.012**     -0.013**
Chicken            0.024        0.027                 -0.006       -0.007               -0.013*** -0.015***
Sausage            0.017        0.018                  0.008        0.009               -0.013*** -0.014***
Eggs             0.035**      0.038**                  0.007        0.007               -0.018*** -0.019***
Tuna             0.027**      0.032**                  0.003        0.004               -0.012*** -0.014***
Coffee           0.026**      0.031**                 -0.006       -0.007               -0.009*** -0.011***
Soft Drink       0.027**      0.033**                  0.012        0.015                -0.008**     -0.010**
Milk             0.016**      0.023**                  0.009      0.013**                -0.007**     -0.009**
Sugar             0.017*       0.019*                 -0.004      -0.004*                 -0.006*      -0.006*
Shortening         0.011        0.020                -0.011**    -0.019**                 -0.004*      -0.006*
Parmesan         0.019**      0.029**                  0.008        0.011               -0.009*** -0.013***
Margarine         -0.003       -0.003                  0.013        0.016               -0.016*** -0.019***
Tissue             0.001        0.002                  0.011        0.013               -0.008*** -0.010***
Detergent         0.015*       0.019*                -0.00007    -0.00008               -0.009*** -0.011***
All regressions have a sample size of 3073, except for sausage for which five observations are missing. See other
notes for Table A1.




                                                        41
Table A3 – Heterogeneity by Order of Store

                          Costcos                         Sam’s Clubs                        Supercenters
                  Short-Run Long-Run                 Short-Run Long-Run                 Short-Run Long-Run
1st Store          0.012**      0.023**               0.008*       0.015                -0.013*** -0.025***
2nd Store          0.013**      0.026**                0.004       0.008                -0.011*** -0.021***
3rd Store           0.015*       0.029*               0.0003      0.0006                -0.009*** -0.017***
4th Store            0.017        0.031               -0.003       0.006                -0.006*** -0.012***
Estimates computed from regressions of ln(Price) on the number of stores and their squares, controlling for lagged
price, product x year fixed effects, and city fixed effects. See other notes for Table A1. Coefficient estimates
(standard errors) for the store variables: Costco 0.012 (0.007), Costco2 0.0007 (0.002), Sam’s 0.010 (0.004), Sam’s2
-0.002 (0.0005), Supercenters -0.015 (0.002), Supercenters2 0.001 (0.0003).




                                                         42
Figure A1 – Marginal Effect of Costcos on ln(Price) by Population
     .05
     .04
     .03
     .02
     .01
     0
     -.01
     -.02
     -.03




            0         1           2          3          4         5          6       7                8           9          10
                                                  City Population (Units of 100,000)

                                      Short-Run Effect                               Long-Run Effect
                                      Short-Run Effect: 95% CI                       Long-Run Effect: 95% CI



Coefficient estimates (standard errors): Costcos 0.015 (0.007), Costcos*population -0.0018 (0.0015), Costcos*population2 0.00006 (0.00004).




                                                                             43
Figure A2 – Marginal Effect of Sam’s Clubs on ln(Price) by Population
     .05
     .04
     .03
     .02
     .01
     0
     -.01
     -.02




            0         1           2          3          4         5          6       7                8           9         10
                                                  City Population (Units of 100,000)


                                      Short-Run Effect                                Long-Run Effect
                                      Short-Run Effect: 95% CI                        Long-Run Effect: 95% CI



Coefficient estimates (standard errors): Sam’s 0.001 (0.006), Sam’s*population 0.002 (0.002), Sam’s*population2 -0.0001 (0.0001).




                                                                             44
Figure A3 – Marginal Effect of Walmart Supercenters on ln(Price) by Population
     0
     -.005
     -.01
     -.015
     -.02
     -.025
     -.03
     -.035




             0        1           2          3          4         5          6       7                8           9         10
                                                  City Population (Units of 100,000)


                                      Short-Run Effect                               Long-Run Effect
                                      Long-Run Effect: 95% CI                        Long-Run Effect: 95% CI



Coefficient estimates (standard errors): Supercenters -0.013 (0.002), Supercenters*population 0.0015 (0.0007), Supercenters*population2 -0.00006 (0.00004).




                                                                              45
Figure A4 – Marginal Effect of Costcos on ln(Price) by Grocery Store Density
     .06
     .05
     .04
     .03
     .02
     .01
     0
     -.02 -.01




                 0         20               40             60           80           100                     120              140
                                                 Grocery Stores per 100,000 Residents


                                     Short-Run Effect                                  Long-Run Effect
                                    Short-Run Effect: 95% CI                           Long-Run Effect: 95% CI



Coefficient estimates (standard errors): Costcos 0.004 (0.008), Costcos*stores 0.0002 (0.0002), Costcos*stores2 -8.27e-7 (6.70e-7).




                                                                               46
Figure A5 – Marginal Effect of Sam’s Clubs on ln(Price) by Grocery Store Density
     .05
     .04
     .03
     .02
     .01
     0
     -.01
     -.02
     -.03




            0              20               40             60           80           100                     120                 140
                                                 Grocery Stores per 100,000 Residents


                                    Short-Run Effect                                   Long-Run Effect
                                    Short-Run Effect: 95% CI                           Long-Run Effect: 95% CI



Coefficient estimates (standard errors): Sam’s -0.003 (0.006), Sam’s*stores 0.0002 (0.0001), Sam’s*stores2 -3.70e-7 (6.88e-7).




                                                                              47
Figure A6 – Marginal Effect of Walmart Supercenters on ln(Price) by Grocery Store Density
     0
     -.04 -.035 -.03 -.025 -.02 -.015 -.01 -.005




                                                   0   20        40             60           80           100         120      140
                                                                      Grocery Stores per 100,000 Residents


                                                            Short-Run Effect                        Long-Run Effect
                                                            Short-Run Effect: 95% CI                Long-Run Effect: 95% CI



Coefficient estimates (standard errors): Supercenters -0.005 (0.003), Supercenters*stores -0.0001 (0.00007), Supercenters*stores2 -4.70e-7 (2.61e-7).




                                                                                              48
