NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAXATiON OF INVESTMENT
AND SAVINGS IN A
WORLD ECONOMY:
THE CERTAINTY CASE

Roger H. Gordon

Working Paper No. 1723

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02135
October 1985

I would very much like to thank Jack Mintz, Michelle White, participants of a seminar at NBER, ana especially Jay Wilson, for comments on an earlier draft. Much of this paper was written while I
as a visitor at Tel-Aviv University and at the University of Bonn.
The research reported here is part of the NBERs research program
in Taxation and projects in Government Budget, Productivity and
Industrial Change in the World Economy, and Taxation and Capital
Formation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the Ntioni Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1723

October 1985

Taxation of Investnnt
and Savings in a
World Economy:

The Certainty Case

BSTRA

This paper explores the characteristics of individual portfolio holdings in a world
economy with a unified securities market where there are many countries, each with its own
tax rates and inflation rate. When nominal interest is taxable but income to equity owners

is tax exempt in all countries, I show that the highest tax bracket investors specialize
in equity and, among the remaining investors, those with lower tax rates buy bonds rf
countries with higher inflation rates.
Because of the tax system, countries with a higher inflation rate must pay a higher
real interest rate on their debt. This is necessary in equilibrium to compensate those who
purchase the debt for their higher taxable income. This diversity of real rates of return
in the world securities market has a variety of effects on the optimal tax policy of a small
open economy.

I also explore a model where there is a unified world market in bonds, but no international trade in equity. Here, I find a strong tax incentive for firms owned by investors
in countries with high personal tax rates to become multinationals and invest abroad. If
domestic investors do end up purchasing both bonds and domestic equity, then the optimal
corporate tax rate on real corporate income in a small open economy would be quite high
relative to the personal tax rate on nominal interest income, in order not to distort the
portfolio composition of domestic investors.

Iger H. Gordon
Ocparthnt of Economics
University of Michigan
l½nn Arbor, MI 48109

TAXATION OF INVESTMENT AND SAVThGS IN A WORLD ECONOMY:
THE CERTAINTY CASE
by

Roger H. Gordon
University of Michigan and
National Bureau of Economic Research

Traditionally, papers examining the effects of taxes on the amount of investment, the
composition of individual portfolios, the determination of market interest rates, and eco—
nomic efficiency, have assumed that the economy is closed. There have been a few recent
exceptions to this rule, among them Feldstein and Hartman(1979), Hartman(1981,1985),
Frisch(1983), and Goulder, Shoven, and Whalley(1983). These papers, however, have generally made quite restrictive assumptions about the determinants of international move-.
ments of capital. For example, Feldstein and Hartman, Hartman(1981), and Frisch, restrict
their discussion to the incentives faced by multinationals based in the U.S. who consider
investing abroad, while Hartman(1985) focuses on direct investment in the U.S. by foreigners. Goulder, Shoven, and Whalley adopt a more .flexible specification in which movement
of capital depends on interest rate differentials, but not on taxes.

The first objective of this paper is to develop a general model of how taxes affect the
amount and form of international flows of capital. Among other questions, it will examine

how taxes affect relative interest rates in different countries, the ownership pattern of
financial and real assets, and relative capital intensities in different countries. The model
also suggests a possible tax explanation for the importance of multinationals. The other
objective of the paper is to analyse the implications of this model for the optimal tax policy
of a small open economy.

Throughout the paper, in order to keep the model simple, I assume that there is no
uncertainty, that all firms have the same technology, and that capital and output are freely
mobile between countries. To obtain an equilibrium, I assume a sufficient set of constraints
on portfolio behavior, following the approach used in Miller(1977). As in Miller(1977), each
individual will either be completely indifferent or prefer a corner solution when choosing
among any pair of assets.1

In section 1, I develop a model of equilibrium savings, portfolio composition, and
capital allocation in an open economy assuming either that all assets are traded internati6nally or alternatively that only bonds are traded internationally. In section 2, I explore
the implications of each of these models for optimal tax policy.

1. Equilibrium portfolios and capital allocation
1 Galper and. Toder(1982) used a similar set of assumptions to analyze savings and
investment incentives in a closed economy with many assets, each treated differently for
tax purposes.
1

1. Equilibrium portfolios and capital allocation

1.1 Characteristics of the model
Because of the focus on effects of differences in tax laws in different countries, I adopt
a very simple representation of production, the tax law, and the types of financial assets in
each country. To begin with, assume that output in country i is produced using a constant
returns to scale production function. Labor supply in country i is denoted by Lj, and is a
positive function of the net wage rate. If capital investment in the country equals K, then

output, net of depreciation, equals f(K,L), where fK > 0 and JKK < 0. Investment
takes place for only one period, and at the end of the period the capital is returned to the
individual investors.

Investors in country i can invest in government bonds of country i, paying interest
at a nominal rate r, or corporate equity of firms of that country, the entire return from
which takes the form of capital gains which accrue at a nominal rate denoted by e per
period. I assume that all investors in country i face the same basic personal income tax
rate t when they invest. Nominal interest payments are assumed to be fully taxable, while
capital gains are assumed to be tax eempt.
In order to have a well defined equilibrium in the securities market in this setting, some
constraints must be imposed on individual trading. Otherwise individuals could profitably

engage in infinite amounts of tax arbitrage, as emphasized by Stiglitz(1983). Following
Miller(1977), I assume that individuals must invest a nonnegative amount in an asset, so
by assumption cannot borrow and cannot sell equity short. Some justification for these
assumptions can be found in institutional limitations in the equity market, and in tax law
regulations which at least in the U.S. prevent unlimited interest deductions and rule out
capital gains treatment of short sales of equity.2

All production is assumed to be done by corporations, which act competitively. A
corporation producing in country i faces a proportional corporate income tax at rate r
on its real return to capital. I assume that corporations must invest solely in real assets,
but can borrow to finance up to an exogenous fraction d of their capital with debt.3 The
nominal income to the equity holders of corporations in country , assuming full use of

2 A preferable, but much messier, approach would be to allow for uncertainty in both

asset returns and in exchange rates, and use risk aversion to limit tax arbitrage. An
analysis of taxation of stochastic income must face many further complications, however.
U.S. tax law prevents a corporation from investing too heavily in financial assets.
Agency and bankruptcy costs presumably limit use of debt finance. Implicitly, I am assuming that each firm has idiosyncratic risk which limits use of debt but does not give rise
to any market risk.
2

debt finance,4 therefore equals

eK(l — d) = (f(K, L) — w1L1 — drK)(1 — r) + irK,

(1)

where w is the local wage rate and ir is the local inflation rate.
1.2 Equilibrium in a closed economy
Competition in the securities market in country i implies that investors in that country
will be indifferent between investing in the government bonds or the corporate equity of
that country. The net of tax rate of return on the two securities must therefore be equal,
implying that in equilibrium r(1—t) = e. Corporations, acting competitively, will invest

until the return, net of corporate taxes, earned on additional capital is just sufficient to
attract investors. Substituting for e in equation (1), differentiating with respect to K
and simplifying implies that
uK = (r(1 — t)(1 — d) + dr(1 — r) — ir)/(i — ri),
(2)
where uK. = fK(K,LI).5
1.3 Equilibrium in an open economy
I now assume, in contrast to the previous assumptions, that capital and output are
freely mobile among the N countries. 6 As before, any investment takes place for only

one period. When the investment is made, it requires b units of currency of the base
country7 to buy one unit of currency in country i. When the investment is repaid in the
following period the same transaction requires a1 units of currency of the base country.
Let c1
a1/b1. Without loss of generality, assume that c1 > c2 > ... > c,. In addition,
assume that the traded goods are perfect substitutes, so that purchasing power parity must

exist at both dates. This implies that c = ö/(1 + ir) for some value of 5. Without loss of
generality, assume that 5 = 1. Given purchasing power parity, lower numbered countries
have lower inflation rates.

Individual investors in each country can now invest in any of 2N assets: government
bonds and corporate equity in each of the N countries. If an investor of country i buys a
bond of country k, he receives a nominal income in his own currency of (1+rk(1—t,))ck/c,.
Similarly, an investment in equity of country k yields an income of (1 + ek)ck/c,.

An equilibrium exists when all assets are owned, each investor earns the same aftertax rate of return on the assets he owns, and each investor would earn a lower after-tax
rate of return on the other assets. Several basic characteristics of an equilibrium for this
economy can easily be described. First,
It is easy to show in this setting that corporations would choose to borrow in a closed
economy only if r > t. Whether or not they would choose to borrow in an open economy
depends on a more complicated condition, as seen in Proposition 6. If r is small enough
that corporations do not gain through use of debt finance, then d should be set equal to
zero.

Similar results appear in Auerbach(1979) or Gordon(1984).
6 Technically, either capital or output, but not both, must be mobile.
The choice of a base country is arbitrary and has no implications for the analysis.
3

Proposition 1.

The coupon rate on bonds of country m will be lower than the coupon
rate on bonds of country n whenever i-n < n.

Proof. In equilibrium, some investor, say from country 1, will own bonds of country n, and
can do no better with bonds of country m. Therefore, c(1+r(1—t)) c,,(1+rm(1—tj)).

Since c, > c, whenever

m

< n, it follows

that r >

i-rn. I

All this proposition says is that a country with a higher inflation rate must have a
higher nominal interest rate. The next two propositions characterize who owns which
assets.
The tax rate of any investor in equity
rate of any investor in bonds.

Proposition 2.

will be at

least as high as the tax

Proof. Assume to the contrary that in equilibrium an investor with tax rate t owns
equity of some country m, while an investor with tax rate t5, with t > t, owns bonds of
some country n. For this to be an equilibrium, each investor must prefer his asset to the
alternatives. Therefore, (1 + em)cm/cj (1 + r(i — t1))c./c1, and (1 + r(i — t))c/c
(1 + em)c,/c.j. Since t, > t, it follows that (1 + em)cm (1 + r,(1 — t.))c > (1 + r(1
t))c ? (1 + em)cm, a contradiction. •
Intuitively, an asset exempt from personal tax is relatively most attractive to the

investor in the highest tax bracket. Similarly,

Proposition 3.

The tax rate of any investor in bonds of country m will be at least as
high as the tax rate of any investor in bonds of country n when m <n.
Proof. Assume to the contrary that an investor with tax rate t owns bonds of country m,

investor with tax rate t owns bonds of country n, and t > t. Then, the equilibrium
conditions imply (1 + rm(1 — ti))Cm (1 + r(i — t))c and (1 + r.(i — t))c (1 +
an

rm(1 — tj))m. By simple algebra, these two conditions imply

CrnCn

—

cmrm

> Cm C

(3)

Since c > c. and t1 > t by assumption, however, this leads to a contradiction. •
This proposition shows simply that higher tax bracket investors have a comparative
advantage in- bonds with low taxable coupons.

I now try to characterize relative rates of return in equilibrium. Let t(k) denote the
tax rate of some investor who buys bonds of country k, and let t(k) and tm(k) represent
the largest and the smallest values that t(k) can take on. Then,

Proposition 4. In equilibrium, relative interest rates mu-st
for all i and k such that i < k:
— cu-i

I=i+1

i

,n .1

(4)

j=i-i-1

4

satisfy the following equation

Proof. Equation (3) must hold for the tax rate of any investor in bonds of countries
k — 1 and k. In particular, the left-hand inequality must be satisfied for tm(k
1), so
< (ck_i — Ck)/(1 — t(k — 1)) + Ck_ irk_i. This inequality must hold for all k.
Repeated substitution for ck_lrk_i yields one side of equation (4). Starting from the
right-hand side of equation (3), using t(k), and following the same procedure yields the
other side of equation (4).

Corollary. In equilibrium, relative interest rates must satisfy
k

(irk

—

irk_1)tm(1 — 1)ckck_1 > (r —
1 — tm(k — i)

lTk)Ck

—

(r —
(irk—irk1)t(k)ckck_1

>

j=i+i

1—t(k)

(5)

for all i and k such that I < k.
Proof. Given purchasing power parity, ck = 11(1 + Irk). Substituting for c, in equation (3)
gives equation (5) for k = I + 1. Repeated addition of these equations for higher values of

k gives the desired result. I
This characterization of relative interest rates in a world with taxes replaces the
much studied interest rate parity condition, which argues that real (before-tax) interest
rates ought to be equated in different countries. Instead, it shows that the real rate
is higher in countries where the inflation rate is higher.8 The corollary is a straightforward generalization of the commonly cited result that if the real after-tax interest rate,
r(1 — t) — ir, is to remain constant as inflation changes, then 8(r — ir)/8ir = t/(1 — t).
Since investors with higher tax rates invest in bonds with lower nominal interest
payments, they have as a result smaller taxable income than lower tax rate investors, and
could pay less in taxes. However, they still earn a lower after-tax real return, for:

Proposition 5. In equilibrium, r(1 — t(n))

—

ir > rrn(1 — t(m))

—

itm for all n > m.

Proof. For investors in bonds of country n., c(1 + r(l — t(n))) > c,(1 + rm(1 — t(n))).
This implies that c,(rr(l — t(n)) — it,2) > cm(r,,(l — t(n)) — it,,2). Since t(rn) > t(n) ahd
Cm > c, the result follows. E
8 Makin(1984) and Boadway, Bruce, and Mintz(1984) also point out that after-tax real

rates, rather than before-tax rates, ought to be equated in equilibrium. They assumed,
however, that there is some one tax rate at which all after-tax real rates are equated,
contrary to equation (5).
5

In words, the lower tax rate investor could have purchased the same bond as the higher

tax rate investor. If he had, he would have received a higher net-of-tax return. Instead,
he does better yet by buying some other bond.
In order to characterize the required return on real capital, it is necessary to determine
where (and whether) corporations would choose to borrow. Unlike investors, who look for
the highest available after-tax return, given their tax rate, corporations would look for the
minimum required after-tax borrowing cost, given their corporate tax rate. It is straightforward to show that

Proposition 8. In equilibrium, corporate debt policy can be characterized as follows:
a) If r < r = [CN(1 + Tr) c(1 + e)]/(cNr1r), then a corporation does not borrow.
b) Corporations facing values of r r would all borrow in the country with the highest
inflation rate.9
Proof. A. corporation would be willing to borrow in country N only if the required payment
on bonds, net of corporate tax, were less than that required on an additional unit of equity,
or if CN(1 + ?-N(1 — ri)) K c(1 + es). This inequality is satisfied except when r < r.

In order to show that a corporation, if it borrows, borrows in country N rather than in
= CN(1 + rN(1 t)).
some other country m, let t be defined so that Cm(1 rm(1 —

t))

t))

It is easy to show that t(N) t < t(tn). It also follows easily that cm(1 + rm(1 —
cm(1 +rm(1 — t(m)) c(1 + ed). If t > r, then cm(1 + rm(1 — ri)) > c(1 + eq), and the
corporation would prefer equity finance to borrowing in country rn. But if t < r, then
CN(1 + rN(1 — ri)) < Cm(1 rm(1 — ri)), since cNrJ\r cmrm by proposition 4. Therefore,
a corporation would borrow only in country N, if it borrows at all. I
This result that all corporations prefer to borrow in the highest inflation rate country
clearly contradicts the evidence. Presumably the agency costs of debt are less if the debt
is used to finance an investment made in the same country.

In order to characterize the required return on real capital, let tm(O) represent the
minimum tax rate among investors who buy equity. Then

Proposition 7. In equilibrium, assuming Tm
ought to occur until
(1 — d)(rj(1

—

tm(O))

lTm

—

7r1)c1

fmCm

> r, real investment in each country m

d(rN(l Tm) — N)CN

(lTm)
(1— d)(ri(1
<
—

—

t(1)) — 7r1)cj

lTm

This result is analagous to a result in Gordon(1982) that corporations in a closed
economy would prefer to issue bonds of that maturity which has the highest coupon.
6

Proof. For the maximum tax rate investor in bonds of country 1, c(1 + rj(1 — t(1)) >
cm(1+em). For the minimum tax rate investor in equity, cm(i+em)) > ci(1+ri(1—tm(O)).
With purchasing power parity, this implies that (ri(1 — tm(O)) — ir1)c1 < (em — u1m)m <
(ri(1 — t(1)) — 7r.)c1. But, given Tm > r, cm(em — itrn)(1 — d) = CmfmK(1 — Tm) —
dcN(rN(1 — Tm) — lrN). The result follows trivially after substitution. I
Given international mobility of capital, the required real return on equity is no higher
than the minimum after-tax real return earned by any investor in bonds.

In deriving the required rate of return on investment in a country, I did not consider
explicitly the possibility of investment by multinationals. All investment in a country,
whether by a local company or by a multinational, is subject to local corporate taxes and
no personal taxes. If a multinational must pay any additional taxes at repatriation, then
it would require a higher marginal product of capital than the local corporation would,
and so could not compete. Under U.S. law, repatriation cannot result in a drop in tax
payments. Therefore, with this model, at best multinational firms are at no competitive
disadvantage relative to local corporations. 10
Many characteristics of the equilibrium described in the above theorems are portrayed
graphically in Figure 1, for a two country world economy. This figure graphs the net of
tax real return earned on each financial asset as a function of the tax rate of the investor.

Equity is untaxed, so its return does not vary with t. The after tax return on any bond,
c(r(1 — t) — ir), declines with t with a slope equal to —cr. Therefore, the after-tax
return line for bonds from the higher inflation country, which by proposition (1) must pay
a higher coupon, has a steeper slope. As seen from the graph, investors with t below ta
earn the highest return on the bonds with the larger coupon. Similarly, investors with t
greater than tb prefer equity, while the remaining investors prefer the low coupon bond.
In equilibrium, these lines must adjust so that demand for each asset equals the supply of
each asset.

The real return on each asset is measured by the height of the return line when t = 0.
As proven earlier, the high coupon bond earns the highest real return, while equity earns
the lowest. Similarly, the after tax return earned by any investor, must lie on the envelope
of the various lines, and clearly declines with t. Note that there is no one tax rate at which
all after tax returns are equal — explaining differences in real rates is more complicated.

The cost to a corporation of borrowing in each country is the height of each of the
return lines at t = r. A corporation would borrow only if this height is below that of the
equity return line. As seen in the graph, corporations would borrow only when T > r and
only in the highest inflation rate country.
10 Taxation of income at repatriation in the U.S. is rather complicated, as described in
Hartman(1981). As Hartman argues, a multinational can avoid extra taxes, and so be at
no disadvantage, either by indefinitely postponing repatriation or by investing in such a
mix of foreign countries that its average tax payment abroad is at least as high as the U.S.
tax payment would be.
7

1.4 EquiUbrum in an open economy with no international trade in equity
The model described above has many counterfactual implications. To begin with,
investors own very specialized portfolios, and are no more likely to own securities issued
in their own country than to own foreign securities. Also, there is no role in the model
for multinational firms. Of course, a model with random returns on securities and risk
aversion will lead to diversified portfolios, and perhaps to a tendency to concentrate one's
portfolio in the securities issued in one's own country.
The presence of risky tax revenue
and endogenous diversification greatly complicates the analysis, however. In this section,
I describe instead a much simpler alternative, but one which still leads to an equilibrium
which is somewhat more consistent with the data.
In particular, I assume that investors cannot buy equity in foreign firms. While some
international trade in equity exists, volume is small relative to the volume of international
loans. Initially, I assume in addition that there are no multinational firms.

The equilibrium in this setting is very similar to that described previously. For simplicity, assume that in each country investors have more than enough wealth to buy all the
domestic equity. Each investor will own, in addition to equity, those bonds most appropriate for their tax rate. By the same arguments as before, those with high tax rates will
prefer low coupon bonds, and conversely. The analogue to proposition 4 and its corollary,
describing relative interest rates, will continue to hold.

The allocation of capital will be very different in this setting, however. Equity in

a country must provide the same real rate of return as is earned on the bonds most
appropriate for domestic investors, given their tax rate. This required rate of return on
equity will vary by country, being higher in countries where investors face lower tax rates,
as shown in Proposition 5. Countries with high personal tax rates should therefore be
more capital intensive, contrary to the standard intuition. This is true regardless of the
impact of a country's high personal tax rate on the domestic savings rate.
As a result, however, there would be an important role for multinationals in this model.
Firms based in countries where investors face a low tax rate must provide a higher nominal
rate of return on equity than firms based elsewhere. Yet all firms investing in a country, by
assumption, have the same technology, and, ignoring any surtax at repatriation, pay the
same corporate tax rate. Therefore, firms based in countries with high personal tax rates
have a competitive advantage when investing abroad. If there were no tax at repatriation,
then the equilibrium would be exactly that described in section 1. Investors in the high tax
rate countries would own the equity of domestic firms which invest throughout the world,
while investors in lower tax rate countries would own bonds of the appropriate type.

Hartman(1981) described various ways by which a firm can reduce any surtax at
repatriation. However, if a surtax for firms in a particular country is unavoidable and
large enough, then firms in that country will invest only domestically, and individual
investors there will end up owning the appropriate bonds, as well as equity.
See, for example, Fraga(1984).
8

For the same reasons that individual investors may not buy equity abroad, however,
multinationals may not have quite the same technological opportunities in foreign countries. Local firms would presumably have much better information about local markets
than would a foreign entrant.12 A model which seriously addressed the implications of
differential information should therefore end up with some multinationals, given the tax

incentives described above, but not to the point where they control production in all
countries with lower personal tax rates.

2. Implications for government policy13
?.1 Closed economy

These different models of capital taxation in an open economy have very different
implications for optimal tax policy. To show this, I begin by briefly describing the incentives
faced by a government in a closed economy. Assume that the government can raise revenue

through a tax on labor income, a corporate tax, and a tax on interest income. In addition,
assume that the government has control over the country's inflation rate. I will ignore,
though, any revenue collected by the inflation tax and focus only on the implications of
the inflation rate for market prices and the revenue collected by the other taxes.
In order to describe the welfare effects of tax changes, I need to make more explicit
the structure of the economy. I have chosen a very simple one. In particular, I assume
that the representative individual lives for two periods. He is born with wealth of Y, and
during the first period can either consume these assets or invest them in equity or bonds.

Production takes place only during the second period. During this period, the individual works, receiving labor income of q = wL(1 — s), where L is his labor supply and s
is the proportional tax rate on labor income. His consumption in the second period equals
his labor income plus the principal and the net of tax return on his savings.
His indirect utility from private expenditures depends on his income and the various
prices that he faces. Let second period consumpton be the numeraire, implying that the
value o his initial wealth is Y(1 + r(1 — t) — r). The only other prices are his wage rate
and the price of first period consumption. The individual's utility from private goods can
therefore be expressed as V(qL,q,,qlY), where qi = (1 + r(l — t) — ir). Similarly, the
individual's optimal labor supply, L, and optimal consumption in each period, denoted
C, and C2, can also be expressed as a function of the same variables. Let a denote his
marginal utility of income.
The government issues bonds of amount C during the first period to fund government
spending. During the second period, it receives revenue from the tax on labor income, the
tax on nominal interest, and the corporate income tax. These revenues must be sufficient

to cover the cost of repaying the debt. Therefore, the government's budget constraint
12 However, a foreign entrant would likely have much better information about foreign
markets than would an individual investor about foreign equity.
' I would like to thank Jay Wilson for helpful advice on this section.
9

is swL tr(G + dK) r(fK — rd)K =

jG. By Wairas' law, satisfying the
government's budget constraint is equivalent to satiEfying the country's overall resource
constraint C2 = f(K, L) K, where K = Y — C — C1.
(1

r—

I assume that the representative individual receives utility from government expenditures of AG. The government's problem is to set the tax rates t,s, and r, and the inflation
rate, allowing C to adjust implicitly, so as to maximize the utility of the representative
individual. Implicitly, however, following the approach used by Diamond-Mirrlees(1971),
the government in setting its policy is simply choosing output G, consumer prices qL and
q1, and the capital stock, K — through its tax policy the government can determine these
parameters and given these parameters the equilibrium is entirely determined.

The characteristics of optimal policy in this setting have been explored extensively
in the past,'4 and I will not attempt to reproduce them here. In this particular model,
however, the government has a surplus of instruments to affect the amount of savings and
investment. In particular,

Proposition 8.

The government can choose arbitrary values of t and ir, allowing r to
adjust appropriately, and leave the equilibrium entirely unchanged.

Proof. Denote the optimal values of the policy parameters by a superscript . Then,

equation (2) and the definition of q1 imply that the tax parameters must be chosen so that

q=w(1—s),

(6a)

q = 1 + r(1 — t) — ir,and

(Gb)

fK(K,L) = [(i — d)r(1 — t) + dr(1 — r) — ir]/(i — r),

(6c)

where L* is that value chosen by the individual, given q and q. Given arbitrary values
of t and 7r, the interest rate r will adjust to produce the desired q. Given the interest
rate, t, and r, the tax rate r can then be set to satisfy equation (6c). The tax rate s can
easily be chosen to ensure equation (6a) is satisfied. I
The equilibrium depends on the tax wedge between the individual's return to savings

and the marginal product of capital, and there are many sets of tax parameters which
imply the same tax wedge.

2.2 Optimal tax policy with international trade in all securities
In an open economy, individual savings need no longer equal government borrowing
plus domestic investment — investment flows of capital can offset any difference. As a
result, taxation of savings is no longer equivalent to taxation of investment.

In general, characterizing optimal government policy in an open economy is very
complicated, since government decisions could well affect world prices, and also induce
14

See,

for example, Feldstein(1978), King(1980), or Bradford(1980).
10

.othergovernments-•to change their policies in response.15 The objective of this paper
is not to describe all these general equilibrium complications, but merely to point out
various considerations that have been ignored in the existing literature. To make these
considerations clear, I make the following simplifying assumptions: 1) Each country is
sufficiently small that its policy has a negligible impact on the level of world interest
rates, 2) the set of available bonds is sufficiently dense that it can be approximated by a
continuum,16 and (3) each government sets its policy based on world prices, and does not
react strategically to decisions of other governments.
Given these assumptions, each country faces a horizontal supply of foreign equity at
the real rate of return to equity required in the world securities market, denoted by e,.,
and a horizontal supply of foreign loans at the appropriate real interest rate, given the
domestic inflation rate. Denote this real rate by i(ir). Similarly, domestic investors can
invest as much as they want in whatever asset is appropriate, given their tax rate. Denote
the real (before-tax) return from this asset, including principal repayment, by p1(t) and
the real after-tax return by qi(t). Also, if investors buy bonds rather than equity, let r(t)
denote the nominal coupon on the bonds and ir(t) the real capital loss on the bonds due to
inflation, so that pi(t) = 1 + r(t) — ir(t).'7 Similarly, if corporations borrow, let rjr denote
the coupon on the bonds they issue in country N, measured in the home currency, and let
irN denote the real capital loss on these bonds.
When setting its tax policy, each government is again assumed to maximize the utility
of the representative individual subject to the aggregate resource contraint18

C2 + (1 + i(ir))G' + (1 + er)M f(M, L) + M + (Y — C1)pi(t).

(7)

Here, M represents the amount of corporate capital invested, by assumption, by foreigners.

Individuals invest in those foreign assets most appropriate given their tax rate. Total
domestic income is used to repay foreign owners of domestic equity and government bonds,
as well as to fund second period consumption.

As before, individual utility and individual behavior depend on the two prices qL and
q1. The government, in setting its policy, is implicitly choosing values for q, t, M, and

it, allowing C to adjust to satisfy the resources constraint. These values are under the
control of the government, given the available tax instruments, and together determine
the equilibrium for the economy.

For an examination of these complications, see Feldstein and Hartman(1979).
16 Otherwise, there could be a nondifferential change in investor's portfolios in response
to a differential change in tax policy, making differential analysis inappropriate.
17 This involves a slight change in notation. Under the previous notation, the coupon
and the real capital loss would have equaled cr and cir respectively.
18 I implicitly assume here that the corporate tax rate is below r, so that corporations
do not use debt finance. This assumption is justified in the next proposition.
' If domestic investors buy domestic securities, then p1(t) will simply equal either i(ir)
or er, as appropriate.
11

Since, the economy faces a horizontal supply curve for capital, one might expect that
the government would not choose to tax corporate investments. Indeed,

Proposition 9.

If in a small open economy a government is choosing optimal rates
simultaneously for a labor income tax and a corporate income tax, then it will set the
corpo rate tax rate to zero.

Proof. The optimal corporate tax rate is zero if, at the optimal value of M, fM = Cr SO
that equity holders are paid the entire marginal product of capital. But differentiating
utility with respect to M, holding constant the other policy instrument qj, and setting
the derivative equal, to zero, immediately implies that fK er. Note, however, that when
Al changes, in order to hold qj constant the tax rate s must change to compensate for
changes in the domestic wage rate.

Intuitively, labor bears the entire burden of either a labor tax or a corporate income
tax when the supply of capital is infinitely elastic, so both lead to a change in labor
supply decisions. A corporate tax, however, simultaneously creates an additional distortion
reducing capital investment in the economy. A small country should therefore not attempt
to tax capital, regardless of the tax policies in other countries.

Unlike in the closed economy, the values of ir and t are no longer arbitrary. When
a country lowers its inflation rate, it lowers the real rate of return that it must pay on
government debt, as shown in the corollary to proposition 4. Since inflation plays no other
role in the model, a country always has this incentive to lower its inflation rate. Of course,
other considerations may also enter into the choice of an inflation rate.
Similarly, in an open economy, the income to investors arid the government together

from the purchase of a bond is the before-tax real interest rate on the bond. But, the
higher the personal tax rate of investors in a country, the lower the real return earned on
the asset they choose to buy, creating an incentive for each country to lower its personal
tax rate on interest income.
This change in the real interest rate received on savings is only one factor, however,
affecting a country's choice of t. In general,

Proposition 10.

In a small open economy, if investors own bonds rather than equity,
then the welfare effect of a change in the tax rate on interest income equals
-

where S = Y

aw =
—

C1,

ap

Sc---

+ S(A*—

8r
3L
as
+ A sw-i-- + A
)(r + t.—)
tr---,

(8)

and where ) = A/(1 +1).

Proof. The representative individual's utility equals W = V(qL,ql,Yql) + AG, where C is
determined by the country's resource constraint. Differentiating utility with respect to t,
holding the other tax instruments constant, and using Roy's identity implies
8W
8q1
*
ac1 ac2

--=aS-—+A [IL -+S--—pi———
12

a

(9)

The individual's budget constraint is C2 = (Y — Ci)q1 + qLL, implyingthat 8C2/at
qL(3L/.9t) + (Y — Ci)(aqj/Ot) — q1(aC1/at). Substituting for (ac2/at) and using the
definition that qj = Pi — rt leads to equation (8) after minor algebra. I
The proposition shows that for a small country four different considerations enter
when choosing t. The first term in equation (9) describes the change in the real interest
rate received on savings when the tax rate changes. This change clearly discourages tax
increases. The second term describes the change in the government's revenue from the tax
on interest income, holding savings constant. If the government collects more revenue when
the tax rate rises, this provides some net benefit since alternative sources of revenue are
also costly. The last two terms describe the change in labor supply and savings resulting

from the drop in the individual's net return to savings. Presumably savings drop while
labor supply rises to compensate, leading to an ambiguous effect overall.

If enough other countries have chosen positive values of t, so that some bonds are
owned by investors facing positive tax rates, then any small country would find it optimal
to make t positive. To show this, all we need to do is demonstrate that (aW/at) > 0 when
evaluated at t = 0. Equilibrium pricing requires that the first term in equation (8) equal
zero when t = 0. The second term is clearly positive at t = 0. Given the presumption that
(aL/at) > 0, the entire derivative must therefore be positive.
Similarly, if a country currently has so high a value of t that its investors own some
equity, and if some bonds are owned by foreign investors facing positive tax rates, th-'n

there is a strong presumption that the country ought to cut its tax rate. Tax revenue
would certainly rise if t is cut, the real before-tax return earned by investors would rise,
and presumably savings would rise. As long as any fall in labor supply is not too large,
there is a welfare gain from cutting t.

We have just shown that if any country's investors own equity, then that country
would want to cut its tax rates. But investors in at least the country with the highest tax
rate would own equity. Therefore, if all countries are small and have simultaneously chosen
optimal. values of t, then no bonds would be held by investors facing positive values of t
and no country would collect revenue from this tax.2° This is a somewhat surprising result
since the elasticity of the supply of savings in a country is no different if the economy is
open. What is different is that in an open economy, investors have unlimited opportunites
to avoid tax by buying equity if tax rates get too high.

If any large countries, facing more complicated incentives, choose to tax interest,
however, and as a result lead some taxable investors to own bonds, then all small countries
would also tax interest income.21

20 If any set of countries choose negative values for t, then interest rates would adjust

so that their investors earn a lower before-tax return on their savings. Given that the
subsidy also uses revenue, these countries would face an incentive to raise their tax rates
back towards zero.
21 Similar interactions among the tax policies of different governments have been de13

2.5 Other po1cy responses n an open economy
If other countries do tax interest income at varying tax rates, perhaps because some
countries are large, and if enough do so that some taxable investors own bonds, then the
diversity of real returns in equilibrium in the world securities market creates a variety of
peculiar incentives for governments. In this section, I describe several of them.

To begin with, while individuals and corporations have been assumed to be unable
to engage in arbitrage, given the presence of these different rates of return, governments
may not face the same difficulties yet face the same incentives. Each government would
wish to borrow at a low real rate and reinvest at a high real rate. For example, a low
inflation rate cot.mtry could issue debt to finance the purchase of a stock of foreign bonds
issued by higher inflation rate countries.. Similarly, a high inflation country could borrow
in a foreign currency (e.g. debt denominated in dollars), and use the funds to retire any
debt issued in its own currency.22 Within the model, there is no natural limit to these
arbitrage opportunities. Presumably such arbitrage is limited by the moral hazard problem
of explicit default, or implicit default through unexpected inflation.
Similarly a country borrows at one real rate, while its investors save facing another
real rate. When these two rates differ, there is an additional consideration when comparing
debt vs. tax finance of government expenditures. If a country has both a low inflation
rate and a low value of t, then it faces a strong incentive to use debt finance, since it must
pay a low real rate on its debt, whereas its investors, who increase their savings to cover
future tax obligations, earn a higher real rate on their extra savings.

In contrast, a country with both a high inflation rate and a high value of t ought to
avoid any debt and even try to built up a stock of foreign reserves. Its investors earn a lower
real return on their savings than the government must pay on its debt. Such a government
might also try to induce its investors to buy domestic bonds rather than foreign bonds.
Simply outlawing purchase of foreign assets, however, may lead investors to buy domestic
equity rather than domestic debt, and so earn an even lower rate of return. A commonly
used alternative is to impose a withholding tax on any interest payments sent to foreign
owners. If foreign investors are to continue to find these assets attractive, the coupon
net of withholding tax cannot change implying that the stated interest rate must rise by
the size of the withholding tax. This increased interest rate is implicitly available only to
domestic investors. If the increase is sufficient, i.e. if the withholding tax is large enough,
domestic investors will switch to buying domestic bonds rather than foreign bonds.23
In contrast, a country should never consider a withholding tax on the return to equity.
This tax would raise the required return on capital, a welfare loss by proposition 9, and
may induce domestic investors to buy equity rather than higher yielding foreign bonds.
scribed in the fiscal federalism literature. See, for example, Wilson(1985) or Gordon(1983).
22 This provides an intriguing explanation for the heavy indebtedness to U.S. banks of
a number of developing countries with high domestic inflation rates.
23 Note that a country should consider a withholding tax on interest payments only if

p1(t) < i(r).

14

Many of the peculiar -incentives described above would be eliminated if a country
taxed the real return earned on every asset at some given tax rate, as would occur under
a comprehensive income tax, rather than the nominal return earned on bonds and none
of the return on equity, and similarly allowed corporations to deduct only the real interest
rate paid on its debt. When only the real return is taxed, each investor would invest in
that asset earning the highest before-tax real rate of return, regardless of the size of the
tax rate, and each corporation would borrow at the lowest available real interest rate.
Portfolio choice would no longer be distorted, only savings incentives. While a country
would still not wish to impose a corporate income tax, the optimal tax rate on the return
to savings should be positive, regardless of the tax policies in other countries.24
Similar incentives would be created if instead of imposing a comprehensive income tax,
the government simply made foreign exchange gains and losses on bonds fully taxable.25

In this case, taxable income on any investment in bonds is the real return earned on the
bond plus the domestic inflation rate. An investor in bonds would still purchase the bond
paying the highest before-tax real return. However, since the tax treatment of equity would
remain different, the investor may still prefer to invest in equity even if its before-tax rate
of return is lower.

One other response a government might take to tax competition driving all tax rates to
zero is to negotiate with other governments concerning their joint tax policy. In isolation,
each country sets its tax rates such that any small change has no effect on the utility of its
representative citizen However, a small change in one country's tax policy could well have
first-order effects on the utility of nonresidents. When it does, there exists the possibility
of mutually beneficial tax treaties.26 Since an examination of the possibility of tax treaties
inevitably involves examining decisions by a group of countries which collectively can
affect market prices, a problem avoided elsewhere in this paper, I leave this topic to future
research.

2. Open economy: no international trade in equity
One characteristic of the small open economy analyzed above is that tax rates on
individi.ial investors can be varied freely without affecting the required marginal product
of corporate investment. This strong separation between the behavior of investors and the
capital intensity of corporate production does not exist if there is no international trade
in equity and no multinational firms, as in the model described at the end of section 1.
Without this separation, additional complications arise when analyzing the effects of tax
changes.

In the model with no international trade in equity, individual portfolios consist of both

24 If real interest is taxed, then the welfare effect of a tax change is still described by
equation (8), but the first term now equals zero, as does (8r/ôt). If (aL/at) is positive,
as assumed above, then this derivative is positive when t 0 and the optimal tax rate is
positive.
25 This tax change was recently proposed by the U.S. Treasury.
26 See Gordon (1984) for a further discussion in the context of fiscal federalism.
15

domestic equity and foreign bonds. The required return on equity, and so the amount of
investment, now depends directly on the tax treatment of bonds. Whenever the taxes
collected on a unit investment in capital differ from those collected on a unit investment in
bonds, the portfolio composition of the country is distorted. Under an optimal tax system,
this would not occur, for

Proposition 11. In a small open economy in which domestic capital is owned entirely
by domestic investors, optimal taxation of corporations implies that27
a) fK = r — ir, and
b) r = tr/(r ir) + d[(r(1 - t) ir) (rN(1 r) lrN)}/(r ir).

-

- -

- -

-

Proof. When equity is owned entirely by domestic investors, the country's resource constraint is (1 + i)G = f(K, L) + K + p1(Y — C1 — K) — C2. Through its choice of r, the
government implicitly chooses K. Differentiating utility with respect to K, holding qj and
t constant, immediately proves part (a) of the proposition.
However, firms will invest until fK(1 — r) = (1 — d)fr(1 — t) — ir] + dErN(1 — —
r) lrN].
Substituting for fK and solving for r yields part (b) of the proposition after simple algebra.

I

Optimal tax policy still involves investing until the marginal product of capital equals
the rate of return available on the world market. However, this is no longer accomplished
by setting the corporate tax rate to zero, since imposing a tax on interest income lowers
the required rate of return on equity. Instead, the tax system must be designed so that
the same amount is collected in tax on an investment in foreign bonds as is collected on
an investment in corporate capital. Since the nominal return on bonds is taxable under
the personal tax, but only the real return on capital is taxable under the corporate tax,
this requires a corporate tax rate that is much higher than the personal tax rate. If the
corporation gains by using debt finance, then the corporate rate must be higher still.28
For example, even if the corporation borrows domestically, if t = .30, r = .10, ir = .04,
and d = .25, the optimal value of r would be 0.75. For many plausible parameter values,
even a corporate tax rate of virtually 1.0 would not bring the marginal product of capital
up to the opportunity cost of funds.

These results on optimal corporate taxation are in sharp contrast to those found in
the previous-section, where equity was assumed to be tradeable internationally. There, the
optimal corporate tax rate was zero, regardless of the value chosen for t, whereas here the
optimal corporate tax rate is much higher than the value chosen for t. Optimal corporate
tax policy depends critically on which assets are tradeable internationally.
27

I have assumed that corporations would choose to borrow, given the optimal r. If not,

then d ought to be set equal to zero in the proposition.
28 If
the corporation chooses to borrow, then the second term in part (b) of the proposition must be positive.
16

3. Summary
This paper has explored the characteristics of individual portfolio holdings in a world
economy with a unified securities market where there are many countries, each with its own
tax rates and inflation rate. When nominal interest is taxable but income to equity owners

is tax exempt in all countries, I show that the highest tax bracket investors specialize
in equity and, among the remaining investors, those with lower tax rates buy bonds of
countries with higher inflation rates.

Because of the tax system, countries with a higher inflation rate must pay a higher
real interest rate on their debt. This is necessary in equilibrium to compensate those who
purchase the debt for their higher taxable income, and gives countries an incentive to lower
their inflation rate.

Similarly, the income accruing to both investors and the government together in a
country on their savings, which is just the real interest rate received on their investments,
is higher in countries where the tax rate on investors is lower. This occurs because lower
tax rate investors buy bonds of countries with higher inflation rates, and countries with
higher inflation rates must pay a higher real interest rate on their debt. Countries where
investors, because of their high tax rate, specialize in equity receive the lowest real return
on their savings.
I also explore a model where there is a unified world market in bonds, but no international trade in equity. Here, I find a strong tax incentive for firms owned by investors in
countries with high personal tax rates to become multinationals and invest abroad. These
firms require a low real return on their investments since their equity owners have a low

opportunity cost of funds. It remains true, however, that the highest tax rate countries,
which generate multinational firms, receive the lowest real return on their savings.
If multinationals are assumed not to play an important role, then investors in a country
would own both bonds and domestic equity. In this case, the tax system distorts investors'

portfolio choice whenever the total taxes paid on an equivalent investment in equity or
foreign bonds differ. This is likely since nominal income on bonds is taxable, but only the
real return on corporate capital is taxable. If equity investments are taxed more lightly,
then there is an incentive on a government to raise its corporate tax rate, and/or lower its
personal tax rate on interest income.

17

REFERENCES

Atkinson, A.B. and N.H. Stern, "Pigou, Taxation, and Public Goods," Review of

Economic Studies, 41(Jan., 1974), pp. 119-128.

Auerbach, Alan J., "Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital," Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 93(Aug., 1979), pp. 433-446.

Boadway, Robin, Neil Bruce, and Jack Mintz, "Taxation, Inflation, and the Effective
Marginal Tax Rate on Capital in Canada," Canadian Journal of Economics, 17(Feb.,1984),
pp. 62-79.

Bradford, David F., "The Economics of Tax Policy toward Savings," in The Govern-

merit and Capital Formation, ed. by G.M. von Furstenberg, Lexington:
Ballinger, 1980,

pp. 11-71.

Diamond, Peter and James Mirrlees, "Optimal Taxation and Public Production,"
American Economic Review, 61(1971), pp. 8-27, 261-278.

Feldstein, Martin S., "The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation," Journal of

Political Economy, 86(April, 1978), pp. S29-S52.

Feldstein, Martin S. and David Hartman, "The Optimal Taxation of Foreign Source
Investment Income," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 93(Nov., 1979), pp. 613-629.

Fraga, Arininio, "The Exchange Rate Risk Premium and the Micro-Foundations of
Asset Markets Models of the Exchange Rate," Woodrow Wilson School Discussion Papers
iii Economics No. 83, Nov., 1984.
Frisch, Daniel, "Issues in the Taxation of Foreign Source Income," in Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis, ed., Martin S. Feldstein, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1983.

Fullerton, Don, John B. Shoven, and John Whalley, "General Equilibrium Analysis of U.S. Taxation Policy," in 1978 Compenthurn of Tax Research, ed. U.S. Treasury
Department, Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1978.
Galper, Harvey and Eric Toder, "Transfer Elements in the Taxation of Income from
Capital," mimeo, 1982.
Gordon, Roger H., "Inflation, Taxation, and Corporate Behavior," Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 98(May, 1984), pp. 313-327.
"Interest Rates, Inflation, and Corporate Financial Policy," Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, 1982:2, pp. 461-488.
"An Optimal Taxation Approach to Fiscal Federalism," Quarterly Journal of
18

Economics, 97(1983), pp. 567-586.

Goulder, Lawrence H., John B.Shoven, and John Whalley, "Domestic Tax Policy and
the Foreign Sector," in Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis, ed., Martin
S. Feldstein, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983, pp. 333-364.

Hartman, David G., "On the Optimal Taxation of Capital Income in the Open Economy," N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 1550, January, 1985.

"Tax Policy and Foreign Direct Investment," N.B.E.R. Working Paper No.
689, June, 1981.
King, Mervyn A., "Savings and Taxation," in Public Policy and the Tax System, ed.
by G.A. Hughes and G.M. Heal, London: George Allen & Unwin, 1980.
King, Mervyn A. and Don Fullerton, The Taxation of Income from Capital, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1984.
Miller, Merton H., "Debt and Taxes," Journal of Finance, 32(May, 1977), pp. 261-275.

Makin, John H., "Exchange Rates and Taxes," N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 1350,
May, 1984.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. ,

"Some

Aspects of the Taxation of Capital Gains," Journal of

Public Economics, 21(July, 1983), pp. 257-294.

Wilson, John D., "Trade, Capital Mobility, and Tax Competition," University of
Wisconsin, Social Systems Research Institute, Workshop Series No. 8505, 1985.

19

Figure 1

after tax
real return

high coupon bond

low coupon bond

t

ta

20

b

tax rates

