                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       NETWORK STABILITY, NETWORK EXTERNALITIES AND TECHNOLOGY
                              ADOPTION

                                           Catherine Tucker

                                         Working Paper 17246
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17246


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2011




I gratefully acknowledge financial support from the NET Institute (www.netinst.org) and the Kauffman
Foundation (www.kauffman.org). All errors are my own. This paper is based on an earlier working
paper entitled 'Interactive, Option-Value and Domino Network Externalities in Technology Adoption'.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Catherine Tucker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Network Stability, Network Externalities and Technology Adoption
Catherine Tucker
NBER Working Paper No. 17246
July 2011
JEL No. L0,L86,L96

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper investigates how the destabilizing of a social network may increase the scope of network
externalities, using data on sales of a video-calling system made to an investment bank's employees
and subsequent usage by these customers. The terrorist attacks of 2001 led potential customers in New
York to start communicating with a new and less predictable set of people when their work teams
were reorganized as a result of the physical displacement that resulted from the attacks. This did not
happen in other comparable cities. These destabilized communication patterns were associated with
potential adopters in New York being more likely to take into account a wider spectrum of the user
base when deciding whether to adopt relative to those in other cities. Empirical analysis suggests that
the aggregate effect of network externalities on adoption was doubled by this instability.


Catherine Tucker
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-533
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
cetucker@mit.edu
1    Introduction
This paper examines empirically the effect of instability in social networks on network

externalities, and therefore on the rate of adoption of technologies whose usage reflects

these social networks. The effect of instability is not clear. On the one hand, instability

may make potential adopters more responsive to adoption by more users, because they

can no longer be reasonably certain they will not talk to them in the future. New

products and technologies may therefore be able to spread faster in contexts where

communications networks are unstable. On the other hand, instability may make

potential adopters less inclined to respond to adoption by anybody, because they are

more uncertain about their future communications patterns; this would mean that

unstable communications networks hinder the adoption of new technologies. Without

knowing the answer to this question, firms who wish to market new technologies that

exploit social networks may mishandle product launches through not understanding the

true scope of their product’s network externalities, where ‘scope’ describes how many

other people in the installed base influences a potential adopter (Katz and Shapiro

1985).

    To analyze the scope of network externalities under network instability, I use data

on the adoption of a video-calling technology sold by a business-to-business technology

developer to employees of an international investment bank. It is hard to establish a

causal link between communications network instability and the adoption rate. There

are many unobserved factors that could lead to both an unstable communications

structure and high or low adoption. For example, in a firm setting, poor management

could lead to both unstable communication patterns and employees who are unwilling

to adopt new technologies. Alternatively, a fast-paced work environment could lead

to both unstable communication patterns and employees who embrace cutting-edge

technologies. To address these identification problems, this paper uses an exogenous

shock to the stability of the communications network (the terrorist attacks of September


                                            2
11, 2001), that forced the bank’s teams in New York to be physically relocated and

reorganized, but did not affect the teams in other comparable cities. This shock led

New York employees to communicate with different people than they did before the

attacks, in a way which was difficult to predict. I study empirically whether this shock

to the communications network led to more or fewer people influencing an adoption

decision.

   Even with this exogenous shock to the communications network, it would still be

problematic to conclude that it was network externalities that prompted two employees

who communicate to adopt at the same time. Network externalities occur when the

performance of the good increases with the number of users. However, these two may

have adopted simultaneously because they shared similar external impulses to adopt

rather than because the usefulness of the good increased when they both adopted. To

identify network externalities, the paper uses the fact that the video-calling system can

also be used for watching TV. Some employees adopted the technology to watch one-

off regional TV events such as the 2002 Six Nations rugby championship. TV-inspired

adoption among employees’ possible contacts varied across country and over time, even

for employees in a single city such as New York. The network externalities are then

measured based on how other employees responded to adoption by these TV-motivated

adopters.

   Combining these identification techniques enables this research to highlight some

surprising findings. Normally, potential adopters react to changes in the installed base

only if they communicate with that person in the month after they adopt. In other

words, network externalities appear to be highly localized. However, in New York

following the attacks, adoption by other related employees with whom adopters do not

actually communicate in the month after adoption had a significant positive effect on

adoption decisions. This increase in the scope of network externalities means that the

importance of network externalities for adoption decisions doubles for those New York

customers affected by communications instability.

                                           3
   This result contrasts with the established literature on the role of uncertainty in

technology adoption. One plausible explanation for the results is that network ex-

ternalities become less localized during periods of instability, because employees are

unsure about whom they will need to talk with in the future. Models of technology

diffusion have usually treated unpredictability about usage as a hindrance to diffusion

(Jensen 1982; Kalish 1985; Mahajan et al. 1990); we present new evidence that argues

for the opposite perspective when considering interactive technologies whose usefulness

depends on social networks. Along similar lines, consumer studies such as Castamo

et al. (2008), have treated consumer uncertainty over their future usage of a technology

as something that firms need to try to minimize. By contrast, in the case studied here,

instability made the adoption decision more responsive to a broader set of adoption

decisions. This was beneficial, since it initiated further adoption cascades and nearly

wholly compensated for the base-level decrease in adoption associated with the attacks.

   Katz and Shapiro (1985) emphasize that the scope of network externalities is just as

important as the size of the network externalities themselves, and that this scope may

vary. However, most current empirical research (Saloner and Shepard 1994; Brynjolfs-

son and Kemerer 1996; Gowrisankaran and Stavins 2004; Tucker 2008) has focused on

quantifying the size of network externalities and has taken the scope as fixed. Following

the analysis of Shankar and Bayus (2003); Chang and Park (2005) who highlight differ-

ence in size of network externalities across firms, there have been some attempts to see

if the size of network externalities varies across firms individuals. Tucker (2008), which

uses the same data as the current paper, shows that for this good network externalities

were larger if an adopter was a manager or acted as a gatekeeper to other social net-

works. However, none of these studies quantifies how uncertainty affects perceptions of

network externalities. Mobius (2001) and Puffert (2002) emphasize the importance of

localness of networks in understanding network evolution, emphasizing that the growth

of a network changes network externalities as the localness of the customer base di-

minishes. This paper builds on this coordination literature by showing that it is not

                                            4
just the growth of the network that affects the role of network externalities, but also

the stability of the network.

   From a managerial perspective, the results suggest that instability in communi-

cation networks may make it harder to coordinate the adoption of a new technology

whose usefulness is characterized by network interactions. This suggests that firms

need to adjust their strategies to reflect network externalities more if networks are

unstable. If a firm were trying to encourage the adoption of a web-based video-calling

service, such as Skype, they would need to target incentives particularly at groups of

people who had less stable communications networks (students rather than seniors, for

example). My findings may also help explain why network externalities have proved so

important for social networking sites such as Facebook: The younger demographic of

such web services is characterized by ever-changing and fluid relationships, which mean

that potential users are influenced by broader adoption rates in addition to adoption

by people who they are currently friends with.

   The result that without network instability network externalities are highly local-

ized is also important for managers. Managers often assume that network externalities

for communications and social networking technologies depend on the total number of

subscribers. My estimates suggest, by contrast, that if networks are stable, only the

smaller subset of people with whom a potential adopter interacts plays a significant

part in the adoption decision. If these results hold for other technologies, then network

externalities for network technologies with stable communications networks may be

limited in scope to predictable communications, reducing the extent to which initial

price cuts for such technologies are warranted. This limited scope for network exter-

nalities may also help explain findings such as Tellis et al. (2009), that suggests that

product quality is more important than network externalities in explaining the success

of high tech products. If a firm only has to ‘tip’ smaller communication clusters, there

may be less room for a long-run strategic advantage from network size.



                                           5
       2     Description of Technology and Data

       2.1    Technology

       Video-calling offers network benefits because users can see the person they are talk-

       ing to rather than just talking to them. This research studies a business-to-business

       technology manufacturer’s efforts to sell a new video-calling technology attached to an

       employee’s workstation to individual employees at an investment bank. The end-point

       technology consists of three elements: video-calling software; a media compressor al-

       lowing TV-quality video; and a camera fixed on top of the computer’s monitor. The

       technology also has a stand-alone use of transforming the employee’s desktop computer

       into a television.

           An unusual feature of the technology is that for data security reasons communica-

       tion was limited to being between employees at the firm. This sets clear limits for the

       potential network for each user.

       2.2    Firm setting

       After the bank chose this technology to allow its employees to conduct internal video-

       calling and invested in the appropriate network architecture, the bank decentralized

       installation decisions to each employee. The bank publicized the technology to employ-

       ees and each employee decided whether and when to order a video-calling unit from an

       external sales representative.1 The equipment’s supplier had excess capacity, meaning

       that capacity constraints did not affect the timing of individual employee installation

       decisions. This decentralization means that I focus my analysis on the private benefits

       of installation for employees, as opposed to firm-wide decisions.

           Though the price to employees was zero, there were still non-monetary costs. Inter-

       views with employees at the firm confirmed that the most salient of these non-monetary

       costs were the time they had to spend with their computer out of service while a tech-
   1
    Only employees who had a position of Associate or higher were eligible, meaning that staff in secretarial
and support functions were not eligible.


                                                     6
nician installed the video-calling unit and the time spent learning how to use it. This

cost was was generally viewed as high because they could not predict when they would

need to respond to rapid changes in the financial markets. The installation required

the employee to be present so that the technician could demonstrate the product.

   One obvious question is how well informed employees were about the spread of the

technology across the firm, since my economic analysis assumes that employees were

well-informed about who had adopted. When questioned, employees were most likely to

respond that they they learned about who else had the technology by asking a colleague

who had adopted the technology to look at the computer briefly and examine the

electronic list of people who were on the network. The second most popular response

was that they gauged who had adopted the technology through emails where someone

suggested the use of the technology. Though the sample size for these interviews was

low, there were no obvious systematic differences in how New York employees learned

about the spread of the technology compared to other employees after the attacks.

2.3   Data

A call database recorded the 2.4 million video-calls made within the bank from Jan-

uary 2001 to August 2004. For two-way video-calls, the database records the caller

and callee, the time the call was made, and the length of the call. Employees made

1,768,348 two-way user-to-user video-calls. The data include only the 1,052,110 video-

calls where the callee accepted the call and there was a non-zero time spent on the

call. Each accepted call lasted on average 5 minutes and 46 seconds. Calls could be

made to more than one employee at a time. Multi-party calls (less than 5% of the

calls) were simplified into their pairwise equivalents: Three-way calls were treated as

three calls between each two of the participants. The results are unchanged whether or

not these three-way calls are dropped or included in the sample, suggesting that they

do not drive the results. For one-way TV calls, the database records who made the

call, which TV channel was viewed, the time, and the length of the call. Employees


                                          7
      made 741,926 successful one-way caller-to-media-device calls. Complete (anonymized)

      personnel records describe every employee in the investment bank in March 2004. Em-

      ployees were divided by function (administration, research, trading, and sales), region

      (Britain, North America, Europe, and Asia/Sub-Equatorial, title (‘Associate’,‘Vice-

      President’, ‘Director’, and ‘Managing Director’. Managing Directors) and product

      (equity and derivative) associated with two main products: equities and derivatives.2

          These data were used both to evaluate when an employee makes a first call and

      ‘adopts’ the technology and also to reconstruct the communications network within

      the firm. The data only partially describe the communications network, because they

      describe whom the 1,294 adopters video-called but not whom the 824 non-adopters

      would have video-called if they had adopted. Therefore, non-adopters were excluded

      from the regressions. Consequently, the empirical results are representative only of

      adopters. They should be interpreted as reflecting how network externalities affect the

      adoption timing of adopters, as opposed to the decision to adopt for all employees.3

      Further, it should be noted that these data fall short of an ideal dataset that might

      include data from regular phone calls to define an employee’s communication circle.

          Though the data span 3.5 years, my interest in the effect of instability means that I

      focus on a limited time-frame of data which bridged the terrorist attacks of September

      11, 2001. I divide the data into January 2001–August 2001 (the ‘stable’ period) and

      October 2001–August 2002 (the ‘unstable’ period). The choice of the ‘unstable’ period

      was based upon interviews with New York employees who said that this was how long

      the period of upheaval to and uncertainty about their roles within the firm lasted after

      the attacks.4 Using shorter windows such as 2 months before the attacks and 2 months

      after the attacks provides directionally similar though less precise results. Table 1
  2
     The data is identical to that used in Tucker (2008), which provides a slightly fuller description.
  3
     Tucker (2008) compares predictions from studying adoption only by adopters and a predicted commu-
nications network that includes non-adopters. The results were similar.
   4
     This is slightly longer than the period described by Bloom (2009) in his study of how multiple New
York-based industries recovered from the attacks, probably because this was a Wall Street firm and was
more directly affected.


                                                  8
describes the summary statistics for major dependent and independent variables used

in the data.


                                   [Table 1 about here.]


2.4    Physical dislocation

Like many firms based in New York, the investment bank had to physically relocate

their offices after the terrorist attacks of September 2001, in this case because their office

close to the World Trade Center had to be evacuated due to the potential for structural

damage. This shift in physical location also led to a change in workgroup dynamics.

Management took the opportunity of the new office space to reorganize teams to better

reflect the new workspace. Typical of the relocation was that employees who had

previously sat in a workgroup that had analyzed ‘small-caps’ or smaller firms, were now

reallocated to work with teams that analyzed particular industrial sectors. Similarly,

there were shifts in how derivatives traders were organized into teams depending on the

particular kind of bonds that they created derivatives for. The reorganization did not

lead to drastic changes, such as shifting people across functions from sales to trading,

but this did represent a genuine shift to group behavior. This physical relocation was

accompanied by employee uncertainty over how their roles would develop and change

within the firm and whether their new role would find a place within the physical

reorganization. New York employees confirmed in interviews that they now called

different people as a result of the reorganization that followed the attacks, but that

they could have not initially have predicted who these people would have been.

   It is crucial to establish whether there was indeed a shock to the communications

network empirically before moving on to the major analysis of paper which presupposes

this communications shock. Therefore in this section, I present some descriptive regres-

sions that explore the extent to which this occurred. This focus on repeated correlations

to illuminate relative stability, echo the work of Hagedoorn (1995) on firm-networks.



                                              9
          These descriptive regressions compare the calling behavior of people who had adopted

      the technology before the attacks in New York and elsewhere. This analysis uses a

      Poisson specification, where the dependent variable is a count of the distinct employ-

      ees each adopter talks to in each month. The key variable of interest is an interaction

      term NY ∗ Unstable, which captures the effect of being based in New York rather than

      elsewhere after the attacks. To control for observable and unobservable heterogene-

      ity, controls for the month, region, title, and function of the employee as well as an

      employee-level random effect were included.5

          Table 2 displays this initial descriptive analysis. Column (1) shows that there was

      no statistically significant change in the raw number of other employees each adopter

      spoke to in each month in New York after the attacks. Relative to other employees in

      the ‘unstable’ period, previous adopters in New York called the same number of people,

      so there was no increase in aggregate use. Column (2) of Table 2 shows, however, that

      there was an increase in the number of new people that an adopter in New York spoke

      to in the period after the attacks, relative to other employees in other locations in the

      firm.

          Columns 3–5 of Table 2 explore the effect of NY ∗ Unstable on the number of new

      people that an employee talks to in different workgroups, functions, product groups,

      and global markets. The insignificance of NY ∗ Unstable in columns 3–5 indicates that

      the new people that New York employees talked to in the period after the attacks were

      from similar functions, product groups, and global markets. The fact that these new

      calls were not placed outside the function, product group and market helps to guide

      the definition of ‘potential contacts’, the group of employees that an employee may

      have talked to, in my main empirical analysis of technology adoption.

          These results suggest that employees in New York called more new people follow-

      ing the attacks relative to employees in other cities, though these new contacts were

      in the same function, product group and market. In the remainder of this paper I
5
    Specifications that included employee-level fixed effects had similar results.


                                                      10
investigate whether this change in underlying communication patterns mattered for

new technology adoption decisions.


                                   [Table 2 about here.]


3    Modeling Technology Adoption
This analysis suggests that communication patterns in New York were destabilized

by the attacks while those in other cities were not. To understand how this affects

technology adoption behavior, I model potential customer technology adoption at the

individual level. This is a latent variable setting, where only installation decisions

instit , not installation benefits inst∗it , are observed for customer i in month t:

                                            
                                                  if inst∗it > 0
                                            
                                            1
                                            
                                insti,t =
                                                  if inst∗it ≤ 0
                                            
                                            0
                                            


where


                     inst∗it = (ExpectedCallsit , StandAloneBenefitsit )               (1)


    Each month, each potential customer chooses whether or not to install the tech-

nology. As described in Farrell and Klemperer (2007), adoption depends on both the

network benefit that a customer expects to receive from making video-calls and the

stand-alone value that the potential customer receives from the technology, indepen-

dent of whether they use it to make video-calls. This is a net stand-alone benefit

that, besides reflecting the TV-watching capacity of the device, also reflects that non-

monetary adoption costs are high for that customer. I discuss my conception of each

in turn.

    ‘Network externality,’ is a term used by social scientists to describe a broad class

of phenomena. These include ‘bandwagon-effects’ and other types of informational


                                             11
spillovers, as well as direct technological complementarity where the usefulness of a

network good (such as a fax machine or video-calling unit) depends on other users

also having it. Since the data used in this study are for a classic network technology,

my initial interpretation and analysis concentrates on technological complementarity

as the source of network externalities.

   The number of calls that a customer expects to be able to benefit from on depends

on three factors. First, the number of other customers that potential customer i would

call if that person also adopted. There are two potential sets of people that a potential

customer i may call {C, P }. C is the set of customers, whom i thinks they are very

likely to call because they are already close-knit contacts. P is the customers that there

is some chance that the employee might call, that is, merely potential contacts. The

second factor is whether another customer j (either in set C or P ) has also adopted

the video-calling technology. The last factor is the probability αk∈{c,p} that employee

i attaches to calling colleagues in their regular contact circle or less closely connected

colleagues.


                                       X                     X
                   ExpectedCallsit =          instj × αc +          instj × αp         (2)
                                       j∈Ci                  j∈Pi

   In some circumstances, customer i may be able to predict very well whom they will

talk with. In such stable circumstances, they may be able to ascribe a probability of

αc close to one for a subset of their closest collaborators, and an αp close to 0 for other

potential contacts. If future communication patterns are less certain, that is there is

network instability, however, a customer i may ascribe a higher probability αp to the

likelihood of calling one of these potential contacts, as they are less certain that they

will talk only with their closest collaborators.




                                              12
3.1   Applying the model to data

The dependent variable instit is whether the employee used video-calling technology to

make an outward call for the first time in that month. This allows me to pinpoint the

actual timing of adoption, because one of the protocols that the installation technician

followed was to make an outward test-call as soon as they installed the technology on

the employee’s laptop. In all instances, this outward call was the first video-calling

activity observed for the employee.

   To operationalize the split between C people and P people for each employee i with

observable customer behavior in the data, I construct two mutually exclusive groups

for each employee. The C group, Contactsi , are the other employees that i actually

did talk to in the month after their adoption. The P group, Potentialsi , are those

employees the customer did not talk to in the month following adoption but that there

was a chance that they could have talked to as they shared the same product area,

function or market specialization.

   This definition of Potentialsi is based on the empirical analysis in Table 2, which

suggests that existing users contacted more new employees, but that these new con-

tacts were not outside their function, market specialization, or product group. In ad-

dition to the evidence from the communication patterns of early adopters, the choice

of these particular (reasonably broad) characteristics to define potential contacts was

supported by interviews with investment bankers that suggested that it is very unusual

for employees to switch from investment banking to equity sales or from researching

Asian equities to researching European derivatives, since an employee has built up

employee-specific expertise in that area. Therefore, even in view of the dislocation and

uncertainty caused by the terrorist attacks, it seems likely that an employee would still

perceive their broad product area as being the set of people in the firm they were most

likely to communicate with.

   Basing my measures for ExpectedCallsit on the subsequent month after adoption


                                           13
       presumes very high discount rates. However, this short time frame is necessary to

       ensure comparability. It ensures that when I compare the influences of adoption before

       the attacks and after the attacks, I am using the same measure of the putative installed

       base.6

          I model that the extent to which adoption by Contactsi and Potentialsi will matter

       depends on the stability of the underlying communications network. If communications

       are predictable, employees should be able to better anticipate whom their Contactsi

       are, or in other words ascribe a high αc and a low αp , and respond only to adoption

       by Contactsi and not to Potentialsi . However, if communications are not predictable,

       employees may also anticipate that they could talk to Potentialsi whom they do not

       call, and as a result they will ascribe a higher αp and a lower αc relative to a stable

       network.

          The installed base for Contactsi is captured by InstalledContactsit . This installed

       base is a count of all contacts’ installation decisions up to and including month t.

       The count of adoption by Potentialsi who have adopted the technology, but with

       whom the employee did not communicate in the month after adoption, is captured

       by InstalledPotentialsit . I assume that each employee i takes the adoption choices of

       other employees as given, that is, that employees do not anticipate that their adoption

       could affect others’ adoption in the future.7 Employees did not divest themselves of the

       technology after it was attached to their desktops. Therefore, I treat adoption decisions

       as permanent, and include only observations where the employee adopts video-calling

       in that month or has not yet adopted when estimating adoption decisions. This means

       an observation is an employee who did not adopt the technology in the previous months

       but does ultimately adopt.

          In order to capture the stand-alone benefit of the technology, I use a rich set of
   6
     I cannot, for example, use the final year of data to establish stable communication patterns for all
adopters, because as illustrated in Table 2, these communication patterns were not predictable for those who
adopted before the attacks.
   7
     See Ryan and Tucker (2008); Dube et al. (2010) for a formal equilibrium model.



                                                    14
       largely non-parametric controls. It is likely that the net costs of adopting the technology

       vary across employees. For example, it may be easier for employees in more flexible

       areas, such as research, to schedule time for their computers to be down than for

       employees who work in fast-paced areas, such as derivatives trading. Such heterogeneity

       is captured using a series of controls for each employee Xi . These include indicator

       variables for each of the different functions, product groups, regions, and titles. A series

       of dummies was also used for each month that employees could potentially adopt the

       technology, Tt . Since these time dummies will also pick up selection and the changing

       baseline hazard rate, they cannot be interpreted, and instead serve to capture the

       varying underlying hazard rate in a flexible manner (Jenkins 1995).

          This technology also had specific benefits that were independent of any network

       usage. In particular, employees enjoyed being able to watch television on their desk-

       top computer. There were two types of television employees could watch: News TV

       programming on CNN and CNBC, which covers financial news; and local TV pro-

       gramming (often non-news) broadcast by country-specific channels. There was little

       variation across regions in the percentage of adopters watching news programming

       (implying that this is largely captured by the month dummies), but there was large

       variation in employee interest in local TV programming across regions.8 For example,

       many employees in the UK watched the 2002 Six Nations rugby championship, while

       employees in the US did not. Empirically, these local broadcast events were corre-

       lated with adoption in the month prior to the month they occur. This suggests that

       employees adopted the technology in advance to ensure they could watch predictable

       ‘must-see’ television.9 These regional shocks to the technology’s stand-alone benefit

       were captured by the variable TVrt , which contains the percentage of previous adopters
   8
     The focus here was on the viewing habits for local television as the instrument. Local channels for Europe
were ZDF (German), ARD (German), Kanal (Swedish), ORF (Austria), and Eurosport. Local channels for
Britain were ITV, SkySports, Channel 4, and the BBC. Local channels for the US were CSPAN, FOX, NBC,
and CBS. Local channels for Asia were NTV (Nippon TV), CATS (Japanese), TV-Asia, and BBC 24 World
Service.
   9
     In the UK, over 60% of users watched television at the time of the World Cup soccer matches.


                                                      15
       watching ‘local TV’ in region r in the month following time t. The video-calling unit’s

       TV use led to a less systematic pattern of adoption than is common for communication

       technologies. For example, there is no statistically significant relationship between how

       many months after the launch date the adopter adopts the technology, and the number

       of people a new adopter calls or the length of time they spend on video-calling.

           Putting these components together, transforms equation (1) into the equation I use

       for estimation:


               inst∗it = f (∆1 InstalledContactsit

                         + ∆2 InstalledPotentialsit + λTVr,t + βXi + ωTt + it |Stabilityit )        (3)


           To summarize: Installation decisions are modeled as depending on the installed

       base of Contactsi and Potentialsi , the stand-alone TV benefit, their own idiosyncratic

       net benefits captured by controls Xi , a series of controls for month-by-month changes

       in their underlying hazard rate Tt , and unobserved heterogeneity (it ). I estimate this

       specification with a probit in a discrete hazard model framework (Jenkins 1995; Tellis

       et al. 2009).10


       4    Correlations In The Data
       To investigate the effects of the shock to the communication networks on adoption, I

       compare adoption behavior in the New York offices to adoption behavior in non-New

       York offices before and after the attacks. As with any difference-in-differences approach,

       the identifying assumption is that the New York office, in the absence of the physical

       relocation, would have had the same change in responsiveness to the installed base as

       employees in other cities. There was no statistically significant relationship between an

       employee working in New York and their number of contacts (see Table 2). However,

       New York employees talk less on average to employees in different cities. Employees
  10
    The direction and significance of the coefficients in the probit specification are similar to those obtained
from a Cox-proportional hazards model.


                                                      16
       attributed this to limitations imposed by the time difference between the New World

       and Old World and did not think that this propensity changed in the period studied.

          Table 3 presents the results of running the specification represented by equation (3)

       separately for before and after the attacks and for New York and non-New York em-

       ployees.


                                          [Table 3 about here.]


          As documented by Manski (1993), measures such as InstalledContactsit and InstalledPotentialsit

       are plagued by the reflection problem, making any causal interpretation of correlations

       in adoption problematic. Instead, the aim of Table 3 is to compare the extent of

       correlation between adoption and actual/potential contacts’ adoption for New York

       employees before and after the attacks relative to employees elsewhere. Subsequently,

       instrumental variables are used to identify actual network externalities.

          There are some suggestive shifts in the correlations. Both New York and non-New

       York employees before 9/11 only exhibit positive and significant correlation in adoption

       with their ‘actual contacts’. However, after 9/11, New York employees no longer have

       a statistically significant correlation in adoption with their actual contacts, but instead

       have a statistically significant correlation in adoption with their potential contacts.

       Non-New-York employees’ adoption, by contrast, continues to be correlated only with

       their actual contacts. These results are robust to whether I use the total number of

       potential contacts adopting (as I do in Table 3), or the percentage of potential contacts

       adopting.11 This fact that whether I use percentage or absolute numbers for potential

       contacts does not matter suggests that these correlations are not driven by the effect

       of employee group size.

          In order to test whether the coefficients on InstalledContactsit and InstalledPotentialsit

       for New York employees are statistically different to those outside New York before
  11
    The proportion of actual contacts that have adopted is always reasonably close to one because a contact
necessarily has adopted the technology by month t + 1, meaning that it is not very instructive to use it as a
regressor.


                                                     17
and after the attacks, I ran a three-way differences-in-differences specification. Fol-

lowing the economics literature, this differences-in-differences specification captures

relative changes in the time trend for different groups of employee by the use of

three-way interactions and panel data. The results are reported in Table 5. The

coefficients on the three-way interactions InstalledContactsit ∗ NYi ∗ Unstablet and

InstalledPotentialsit ∗ NYi ∗ Unstablet are significantly different from zero, suggesting

that there was a statistically meaningful change (p¡0.05) in adoption responsiveness for

New York employees after the attacks.


5    Measuring network externalities
Table 3 suggests that employees in New York were more likely to adopt when a wide

circle of their acquaintances adopted the technology after the attacks, compared to

before and to other comparable employees. Correspondingly, Table 2 suggests that

employees called more new people after the attacks. However, while suggestive, these

two pieces of evidence do not prove that the changes in correlations in adoption can be

ascribed to anticipated changes in calling behavior due to the potential for unobserved

heterogeneity (Manski 1993). Consider two employees who are both encouraged to

install the technology by their New York boss who is concerned about aviation safety

after the attacks; a clear identification strategy is needed to avoid interpreting the

subsequent correlation in their adoption decisions as a causal network externality.

    I use variation in the TV-viewing benefit of the technology as an instrumental

variable to identify how changes in the installed base causally affect an employee’s

adoption. This exploits three types of variation in the data: Regional variation in the

benefit of watching TV; time variation in the benefit of watching TV; and variation

in the regions in which employees have contacts or potential contacts. The instrument

for actual contacts for employee i is ij∈C (TVr,t ), or the average TV benefit (TVr,t )
                                     P

for each actual contact j’s region r at month t. The instrument for potential contacts

for employee i is ij∈P (TVr,t ), or the average TV benefit (TVr,t ) for each potential
                  P



                                           18
contact j’s region r at month t.

   The value of these instruments varies over time and by the regions these contacts

and potential contacts work in. Crucially, the instrument for the New York office for

potential contacts also has considerable variation in the data. This is because the

variety of different functions, product markets and market specializations means that

there were at least 48 different viable sets of potential contacts for any one employee in

the New York office. Not all earlier adoptions by i’s actual or potential contacts were

counted as necessarily causing i’s installation. Instead, the research uses variation in

adoption by i’s contacts or potential contacts that can be predicted by variation in

the stand-alone (TV) benefit. In all specifications, the joint F -test of the first-stage

regressions was significant at the 0.01 level.

   One concern is that employees who had contacts in a region that had heavy TV-

watching might be different in unobserved ways from similar employees who did not

have contacts in that region. To rule out such challenges to the exclusion restriction,

I ran multiple regressions examining whether there were significant differences in the

observable correlates of having contacts in a particular region. Except for a relationship

with the global market area that an employee worked in, there was no statistically

significant difference between employees who had different regional concentrations of

contacts in terms of their observable characteristics, TV-watching or network use.

   Table 4 displays the estimates for this instrumented version of equation (3). The

first two columns display results for the ‘stable’ pre-period before September 2001.

They suggest that for both New York and other financial centers, the effect of actual

contacts adopting was significant while the effect of potential contacts was insignificant.

   After September 2001, the ‘unstable’ period, employees in New York reacted differ-

ently to adoption by other employees in other locations. For New York employees, the

potential installed base now exerts a positive influence on adoption. Potential adopters

who are not based in New York, however, still do not react to the potential installed

base. For both New York and non-New York employees, the estimated network exter-

                                            19
nalities for the influence of actual contacts decrease. In the case of New York, they

become statistically insignificant at conventional levels with a p-value of 0.11, though

the point estimate is still higher that for InstalledPotentialsi . This suggests that there

was increased variance on the extent to which employees in New York responded to

adoption by their actual contacts, which would again fit an explanation whereby New

York employees became less sure about whom they would talk to after the attacks.

The fact that TV viewing is positive and significant in the unstable period outside of

New York reflects the relative degree of interest in the World Cup outside of the US in

2002 (as documented by Tucker (2008).


                                  [Table 4 about here.]


   In order to test the difference in magnitude of the coefficients in Table 4, I repeated

the regression using a pooled sample. The main variables of interest are the three-

way interactions, InstalledPotentialsit ∗ NYi ∗ Unstablet and InstalledContactsit ∗ NYi ∗

Unstablet . These measure the differential effect on the installed base of the relocation of

the New York offices. Therefore, the differences-in-differences specification of equation

(3) becomes:


inst∗it = ∆1 InstalledContactsit + ∆2 InstalledPotentialsit

        + ∆3 InstalledContactsit ∗ NYi ∗ Unstablet + ∆4 InstalledPotentialsit ∗ NYi ∗ Unstablet

        + γ(Unstablet ∗ NYi + InstalledContactsit ∗ NYi + InstalledPotentialsit ∗ NYi

        + InstalledContactsit ∗ Unstablet + InstalledPotentialsit ∗ Unstablet )

        + λTVr,t + βXi + ωTt + it                                                      (4)


   The level effects of Unstablet and NYi are captured by the vector of time dummies

and location dummies (Xi ).


                                  [Table 5 about here.]


                                            20
   Column (1) of Table 5 presents the results for all employees without IV. Column

(2) presents the results using instrumental variables. The instruments are the average

TV benefit for an employees’ actual and potential contacts and appropriate weights to

reflect the endogenous interactions. They key variables of interest are the three-way in-

teractions InstalledContactsit ∗NYi ∗Unstablet and InstalledPotentialsit ∗NYi ∗Unstablet .

Though precise estimation is problematic in a regression with eight endogenous vari-

ables, the interaction for InstalledPotentialsit ∗ NYi ∗ Unstablet was positive and sig-

nificant (p¡.10). New York showed no change in responsiveness to the installed base of

their contacts, but the adoption of employees in New York became increasingly cor-

related with the measure of the installed base of potential contacts in the firm after

the attacks. The coefficient on InstalledContactsit ∗ NYi ∗ Unstablet was not, however,

significantly different from zero, suggesting there was no measurable change in how

New York employees responded to adoption by employees they called in the month

after they adopted. Other variables are much in line with past evidence. There are

positive correlations between adoption and the narrow installed base InstalledContacts.

The negative coefficient on Unstable ∗ InstalledContacts may reflect the fact that later

adopters were in general less responsive to adoption by others than earlier adopters.

   To address concerns about the reliability of the Probit-IV model when there are

multiple dummy variables and interaction terms (Ai and Norton 2003), I also estimated

a linear probability model. The estimates are very similar, with a slight increase in

significance, especially for the installed base of actual contacts.

5.1   Robustness and discussion

The major finding in Tables 4 and 5 is that New York employees became more likely

to adopt if their broader group of potential contacts adopted, relative to employees in

other cities. The interpretation that this paper has highlighted so far is that when com-

munication patterns are more unstable, potential adopters take into account adoption

by a wider group of network users. However, there are other potential explanations,


                                            21
which I now discuss in turn.

     The first set of alternative explanations are concerned with unobservable hetero-

geneity. The identifying assumption underlying these results is that New York em-

ployees would have had a similar change in their adoption patterns to non-New York

employees if it had not been for the attacks. However, there may be concerns that

changes in communication in general after 9/11 can provide an alternative explana-

tion for what occurred, and that these changes may have had a larger effect in New

York than in cities such as Hong Kong that were far away from the attacks. For ex-

ample, perhaps concerns over increased security measures in airports led New York

employees to anticipate using the technology more broadly. To alleviate such concerns,

I reran the regressions from Table 4 for employees in the London office. These were

the closest employees to the New York office, both in terms of the economy of the

country they operated in and the cultural practices of the firm. London itself was

considered at the time to be a reasonably likely location for a terrorist attack, though

an attack did not occur there until July 7, 2005. Since both countries participated in

the war in Afghanistan, both sets of employees experienced similar changes to their

previous air-travel patterns and airport security measures. Both economies’ financial

sectors experienced similar declines as a result of the attacks. However, the effect of

InstalledPotentialsit was both insignificant and negative for London employees, sug-

gesting that the broadening of scope of network externalities was exclusive to the New

York office which experienced the actual physical reorganization. Furthermore, the

communication patterns of existing adopters did not display the shift shown in Table

2.

     Another interpretation of the positive coefficient on InstalledPotentials after the at-

tacks is that it reflects a different kind of network effect from those associated with the

complementarity of video-calling technology. For example, it could reflect an increase

in bandwagon effects or informational spillovers. This is a plausible interpretation if

after 9/11 New York employees were more likely to mimic their neighbor’s adoption

                                             22
due to an increase in sensitivity to other people’s actions. To study this interpreta-

tion further, I examined whether there was any increase in correlations in adoption

between one employee and other employees on the same floor as them. If informational

spillovers or bandwagon effects were important, it would seem likely that they would be

most concentrated amongst people who had daily physical contact. However, I found

no statistically significant change in the relationship between New York employees’

adoption and their physically close colleagues’ adoption before and after the attacks.

   Back-of-the-envelope estimates allow a comparison of the overall effect of network

externalities for New York employees after the attacks compared with other employ-

ees. There is no effect that can be measured accurately from actual contacts for New

York employees. An average New York employee after the attacks had 102 potential

contacts. The marginal effect of the potential installed base of 0.0004, based on the

probit estimates in table 4, therefore suggests that the average New York employee re-

ceived a boost in their adoption propensity of around 4% from their potential contacts

(0.0004 x 102). To put this boost into context, the average adoption propensity is 8%

each month. By contrast, the average non-New York employee, who has nine actual

contacts installed after the attacks, receives a boost of 2% from the marginal effect of

the coefficient of 0.0021 on actual contacts (0.0021 x 9). There is no effect that can be

measured accurately for potential contacts. Therefore, roughly, network externalities

were twice as important for adoption for New York employees after the attacks than

for employees elsewhere.

   This is a marginal boost to adoption. As suggested by the negative probit coefficient

on Unstable ∗ NY in Table 5 that translates to a marginal effect of −0.0275, on average

the level of adoption in New York after the terrorist attacks was slightly lower (around

1% in the raw data). This is in line with traditional theories of how instability or

uncertainty affects investment. There are of course other explanations too, such as

employees having more spare time to spend acquiring the technology as business volume

went down after the attacks. What is novel is that the increased scope of network

                                           23
externalities from the broader installed base nearly compensates for this decrease in

the base level of adoption during this time of instability.

    Also striking is that in Table 4 is the persistently null result for the effect of

InstalledPotentialsit for the majority of employees (87.5 % of the sample) who either

adopted before the attacks or were not based in New York. This null result is impor-

tant in two ways. First, it suggests that broader network externalities in the form of

informational spillovers and bandwagons were not that important for the adoption of

this technology, since it seems likely that if these were present they would be reflected

in a correlation in adoption between an employee and other employees similar to him.

Second, it suggests that network externalities due to the complementarity of technolo-

gies such as video-calling are limited to smaller subsets of network users who actually

communicate if network relationships are reasonably stable.


6    Implications
This paper finds that when social networks were stable, adoption cascades for a new

network technology were confined to small subsets of people who interacted with each

other.   However, when the communications network became less stable, potential

adopters looked more broadly at the network and were more responsive to adoption

by a broader circle of potential contacts. These empirical results are based on the

destabilization of a communication network due to the terrorist attacks in 2001 for a

subset of potential users.

    This finding is important for managers trying to introduce new products. Both

managerial practice and the academic literature have assumed that unpredictability

in usage for a new product deters consumers from adopting new technology (Jensen

1982; Kalish 1985; Mahajan et al. 1990; Castamo et al. 2008). By contrast, the findings

here suggest that if there are network externalities and there is uncertainty over usage

patterns, an adoption decision may become responsive to a broader set of adoption

decisions. This increase in the scope of network externalities led to a doubling of their


                                           24
role in adoption decisions.

   This research also underscores that for many technologies where communication and

social networks are stable, network externalities are extremely local and only depend

on the people that a person directly communicates with (Sundararajan 2007). This

may undercut marketing strategies for network products that are based on a ‘winner

takes all’ mentality. It may also explain research such as Tellis et al. (2009) that has

found that network externalities are less important for technology diffusion that other

product features such as quality.

   From a managerial perspective, my results suggest that instability may make it

harder for firms to spread new technologies for which network externalities could theo-

retically be important. If the network is stable, and interactions are small and localized,

managers are unlikely to need to adjust their marketing strategically to take network

externalities into account. However, if the network is unstable, and interactions may

not be predictably localized, managers should be very active in targeting promotions

to kick-start network growth. For example, managers at Skype would ideally target

incentives toward groups of people, like students, whose communications networks are

relatively unstable. These findings help to explain why the social networking sites that

have grown fastest are ones like MySpace and Facebook, which are targeted towards

young people who have ever-changing and fluid social relationships. This instability

means that potential users are influenced by broader adoption rates as well as only

adoption by people they are currently friends with.

   There are of course limitations to this research. I study the effect of instability of

communications within a specific business-to-business setting. Therefore, I can only

speculate how these results translate to direct consumer markets. Further, the nature

of the uncertainty in this particular context was unusual in that it was particularly

salient. The employees knew that as a result of re-organization that their communica-

tion patterns would change - they just did not know whom they would talk to. The

effect of uncertainty might be more muted if the fact that interactions may be uncer-

                                            25
tain was less salient. However, notwithstanding these limitations, my research does

suggest that uncertainty can change the influence that network externalities have on

adoption decisions, and that recognition of this should be reflected both in academic

models and in managerial practice.




                                         26
References
Ai, C. and E. C. Norton (2003, July). Interaction terms in logit and probit models. Economics
   Letters 80 (1), 123–129.

Bloom, N. (2009, 05). The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica 77 (3), 623–685.

Brynjolfsson, E. and C. Kemerer (1996). Network externalities in microcomputer software: An
  econometric analysis of the spreadsheet market. Management Science 42, 1627–1647.

Castamo, R., M. Sujan, M. Kacker, and H. Sujan (2008). Managing consumer uncertainty
  in the adoption of new products: Temporal distance and mental simulation. Journal of
  Marketing Research (JMR) 45 (3), 320 – 336.

Chang, S.-J. and S. Park (2005). Types of firms generating network externalities and mncs’
  co-location decisions. Strategic Management Journal 26 (7), 595–615.

Dube, J.-P. H., G. J. Hitsch, and P. K. Chintagunta (2010). Tipping and Concentration in
  Markets with Indirect Network Effects. Marketing Science 29 (2), 216–249.

Farrell, J. and P. Klemperer (2007, December). Coordination and Lock-In: Competition with
  Switching Costs and Network Effects, Volume 3 of Handbook of Industrial Organization,
  Chapter 31, pp. 1967–2072. Elsevier.

Gowrisankaran, G. and J. Stavins (2004). Network externalities and technology adoption:
  lessons from electronic payments. RAND 35 (2), 260–276.

Hagedoorn, J. (1995). A note on international market leaders and networks of strategic tech-
  nology partnering. Strategic Management Journal 16 (3), pp. 241–250.

Jenkins, S. P. (1995, February). Easy estimation methods for discrete-time duration models.
  Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 57 (1), 129–38.

Jensen, R. (1982, June). Adoption and diffusion of an innovation of uncertain profitability.
  Journal of Economic Theory 27 (1), 182–193.

Kalish, S. (1985). A new product adoption model with price, advertising, and uncertainty.
  Management Science 31 (12), 1569–1585.

Katz, M. L. and C. Shapiro (1985). Network externalities, competition, and compatibility.
  American Economic Review 75 (3), 424–40.

Mahajan, V., E. Muller, and F. M. Bass (1990). New product diffusion models in marketing:
  A review and directions for research. The Journal of Marketing 54 (1), 1–26.

Manski, C. (1993, July). Identification of endogenous social effects: the reflection problem.
  Review of Economic Studies 60 (3), 531–542.

Mobius, M. (2001). Death through success: The rise and fall of local service competition at
  the turn of the century. Harvard Working Paper.

Puffert, D. J. (2002). Path dependence in spatial networks: The standardization of railway
  track gauge. Explorations in Economic History 39 (3), 282 – 314.




                                             27
Ryan, S. and C. Tucker (2008). Heterogeneity and the Dynamics of Technology Adoption.
  Mimeo, MIT .

Saloner, G. and A. Shepard (1994). Adoption of technologies with network effects: An empirical
  examination of the adoption of automated teller machines. RAND 26 (3), 479–501.

Shankar, V. and B. L. Bayus (2003). Network effects and competition: an empirical analysis
  of the home video game industry. Strategic Management Journal 24 (4), 375–384.

Sundararajan, A. (2007, July). Local network effects and complex network structure. The B.E.
  Journal of Theoretical Economics 7 (1).

Tellis, G. J., E. Yin, and R. Niraj (2009). Does quality win? network effects versus quality in
  high-tech markets. Journal of Marketing Research (JMR) 46 (2), 135 – 149.

Tucker, C. (2008). Identifying Formal and Informal Influence in Technology Adoption with
  Network Externalities. Management Science 54 (12), 287–304.




                                              28
                       Table 1: Description of all variables used in regressions
                                                                             Before Attacks    After Attacks
Variable                       Description                                  Mean Std. Dev.    Mean    Std. Dev.

                                     Dependent Variables
instit                         Indicator variable for the first month an    0.112    .3157     .046     0.209
                               employee makes outward video-call

                                   Right-hand Side Variables
InstalledContactsit            Sum of cumulative adoption by employee       8.086    9.080     8.523    10.109
                               i’s contacts by month t, where contacts
                               are the employees in the firm that the em-
                               ployee talks to in the month after they
                               adopt.
InstalledPotentialContactsit   Sum of cumulative adoption by employee       68.511   31.316   111.133   45.458
                               i’s potential contacts who work in the
                               same function, product, and global mar-
                               ket area but whom the employee did not
                               contact in the month after they adopt
TVrt                           Proportion of adopters in the employee’s     0.249    0.345     0.393    0.374
                               region r who have adopted prior to month
                               t who watch local television channels in
                               month t + 1
Controls for regions           Indicator variables for Europe, Asia, US,
                               and UK
Controls for month             Indicator variables for each month from
                               February 2001 to August 2002
Controls for function          Dummies for working in administration,
                               research, trading, and sales

       Total Observations                            12,723




                                                     29
Table 2: Preliminary analysis exploring number of new people that employees who adopted
prior to September 2001 talked to after the attacks
                                                                      Number of new         Number of new         Number of new
                         Number of             Number of new
Dependent                                                             people spoken         people spoken         people spoken
                         people spoken         people spoken
Variable                                                              to in different       to in different       to in different
                         to                    to
                                                                      functions             product markets       global markets

                         (1)                   (2)                    (3)                   (4)                   (5)

NY ∗ Unstable            0.005                 0.184∗∗∗               −0.068                0.045                 0.035
                         (0.038)               (0.105)                (0.102)               (0.106)               (0.087)
NY                       −0.008                −0.175                 0.025                 −0.055                −0.154
                         (0.129)               (0.137)                (0.143)               (0.138)               (0.121)
Unstable                 0.063                 0.008                  0.028                 −0.011                0.184
                         (0.057)               (0.160)                (0.160)               (0.172)               (0.134)
Observations             34,125                34,125                 34,125                34,125                34,125
Log-likelihood           −3.35 × 104           −1.26 × 104            −1.18 × 104           −1.18 × 104           −1.63 × 104

Month Dummies            Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Title Dummies            Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Region Dummies           Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Function Dummies         Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes

Sample: Employees who adopted video-calling prior to September 2001.
Poisson specification. No zeros dependent variables observed in the data. Poisson goodness of fit χ2 statistic suggested that
the hypothesis data were dispersed according to the Poisson distribution could not be rejected at the 5 percent level. Random
effects at employee level. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                            30
Table 3: Correlations between Employee’s Own Adoption and Potential and Actual Contacts’
Adoption
                                                     Stable Period                         Unstable Period
                                                  NYC          Not NYC                   NYC         Not NYC


InstalledContacts                              0.0419***           0.0316***           0.0117             0.0201***
                                               (0.0065)            (0.0040)            (0.0075)           (0.0040)
InstalledPotentials                            0.0010              -0.0024             0.0057**           0.0009
                                               (0.0036)            (0.0023)            (0.0026)           (0.0015)
TV-Watching                                    0.4482              0.1151              0.0054             0.6067***
                                               (0.3808)            (0.1643)            (0.4572)           (0.1828)
Observations                                   1294                3654                1171               3248
Log-Likelihood                                 -372.13             -1054.58            -171.10            -586.26

Month Dummies                                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                Yes
Region, Title, Function Dummies                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                Yes


Dependent Variable: Indicator for when an employee first makes an outward video-call
Sample: Adopters who have not yet made a video-call. 2,506 observations dropped due to multi-collinearity with fixed effects.
Probit Specification. Clustered standard errors at the work-group level.
∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.014.

Stable period is January 2001–August 2001 and unstable period is October 2001–August 2002




                                                            31
                       Table 4: Probit specification with instrumental variables
                                                  Stable Period                          Unstable Period
                                           New York      Non-New York               New York    Non-New York

InstalledContacts                          0.0389∗∗∗         0.0325∗∗∗              0.0162            0.0174∗∗∗
                                           (0.0077)          (0.0040)               (0.0100)          (0.0045)
InstalledPotentials                        0.0016            −0.0003                0.0060∗           −0.0004
                                           (0.0037)          (0.0021)               (0.0036)          (0.0016)
TV viewing                                 −0.3807           0.0676                 −0.0430           0.7402∗∗∗
                                           (0.2984)          (0.1558)               (0.3977)          (0.2126)
Observations                               1,383             4,017                  1,276             3,541

Month Fixed Effects                        Yes               Yes                    Yes               Yes
Region, Title, Function Controls           Yes               Yes                    Yes               Yes


Dependent Variable: Indicator for whether an employee first makes an outward video-call that month
Sample: Employees who ultimately adopt the technology who have not yet made a video-call. 850 additional observations
dropped from sample used in Table 3 due to collinearity.
Probit two-step Newey estimates: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
Instruments for the different installed base measures are the TV valuation of each employee’s actual and potential contacts.
First-stage regressions significant at 1% level. Regression is exactly identified.
Stable period is January 2001–August 2001 and unstable period is October 2001–August 2002




                                                            32
                        Table 5: Hypothesis testing using three-way diff-in-diff
                                                        All Employees                    All Employees (IV)

Unstable ∗ NY ∗ InstalledContacts                       -0.0041                          -0.0037
                                                        (0.0038)                         (0.0097)
Unstable ∗ NY ∗ InstalledPotentials                     0.0039***                        0.0040*
                                                        (0.0006)                         (0.0023)
InstalledContacts                                       0.0332***                        0.0324***
                                                        (0.0028)                         (0.0032)
InstalledPotentials                                     0.0006                           0.0014
                                                        (0.0014)                         (0.0015)
Unstable ∗ NY                                           -0.4976***                       -0.5371*
                                                        (0.0802)                         (0.2796)
NY ∗ InstalledContacts                                  0.0056**                         0.0061
                                                        (0.0023)                         (0.0057)
Unstable ∗ InstalledContacts                            -0.0153***                       -0.0142***
                                                        (0.0033)                         (0.0045)
NY ∗ InstalledPotentials                                -0.0006                          -0.0004
                                                        (0.0006)                         (0.0011)
Unstable ∗ InstalledPotentials                          -0.0001                          -0.0011
                                                        (0.0012)                         (0.0015)
TV viewing                                              0.2915***                        0.2983***
                                                        (0.0960)                         (0.0961)
Observations                                            10217                            10217
Month Fixed Effects                                     Yes                              Yes
Region, Title, Function Controls                        Yes                              Yes


Dependent Variable: Indicator for whether an employee first makes an outward video-call that month
Sample: Employees who ultimately adopt the technology who have not yet made a video-call
Column (1) displays Probit estimates. Column (2) displays Probit two-step Newey estimates: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05,
∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Instruments for column (2) the different installed base measures are the TV valuation of each employee’s actual and potential
contacts interacted with Unstable and New York Indicator variables. First-stage regressions significant at 1% level. Regression
is exactly identified.
Stable period is January 2001–August 2001 and unstable period is October 2001–August 2002




                                                             33
