                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      PROSPECTIVE ANALYSIS OF A WAGE SUBSIDY FOR CAPE TOWN YOUTH

                                       James A. Levinsohn
                                          Todd Pugatch

                                       Working Paper 17248
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17248


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2011




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by James A. Levinsohn and Todd Pugatch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Prospective Analysis of a Wage Subsidy for Cape Town Youth
James A. Levinsohn and Todd Pugatch
NBER Working Paper No. 17248
July 2011
JEL No. J64,J68

                                          ABSTRACT

Recognizing that a credible estimate of a wage subsidy's impact requires a model of the labor market
that itself generates high unemployment in equilibrium, we estimate a structural search model that
incorporates both observed heterogeneity and measurement error in wages. Using the model to
examine the impact of a wage subsidy, we find that a R1000/month wage subsidy paid to employers
leads to an increase of R660 in mean accepted wages and a decrease of 15 percentage points in the
share of youth experiencing long-term unemployment.


James A. Levinsohn
Yale School of Management
PO Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
James.Levinsohn@yale.edu

Todd Pugatch
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
tpugatch@umich.edu
1       Introduction

Unemployment among the young in South Africa is stunningly high and frustratingly persistent.

Using the narrow ILO definition of unemployment which requires one to have actively sought work

in the past four weeks, unemployment among 20-24 year olds exceeds 50 percent. These rates have

persisted for over a decade.1 One policy response being actively considered is an employer wage

subsidy for young workers. In this paper, we prospectively analyze such a policy for the Cape Town

metro area.

     Any analysis of a wage subsidy must be embedded in a model that generates equilibrium unem-

ployment, given the magnitude and persistence of South African youth unemployment. Accordingly,

we estimate a structural job search model in which reservation wages play a prominent role. In our

model, an individual’s reservation wage is an optimal response to labor market frictions that gen-

erate equilibrium unemployment. We then use our model to analyze the impact of a wage subsidy.

Intuitively, the reservation wage is that which leaves an individual indifferent between accepting

a job today and continuing to search. In this dynamic model, a wage subsidy increases both the

value of search and the value of employment resulting in a higher reservation wage. The impact of

a wage subsidy in this context is nuanced.

     The paper’s contributions are two-fold. On the policy front, the paper analyzes the efficacy

of a wage subsidy to Cape Town youth. We find that while a wage subsidy does lead youth to

increase their reservation wages, they do so by a modest amount so the subsidy increases accepted

wages and reduces the probability of lengthy unemployment spells. Specifically, we find that a

R1000/month wage subsidy paid to employers leads to an increase of R660 in mean accepted wages

and a decrease of 15 percentage points in the share of youth experiencing long-term unemployment.

On the methodological front, the paper is the first to apply data on reservation wages from a

developing country to estimate a structural search model. Our model incorporates measurement

error in reported wages and observed heterogeneity in the structural parameters.

     The paper is also part of an extensive literature on unemployment in South Africa. For our
    1 See
        (Banerjee, Galiani, Levinsohn, McLaren and Woolard 2008) for the exact figures and for a discussion of the
causes behind the post-apartheid increase in unemployment.



                                                        1
purposes, the most relevant is the recent literature on search and reservation wages in Cape Town.

Using the Cape Area Panel Study (CAPS), which we also use in this paper, Lam, Leibbrandt and

Mlatsheni (2009) document the lengthy unemployment spells faced by Cape Town youth who exit

school. Nattrass and Walker (2005) analyze data from the Khayelitsha/Mitchell’s Plain (KMP)

survey conducted in 2000-2001, which sampled working-age adults from a Cape Town working-

class district. Using the same KMP data, Schoer and Leibbrandt (2006) find that several different

search strategies prevail in the data. An employer-based wage subsidy for youth in South Africa

is discussed in Pauw and Edwards (2006), Levinsohn (2008), Go, Kearney, Korman, Robinson and

Thierfelder (2010), and Burns, Edwards and Pauw (2010).

    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: the next section presents the model and

discusses its estimation and identification. Section 3 describes the data and Section 4 presents

results of the search model. Section 5 presents results of the policy simulation of an employer wage

subsidy. Section 6 concludes.



2     Model, Estimation and Identification

2.1    Model and Estimation

To use the terminology of Eckstein and Berg (2007), our model is a standard “classical job search”

model. It is a partial equilibrium model in that it models only the worker’s optimal search policy in

a dynamic setting, leaving the firm’s behavior as exogenous; and it is a “wage posting” model in that

firms post wages which potential workers must either accept or reject (in contrast to “bargaining”

models, in which workers and firms bargain over the wage after a match has been made). Flinn

and Heckman (1982) provide an extensive discussion of parameter identification in such models.

Christensen and Kiefer (1991) present a model of this type that is quite similar to ours, develop

its likelihood function, and discuss parameter identification. Our model follows Wolpin (1987) and

Eckstein and Wolpin (1995) in its focus on the transition from school to work, and is among the

small number of papers (such as Lancaster and Chesher 1983, Lynch 1983, Berg 1990) to use survey

data on the reservation wage in a structurally estimated search model.


                                                 2
       We consider the infinite-horizon, continuous-time dynamic programming problem of an unem-

ployed worker searching for a job, who faces a known wage offer distribution with cumulative

distribution function FW (w) and Poisson job offer arrival rate q. When unemployed, the searcher’s

flow value of leisure2 is b and she/he discounts the future by discount factor δ. If accepted, a job

pays constant wage w, but the worker faces an exogenous probability of job separation p. Once

rejected, wage offers may not be recalled. The corresponding continuous-time Bellman equations

for the value of search and employment (V s and V e , respectively) are:




                                   (1 − δ)V s = b + qE[max{0, V e (w0 ) − V s }]                                (1)

                               (1 − δ)V e (w) = w + p[V s − V e (w)]                                            (2)


where w0 denotes a future draw from FW . The reservation wage w∗ makes the agent indifferent

between accepting the job offer and continued search, i.e., it solves: V e (w∗ ) = V s . Manipulation

of the above Bellman equations lead to the following standard expression for the reservation wage

w∗ :

                                                         Z   ∞
                                  ∗       qδ
                                w =b+                             (w − w∗ )dFW (w)                              (3)
                                      (1 − δ) + p            w∗

Given values of b, δ, p and the parameters characterizing FW , one may solve for w∗ through policy

function iteration using the above.

       Note that this formulation does not explicitly account for two institutional features of the

broader South African labor market: minimum wages and union wage-setting. With respect to the

former, several studies have found low enforcement of minimum wages in South Africa (Hertz 2005,

Yamada 2007, Dinkelman and Ranchhod 2010). With respect to the latter, in our sample only 2

percent of employed respondents report being union members (CAPS, Wave 2).3 To the extent

that both of these features impact the distribution of wage offers and the job arrival rate, they are
   2 The flow value of leisure may also be viewed as the net search cost. In this paper, we will use the terms “flow

value of leisure,” “net search cost,” and “search cost” interchangeably. All refer to the model parameter b.
   3 See Magruder (2010) for a discussion of the extended consequences bargaining councils on wage setting.




                                                         3
implicit in (3).

    The model implies a joint distribution of accepted wages and unemployment durations, f (w, d|w ≥

w∗ ), which will form the basis of the likelihood function and whose parameters we seek to recover.

Since the model assumes that offer arrivals are independent of wage draws, this joint distribution

may be factored as the product of the marginal distributions of accepted wages and unemploy-

ment durations, leaving us with f (w, d|w ≥ w∗ ) = fW (w|w ≥ w∗ ) × fD (d|w ≥ w∗ ). We consider

estimation of each in turn.

    According to the model, no agent accepts a wage below the reservation wage, allowing us to use

the truncation of the wage distribution from below at w∗ to recover the parameters of the wage offer
                                             fW (w)
distribution, since fW (w|w ≥ w∗ ) =        1−FW (w) .     In practice, however, wages are measured with error,

so that some reported wages may fall below the reservation wage. Suppose classical measurement

error, such that wo = w + , where wo denotes observed wages and  ∼ N (0, σ2 ) is independent

of w. Although the support of the measurement error distribution is unbounded, we may bound

realized draws of  by noting that no true accepted wage may fall below w∗ , i.e., Pr(w < w∗ ) = 0.4

Therefore we have:




                                           w = wo −  ≥ w∗ ⇔

                                                            ≤ wo − w∗ ≡ ¯                                        (4)


    The corresponding density of observed wages is:

                                                  Z   ¯                                  
                                                                                      
                            fW (wo |w ≥ w∗ ) =             fW (wo |w ≥ w∗ , )φ                d                  (5)
                                                    −∞                                σ

where φ(·) is the standard normal density.5
   4 This approach to bounding the measurement error distribution follows Christensen and Kiefer (1994), although

they do not assume that the measurement error is normally distributed, as we do.
   5 Allowing instead for measurement error in reservation wages rather than accepted wages would not change the

results of our model. To see this, suppose (without loss of generality) that reservation wages are measured with error,
such that wo∗ = w∗ − , where wo∗ is the observed reservation wage and  is distributed N (0, σ2 ), as above. Then we
would have:




                                                             4
    Now consider the density of unemployment durations, fD (d). Under the assumption of Poisson

offer arrivals, the hazard rate of unemployment exit, h, is a (constant) product of the offer arrival

rate and the probability that a wage draw exceeds the reservation wage, i.e., h = q(1 − FW (w∗ )).

Accordingly, unemployment durations are distributed exponentially with parameter h, so that

fD (d) = h exp(−hd). In practice, however, some unemployment spells will be right-censored,

so that observed duration d = min{d∗ , dc }, where d∗ is the true duration and dc is the duration

observed when the spell was censored. Let c = I{d = dc } be an indicator for censored spells. Then

the density of observed unemployment durations, gD (d), is:



                                          gD (d) = fD (d)1−c [1 − FD (d)]c                                      (6)


    We observe a sample of accepted wages and (possibly right-censored) unemployment durations.

By definition, we do not observe accepted wages for those with right-censored durations, and an

additional subset of observations with completed unemployment spells may also have missing wage

data. Let m = {0, 1} be an indicator for missing wage data. Therefore, the vector of observed data

for each observation is Y = (w, d, c, m), and the corresponding log likelihood function is:6

                                    N
                                    X
                        L(θ|Y ) =     (1 − mi ) ln fW (woi |wi ≥ w∗ ; θ) + ln gD (di ; θ)                       (7)
                                    i=1

    We estimate (7) using quasi-Newton techniques, with starting values chosen from initial esti-

mates obtained from separate, preliminary estimation of the observed wage and unemployment

duration distributions. We parameterize the wage offer distribution as exponential with parameter

λ, so that the model parameters estimated by the likelihood function are θ = (q, λ, σ ).7 Note that


                                                        w ≥ w∗ = wo∗ +  ⇔
                                            w−   wo∗   ≡ ¯ ≥ 
  This leads to the same upper bound on , and thus the same accepted wage density as the case with measurement
error in wages. The only difference would arise in the interpretation of the placement of the measurement error, but
estimation results would be identical.
   6 Appendix A describes the derivation and form of the likelihood function in greater detail.
   7 To restrict our estimated parameters to the positive domain, as implied by theory, we actually estimate each

parameter as exponentiated functions of observable characteristics, e.g., q = exp(φ0 X).




                                                             5
the parameters (b, δ, p) of the theoretical model are not identified by the likelihood function. We

describe estimation of the reservation wage w∗ in the following subsection.


2.2      Identification

Identification of the model parameters depends crucially on the reservation wage. In addition to

determining the policy function of the theoretical search model, the reservation wage plays a key

role in empirical parameter identification in the likelihood function. By providing the truncation

point of the accepted wage distribution, the reservation wage, in conjunction with the dispersion of

accepted wages around it, serves to identify the underlying wage offer distribution. Additionally, its

role in truncating the accepted wage distribution helps to identify the measurement error variance by

placing an upper bound on the measurement error for all observed wages. Moreover, by entering into

the expression for the hazard rate of unemployment exit, the reservation wage helps to identify the

offer arrival rate by reconciling variation in observed unemployment durations with the probability

of offer acceptance.

    We estimate the preferred version of the model using survey data on the reservation wage.

Because the CAPS data has the rare advantage of self-reported reservation wages, we use the

median reservation wage (within cells defined by included covariates) as model inputs. The median

reservation wage, rather than individual reservation wage reports, is used because under the model

all agents face identical structural parameters and therefore must have an identical reservation

wage.8

    However, for comparative purposes, we also estimate the model under alternative measures of

the reservation wage, and report how results change under each. Under the model assumptions,

the minimum accepted wage in the data is a consistent estimator of the reservation wage (Flinn

and Heckman 1982). However, under the assumption that wages are measured with error, this

estimator will be susceptible to outliers in the left tail of the observed wage distribution, so instead

we use the 5th percentile of observed wages, which is also a consistent estimator of the reservation
   8 We could also choose the mean reservation wage or other measure of central tendency, but chose the median

because it is less sensitive to outliers. Parameter estimates obtained using mean reservation wages are qualitatively
similar to those obtained under the median.



                                                         6
wage (Flinn and Heckman 1982, Eckstein and Berg 2007).9

    The theoretical model also provides a means to identify the reservation wage in a manner that

is fully structural. Actually doing so in practice, though, is typically problematic. This is because

the reservation wage is a boundary value (since it is the truncation point of the accepted wage

distribution) so it cannot be estimated by maximum likelihood.10 However, because our model

assumes that measurement error in the reservation wage may lead some observed wages to fall

below the reservation wage, the boundary value problem is eliminated, and the reservation wage

may indeed be estimated as an additional model parameter in a conventional maximum likelihood

framework.



3     Data

We use data from the Cape Area Panel Study (CAPS), a longitudinal study of youth in metropolitan

Cape Town, South Africa (Lam, Ardington, Branson, Case, Leibbrandt, Menendez, Seekings and

Sparks 2008). CAPS sampled about 4,800 youth aged 14-22 in Wave 1 (August-December 2002)

and currently contains four waves, the most recent conducted in 2006. For our purposes, the most

relevant features of the data are its monthly histories (for a period of 52 months from 2002-2006) of

education, search and employment activity, as well as its questions on reservation wages. We focus

only on those youth who have left school,11 are observed for at least 12 months in the calendar

sample, and have a valid response to the reservation wage question. Additionally, those outside

the 1st and 99th percentiles of the accepted wage distribution are dropped to limit the influence

of outliers in the estimation. This leaves N = 1, 430 individuals in the sample. Key variables are

described in Appendix B.

    Table 1 presents summary statistics for the full sample. Among the notable features are the

high durations and rates of unemployment: mean duration to first job since school exit is nearly
   9 Flinn and Heckman (1982) and Eckstein and Berg (2007) note that any fixed order statistic of the accepted wage

distribution consistently estimates w∗ .
  10 Identification in this case requires specifying b, δ, and p which are not identified by the likelihood function.
  11 We define school exit as being out of school for at least 3 consecutive months. A related paper, Pugatch (2011)

uses this data to investigate school re-enrollment.




                                                         7
12 months, while 42% of the sample is unemployed for at least one year. Observed search behavior

appears low with 35% never searching since leaving school. Nonetheless, few youth are returning to

school: only 6% report returning to school before obtaining their first job (or censoring), and none

returned to school full-time (i.e., all report searching or working concurrently with re-enrollment

in school). Of those who find work, most (77%) are employed full-time.12 Unlike many African

economies, South Africa does not have a substantial informal sector. The mean accepted wage was

2486 rand and wages are measured in real South African rand per month (base month August 2002,

at which time the South African rand/US dollar exchange rate was 10.59). Table 1 appears quite

consistent, at least on the surface, with a reservation wage story in which school leavers wait for a

full-time, reasonably well-compensated job.

   Table 2 presents unemployment durations and rates by observable characteristics. The data

reveal expected patterns: unemployment is more prevalent and prolonged for coloureds and blacks,

females, the young, and the low-skilled (both in terms of low schooling and low ability). The levels

can be quite striking, however, even for the most advantaged groups: 21% of whites and 15% of

those with at least some post-secondary education are unemployed for at least one year since school

exit, for instance. Another surprising result is the post-school labor market experience of those

who report never searching: of this group, only 36% are censored, meaning that the remaining

64% obtain a job, despite reporting to never have searched. This suggests that “search,” at least as

understood by the survey respondents, is not necessary to obtain employment, and thus many youth

who may appear to be non-participants in the labor market may in fact be searching passively, or

at least prepared to accept a job should an acceptable offer arrive.13

   Because reservation wages play a key role in our model, we further investigate the quality of the

reservation wage data. Our reservation wage measure is the minimum monthly wage for which the

youth reported to be willing to accept full-time work, measured at the latest wave prior to obtaining

a job after permanent school exit (or censoring).14 Table 1 showed that 24% of those with completed
 12 Our  model results are qualitatively similar when excluding part-time workers from the sample.
 13 Our   definition of “never searched” excludes those who report obtaining employment immediately after leaving
school. Although such youth do not report searching between school exit and employment, we expect that many
in fact did actively search for work prior to obtaining work, and therefore exclude them from the “never searched”
group so as not to bias results.
  14 Appendix B contains additional details on the construction of the reservation wage measure.




                                                        8
spells and non-missing wage data report reservation wages that exceed their reported wage; Figure

1 is a graphical depiction of the same, with points below the 45-degree line indicating observations

for which w∗ > w. The model accounts for this phenomenon by estimating the distribution of

measurement error in wages. Table 3 presents regressions of the reservation wage on a set of

observable characteristics. Although few coefficients are statistically significant, they generally

enter with the expected sign: reservation wages are lower among females, blacks and coloureds,

who likely face more labor market disadvantages than similarly-skilled males and whites; lower

(convexly) as a function of age, suggesting that older youth are less patient in their search; higher

for the more skilled, as proxied by schooling and ability; higher for those with employed fathers or

with co-resident parents, likely due to the greater availability of intra-household transfers; lower for

those whose parents want them more strongly to work; and lower for those with their own children

in the household, who have greater need to accept paid work. A notable exception is the negative

coefficient on pension receipt by a household member, which contradicts the conventional wisdom

that availability of pension-related resources increases reservation wages, although the coefficient is

significant only at the 10% level. The regression results suggest that, despite some discrepancies

between observed wages and reservation wages, the reservation wage data from the survey are

generally internally consistent when considering correlations with observable attributes.

    An assumption of our model is a constant arrival rate for job offers which (in combination with

the assumption that all other structural parameters are time-invariant) implies that the reservation

wage is constant. Because CAPS asks about reservation wages in each wave of the panel, we can

test whether an individual’s reservation wage is constant or whether it declines with unemployment

duration. We do so by regressing the reservation wage on unemployment duration with individual-

level fixed effects to account for time-invariant individual heterogeneity, and we find no evidence

of declining reservation wages. We conclude that the assumption of constant reservation wages is

plausible.15
   15 This is convenient since the leading methods for incorporating time-varying reservation wages in structurally

estimated search models make assumptions that do not fit the South African context: assuming a finite search
horizon (as in Wolpin 1987) seems unsuited to youth seeking their first job following school exit, and allowing
structural parameters (typically the unemployment benefit, as in Berg 1990) to evolve over time in a known fashion
is at odds with the South African experience.




                                                        9
    Finally, we consider the adequacy of our distributional assumptions used to form the likelihood

function. Figure 2 shows kernel density estimates of accepted wages and first unemployment spells,

respectively; recall that both distributions are assumed exponential for purposes of estimation.16

Although the empirical distributions from the full sample may mask considerable heterogeneity and

thus can not show that our distributional assumptions are correct, observable patterns consistent

with the exponential distribution (e.g., monotonically decreasing with a long right tail) at least

suggest that our estimates may fit the data well. The accepted wage distribution, panel [a], does

exhibit the left tail mode and long right tail that is characteristic of the exponential distribution;

in our model, measurement error may account for the increasing density in the far left tail. The

unemployment duration density (for completed spells; panel [b] also exhibits these patterns, and

appears to be consistent with our assumption of a constant hazard rate of unemployment exit, in

the aggregate.17



4     Model Parameter Estimates

In this section, we discuss the parameter estimates of the structural model that we next use to

analyze the wage subsidy. Recall the key parameters governing the model are q (the job offer

arrival rate), λ (the wage offer), and σ (the standard deviation of the measurement error). We

incorporate observed heterogeneity by modeling the job arrival rate and the wage offer as log linear

functions of a parsimonious set of covariates: indicator variables for black, coloured, high school

graduate, at least some college, high ability,18 and previous work experience; the omitted group is

low-ability whites with less than a high school education and no previous work experience. The

measurement error variance is estimated as a single parameter for the entire sample, however.19
  16 Under exponential wage offers, the density of accepted wages will also be exponential, with a rightward shift of

the offer distribution by the amount of the reservation wage.
  17 Although the kernel density is increasing in the far left tail, the empirical mode is 1 month (the minimum allowed,

by assumption), so the empirical density does have its mode at the left tail of the distribution.
  18 We define “high ability” as above the median literacy and numeracy evaluation score within the estimation

sample.
  19 Although in principle we could have treated the measurement error as heteroskedastic by allowing its variance

to vary according to observable characteristics, in practice the measurement error coefficients were rarely significant
in such models, and frequently led to numerical instability in the parameter estimates.




                                                          10
    As noted above, the reservation wage plays a key role in identification of the model. We in-

corporate the reservation wage into our model first in a base case approach and then using two

alternative approaches.


4.1     Base Case Estimates

In the base case, we estimate (7) using the median reservation wage within cells defined by the

included covariates as our measure of w∗ . Results are presented in Table 4.

    Results for q, the job offer arrival rate, are given in the first column. The “baseline level”

reported in the first row is the exponentiated value of the constant term, and may be interpreted

as the monthly probability of receiving a job offer for the omitted group.20 The baseline monthly

probability of a job offer is 27%. The reported coefficients on ln q represent the marginal effect, in

log points, on the offer arrival rate. We see that blacks and coloureds face offer arrival rates that are

.8 and .4 log points (or approximately 80% and 40%) lower, respectively, than those for whites. High

school graduation and post-secondary schooling generate large returns on offer arrivals (coefficients

of .48 and .69, respectively), while high ability and previous work experience also increase the offer

arrival rate considerably (coefficients of .27 and .37, respectively). The estimates imply that a black,

low-ability high school dropout with no previous work experience has a monthly offer probability

of just 12%, but that high ability, previous work experience and some college education nearly

quadruple this probability, to 46%.

    Results for λ, the wage offer distribution parameter, whose baseline represents the mean (and

standard deviation) of the wage offer distribution are given in the second column. Coefficients are

marginal effects in log points, as before. The estimated baseline wage offer, at R710, is quite low

relative to the mean accepted wage of R2,486.21 Not surprisingly, the model predicts that only

29% of wage offers are accepted.22 As with the offer arrival rate, the estimates imply considerable
   20 When the estimate exceeds unity, the parameter may also be interpreted as the predicted number of job offers

per month.
   21 Such a comparison must be interpreted with caution, however, as the baseline wage offer is for the omitted

category of white, low ability high school dropouts without previous work experience, while the mean accepted wage
is for the full sample.
   22 We calculate the probability of offer acceptance, Pr(w ≥ w ∗ ), as the mean over the distribution of the full sample,

i.e., Pr(w ≥ w∗ ) = Pr(w ≥ w∗ |x)f (x)dx.
                     R




                                                            11
labor market disadvantages for black and coloured youth (coefficients -.32 and -.13, respectively).

Schooling, ability and previous work experience generate large returns, however, with the coefficient

of .73 on previous work experience particularly notable (although this coefficient may be picking

up a number of omitted factors that are correlated with experience, such as motivation or access

to employment networks). Comparing model estimates again for black, low-ability high school

dropouts with no previous work experience to their high ability, college-educated and experienced

counterparts, we find that the former face a mean wage offer of R513, while the latter receives offers

more than four times as large, at R2,113. The estimated measurement error standard deviation, σ ,

implies that measurement error accounts for 27% of the standard deviation in accepted wages.23


4.2     Estimates with Alternative Measures of the Reservation Wage

The base case approach above used within-cell median reported reservation wages as the measure

of w∗ . Reported reservation wage data, though, are rare. In this section, we estimate the model

using two alternative measures of the reservation wage that do not require reported reservation

wages. First, we use the fifth percentile of accepted wages (by cell), denoted wq5 as our measure

of the reservation wage. We next estimate the model leaving the reservation wage as a parameter

to be estimated as described in the last paragraph of section 2.2. We denote this measure as
 ∗     24
wM LE .   Estimating the model with these alternative measures of the reservation wage serves

two purposes. It allows us to infer the “value-added” of having data on actual reservation wages.

Usually, reservation wages have to be inferred (or estimated). By comparing estimates with actual

reservation wages to those without, we highlight the role that the reservation wage data play. It

also allows us to investigate how the impact of the wage subsidy varies depending on which measure

of the reservation wage is used.

   Table 5 presents parameter estimates for each alternative. The first column repeats the base case

estimates for comparison while column 2 reports results with wq5 and column 3 reports estimates
  23 Bound and Krueger (1991) found that measurement error accounts for 18% of the variance in reported annual

earnings for men in the US.
  24 In the estimation, w ∗                        ∗
                         M LE is restricted to be w = w̄ − λ, corresponding to the truncation of the exponential
accepted wage distribution at w∗ .




                                                      12
      ∗
with wM LE . We find that results are qualitatively similar regardless of the measure of the reservation

wage used with expected signs on all coefficients.

   Turning first to results for q, the job offer arrival rate, we see that baseline offer arrivals are

estimated to be more frequent with the actual reservation wage data, w∗ , than is the case when we

use inferred or estimated reservation wages: a monthly job offer probability of .27, versus .07 and
                   ∗
.15 under wq5 and wM LE , respectively. Although the differences between the models shrinks for

some groups when coefficients are factored in, the generally higher offer arrival rates of column (1)

are consistent with higher reservation wages under w∗ : youth who face more frequent offers will be

more selective about which to accept.

   Differences between the models’ estimates of λ, the wage offer distribution parameter, are also

quite striking. The baseline mean wage offer of R1,445 in the model with wq5 (Table 5, column 2) is

more than double that of the model with w∗ . The baseline offer of R899 in the model with wM
                                                                                           ∗
                                                                                             LE

(column 3), while not nearly as high, still exceeds the baseline under w∗ by more than 20%. Again,

certain coefficients mitigate these differences somewhat, but the generally lower level of wage offers

in the model with w∗ comes through clearly in the estimated probabilities of offer acceptance: 29%

under w∗ , versus 59% and 44% under wq5 and wM
                                             ∗
                                               LE , respectively.

   Considered in conjunction with the offer arrival rate results, the estimates offer a contrasting

picture of the labor market: under w∗ , wage offers are relatively frequent but low, while under wq5

offers are infrequent but high. This arrival/wage offer tradeoff is how the model reconciles different

reservation wages using the same data on unemployment durations and accepted wages. Accord-

ingly, the probability of offer acceptance (Pr(w ≥ w∗ )) implied by the models suggest that if youth

behave according to their reservation wage reports, they are less than half as likely to accept a wage

offer than under wq5 ; we will return to this discrepancy and suggest possible explanations shortly.
                            ∗
Results for the model with wM LE fall somewhere in between the other two, with intermediate offer

arrivals and wage offers for most subgroups, as may be expected when we “let the data speak” to

find the best fit.

   The estimated measurement error standard deviation, σ , is greatest in the model with w∗ and

smallest in the model with wq5 . This is unsurprising: recall that the measurement error parameter


                                                  13
serves to reconcile the density of observed wages below the reservation wage, and hence should be

largest in the model with w∗ , since reservation wages are highest (on average) in that case.
                                 ∗
   Finally, the coefficients on wM LE in column (3) follow the expected pattern: black and coloured

youth have lower reservation wages relative to whites, while reservation wages are increasing in

schooling and ability. Interestingly, the negative coefficient on previous work experience suggests

that youth who have already engaged in paid work are willing to work for less than their inexperi-

enced peers, although this coefficient is imprecisely estimated.

   The relatively frequent offer arrivals and low job acceptance probability in the model with w∗

begs the question, “If the South African youth labor market is so bad, why are youth turning down

so many jobs?” Our answer is that it is unlikely that youth are actually receiving, and refusing, job

offers with the frequency implied by our estimates. Instead, we consider it more likely that low-wage

jobs are more abundant than the unemployment data may suggest, but such low-wage matches are

made infrequently. “Search” is not necessarily an active process for this group, as the 64% of our

sample who obtained employment without ever reporting search activity suggests. Thus the high

frequency of offer arrivals and refusals we estimate are more likely to represent “implicit refusals”

of low-wage offers that are available in principle, but that are not literally made by employers to

unemployed youth. The matching costs incurred by both sides may exceed the surplus generated

by these low-wage matches.


4.3    Model Fit

The structural search model generates predictions for the distributions of unemployment durations

and accepted wages. Before considering a formal Lagrange Multiplier test, we first offer a more

qualitative comparison of the predicted distributions and their empirical counterparts.

   We first consider the distribution of unemployment durations till obtaining the first job. Because

some durations are right-censored, it will be convenient to work with the survivor function for

unemployment, or the probability that an unemployment spell d exceeds some value d0 (i.e., S(d0 ) =

Pr(d ≥ d0 )). Table 6 shows, in column (1), the empirical survivor function at various monthly

durations, along with model estimates depending on how the reservation was is treated in columns


                                                 14
(2)-(4). For example, 69 percent of actual unemployment spells exceed 3 months while the model,

for each treatment of the reservation wage, predicts that 75 percent of the spells would exceed 3

months. The model almost exactly predicts the fraction of spells exceeding 12 months (42 percent)

and over-predicts the fraction of spells lasting 24 and 36 months.

   We next consider the distribution of accepted wages in Table 7. The model predicts the mean

of the accepted wage distribution pretty well. The actual mean is R2486 while, when we use the

reported reservation wages, w∗ , the model predicts a mean accepted wage of R2346. The model,

though, underestimates the standard deviation of the distribution of accepted wages, and this is

seen by comparing actual and predicted accepted wages at different parts of the distribution. The

empirical distribution has a longer right tail than that predicted by the model, and this explains

the differences in the mean and standard deviation reported in the top two rows of the table.

   We conclude from our qualitative evaluation of model fit that the model does fairly well for

most of the mass of the distributions but does less well in the right tails. That is, the model does

not fit the really long unemployment durations or really high accepted wages very well. At some

level, this is unsurprising. The model is quite simple and it is asking a lot to fit the far right tail of

the distributions of unemployment duration and accepted wages.

   We test the model more formally by conducting Lagrange Multiplier (LM) tests.25 This test

essentially asks whether moments of the distributions predicted by model match their empirical

counterparts. The LM test is similar in spirit to the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test–a nonparametric

test for the equality of two distributions. Results are given in the bottom panels of tables 6 and

7. We consistently reject the null hypothesis that the model is correctly specified. This too is

unsurprising given the simplicity of the model and the high bar set by a test that is, in essence,

comparing entire distributions of outcomes.
 25 Appendix   C describes details of these tests.




                                                     15
5     Analysis of a Youth Wage Subsidy

5.1       The impacts of a wage subsidy

Having estimated a structural search model consistent with the observed distributions of unem-

ployment and accepted wages, we now use this model to prospectively analyze the impact of a wage

subsidy to youth in the Cape Town area.

    As government in South Africa contemplates responses to youth unemployment, a wage subsidy

is being actively considered. In his 2010 budget speech, Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan stated:26

      Many South Africans, speaking of their own experiences on the streets of our cities,
      at factory gates and in rural communities, have urged us to take steps to make it
      easier for young people to find work. Labour market data confirm that employers are
      reluctant to hire inexperienced work-seekers, while school-leavers lack basic workplace
      competencies. Furthermore, our bargaining arrangements push up entry level wages,
      pricing out inexperienced work-seekers.
      Under the leadership of the Department of Labour, initiatives are in progress to improve
      information services to help young people access jobs and training opportunities. We
      propose to support these reforms through a subsidy to employers that will lower the
      cost of hiring young people without work experience.


    The impact of a wage subsidy will depend on its level, of course, but also on how individuals

respond to the subsidy. Intuitively, the subsidy shifts the wage offer distribution to the right and

the bigger the subsidy, the bigger the shift. Knowing that expected wage offers will be higher,

individuals increase their reservation wages (see eq. (3)). In the new equilibrium, the probability

of accepting a job offer increases as does the mean accepted wage. Correspondingly, unemployment

spells are shortened. The magnitude of these responses, though, is an empirical question.

    We model the wage subsidy as a shift right in the wage offer distribution by the full amount

of the subsidy, s. Hence the entire distribution, including the truncation point, shifts by s. This

approach implicitly assumes that the subsidy is fully passed through to job seekers in the form of

wage offers. In this sense, this is a best-case scenario for the impact of the subsidy, since to the

extent that employers have some market power in the youth labor market, pass-through will not

be complete.
 26 The   entire National Budget Speech is found at Gordhan (2010).



                                                       16
   The first step of simulating the impact of a wage subsidy is to compute the new reservation

wage. In our model, a change in the wage offer mean (or any structural parameter) will change w∗ ,

and hence the simulation results will depend crucially on how the model accounts for the agent’s

updated w∗ in response to the policy change. When w∗ is estimated structurally, the approach is

straightforward: merely update the structural estimate of w∗ under the new wage offer distribution.

However, when w∗ is estimated from individuals’ reported reservation wages as in our analysis, we

must update w∗ by calibrating some elements of θ that we did not observe (or estimate) in our

baseline specification. We update w∗ in a fashion that is consistent with our search model, as

expressed in (3). Specifically, we use our maximum likelihood estimates of (λ, q) and calibrate the

model parameters not estimated by our model (b,δ,p) such that they reproduce the value of w∗

used in the baseline (no subsidy) estimation. We calibrate p according to observed job separations

in the data; choose δ = .95 annually; and then choose b to match w∗ to the data (by inverting the

reservation wage function). We then update w∗ by varying the subsidy value s, holding all other

parameters fixed.

   Results of this exercise are given in the top panel of Figure 3. That panel shows the new

reservation wage and how it varies depending on the level of the subsidy.27 The subsidy s = 0

corresponds to the baseline estimates discussed in the preceding sections, and s increases to R1,000

in increments of 100 along the horizontal axis. (To put the size of the subsidy in context, note

that the mean wage in the sample is about R2486.) The top panel shows that the reservation

wage increases monotonically with the subsidy and that the relationship is close to linear. A R1000

subsidy increases the reservation wage by about R660 and, while the level of the reservation wage

depends on how it is estimated, the response of the reservation wage to a subsidy is about the same

for each treatment of the reservation wage.

   The higher reservation wages that result from the introduction of the wage subsidy result in

higher accepted wages. The bottom panel of Figure 3 displays these results. Again, the relationship

between the mean accepted wage and the subsidy is about linear and that relationship is fairly

invariant to the way that reservation wages are treated in the estimation. A R1000 subsidy increases
  27 In Figures 3-5, the lines labeled wrhat=wr correspond to the model estimated with w ∗ ; wrhat=wp5 to w ; and
                                                                                                           q5
wrhat=wrmle to wM  ∗
                     LE .



                                                       17
the mean accepted wage by about R660 (and recall this is assuming that the subsidy is fully passed

through to the wage offer distribution).28 Hence, only about 66% of the wage subsidy shows up

as an increase in the mean accepted wage. Of course, the wage subsidy also impacts the length of

unemployment spells so the 66% figure is not the end of the story.

   The rise in the reservation wage is one measure of the subsidy’s impact. The subsidy also raises

the likelihood that an individual will accept a job offer. This is illustrated in Figure 4. When we

model reservation wages using reported reservation wages, w∗ (as opposed to wq5 or wM
                                                                                    ∗
                                                                                      LE ), the

probability of accepting a job offer increases from .30 to about .44 with a subsidy of R1000. This

translates into shorter unemployment spells–presumably the foremost goal of the wage subsidy–

and this is shown in Figure 5. Focusing again on the results that use the reported reservation

wages, w∗ , the fraction of youth who report an unemployment spell of 12 months falls from about

42% with no subsidy to about 27% with a R1000 subsidy. A 15 point reduction in long term

unemployment strikes us as quite sizeable. The reduction is close to 10 percentage points when we

estimate the model without using reservation wages inferred from the 5th percentile of accepted

wages. These percentage point declines carry over to comparable declines in the probability of 24

month unemployment spells, as shown in the bottom panel of Figure 5. The model using reported

reservation wages has 25% of individuals reporting a 24 month period of unemployment, and this

falls to about 10% with a R1000 wage subsidy.

   Overall, our prospective analysis of an employer wage subsidy indicates that the subsidy will be

effective in reducing unemployment spells, even in a model that generates substantial unemployment

in the absence of such a subsidy. The avenues through which the subsidy works are more subtle than

would be the case in an “Econ 101” model of supply and demand. We find that the subsidy raises

reservation wages and so, even with an assumed 100% pass-through of the subsidy as it impacts

the wage offer distribution, accepted wages only rise by about 66% of the subsidy. This amount of

pass-through, though, is enough to generate substantial declines in long term unemployment spells.

The fact that all of the impacts of the subsidy illustrated in Figures 3 - 5 are almost linear suggests

that the level of the wage subsidy is mostly a political decision. That is, there are no obvious
  28 The reservation wage and mean accepted wage increase by the same amount because the entire accepted wage

distribution has shifted to the right by the increase in the reservation wage.


                                                     18
inflection points that would support an argument for a subsidy set at a particular level.


5.2    Caveats

Figure 5 represents our estimate of the impact of a wage subsidy on unemployment spells, but

the model that generates these results is necessarily much simpler than the youth labor market in

metro Cape Town. There are assumptions in both the underlying search model as well as in how

we model the wage subsidy that merit highlighting.

   Notably, the partial equilibrium nature of our search model treats labor demand as exogenously

determined and fully described by the Poisson job offer arrival rate and wage offer distribution.

Our model may fail to capture additional idiosyncratic frictions in the South African labor market

that firms and workers face, such as firing restrictions and the lack of a vibrant informal sector.

Moreover, young people may not behave entirely according to the reservation wage policy described

by our simple search model, as the large proportion who accept wages below their stated reservation

wage suggests. The wage subsidy we model may not pass through completely to the wage offer

distribution, as we assume, if firms can exercise market power and capture rents from the subsidy.

Finally, we ignore any possible general equilibrium effects from the wage subsidy: even if targeted

only to the young, youth make up a disproportionate share of South Africa’s unemployed, as noted

in the Introduction.

   Nonetheless, we believe that our analysis adds to the existing literature and political conversation

about wage subsidies by considering how the subsidy would affect the reservation wages of job

seekers in an environment of equilibrium unemployment. Our analysis of the effects of a wage

subsidy complements those of Pauw and Edwards (2006), Burns et al. (2010) and Go et al. (2010),

who consider wage subsidies in the context of computable general equilibrium (CGE) models of the

South African economy and find positive effects on employment, wages and GDP.




                                                 19
6     Conclusion

Persistently high youth unemployment is one of the most pressing problems in South Africa. The

South African government has proposed an employer wage subsidy to address the issue. We prospec-

tively analyze such a policy. Recognizing that a credible estimate of the policy’s impact requires

a model of the labor market that itself generates high unemployment in equilibrium, we estimate

a structural search model that incorporates both observed heterogeneity and measurement error

in wages. We find that the estimated model replicates the observed unemployment spells and the

distribution of accepted wages reasonably well, although not perfectly. Using the model to examine

the impact of a wage subsidy, we find beneficial effects for youth even after accounting for how the

subsidy increases reservation wages. We find that a R1000/month wage subsidy paid to employers

leads to more frequent job offer acceptances, increased accepted wages and substantial declines in

even long term unemployment.

    This paper is hardly the final word on this question but rather represents an initial examination

of an important policy option.




                                                 20
References
Banerjee, Abhijit, Sebastian Galiani, James A. Levinsohn, Zoe McLaren, and Ingrid Woolard, “A
   Symposium on Fostering Growth in South Africa: Why Has Unemployment Risen in the New
   South Africa?,” Economics of Transition, 2008, 16 (4), 715–40.
Berg, Gerard J. Van Den, “Nonstationarity in Job Search Theory,” The Review of Economic
   Studies, April 1990, 57 (2), 255–277.
Bound, John and Alan B. Krueger, “The Extent of Measurement Error in Longitudinal Earnings
   Data: Do Two Wrongs Make a Right?,” Journal of Labor Economics, January 1991, 9 (1),
   1–24.
Burns, Justine, Lawrence Edwards, and Karl Pauw, Wage subsidies to combat unemployment
   and poverty : assessing South Africa’s options, Cape Town: Southern Africa Labour and
   Development Research Unit, 2010.
Cameron, A. Colin and Pravin K. Trivedi, Microeconometrics: Methods and Applications, Cam-
   bridge University Press, May 2005.
Christensen, Bent Jesper and Nicholas M. Kiefer, “The Exact Likelihood Function for an Empirical
    Job Search Model,” Econometric Theory, December 1991, 7 (4), 464–486.
      and      , “Measurement Error in the Prototypal Job-Search Model,” Journal of Labor
    Economics, October 1994, 12 (4), 618–639.
Dinkelman, Taryn and Vimal Ranchhod, “Evidence on the impact of minimum wage laws in an
   informal sector: Domestic workers in South Africa,” 2010.
Eckstein, Zvi and Gerard J. Van Den Berg, “Empirical Labor Search: A Survey,” Journal of
   Econometrics, February 2007, 136 (2), 531–64.
     and Kenneth I. Wolpin, “Duration to First Job and the Return to Schooling: Estimates from
    a Search-Matching Model,” The Review of Economic Studies, April 1995, 62 (2), 263–286.
Flinn, C. and J. Heckman, “New Methods for Analyzing Structural Models of Labor Force Dy-
    namics,” Journal of Econometrics, 1982, 18 (1982), 115–68.
Go, Delfin S, Marna Kearney, Vijdan Korman, Sherman Robinson, and Karen Thierfelder, “Wage
    Subsidy and Labour Market Flexibility in South Africa,” Journal of Development Studies,
    October 2010, 46 (9), 1481–1502.
Gordhan, Pravin, “2010 Budget Speech,” http://www.info.gov.za/speeches/2010/10021715051004.htm
   February 2010.
Hertz, Tom, “Refundable The Effect of Minimum Wages on the Employment and Earnings of
   South Africa’s Domestic Service Workers,” W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research,
   2005, (05).
Lam, D., Cally Ardington, Nicola Branson, Anne Case, Murray Leibbrandt, Alicia Menendez,
   Jeremy Seekings, and Meredith Sparks, “The Cape Area Panel Study: A Very Short Introduc-
   tion to the Integrated Waves 1-2-3-4 Data,” October 2008.

                                              21
     , M. Leibbrandt, and C. Mlatsheni, “Education and youth unemployment in South Africa,”
    Labour markets and economic development, 2009, p. 90.
Lancaster, Tony and Andrew Chesher, “An Econometric Analysis of Reservation Wages,” Econo-
   metrica, November 1983, 51 (6), 1661–1676.

Levinsohn, James A., “Two Policies to Alleviate Unemployment in South Africa,” Harvard Center
    for International Development Working Paper Series, May 2008, No. 166.
Lynch, Lisa M., “Job Search and Youth Unemployment,” Oxford Economic Papers, November
   1983, 35, 271–282.
Magruder, Jeremy, “High Unemployment Yet Few Small Firms: The Role of Centralized Bargaining
   in South Africa,” 2010. University of California, Berkeley Working Paper.
Nattrass, Nicoli and Richard Walker, “Unemployment and Reservation Wages in Working-Class
   Cape Town,” South African Journal of Economics, September 2005, 73 (3), 498–509.
Pauw, Kalie and Lawrence Edwards, “Evaluating the General Equilibrium Effects of a Wage
   Subsidy Scheme for South Africa,” South African Journal of Economics, September 2006, 74
   (3), 442–62.
Pugatch, Todd, “Bumpy Rides: School to Work Transitions in South Africa,” Unpublished paper,
   University of Michigan, 2011.
Schoer, Volker and Murray Leibbrandt, “Determinants of Job Search Strategies: Evidence from the
    Khayelitsha/Mitchell’s Plain Survey,” South African Journal of Economics, December 2006,
    74 (4), 702–24.
Wolpin, Kenneth I., “Estimating a Structural Search Model: The Transition from School to Work,”
   Econometrica, July 1987, 55 (4), 801–817.
Yamada, H., “The Impact of the Introduction of Sectoral Minimum Wages on Low Wage Markets
   in a Low Income Country: Evidence from South Africa,” 2007.




                                              22
A     Derivation of Likelihood Function
This appendix provides more detail on the derivation and form of the likelihood function used in
model estimation. The likelihood function is composed of two additively separable parts that follow
from the search model: the accepted wage distribution and the unemployment duration distribution.
We consider each in turn:
   Accepted wage distribution. Under our assumption that wage offers are distributed exponential(λ),
the accepted wage distribution is:


                                                     fW (w)
                               fW (w|w ≥ w∗ ) =
                                                  1 − FW (w∗ )
                                                            w − w∗
                                                                  
                                                  1
                                                 = exp −
                                                  λ            λ

    Because we also assume that wages are measured with error such that wo = w + , where wo
is the observed accepted wage and  is distributed N (0, σ2 ), we have the following distribution of
observed accepted wages:

                                Z   ¯                       
                           ∗                            ∗  
             fW (wo |w ≥ w ) =       fW (wo |w ≥ w , )φ        d
                                −∞                         σ
                               Z ¯
                                               wo −  − w∗
                                                                  
                                     1                             
                             =         exp −                  φ        d
                                −∞ λ                λ             σ
                                      −2wo λ + 2w∗ λ + σ2            wo − w∗ λ + σ2
                                                                                   
                                                                1
                             = exp                           ×    φ
                                              2λ2               λ          λσ

where φ(·) is the standard normal distribution, and ¯ = wo − w∗ is the upper bound on the
distribution of .
    Unemployment duration distribution. Under our assumption of Poisson offer arrivals, the hazard
of unemployment exit h is the (constant) product of the offer arrival rate q and the probability
that the offer will be accepted, i.e., h = q(1 − FW (w∗ )). Accordingly, unemployment durations
d are distributed exponentially with parameter h, so that fD (d) = h exp(−hd). Because some
unemployment spells are right-censored, the observed duration d = min{d∗ , dc }, where d∗ is the
true duration and dc is the duration observed when the spell was censored. Let c = I{d = dc } be
an indicator for censored spells. Then the density of observed unemployment durations, gD (d), is:


                               gD (d) = fD (d)1−c [1 − FD (d)]c
                                         = [h exp(−hd)]1−c [exp(−hd)]c

   Finally, let m = {0, 1} be an indicator for missing wage data (either due to a censored un-
employment spell or otherwise). The individual’s likelihood contribution is the (log) sum of the
observed accepted wage and unemployment duration densities:

                         L(θ) = (1 − m) ln fW (wo |w ≥ w∗ ; θ) + ln gD (d; θ)


                                                   23
for θ = (q, λ, σ ).




                       24
B     Data Definitions
The sample is all young adults in CAPS who began as enrolled students at the inception of the
monthly calendar data (August 2002) but have exited school; are observed for at least 12 months
since leaving school in the monthly calendar data; and have non-missing reservation wage data
(reservation wage measure defined below). Additionally, those below the 1st and above the 99th
percentiles of accepted wages are dropped. School exit is defined as at least 3 consecutive months of
school absence in the calendar data (only 6% report returning to school after a minimum 3-month
absence, none of them full-time). Time is calculated relative to month of school exit, so that month
1 is the first of the minimum 3 consecutive months of school absence that define school exit.
    Unemployment duration is calculated relative to month of school exit, so that the minimum
unemployment duration is one month. An unemployment spell ends when the youth reports working
in any job in a calendar month, where work is defined as employment for pay, in-kind benefits or
“family gain.” Censored observations are those that had not completed their first unemployment
spell by the end of the observation period (December 2006).
    The observed wage is the first reported wage after school exit across Waves 1-4, adjusted for
monthly CPI (base is August 2002, the first month of calendar data) at the time of interview and
scaled to full-time monthly equivalent based on 160 working hours per month (those reporting
monthly hours above 160 are considered full-time and do not receive an adjustment). Wages
reported in Waves 2-4 are the sum of wages reported across all jobs held.
    When the reservation wage is based on survey data, it is the value from the most recent interview
before conclusion of the first unemployment spell since exiting school. For Wave 1, the reservation
wage w∗ = wmof   ∗                  ∗
                      t , where wmof t is the response to the question, “What is the lowest monthly
wage you would accept for full-time work?” For Waves 2-4, the reservation wage is defined as
w∗ = min{wmof   ∗         ∗                 ∗
                    t , wrevealed }, where wrevealed is the lowest wage associated with an affirmative
response to the series of questions, “Would you accept a job doing occupation x at monthly wage w?”
Reservation wages are adjusted for monthly CPI (August 2002 base) at the time of interview. For
those with a censored first unemployment spell, the reservation wage is the last reported reservation
wage in the panel.
    Search is defined as a positive response to the “Searched for work in this month?” question in
the calendar data. The job separation probability is calibrated as total number of separations from
the first job divided by total months employed in first job since leaving school for all observations
in the sample.
    Age is age in years at school exit. Schooling is years of completed schooling at school exit.
The ability proxy is the z-score from the literacy and numeracy evaluation (LNE) administered by
CAPS in Wave 1. The “previously worked” variable is an indicator for whether the youth worked
for pay (i.e., reported a non-zero wage) in the panel prior to school exit. Full-time work is defined
as an an average of at least 35 hours per month.
    The survey weight is the young adult sample weight, which is adjusted for the sample design
plus household and young adult non-response.




                                                 25
C      Tests of Model Fit
This appendix discusses the formal test of model fit we use to compare our predicted unemployment
duration and accepted wage distributions to the data. For continuous data, Cameron and Trivedi
(2005, pp. 261-2) propose a variation of the Lagrange Multiplier (LM) test using the sample
moments and scores from the estimated model.29 Let m̂i = m(xi , θ̂) be the sample moment(s) for
observation i evaluated at the estimated parameters θ̂. For instance, for exponential wage offers
we would have m̂i = wi − (λ̂ + w∗ ). Let ŝi = s(xi , θ̂) = ∂ ln Li
                                                              ∂ θ̂
                                                                    be the score vector for observation i
evaluated at θ̂. Under the null hypothesis that the model is correctly specified, E(m) = E(s) = 0.
Cameron and Trivedi propose the following auxiliary regressions:


                                               1 = m̂0i δ + ŝ0i γ + ui
                                               1 = m̂0i δ + ui
                                                                                                            ∂m
where 1 is a vector of ones and the second auxiliary regression is valid in the case where                  ∂θ   = 0,
as it is in our case. The corresponding test statistic is then:

                                                    M = N Ru2
where Ru2 is the uncentered R2 from the auxiliary regression. Under the null, M is distributed
χ2 (h), where h is the dimension of m (i.e., h is the number of moments).30
  29 Although many researchers use the Pearson χ2 test to evaluate the fit of structural models, Cameron and Trivedi

(2005, pp. 266) note that the test is invalid if the data are not generated from a multinomial distribution. Since our
outcomes of interest (duration and wages) are continuous, we use the LM test described above.
  30 Another test of model fit that could be applied in our context is the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, which is a

nonparametric test for the equality of two distributions. However, when the parameters of one distribution are
estimated using data from the other, the test statistic may not be asymptotically distributed according to the
Kolmogorov distribution, invalidating the test.




                                                         26
                                                   Table 1: Summary statistics


                         Variable                          N        Mean       Std. Dev.         Min           Max
                         female                         1430         0.53           0.50            0             1
                         black                          1430         0.26           0.44            0             1
                         coloured                       1430         0.62           0.49            0             1
                         white                          1430         0.12           0.32            0             1
                         age                            1430         19.5            2.1           14            26
                         schooling                      1430         10.7            2.1            0            16
                         ability score                  1430         0.18           0.91        -2.97          2.01
                         wage                            977       2486.4         1859.9        346.6       11642.3
                         reservation wage               1430       1594.2         1801.8         48.7       36645.8
                         I(w∗ > w)                       977         0.24           0.43            0             1
                         first UE spell                 1430         11.7           11.2            1            50
                         UE spell≥1yr                   1430         0.42           0.49            0             1
                         censor                         1430         0.24           0.43            0             1
                         previously worked              1430         0.34           0.48            0             1
                         full-time                      1027         0.77           0.42            0             1
                         never searched                 1430         0.35           0.48            0             1
                         return to school (ft)          1430         0.00           0.00            0             0
                         return to school               1430         0.06           0.23            0             1

Sample is youth who have left school (absent at least 3 consecutive months after attending school at least one month in calendar sample),
observed for at least 12 months in calendar sample after school exit, and with valid reservation wage data. Age and schooling measured
at time of school exit. Ability score is z-score from literacy and numeracy evaluation administered in Wave 1. Wage is first reported wage
following completion of first unemployment spell. Reservation wage is last reported reservation wage before first completed unemployment spell
or censoring. Observations below 1st percentile and above 99th percentile of accepted wages dropped. Wages and reservation wages in real rand
per month, base month August 2002 (South African rand/US dollar exchange rate at base=10.59). I(wr > w) is indicator that reservation wage
exceeds reported accepted wage. Previously worked refers to work experience in calendar history prior to school exit. Full-time is average of at
least 35 hours per week of work in last month. Never searched excludes those who obtain employment immediately after school exit. Statistics
calculated using sample weights (weightyr).




                                                                      27
                                Table 2: Unemployment, by observable characteristics


                                        First UE spell      UE spell≥1yr        UE spell≥2yrs        UE, month 12         censored
            male                             10.2               0.35                0.23                 0.47               0.19
            female                           13.0               0.49                0.34                 0.56               0.28
            African                          17.2               0.66                0.52                 0.72               0.38
            coloured                         10.2               0.36                0.20                 0.48               0.20
            white                             7.7               0.21                0.24                 0.28               0.14
            age:
              ≤18                            13.9                 0.50                0.35                 0.59              0.33
              19-22                          10.9                 0.39                0.25                 0.50              0.20
              ≥23                             7.4                 0.27                0.18                 0.34              0.11
            schooling:
              ≤9                             16.3                 0.59                0.43                 0.70              0.38
              10 or 11                       12.7                 0.48                0.28                 0.55              0.28
              12                              9.2                 0.32                0.19                 0.42              0.15
              >12                             5.0                 0.15                0.15                 0.29              0.07
            low ability                      14.3                 0.54                0.37                 0.63              0.31
            high ability                      8.7                 0.29                0.19                 0.39              0.16
            previously worked                15.1                 0.57                0.41                 0.66              0.37
            never worked before               5.2                 0.14                0.05                 0.25              0.00
            some search                      10.2                 0.36                0.26                 0.47              0.18
            never searched                   14.5                 0.55                0.33                 0.61              0.36

Age and schooling measured at time of school exit. “Low” and “high” ability refer to below and above within-sample median literacy and
numeracy evaluation score. “Some search” is reported search in at least one month prior to completion of first UE spell or censoring. “Previously
worked” means work experience reported in calendar history prior to school exit. Never searched excludes those who obtain employment
immediately after school exit. First unemployment spell measured in months; all other statistics are means of indicator variables. “UE, month
12” refers to employment at month 12 following school exit. All statistics weighted by sample weights.




                                                                      28
                                             Table 3: Reservation wage regressions


                                                                                    (1)                 (2)
                                                                                   wi∗                 wi∗
                                    female                                        -89.8              -102.9
                                                                                (107.2)             (114.9)
                                    black                                        -754.3              -827.7
                                                                              (244.3)***         (233.8)***
                                    coloured                                     -507.4              -449.6
                                                                               (241.3)**           (247.5)*
                                    age                                          -109.6               -63.5
                                                                                (183.9)             (176.1)
                                    age2                                            3.9                 3.2
                                                                                  (4.7)               (4.5)
                                    schooling                                      90.3                93.8
                                                                               (31.9)***          (31.0)***
                                    ability score                                 281.9               303.8
                                                                               (74.4)***          (75.9)***
                                    pensioner in HH                                                  -181.1
                                                                                                   (106.0)*
                                    father employed                                                    69.1
                                                                                                    (128.5)
                                    ill                                                               117.4
                                                                                                    (190.1)
                                    parents want youth to work                                        -79.9
                                                                                                  (25.4)***
                                    co-resident with parent                                           180.8
                                                                                                   (79.0)**
                                    own child in HH                                                  -274.1
                                                                                                  (138.5)**
                                    N                                             1430                1430
                                    R2                                            0.09                 0.13

Robust standard errors in parentheses: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Reservation wage wi       ∗ is individual-
specific survey report, as defined in Appendix B. Age and schooling measured at time of school exit. Pensioner in HH, father employed, ill,
parents want to work, co-resident with parent, and own child in hh variables measured at time of reservation wage, where reservation wage is
last report prior to job acceptance or end of calendar sample. “Ill” refers to self-reported illness that prevents normal activities. “Parents want
youth to work” measured on self-reported 1-5 scale, with 5 being strongest. All regressions include fixed effects for wave at which w∗ measured.




                                                                        29
                     Table 4: Parameter estimates, using reservation wage survey reports


     Parameter                                                               ln q                  ln λ                   ln σ
                                                                       (offer arrival         (wage offer           (measurement
                                                                           rate)              parameter)              error s.d.)
     baseline level                                                          0.27                710.58                 495.11
      constant                                                              -1.30                  6.57                   6.20
                                                                           (0.29)                (0.17)                  (0.05)
       black                                                                -0.80                 -0.32
                                                                           (0.32)                (0.19)
       coloured                                                             -0.40                 -0.13
                                                                           (0.26)                (0.15)
       HS grad                                                               0.48                  0.27
                                                                           (0.13)                (0.07)
       at least some college                                                 0.69                  0.54
                                                                           (0.19)                (0.11)
       high ability                                                          0.27                  0.15
                                                                           (0.12)                (0.07)
       previous work                                                         0.37                  0.73
                                                                           (0.12)                (0.09)
     N                                                                                              1430
     ln L                                                                                       -1,055,884
     Pr(w ≥ w∗ )                                                                                    0.29
     σ (measurement error s.d.)                                                                    0.27
       as percentage of observed accepted wage s.d.

Robust standard errors in parentheses. Estimation is by maximum likelihood, with reservation wage as median reservation wage from survey
within covariate cell. Starting values taken from converged estimates of sequential estimation of wage offer and unemployment duration distri-
butions. Optimization algorithm alternates between BFGS and BHHH. “Baseline level” refers to value of exponentiated constant term for each
parameter, and may be interpreted as parameter level for left-out category (white high school dropouts    of low ability, with no previous work
experience). Pr(w ≥ w∗ ) calculated as mean over distribution of full sample, i.e., Pr(w ≥ w∗ ) = Pr(w ≥ w∗ |x)f (x)dx.
                                                                                                  R




                                                                     30
                  Table 5: Parameter estimates, using alternate reservation wage measures


                                                                                      (1)            (2)             (3)
                     Reservation wage                                                 w∗            wq5            ∗
                                                                                                                  wM LE
                     ln q (offer arrival rate): baseline                             0.27           0.07            0.15
                       constant                                                     -1.30          -2.64           -1.88
                                                                                   (0.29)         (0.20)          (0.24)
                      black                                                         -0.80          -0.51           -0.74
                                                                                   (0.32)         (0.20)          (0.23)
                      coloured                                                      -0.40          -0.12           -0.33
                                                                                   (0.26)         (0.18)          (0.19)
                      HS grad                                                        0.48           0.54            0.43
                                                                                   (0.13)         (0.09)          (0.13)
                      at least some college                                          0.69           0.92            0.73
                                                                                   (0.19)         (0.18)          (0.20)
                      high ability                                                   0.27           0.25            0.10
                                                                                   (0.12)         (0.10)          (0.13)
                      previous work                                                  0.37           1.13            0.78
                                                                                   (0.12)         (0.09)          (0.12)
                     ln λ (wage offer parameter): baseline                         710.58        1445.88          899.51
                       constant                                                      6.57           7.28            6.80
                                                                                   (0.17)         (0.15)          (0.12)
                      black                                                         -0.32          -0.53           -0.33
                                                                                   (0.19)         (0.16)          (0.13)
                      coloured                                                      -0.13          -0.34           -0.17
                                                                                   (0.15)         (0.13)          (0.10)
                      HS grad                                                        0.27           0.22            0.27
                                                                                   (0.07)         (0.07)          (0.08)
                      at least some college                                          0.54           0.49            0.55
                                                                                   (0.11)         (0.11)          (0.12)
                      high ability                                                   0.15           0.11            0.20
                                                                                   (0.07)         (0.07)          (0.09)
                      previous work                                                  0.73           0.41            0.61
                                                                                   (0.09)         (0.07)          (0.09)
                     ln σ (measurement error s.d.): baseline                      495.11         262.09          322.73
                       constant                                                      6.20           5.57            5.78
                                                                                   (0.05)         (0.09)          (0.07)
                     ln w∗ : baseline                                                                            1304.30
                       constant                                                                                     7.17
                                                                                                                  (0.11)
                      black                                                                                        -0.64
                                                                                                                  (0.10)
                      coloured                                                                                     -0.44
                                                                                                                  (0.09)
                      HS grad                                                                                       0.20
                                                                                                                  (0.06)
                      college                                                                                       0.40
                                                                                                                  (0.10)
                      high ability                                                                                  0.09
                                                                                                                  (0.06)
                      previous work                                                                                -0.09
                                                                                                                  (0.07)
                     N                                                              1430            1430            1430
                     ln L                                                     -1,055,884      -1,055,534      -1,052,301
                     Pr(w ≥ w∗ )                                                    0.29            0.59            0.44
                     σ (measurement error s.d.)                                    0.27            0.14            0.17
                       as percentage of observed accepted wage s.d.

Robust standard errors in parentheses. Reservation wages at top row refer to inputs of maximum likelihood estimation: w∗ is median reservation
wage from data; wq is 5th percentile reservation wage; and wM ∗
                   5                                            LE is maximum likelihood estimate (all by cell defined by included covariates).
Estimation is by maximum likelihood, with starting values taken from converged estimates of sequential estimation of wage offer and unemploy-
ment duration distributions. Optimization algorithm alternates between BFGS and BHHH. “Baseline” refers to value of exponentiated constant
term for each parameter, and may be interpreted as parameter level for left-out category (white high school dropouts    of low ability, with no
previous work experience). Pr(w ≥ w∗ ) calculated as mean over distribution of full sample, i.e., Pr(w ≥ w∗ ) = Pr(w ≥ w∗ |x)f (x)dx.
                                                                                                                R




                                                                     31
                      Table 6: Empirical and predicted unemployment survivor functions


                                                                                  Pr(d ≥ d0 )
                                                                   (1)             (2)      (3)            (4)
                                                                 empirical         w∗      wq5             ∗
                                                                                                          wM LE
                              UE duration (months)
                                        3                             0.69          0.75       0.75        0.75
                                        6                             0.58          0.60       0.60        0.60
                                       12                             0.42          0.42       0.43        0.42
                                       24                             0.16          0.25       0.25        0.25
                                       36                             0.04          0.15       0.16        0.16
                                       χ2                                           424.7      399.3       430.7
                                     p-value                                        0.00       0.00        0.00

Each cell reports value of survivor function at UE duration in left-hand column, i.e., each cell gives the proportion of the unemployment duration
distribution that is at least as great as the value in the left-hand column. Column (1) is empirical survivor function observed in the sample,
while columns (2)-(4) give predicted survival function for models using the indicator reservation wage inputs. χ2 statistic is from auxiliary
regression of ones on sample moments; statistic is N R2 from this regression, and is distributed χ2 (m), where m = 1 is the number of moments;
see Cameron and Trivedi (2005, p. 261-2). Appendix C describes this test in greater detail.




       Table 7: Moments and quantiles of empirical and predicted accepted wage distributions


                                                                      Accepted wage
                                                           (1)             (2)      (3)                    (4)
                                                    empirical              w∗      wq5                 wM∗
                                                                                                           LE
                                    mean                2486.4          2346.4   2336.0                2295.2
                                 (std. dev.)          (1859.9)        (1356.6) (1682.5)              (1529.5)
                                  quantiles
                                      0.1                  902.0          886.9          709.6          866.6
                                     0.25                 1299.9         1341.2         1087.4         1224.6
                                      0.5                 1835.2         1969.7         1760.6         1789.8
                                     0.75                 3108.0         2899.8         2915.4         2753.2
                                      0.9                 4961.0         4278.9         4676.0         4282.1
                                      χ2                                  221.7          204.0          196.8
                                    p-value                                0.00           0.00           0.00

Each cell reports corresponding moment or quantile of observed accepted wages for empirical wage distribution (column 1) and predicted wage
distribution by reservation wage input used in model estimation (columns 2-4). χ2 statistic is from auxiliary regression of ones on sample
moments; statistic is N R2 from this regression, and is distributed χ2 (m), where m = 1 is the number of moments; see Cameron and Trivedi
(2005, p. 261-2). Appendix C describes this test in greater detail.




                                                                       32
    Figure 1: Wages and reservation wages




Full-time equivalent wages based on 160 hours of work per month.




                              33
Figure 2: Density of accepted wages and first unemployment spell

                              (a)




                              (b)




                              34
Figure 3: Reservation wages and accepted wages under employer wage subsidy

                                   (a)




                                   (b)




                                   35
Figure 4: Probability of offer acceptance under employer wage subsidy




                                 36
Figure 5: Unemployment survivor function under employer wage subsidy: 12 and 24-month UE
spell

                                          (a)




                                          (b)




                                          37
