NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEFYING GRAVITY:
THE 1932 IMPERIAL ECONOMIC CONFERENCE AND THE REORIENTATION OF CANADIAN TRADE
David S. Jacks
Working Paper 17242
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17242

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2011

This paper was written while the author was a visitor at UCLA, and he thanks the Department of Economics
for its hospitality. He also thanks Jen Baggs, Krishna Pendakur, Leah Platt Boustan, and Almos Tassonyi
for advice and appreciates the comments from seminars at Caltech, the LSE, Toronto, Waterloo, and
Western Ontario as well as from the 2011 All-UC Group/Caltech/Huntington Conference, the 2011
Canadian Network in Economic History meetings, the 2011 NBER DAE Summer Institute, and the
2011 Rocky Mountain Empirical Trade meetings. Finally, the author gratefully acknowledges the
Social Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada for research support. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by David S. Jacks. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Defying Gravity: The 1932 Imperial Economic Conference and the Reorientation of Canadian
Trade
David S. Jacks
NBER Working Paper No. 17242
July 2011
JEL No. F1,N7
ABSTRACT
In the wake of the Great Depression, the Canadian government embarked on a stunning reversal in
its commercial policy. A key element of its response was the promotion of intra-imperial trade at the
Imperial Economic Conference of 1932. This paper addresses whether or not Canadian trade was able
to defy gravity and divert trade flows towards other signatories at Ottawa. The results strongly suggest
that the conference was a failure from the Canadian perspective. Potential sources of this failure include
unreasonable expectations about the likely reductions in trade costs and a neglect of key considerations
related to certainty and credibility.

David S. Jacks
Department of Economics
Simon Fraser University
8888 University Drive
Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6
CANADA
and NBER
dsjacks@gmail.com

I. Introduction
The recent collapse in international trade in the wake of the Global Financial Crisis has
led to fundamental reconsiderations of the structure and sustainability of the global economy.
Although the sources of this trade bust are still debated, changes in the composition of output
and trade, the role of inventories, and issues related to trade credit and the spread of cross-border
supply chains are all clearly implicated (cf. Alessandria et al., 2010; Bems et al., 2010; Chor and
Manova, 2010; Eaton et al., 2010; Levchenko et al., 2010). What has been less contentious is the
appropriate response of policymakers with respect to commercial policy. This, of course, comes
in marked contrast to the experience of the interwar period.
In this paper, the Canadian experience with the international economy of the interwar
period is explored. In particular, the implications of the Canadian policy response in the wake of
the Great Depression and the erection of trade barriers, most notably in the form of SmootHawley in the United States, are considered. Apart from home-grown tariff legislation, a key
element of the Canadian response was the promotion of intra-imperial trade at the Imperial
Economic Conference of 1932. This represented a stunning volte-face in Canadian commercial
policy which had previously emphasized maintaining continued access to US goods and markets.
Contemporaries and subsequent commentators were oftentimes convinced of the folly of the
exercise: in the Lords sitting, Lord Arnold asked, “Is it surprising, having regard to the fact that
[they] are contiguous for over two thousand miles, that the trade of the United States with
Canada has been growing much more than our trade, although we have got preference and the
United States have not? The point which I am submitting…is this, that this Ottawa policy is
working against natural conditions” (1932, p. 828). Thus, drawing on an analogy from the
international trade literature, the primary question which this paper seeks to address is whether or
not Canadian trade was able to defy gravity—that is, defy the attractive force for Canadian
exports and imports exerted by the economic mass and close proximity of the US—and divert
trade flows towards other signatories at Ottawa in 1932.
The choice of Canada as the observational unit is motivated by a number of reasons. First
is the sheer size of the Canadian-US border trade and its long-running preeminence. By 1927,
Canada had surpassed the United Kingdom as the United State’s largest trading partner (Jacks et
al., 2011), a position it holds into the present day and which represents the largest bilateral

2

trading relationship over the past 80 years.1 What is more, this single border represented roughly
5% of all world trade in the interwar period. At the same time, the Canadian response to the
combined pressures of the Great Depression in general and Smoot-Hawley in particular was to
embark on its most pronounced reversal in commercial policy to date. Documenting the
evolution of this key trading relationship is, thus, important not only for our understanding of
history, but also of the context of commercial policy and performance in the present.
Second, Canada provides insight into the critical dilemma facing small- and mediumsized economies which are dominated by a few (generally large and proximate) trading partners.
Historically, we can place areas like Australasia, the Low and Nordic Countries, and Latin
America in this category; in the contemporary setting, this may become more binding for the
Four East Asian Tigers, Japan, and (again) Australasia with the rise of China as a dominant
player in international trade. The particularly Canadian experience explored here serves to
highlight the tension between the benefits of integration which are often hard to identify and the
more readily felt costs which are borne in the face of significant reversals in a dominant trading
partner’s commercial policy and economic fortunes. The topic of diversifying trade partners
uncannily emerges any time progress along these lines is reversed. Unfortunately, little of the
debate surrounding this decades-long issue has addressed the feasibility, as opposed to the
desirability, of such a re-orientation of trade flows. This paper represents a step forward in this
direction and implicitly questions the logic of bilateral or multilateral trade agreements
encompassing widely geographically dispersed nations.
Finally and more generally, the experience of commercial policy in the interwar period
has proven to be one of the few decisive lessons learned from economic history. A consensus
seems to have emerged within the economics profession, across the political spectrum, and more
haltingly—but more surprisingly—throughout the electorate. This consensus holds that while
broad-based protectionism may perhaps bolster the domestic macroeconomy in its direct effects,
indirectly it almost certainly will raise the counter-protectionist ire of other nations and, thus,
1

This blanket statement has a few notable exceptions when the United Kingdom-United States bilateral trading

relationship reasserted itself. These came in 1933 when Canadian-US commercial and diplomatic relations where
close to their nadir and the war years of 1940 through 1944 when the US engaged in an unprecedented and, thus,
unrepresentative export trade with the UK. Putting things in further perspective, the volume of Canadian-US trade
still held a commanding 17% lead on the next runner-up, namely China and the US, at the time of writing.

3

little is to be won. Additionally, the experience of the interwar with respect to unilateral changes
in commercial policy initiated the pronounced move towards multilateralism in the post-World
War II period (Baldwin, 2009; Snyder, 1940). Therefore, a further consideration of the policy
disaster of the interwar may contribute to a wider appreciation of this consensus view.
Section II below sets the scene leading up to the fateful events surrounding the period
from 1929 to 1932. It reveals that the Canadian economy was highly exposed to changes in
commercial and economic conditions in the United States and, thus, woefully unprepared for the
Great Depression. This fact might help explain why the Canadian economy had not regained the
economic ground lost during the depression even as late as 1939. Sections III and IV represent
the main contribution of the paper. Canadian trade statistics are particularly rich for this period
and relatively unexploited. The results strongly suggest that the Imperial Economic Conference
of 1932 was a failure in that the cause of Canadian trade with the rest of the Empire seems to
have been furthered little in its wake. The final sections seek to identify the sources of this failure
as well as placing the results in a broader context. They demonstrate that either implicitly or
explicitly the goals of the conference carried with them unreasonable expectations about the
scale of the attendant reductions in bilateral trade costs and, thus, the scale of effects on bilateral
trade flows. Furthermore, the discussion at Ottawa neglected key considerations with respect to
certainty over the likely course of Canadian commercial policy and credibility in maintaining
any set of provisions emerging from the conference itself.

II. Canadian Trade: Policy and Performance, 1921-1939
Riding the tide of a mounting immigration, investment, and trade boom in the early
1920s, the Canadian economy experienced significant gains in this period, with real GDP per
capita rising 50.9% in the years from 1921 to 1929 (Maddison, 2004; Safarian, 1970). This
growth was also mirrored in the trade statistics: Canadian real exports and imports grew by
30.3% and 20.8%, respectively (Jacks et al., 2011). Underlying this growth was the development
of new resource exports such as newsprint and non-ferrous minerals to the United States as well
as a durable consumer goods sector, especially for automobiles, which serviced both the market
of Canada and the British Empire (Pomfret, 2000). However, forces were mounting even from
the beginning of the decade which would draw this effervescence, especially in the external
sector, to an end.
4

Of particular note in this respect was the rise of protectionist sentiment within the United
States beginning with the tariff bill of 1922. In response to the deteriorating conditions in world
agricultural markets following World War I, the Fordney-McCumber tariff soon found room to
incorporate wider calls for industrial protection. The result was a slight decline in the percentage
of Canadian goods which entered the United States duty-free from 66 to 64% but a more
moderate increase in both the equivalent ad valorem rates for dutiable imports and total imports
from 27 to 39% and from 9 to 14%, respectively (Hart, 2002). Although relatively innocuous in
terms of its effects on international trade in general and Canada-US trade in particular, FordneyMcCumber did act as an ominous warning of things to come: namely the all-too-easy willingness
on the part of the United States to sacrifice foreign access to the domestic market in the face of
slack business conditions at home.
The aforementioned conditions in world agricultural markets were also to have a more
direct impact on the Canadian economy during this period. Canada’s privileged geographic
position and imperial ties had allowed for unprecedented access for its agricultural goods in
European markets during World War I. But for every boom, there is almost invariably a bust,
and Canada was no exception in these circumstances: the share of agriculture in Canadian
exports was in secular decline from 1919 all the way up to 1939 (a pattern documented later in
the paper). In terms of its wider external relations, the Canadian economy was also heavily
reliant on a handful of markets and a handful of goods. Even in the face of efforts to promote
trade diversification, at no time were more than 33% of all exports shipped to destinations other
than the United Kingdom or the United States (Hart, 2002). What is more, the Canadian
economy of the 1920s “was greatly dependent on two export demands—for American
newspapers and European bread” (Marcus, 1954, p. 32) with fully 32% of all exports accounted
for by wheat and flour alone and an additional 15% accounted for by newsprint and wood pulp
alone (Safarian, 1952).2 Of course, anything which threatened either demand, whether it be
deteriorating incomes or protectionist commercial policy, could potentially have serious
implications for the Canadian macroeconomy.
2

Naturally, these two features of Canadian trade are one of the predominant themes of Canadian economic history

from the time of Confederation to the present day. In 2010, 73% of Canadian exports were shipped to the United
States (the United Kingdom absorbed a scant 4%) while 44% of Canadian exports were accounted for by the energy,
forestry, and metal goods categories.

5

The combination of these dampening forces was already being signaled in Canadian trade
statistics from the middle of the decade. Figures 1a and 1b, respectively, depict real monthly
exports and imports for the period from January 1925 to December 1939. In order to extract
broader patterns from the highly seasonal nature of these series, they have also been plotted with
their 12-month moving average. In 1925, exports clearly outstripped imports. However,
comparing the evolution of the two series, it is clear that whereas exports had effectively peaked
by then imports continued to climb throughout the late 1920s. In combination, we can see that
this scissors-like movement was to have strong implications for the Canadian trade balance as
depicted in Figure 2. From a monthly excess of exports over imports of $275 million in
December 1925, the monthly balance of trade had declined to $90 million in December of 1928.
Nor was this absolute decline unmatched relative to GDP: the ratio of the balance-of-trade to
GDP fell from +7.94% in 1925 to +2.07% in 1928, representing a significant drag to the
Canadian economy in the years leading up to 1929.
1929, of course, was to inaugurate a series of even more unfortunate developments for
the Canadian macroeconomy. The simultaneous peak in the economic activity of the United
States as well as drafting of the Smoot-Hawley tariff bill in the summer of 1929 constituted a
serious threat to the two sources of Canadian success in external—and particularly American—
markets: buoyant incomes and open commercial access. Little wonder then that the second and
third quarter of 1929 represented the absolute peaks for the 12-month moving averages of
Canadian exports and imports, respectively. What is less widely appreciated is the fact that the
Canadian economy had already started its long decline into the Great Depression well before this
point with GDP having peaked sometime in 1928 (Maddison, 2004; Marcus, 1954).
Thus, any glimmer of hope which remained for Canada steadily diminished throughout
the remainder of 1929 and the beginning of 1930 as the session and accompanying log-rolling
process surrounding Smoot-Hawley was taken to unprecedented lengths (Taussig, 1930a). As
Kindleberger (1989, p. 170) writes, “Democrats joined Republicans in their support for tariffs for
all who sought them; and both Republicans and Democrats were ultimately pushed from the
committee room as lobbyists took over the task of setting the rates.” With its revision of tariffs
on over 20,000 line-items, the aim of the legislation was remarkably clear in its focus as well as
remarkably myopic to its likely consequences: in response to official Canadian protest and notso-veiled threats of retaliation, the House Ways and Means Committee replied that “‘they were
6

not so concerned with American exports, but only with the prevention of imports’” (quoted in
Kottman, 1975, pp. 615-616). As time progressed, much of the force of Smoot-Hawley—in
combination with rapidly declining commodity prices—was to clearly fall on Canada, given its
overwhelming reliance upon the US export market and the heavy-handed treatment to which the
border trade in agricultural goods was subjected (Irwin, 2011; Taussig, 1930b). Thus, for
Canada, Smoot-Hawley was to play a deciding role in not only short-run electoral politics as
described below but also a longer-run change in its commercial policy objectives from
maintaining continued access to US goods and markets to finding a substitute for the US
altogether (Conybeare, 1985; Kottman, 1975).
The Canadian response to Smoot-Hawley was more than just immediate: in anticipation
of the bill’s final passage in June 1930, Prime Minister Mackenzie King announced changes to
the Canadian tariff schedule a full month beforehand. The main innovations were comprised of
reductions in tariffs on 270 goods sourced from within the British Empire and the introduction of
countervailing duties on 16 goods imported from the United States, corresponding to roughly
30% of US exports to Canada (McDonald et al., 1997). While this response was swift, it
seemingly lacked conviction with Hart for one (2002, p. 106) calling the effort more “symbolic
than substantive” and reflective of a Canadian strategy which emphasized increased
discrimination in the face of increased protectionism. Such moderation on the part of the Liberal
administration, however, was not rewarded in the so-called “Canada First” election of late July
1930 (“The Imperial Economic Conference”, 1934).
King’s chief adversary in this election was Richard B. Bennett. From the very beginning,
addressing the affront of Smoot-Hawley and identifying the appropriate response were the key
issues of the campaign. Bennett, in particular, was very clear about his intentions: “he pledged
[not only] a future in which Canadians would no longer be ‘hewers of wood and drawers of
water’” but also one in which higher tariffs would be used “‘to blast a way into markets that have
been closed’” (Rooth, 2010, p. 8). The message was well-received with the Conservatives
presiding over a land-slide victory. Locating the sources of this win is relatively straightforward,
seeing as how Smoot-Hawley had strongly antagonized wide sections of the Canadian electorate
by increasing tariffs on the chief exports of almost every province (Hart, 2002). Indeed,
McDonald et al. (1997) find that those ridings most affected by Smoot-Hawley swung decidedly
Conservative.
7

The election of Bennett produced two outcomes with respect to Canadian commercial
policy. Given the clear mandate in favor of protectionism, the administration proceeded to
supplement the tariffs of May 1930 the following September. Agricultural implements, electrical
equipment, meats, and textiles among other goods were now subject to an emergency tariff; an
upper-bound estimate of the effects of these new tariffs suggests that they potentially reduced US
exports to Canada by 21% (Irwin, 2011). These changes were also significant in that by
upwardly revising tariffs across the board they almost fully reversed the preferences for British
goods embodied in the tariff legislation of May (MacKay, 1932). Clearly, protectionism against
all and not discrimination against the United States was to be the new order of the day. Further
measures were forthcoming in June 1931which saw rises in Empire, general, and intermediate
rates as well as the imposition of higher anti-dumping rates (Kindleberger, 1989).
Bennett also made good on his promise to call yet another Imperial Economic
Conference in order to more fully decouple the Canadian economy from that of the United
States. The conference of 1930 had yielded little in the way of substantive results. Much of this
reflected the conflict between the Dominions’ desire to more fully penetrate the UK market in
the guise of imperial preferences and the British government’s long-suffering commitment to
free trade. At the conference’s conclusion, Bennett issued an invitation to reconvene the next
year in Ottawa. Accordingly, expectations were not very high. Had the proposed conference
proceeded as planned it is not obvious that the fundamental divergence of views in the
Dominions and Westminster could have been reconciled (Drummond, 1972). However, the
conference was delayed until 1932, a delay which witnessed not only the rise of the National
coalition government in the UK in October 1931 but also the British abandonment of the gold
standard and the cause of free trade (Capie, 1983; Rooth, 2010).
By the time that it was formally convened in July 1932, both Canadian and world trade in
general were in free-fall as attested to by Figures 1a and 1b. Canadian real exports and imports
were down 48.6% and 61.2%, respectively, from July 1929. At the bilateral level, trade with the
United States looked even worse: real exports to the US were down 67.3% while real imports
were down by 65.4%. Bilateral trade with the United Kingdom represented a more moderate case
with equivalent figures for exports and imports being a “mere” 48.3% and 13.4%. What is more,
these declines while far from uniform across commodity groups were broad-based. The average
rate of decline in exports across nine commodity classifications (detailed below) was 49.3% with
8

a minimum of 27.6% for miscellaneous commodities and a maximum of 67.8% for non-ferrous
metal products; likewise, the average rate of decline in imports was 57.7% with a minimum of
22.6% for chemical products and a maximum of 79.1% for iron products. When matched against
the cumulative declines in GDP from 1929 to 1932, these declines in exports and imports were
little short of breathtaking: GDP declined 24.1% in Canada, 5.1% in the United Kingdom, 27.0%
in the United States, and perhaps 10.4% globally (Maddison, 2004). Conclusively locating the
sources of this trade bust has remained elusive (cf. Estevadeordal et al., 2003; Madsen, 2001).
But clearly, this suggests a strong role for rising trade costs (Jacks et al., 2011; Hynes et al.,
2011), especially in the form of the heightened protectionism detailed above.
Dominion success at Ottawa was critical in light of the passage of the UK’s Import
Duties Act of February 1932 (Glickman, 1947). This allowed for a direct duty of 10% advalorem which was to be levied on a very broad range of goods imported from non-Empire
sources and which was subject to increase by a newly-formed Tariff Advisory Commission.
Effective November 15, 1932, trade with the non-dependent Empire would also be subject to this
legislation, barring that no new agreements were reached in Ottawa (Drummond, 1972).
Standing in the way of this success were a few key items of contention which might be
summarized as “meat, wheat, and the Soviets”. The first two items reflected the intransigency of
Australia and Canada in securing preferential access to the UK market for their two respective
main exports through higher tariffs (Pomfret, 2000). The last item was a particularly Canadian
effort to block Soviet access to the UK market in the face of real or imagined dumping activity
which threatened Canadian competitiveness in the key markets for wheat and wood products
(Kindleberger, 1989). Lining up against these interests, the British negotiators pushed for their
preference to lower barriers within the Empire rather than raise barriers outside of it.
Relenting somewhat on this point, the UK managed to negotiate 7 agreements on a
strictly bilateral basis with Australia, Canada, India, Newfoundland, New Zealand, South Africa,
and Southern Rhodesia as well as grant substantial tariff concessions to a number of non-selfgoverning colonies (Lattimer, 1934). In addition, Canada managed to negotiate or re-negotiate 5
agreements with Australia, the Irish Free State, New Zealand, South Africa, and Southern
Rhodesia while further agreements with India and Newfoundland were concluded shortly
thereafter (Hart, 2002). The principal outcomes from the perspective of the UK were that it
guaranteed continued application of the Import Duties Act on non-imperial goods while the
9

Empire was granted continued exemption, the UK would impose new or revised tariffs on a wide
range of agricultural products, the UK would apply significant quantitative restrictions on the
import of animal products from foreign countries, that signatories were granted MFN status in
any future negotiations with non-Imperial parties, and that all the aforementioned stipulations
would continue for five years but were subject to change at the discretion of the signatories given
a mere six months’ notice (Glickman, 1947).
In return for this lengthy list of concessions, the Dominions ceded considerably less
ground. Canada, in particular, made vague promises about abolishing its surcharge on British
imports and its imposition of arbitrary customs valuations, both of which were imposed
following the UK’s abandonment of the gold standard (Eichengreen and Irwin, 2010). More
substantively, it pledged no changes for those goods already enjoying preferential treatment and
an improvement in the terms of preference for over 200 British goods. Compared to the
relatively scant 900 line-items in its tariff code, this easily represented the most important
concession to the UK. Canada affected similar changes—or at least, maintenance—of rates of
preferential treatment in its agreements with the rest of the British Empire.
With such potentially far-reaching changes in commercial policy, especially with respect
to the UK market, the cause of Imperial trade seemed poised for a turn for the better. Indeed,
even a very casual glance at Figures 1a and 1b reveals a significant reversal in Canadian trade
volumes almost immediately following the enactment of the provisions of the Ottawa
Conference in November 15, 1932. Thus, a very historically uninformed opinion might ascribe a
primary role for the Ottawa Conference in reviving the fortunes of Canadian trade in this period.
Of course, a number of conflating factors arose in the meantime such as the global recovery in
GDP from 1933 and the perhaps-related abandonment of the gold standard by the US in the same
year. Further ambiguity was introduced by Canada’s relatively quick “retreat from
protectionism” and its subsequent ratification of reciprocal trade agreements with the United
States in 1935 and 1938 (O’Brien and McDonald, 2009). So, the question remains: did the
Imperial Economic Conference actually serve to boost the growth of imperial trade over and
beyond that of non-imperial nations? And even if successful in this regard, did it matter, citing
the overwhelming importance of the US market? If not, what were the sources of its failure? The
following sections seek to directly address these questions with a consideration of the data used
throughout being the first point of order.
10

III. Data
The primary source used in this study is the Dominion Bureau of Statistics’ Monthly
Report of the Trade of Canada from January 1925 to December 1927 and Quarterly Report of
the Trade of Canada from January 1928 to December 1939. Publication of these series began in
1894 and continues—albeit under a different name—to this day. Obviously, this tremendous data
collection over so many years simply reflects the importance of the external sector to the
Canadian economy as well as official recognition of this fact from early on.
That being said, the coverage of the bilateral trade data is uniquely wide across the
commodity and country spectrum for this era. The dataset encompasses nine broad commodity
classifications: Agricultural and Vegetable Products; Animals and Animal Products; Fibres,
Textiles, and Textile Products; Wood, Wood Products, and Paper; Iron and Its Products; NonFerrous Metals and Their Products; Non-Metallic Minerals and Their Products; Chemicals and
Allied Products; and Miscellaneous Commodities.3 Figures for total bilateral exports and imports
are separately reported which correspond with the sum across the nine commodity
classifications. In 1925, the dataset records Canadian exports and imports with 99 trading
partners; this figure rises to 119 nations by 1939. Figures 3 and 4 graphically summarize the
geographic spread of the sample, making it clear that the dataset spans the near universe of
possible trading partners. All told, the sources allow for 179,154 unique monthly observations on
Canadian exports and imports from January 1925 to December 1939, of which this paper only
exploits a relatively small percentage4 due to the identification strategy detailed below and the

3

4

Appendix I details the principal goods contained in each commodity classification.
The final dataset contains 205,090 monthly observations on Canadian exports and imports which include both

totals across commodity classifications as well as totals across geographic units such as the British Empire. In the
majority of cases, the data collection process was straightforward (if mind-numbing). However, the beginning of the
fiscal year in April 1936 marked a significant departure from former reporting standards. At this time, the Dominion
Bureau of Statistics continued to publish monthly bilateral figures for aggregate exports and imports but stopped
publishing the equivalent monthly bilateral figures for the nine commodity classifications, substituting quarterly
figures instead. In order to maintain comparability with the data for earlier periods, this quarterly data was
transformed into monthly data by calculating the product of the monthly bilateral figures for aggregate exports and
imports and the quarterly shares of each commodity classification in aggregate exports and imports on a country-bycountry basis. Thus, Canadian exports of agricultural and vegetable products to the United Kingdom in April 1936
was estimated as

11

decision to aggregate the raw data up to the quarterly level. Lacking monthly or quarterly data
on export and import prices disaggregated across commodities, all bilateral trade data have been
deflated by the Statistics Canada monthly wholesale consumer price index reported in the Global
Financial Database and the summed up across quarters.5
To gain a broader perspective on the composition of Canadian trade and its changes over
time, Figures 5a and 5b consider Canadian export and import shares by region on an annual basis
from 1925 to 1939. In Figure 5a, the clearest pattern for Canadian exports is the continuing
jockeying of position between the United Kingdom and the United States. A slight lead on the
part of the United Kingdom in 1925 is whittled away until 1930 when the share of the United
States crests. Another reversal in the United Kingdom’s favor occurs in 1932 which, in turn, is
reversed in 1936. As to other regions, there is a clear decline in the European share dating from
1928 or 1932 at the latest, a clear (but less visible) increase in the share of the rest of the British
Empire from 1933, and no clear trend in the shares of Asia or Latin America. In Figure 5b, the
dominance of the United States as a source of Canadian imports is without question as its share
stood on average 3.5 times greater than that of the United Kingdom, its closest competitor. At the
same time, it demonstrates a fair degree of variation as the series for the United Kingdom and the

(1)

,

,

&

,

,

&

.

In order to gauge the appropriateness of this approach, two simple diagnostics were employed. First, the estimated
figures by commodity and country were summed up across countries and were then compared to monthly aggregate
figures for exports and imports for the nine commodity categories which were reported from April 1936 to
December 1939. In this case, the correlations between the reported and constructed series were 0.9972 and 0.9996
for exports and imports, respectively. Second, the same methodology of transforming quarterly into monthly trade
data was followed for the fiscal year, 1935-1936, the last fiscal year for which monthly bilateral trade flows by
commodity were actually reported. The estimated figures were then compared to the recorded values for this year. In
this case, the correlations between the reported and constructed series were 0.9990 and 0.9998 for exports and
imports, respectively. These results, thus, leave little doubt that the approach proposed above is appropriate.
5

The Dominion Bureau of Statistics (1949) does report price indices for exports and imports in aggregate and across

eight commodity classifications (Agricultural and Vegetable Products and Animals and Animal Products are
combined together in this instance) for the years from 1926 to 1939. Substituting the annual, but disaggregate price
indices for the monthly, but aggregated ones does not materially affect the results presented here. Tables 4a and 4b
later demonstrate this fact by replicating the main tables of the paper.

12

United States reach their respective trough and peak in 1929 and their respective peak and trough
in 1933. Indeed, the symmetry between the two is nothing short of remarkable. As to other
regions, the same pattern as for exports emerges again: a declining share for Europe, a (much
more visible) rise for the rest of the British Empire, and a lack of trend for Asia and Latin
America. Underlying all of these series is a decided lack of a sharp discontinuity in 1932,
suggesting that any potential effects of the Ottawa conference were decidedly muted.
Likewise, Figures 6a and 6b consider Canadian export and import shares by commodity
on an annual basis from 1925 to 1939. In Figure 6a, there are clear patterns in export shares with
respect to the aforementioned secular decline in agricultural goods and the maintenance of the
animal products, iron products, and paper and wood categories. However, the most striking
pattern is the dramatic climb of non-ferrous metal products, a climb which through fits and starts
saw a clear inflection point in 1932, arriving in 1939 as a close second to the agricultural sector
in its share of Canadian exports (0.2340 versus 0.2327). Less clear was the near doubling of the
contributions arising from the chemical products, fibres and textiles, miscellaneous, and nonmetallic mineral product categories, yet these sectors combined still accounted for a little less
than 10% of Canadian exports in 1939. With respect to import shares, Figure 6b first
demonstrates the greater balance of import versus export shares across commodity categories: at
no point does a single category exceed 27% of Canadian imports. Like the export shares, there
are secular declines in the agricultural and fibre and textile categories while iron products
reaches a successive peak and trough in 1929 and 1932, likely reflecting the retreat of American
imports documented in Figure 5b above. We see the obverse pattern of trough and peak in 1929
and 1932 for the chemicals, miscellaneous, and non-metallic mineral product categories.
Considering developments in intra-industry trade, Figure 7 depicts the Grubel-Lloyd
index by commodity category. This is simply calculated as
(2)

1

|

|

100

and is interpreted as the fraction of total trade in a given commodity classification, i, which is
accounted for by intra-industry trade (times 100). Here, apart from the dramatic decline in the
index for non-ferrous metal products and the rise in the index for fibre and textiles, few striking
patterns emerge, suggesting that more dramatic changes in the structure of Canadian industry
and, thus, intra-industry trade awaited the post-World War II period.

13

Finally, Figures 8a and 8b depict changes in the extensive margin of Canadian bilateral
trade over time by considering the share of commodity-country observations for which the
source records a value of zero. Although for a few series in Figure 8a there is a slight rise in the
number of zero observations around 1929, the clearest pattern is the downward trend in the
various series. This is a pattern mirrored, albeit less forcefully, in Figure 8b for Canadian
imports. Cumulatively, these two figures suggest that the effects of the Ottawa Conference—and
indeed all similar commercial policy innovations—are most likely to be found in changes in the
intensive margin of bilateral trade during this period.

IV. Empirics
Again, the primary questions motivating this study are the following. Did the Ottawa
Conference actually serve to boost the growth of imperial trade over and beyond that of nonimperial nations? And even if successful in this regard, did it matter, citing the overwhelming
importance of the US market? If not, what were the sources of its failure?
The most straightforward way to proceed is to note that bilateral trade flows are typically
described by an equation like the following:
(3)

.

The first term represents exports from country i to country j at time t while the second term is a
common time-specific factor determining trade. The third and fourth terms are indices of the
attributes of exporter i and importer j, respectively, which are potentially time-varying. The final
term represents factors which directly affect bilateral trade intensity. Thus, bilateral trade is a
function of factors common to all countries, factors within particular countries such as size and
productivity, and factors specific to country-pairs. It is these last country-pair specific factors
which will be of particular interest here as they are thought to capture the bilateral trade costs
facing countries. Trade costs are all the costs of transaction and transport associated with the
exchange of goods across national borders. Broadly defined, they include obvious barriers such
as tariffs and transport costs but also many other barriers that are more difficult to observe such
as the costs of overcoming language barriers and exchange rate risk. For our purposes, we wish
to determine the degree to which the Ottawa Conference served to first lower bilateral trade costs
between its signatories and then raise bilateral trade flows in the same over and beyond that of
non-signatories.
14

As a first step, a seemingly appropriate identification strategy is to make use of a simple
difference-in-differences specification, such that year-on-year observations on bilateral trade in
two quarters are pooled:
(4) ln

.

Here, T is an indicator for time which is common to all country-pairs and Ottawa is an indicator
for whether a particular Canadian trading partner was a signatory at the Ottawa Conference.6
Note that this specification necessarily assumes that any annual changes in other bilateral trade
cost elements (e.g., maritime freight rates) are uncorrelated with Ottawa. Likewise, it assumes
there is no change in the attributes of exporter i and importer j. This last assumption is the
stronger of the two, and in later sections, we address this issue head-on by exploring a much
more exacting specification.
Another issue which arises is the appropriate means for estimating gravity equations such
as (4). It has long been noticed that this particular specification presents a problem in the
presence of bilateral trade observations which are zero. The most common solutions have been
either to employ a Tobit estimator or transform the dependent variable into ln 1

and run

OLS (otherwise known as scaled OLS). Recently, Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2006) have argued
that in the presence of heteroskedasticity such estimators are biased and inconsistent. Instead,
they argue for the estimating (4) in its multiplicative form by use of a Poisson pseudo-maximumlikelihood (PPML) estimator. They demonstrate that in simulations the PPML estimator
performs markedly better than either the scaled OLS or Tobit estimator as well as argue that their
estimation technique does a superior job of handling zero observations. These claims have also
been corroborated for data from the interwar period (Ritschl and Wolf, 2011), suggesting that the
use of the PPML estimator on bilateral trade levels (as opposed to logs) is a suitable way
forward.7
Finally, this paper fully exploits the multiple dimensions of the dataset by distinguishing
between Canadian bilateral exports and imports, by exploring systematic differences across
commodity classifications and aggregates, and by considering year-on-year changes in trade
6

Thus, Australia, India, the Irish Free State, New Zealand, Newfoundland, South Africa, Southern Rhodesia, and

the United Kingdom would be assigned a value of one for Ottawa.
7

Appendix II replicates the main regressions of the paper variously using the PPML, scaled OLS, and Tobit

estimators. The results there are strongly supportive of the PPML estimator.

15

volumes for given quarters corresponding to the announcement of the Ottawa Conference on
November 23, 1931 (Q4 1931), the announcement of its results on August 15, 1932 (Q3 1932),
and the enactment of its provisions on November 15, 1932 (Q4 1932). The rationale for using
different starting points is that firms, in anticipation of the results at Ottawa, may have entered
new markets in an attempt to gain market share in the future. Tables 1a and 1b report the
coefficients for T and its interaction with Ottawa. In this framework, the coefficient on T is
interpreted as the growth rate shared in common by all countries. The coefficient on T * Ottawa
is then the differential growth in Canadian bilateral exports or imports with signatories of the
Ottawa Conference which is observed at the end of the period.
Thus, the cell in the upper-left hand corner of Table 1a reports the results of estimating
equation (4) for Canadian exports of Agricultural and Vegetable Products, pooling the
observations for the fourth quarters of 1931 and 1932 and, thus, representing the export trade
with 117 countries. Likewise, the cell in the lower-right hand corner of Table 1a reports the
results of estimating equation (4) for total Canadian exports, pooling the observations for the
fourth quarters of 1932 and 1933 and, thus, representing the export trade with 118 countries.8
In the latter case, the respective coefficient values of 0.1864 and 0.0105 for T and T * Ottawa
suggest that in the fourth quarter of 1933 Canadian exports to all other countries of the world
grew on average by 20.5% from the fourth quarter of 1932 while Canadian exports to signatories
at Ottawa grew on average by 21.8% for the same period. However, while the indicator variable
for T is highly statistically significant, the interacted term proves to be grossly statistically
insignificant.
A few conclusions from Table 1a are clearly forthcoming. First, the data demonstrates a
wide range of potential effects arising from the Ottawa conference across commodities. For
instance, the Animals and Animal Products category registers a 24.3% increase in Canadian
exports to signatories in the period from the fourth quarter of 1931 while the Chemicals and
Allied Products category registers a 38.8% decline in the same period. Large differences such as
these arise for almost period, perhaps naturally reflecting the differential size and impact of the
concessions agreed to at Ottawa. Second, even for all this heterogeneity across commodities, the

8

The discrepancy in the country count arises from the fact that Canadian bilateral trade with Afghanistan only began

to be reported in April 1932.

16

results for each product category tell a consistent story when considered as a whole. Thus, the
positive coefficients on the interaction between T and Ottawa in the second column for Animals
and Animal Products, Miscellaneous Commodities, Non-Ferrous Metal Products, Non-Metallic
Mineral Products, and Paper and Wood are consistent with the large and statistically significant
coefficient estimated for Total Merchandise Exports from Q4 1931 to Q4 1932. Finally and most
importantly, even for all this consistency within years, the results for total exports suggest that a
potential differential growth effect for the announcement of the Ottawa conference (+41.6% in
between Q4 1931 and 1932) quickly petered out for the period between Q4 1932 and 1933 when
the differential growth effect stood at a meager (and statistically insignificant) +1.1%.
With respect to Canadian imports, Table 1b corroborates the results above. Estimates of
the T * Ottawa interaction widely vary across commodities, but tell a consistent story within
periods. Furthermore, they point to the steady decline in any potential differential growth effect
of the Ottawa conference from the time of its announcement (+40.1%), from the announcement
of its results (+22.9%), and from the enactment of its provisions (+3.2%). Cumulatively, these
results suggests that the Ottawa Conference was somewhat of a failure in that the cause of
Canadian trade with the rest of the Empire seems to have been furthered little in its wake.
Identifying the sources of this failure as well as placing the results in a broader context is the
objects of the final sections. In what immediately follows, the results presented in Tables 1a and
1b are subjected to a number of robustness exercises.
Robustness: Incorporating Different Time Horizons
A potential objection concerning the preferred specification is that it only incorporates
changes in bilateral trade flows for one particular interval length, namely one year, from the
beginning of the policy innovation. Lacking any formal model or historical precedent, the choice
of a 4 quarter lag may seem arbitrary. To this end, the relevant comparison over time was
extended to include changes over 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 quarters. The results for
exports and imports are reported in Table 2a and 2b, respectively. Table 2a demonstrates a high
degree of correspondence with Table 1a: a potentially strong effect from the announcement of
the conference as seen in the second column gives way to a decided lack of results dating from
the announcement or enactments of its provisions (indeed, the only statistically significant results
in the fourth and sixth columns would suggest a negative effect of the Ottawa conference on
17

Canadian exports to the other signatories). As to Table 2b, the results are decidedly more mixed.
Again, the strong, positive effects of the conference on Canadian imports from the signatories
dating from the time of its announcement emerges whereas there is decidedly less potential
impact dating from the announcement of its results. However, the clearest divergence between
Tables 1b and 2b emerges from the sixth column in which the positive, but statistically
insignificant effect on Canadian imports dating from the enactment of the conference’s
provisions turns decidedly negative and statistically significant at all intervals greater than six
quarters out (i.e. after Q2 1934). If anything, these results cast further doubt on the efficacy of
the Ottawa Conference in promoting intra-imperial trade.

Robustness: Incorporating the Greater British Empire
Naturally, the working definition of Empire used throughout has been a fairly narrow
one: it includes only the signatories of bilateral trade agreements with Canada at or around the
time of the Ottawa Conference, a fairly slim seven dominions and non-dependent colonies plus
the United Kingdom. Perhaps a broader and more historically accurate definition of the British
Empire would change the results. This could be so for a number of reasons. First, the Ottawa
Conference entailed numerous provisions which affected the dependent colonies of the British
Empire. At the same time, it almost certainly heightened awareness of the ongoing “Buy
Empire” campaign (Rooth, 1993). Broadening the definition of the British Empire used increases
the number of countries under consideration from 8 to 35, or roughly one-third of the sample.
The results of this exercise are reported in Table 3. Again, the patterns initially established in
Tables 1a and 1b hold: a potentially strong effect for both exports and imports from the
announcement of the conference (+40.4% and +32.1%, respectively) gives way to decidedly
mixed results dating from the announcement of its provisions (-15.3% and +17.7%,
respectively), and quantitatively small as well statistically insignificant effects from the
enactment of its provisions (-0.1% and +2.6%, respectively).

Robustness: Incorporating Different Price Indices
As mentioned previously, all bilateral trade data have been deflated by the Statistics
Canada monthly wholesale consumer price index reported in the Global Financial Database.

18

Although unlikely given the amount of variation in the nominal bilateral trade series themselves,
the common trend in this series could potentially impart a bias to the estimates. The Dominion
Bureau of Statistics (1949) reports annual price indices for exports and imports in aggregate and
across eight commodity classifications (Agricultural and Vegetable Products and Animals and
Animal Products are combined together in this instance) for the years from 1926 to 1939. Thus,
in Tables 4a and 4b we substitute the annual, but disaggregate price indices for the monthly, but
aggregate price index used in our preferred specification. Again, this exercise does not
materially affect the results: apart from some minor and expected changes in the value of
coefficients, the same patterns of sign and significance emerge.

Robustness: Incorporating Multilateral Resistance
In recent years, one of the strongest conclusions to have emerged from the extensive
literature on the gravity equation is that precise inference relies upon a proper treatment of socalled multilateral resistance (Anderson and van Wincoop, 2003). The best way to think of this is
as an unobserved average trade barrier effect which may potentially bias any estimates of the
effects of changes in bilateral trade costs. That is, there may have been either countervailing or
reinforcing changes in the bilateral trade costs separating other countries from one another which
accompanied any potential reduction in Canadian bilateral trade costs attendant upon the Ottawa
Conference, e.g., the rise in German quantitative restrictions on American goods in 1932.
With respect to the terms of equation (3), the solution is straightforward in that the
exporter and importer effects are now time-varying:
(5)

.

With respect to the data at hand, however, this is problematic in that we only observe Canadian
bilateral trade and, thus, every observation would exactly correspond with the time-varying
exporter or importer fixed effects. One way forward is to combine the Canadian trade data with
equivalent data from the US. The necessary data is drawn from the Bureau of the Census’s
Monthly Summary of Foreign Commerce of the United States which reports monthly US bilateral
exports and imports and which is first translated into Canadian dollars using the monthly
bilateral exchange rate, then deflated using the Canadian monthly consumer price index, and
finally aggregated to the quarterly level. These figures are then joined with the relevant Canadian
trade data, allowing for 95 precise country matches.
19

In this case, we must augment the benchmark difference-in-differences specification to
allow for any differential growth in Canadian versus US trade with signatories at the Ottawa
conference. The resulting difference-in-difference-in-differences (DDD) specification pools
observations on Canadian and US bilateral trade in two periods:
(4) ln
.
Here, Ottawa is an indicator for whether a particular bilateral pair includes a signatory at the
Ottawa Conference, Canada is an indicator for whether a particular bilateral pair includes
Canada, and T is an indicator for time which is common to all country-pairs. The coefficient of
interest in this case will be the seventh beta which indicates the degree to which Canada’s
bilateral trade with signatories at Ottawa changed at a differential rate than that of US bilateral
trade with the same at the end of the period. Again, the PPML estimator is used throughout.
It should also be re-emphasized that this particular specification controls for all countryspecific, but time-variant unobserved variables in particular GDP and the level of the nominal
exchange rate. As such, this is by far the most exacting specification available to test for any
effects of the Ottawa Conference on Canadian bilateral trade flows. The results are reported in
Table 5 below. The coefficients associated with Ottawa * Canada * T repeat a familiar pattern:
positive and strongly statistically significant for the period from the announcement of the
conference while no clear results are forthcoming for the periods corresponding to the
announcement and enactment of its provisions. Thus, the degree to which the Ottawa Conference
altered the pattern of Canadian exports and imports in any meaningful sense remains very much
in doubt.

V. Putting the Ottawa Conference in Perspective
Although this paper represents one of the most rigorous assessments of the Ottawa
Conference, it is far from the first to have considered its likely effects. Apart from the more
narrative-based, contemporary accounts (cf. Lattimer, 1934; MacKay, 1932; Potter, 1932), one
of the first attempts at a true quantitative assessment came from Macdougall and Hutt (1954).
They are generally of the opinion that the system of preferences introduced at Ottawa and
articulated in the intervening twenty years did serve to promote intra-imperial trade. However,

20

they also recognize that any potential identification is confounded by other developments. And in
the intervening fifty-plus years, there still seems to be little consensus on the issue.
On one side of the debate, Kindleberger (p. 178, 1989) resolutely claims that the
conference was “no great success” in that it engendered “endless discussion” and “dissatisfaction
on all parts” but little in way of tangible results. This view is corroborated in contemporary
accounts which highlight problems related to adjusting and interpreting the conference’s many
clauses (Toynbee, 1935). However, the empirical basis of Kindleberger’s claims remains
unclear. Others such as Glickman (1947), Marcus (1954), and Safarian (1970) have just as
resolutely claimed beneficial effects on a similarly thin body of data. A slightly more nuanced
and data-informed view arose with Capie (1983) who argues for a noted rise in intra-Empire
trade which predated 1932 and which could be detected in the aggregate data from as early as the
1870s. At the same time, he allows for the possibility that the Ottawa Conference served to
reinforce this trend. This view was first corroborated by Kitson and Solomou (1991) who found
that the rate of increase of the share of the Empire in British trade seemed to have increased in
the 1930s. Even stronger evidence emerged from Eichengreen and Irwin (1995) in a
consideration of bilateral trade flows for 34 countries taken from 1928, 1935, and 1938. They
find an increase in the value of the coefficient for trade within the British Commonwealth in a
standard gravity framework from 1928 to 1935. Furthermore, the difference is found to be
statistically significant. Given the wide span of years separating these dates, it is not at all
obvious whether this was a consequence of the Ottawa Conference itself or the entrenchment of
deep commercial, financial, and monetary linkages within the Empire in the face of a
disintegrating world economy, a point which Eichengreen and Irwin carefully acknowledge and
which Ritschl and Wolf (2011) confirm.
Part of the confusion with respect to the effects of the Ottawa Conference is perhaps
derived from the more fundamental confusion of what is purposes really were. From the
perspective of the British, it has been argued that the negotiations and generous concessions,
while geared towards the short-term goal of trade creation, also had an eye towards the long-run
goal of substituting the British Empire for global markets (Boyce, 2010). From the perspective of
Canada and the other Dominions, gaining enhanced access to the UK market was clearly one of
their more immediate objectives. But whether this reflected a desire to somehow replace the UK
for the US as the primary destination for Canadian exports or more modestly to return Canadian
21

exports to their pre-1930 levels is unclear (O’Brien and McDonald, 2009). Regardless of what
their long-run aspirations were, however, all signatories hoped that the concessions agreed to in
Ottawa would significantly lower trade costs among them.
In this respect, it is possible to gauge whether expectations of significant trade cost
declines were even reasonable. Jacks et al. (2011) use the following gravity equation which is
consistent with a large number of leading theories of international trade,
(10)

,

and where the product of bilateral exports is a function of two terms. The first term is the product
of domestic trade, that is, how much a country in effect trades with itself. The second term is the
product of two trade cost ratios which represent the extent to which bilateral trade costs exceed
domestic trade costs. Finally, σ is the elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign
goods. By calculating the logarithm of this expression and taking its first difference, it becomes
possible to decompose the growth in bilateral trade into four components: the contribution of
output growth, the contribution of changes in income similarity, the contribution of changes in
trade costs, and the contribution of changes in multilateral factors.
Thus, assuming all else constant, the relationship between bilateral exports and bilateral
trade costs is given by
(11) ∆ ln

2 1

Δ ln 1

.

This implies that, given conditions in August 1932 and a value of 8 for sigma, trade costs would
have needed to decline by a sizeable 9.5% to return Canada-UK bilateral trade to its August 1929
level.9 Likewise, trade costs would have needed to decline by an astounding 38.7% in order for
Canada-UK bilateral trade to reach the August 1929 level of Canada-US bilateral trade. To put
these figures in perspective, bilateral trade costs between Canada and the UK fell by 13.0% for
the entire period from 1870 to 1913, a time of rapidly declining communication and

9

Canadian real exports to the UK stood at $185,293,223 while Canadian real imports from the UK stood at

$152,224,105 in August 1929. Canadian real exports to the UK stood at $185,090,732 while Canadian real imports
from the UK stood at $79,123,309 in August 1932. Canadian real exports to the US stood at $411,059,720 while
Canadian real imports from the US stood at $632,077,286 in August 1929. Finally, the Canadian-UK bilateral trade
cost in 1932 was equal to 0.9208. All that remains is to calculate for the hypothetical value for the bilateral trade
cost in equation (10).

22

transportation costs and significant change in the institutions surrounding world trade (Jacks et
al., 2010). Clearly, such declines represent overly ambitious, if not audacious, expectations on
the downward trajectory of trade costs following the Ottawa Conference.

VI. Conclusion
This paper has explored the effects of the Imperial Economic Conference of 1932,
particularly in the context of subsequent Canadian bilateral export and import performance. The
results have not been particularly kind to the traditional literature which has held that the
conference promoted the cause of imperial trade, at least from the Canadian perspective. Across
commodities, across exports and imports, across different time horizons, across alternative
transformations of the data, and across different specifications, we identify few economically and
statistically significant effects of the conference in the extensive bilateral trade data at hand.
Indeed, the data suggest that any hopes of recovering the ground lost from 1929 were wedded
with unrealistic expectations as to the efficacy and limits of commercial policy.
The paper has also highlighted the asymmetric nature of the forces shaping North
American economic history, as seen in the trading relation between Canada and the United
States. Although the former is dominated by the latter, especially with respect to commercial
policy, the experience of the years from 1929 to 1932 demonstrated the utter folly of either
country attempting to “defy gravity” and sever the links of capital and trade which had served to
not only deepen the division of labor between them but also enhance their joint material wellbeing. In this sense, the paper has implicitly invoked the perennial dilemma of small-to-medium
sized economies in tying their fortunes to a dominant trade partner and suffering at their whim or
going it alone and thereby foregoing potential productivity and welfare gains. Likewise, the
paper has served as a reminder that there seems to have been at least some lessons learned from
economic history, particularly in the context of commercial policy. And nowhere can this be seen
more clearly than in the recent experience surrounding the second great trade bust of the past
century: at no time did the Canadian commitment to free trade seriously waver in the past few
years.
At the same time, the paper opens a number of issues. One of the most glaring of which is
that we still lack a complete quantitative assessment of the forces which were responsible for the
collapse of world trade from 1929 to 1933 and which provided the backdrop to the developments
23

at Ottawa. Pet theories abound, but even eighty years on, not enough work has been done in
systematically relating changes in the various policy, transaction, and transport frictions as well
as global output in driving the trade bust. Apart from antiquarian interests, this episode is
important in that it represents one of the few documented and generalized trade collapses in
world history. What is more, the mechanisms seemingly at work in the case of Canadian bilateral
trade in this period suggest there may be some here-to-fore unexplored forces to be considered.
First is the role of certainty over the likely course of commercial policy in the decision set
of exporters and importers alike. Leo Amery was almost certainly correct in his prognosis that
“unless the manufacturers and farmers of the Empire have some definite assurance they cannot
embark on any policy of development…who is going to build a railway or develop a port on the
assurance of an export trade, the conditions of which may be destroyed before the building is
finished?” (1932, p. 687). Given the present-day evidence on the necessary role of beachhead
activity by exporting firms and the existence of substantial fixed costs to trading activity
(Bernard et al., 2007), such concerns are likely to have been a critical element holding back the
re-orientation of Canadian trade in this period. This is especially true in light of the fact that
informational barriers to trade have almost certainly fallen over time.
Second, and relatedly, is the role of credibility in maintaining any set of provisions linked
to commercial policy. In this respect, the question becomes whether or not the Canadian
commitment to re-orienting its trade away from the United States and towards the rest of the
British Empire was credible. Of course, developments over the past eighty years suggest not.
However, even contemporary accounts seemed doubtful on this front (“Afterthoughts on the
Conference”, 1932; “An Ottawa Impression”, 1932). This situation was not improved when from
as early as January 1933 Canadian Prime Minister Bennett opened the door to trade negotiations
with the United States, remarking before the Toronto Board of Trade that “geographically, we
are part of the North American continent…and it gives me no joy to remind you also that
financially it is in the same position” (quoted in O’Brien and McDonald, 2009, p. 352). Clearly,
from the perspective of firms engaged in international trade, the official Canadian position of
defying the inexorable pull exerted by the combined economic mass and proximity of the US
was untenable. The subsequent re-orientation towards the US in its commercial policy was,
therefore, likely expected.

24

Finally, a thread of analysis which is prominent in accounts from the 1930s but which has
been successively played down through time is the role of endogenous changes in consumer
taste. It is standard in much of the literature to assume that some degree of home bias in
international trade exists. It is also standard to assume that this bias is constant. The experience
of the interwar period suggests that unobserved changes in home (or in this case, imperial) bias
brought about by the radical changes in commercial policy may have significantly altered the
orientation of world trade in this period. Frieden (2006) and Irwin (2011) both present some
compelling examples of the worldwide consumer response to US goods in the wake of SmootHawley. Generalizing this response and framing it within the context of standard models of
consumer demand as well as incorporating the aforementioned elements of certainty and
credibility remain promising ways forward for assessing the forces driving the collapse and reorientation of trade, both in the past and present.

25

References
“Afterthoughts on the Conference.” The Economist. September 24, 1932.
Alessandria, George, Joseph P. Kaboski, Virgiliu Midrigan. “The Great Trade Collapse of
2008-09: An Inventory Adjustment?” NBER Working Paper 16059, 2010.
“An Ottawa Impression.” The Economist. September 3, 1932.
Amery, Leo S. “The Imperial Economic Conference.” International Affairs 11, no. 5 (1932):
678-699.
Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop. “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border
Puzzle.” American Economic Review 93, no. 1 (2003): 170-192.
Baldwin, Robert. “U.S. Trade Policy since 1934: An Uneven Path toward Greater Trade
Liberalization.” NBER Working Paper 15397, 2009.
Bems, Rudolfs, Robert C. Johnson, Kei-Mu Yi. “The Role of Vertical Linkages in the
Propagation of the Global Downturn of 2008.” Dartmouth College, 2010.
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott. “Firms in
International Trade.” Journal of Economic Perspective 21, no. 3 (2007): 105-130.
Boyce, Robert. “The Significance of 1931 for British Imperial and International History.”
Histoire@Politique 11, no. 2 (2010).
Bureau of the Census. Monthly Summary of Foreign Commerce of the United States.
Washington: Government Printing Office, various years.
Capie, Forrest. Depression and Protectionism: Britain between the Wars. London: George Allen
and Unwin Limited, 1983.
Chor, Davin and Kalina Manova. “Off the Cliff and Back? Credit Conditions and International
Trade during the Global Financial Crisis.” NBER Working Paper 16174, 2010.
“Commonwealth: Imperial Conference.” Time. July 25, 1932.
Conybeare, John. “Trade Wars: A Comparative Study of Anglo-Hanse, Franco-Italian, and
Hawley-Smoot Conflicts.” World Politics 38, no. 1 (1985): 147-172.
Dominion Bureau of Statistics. “Export and Import Price Indexes 1926-1948.” D.B.S.
Reference Papers no. 5, 1949.
Dominion Bureau of Statistics. Monthly Report of the Trade of Canada. Ottawa: F.A. Acland,
various years.
Dominion Bureau of Statistics. Quarterly Report of the Trade of Canada. Ottawa: F.A. Acland,
various years.
Drummond, Ian M. British Economic Policy and the Empire, 1919-1939. London: George Allen
and Unwin Limited, 1972.
Eaton, Jonathan, Sam Kortum, Brent Neiman, and John Romalis. “Trade and the Global
Recession.” NBER Working Paper 16666, 2010.
Eichengreen, Barry and Douglas A. Irwin. “Trade Blocs, Currency Blocs and the Reorientation
of World Trade in the 1930s.” Journal of International Economics 38, no. 1 (1995): 1-24.
Eichengreen, Barry and Douglas A. Irwin. “The Slide to Protectionism in the Great Depression:
Who Succumbed and Why?” Journal of Economic History 70, no. 4 (2010): 871-897.
Estevadeordal, Antoni, Brian Frantz, and Alan M. Taylor. “The Rise and Fall of World Trade,
1870–1939.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, no. 2 (2003): 359-407.
Frieden, Jeffry. Global Capitalism: Its Fall and Rise in the Twentieth Century. New York: W.W.
Norton, 2006.
Glickman, David L. “The British Imperial Preference System.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
61, no. 3 (1947): 439-470.
26

Hart, Michael. A Trading Nation: Canadian Trade Policy from Colonialism to Globalization.
Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 2002.
Head, Keith, Thierry Mayer, and John Ries. “The Erosion of Colonial Trade Linkages after
Independence.” Journal of International Economics 81, no. 1 (2010): 1-14.
Hynes, William, David S. Jacks, and Kevin H. O’Rourke. “Commodity Market Disintegration in
the Interwar Period.” Forthcoming in European Review of Economic History, 2011.
Irwin, Douglas A. Peddling Protectionism: Smoot-Hawley and the Great Depression. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2011.
Jacks, David S., Christopher M. Meissner, and Dennis Novy. “Trade Costs in the First Wave of
Globalization.” Explorations in Economic History 47, no. 2 (2010): 127-141.
Jacks, David S., Christopher M. Meissner, and Dennis Novy. “Trade Booms, Trade Busts, and
Trade Costs.” Journal of International Economics (2011).
Kindleberger, Charles P. “Commercial Policy between the Wars.” In The Industrial Economies:
The Development of Economic and Social Policies. Edited by Peter Mathias and Sidney
Pollard. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Kitson, Michael and Solomos Solomou. “Trade Policy and the Regionalization of Imports in
Interwar Britain.” Bulletin of Economic Research 43, no. 2 (1991): 151-168.
Kottman, Richard N. “Herbert Hoover and the Smoot-Hawley Tariff: Canada, A Case Study.”
Journal of American History 62, no. 3 (1975): 609-635.
Lattimer, John E. “The Ottawa Trade Agreements.” Journal of Farm Economics 16, no. 4
(1934): 565-581.
Levchenko, Andrei A., Logan T. Lewis, and Linda L. Tesar. “The Collapse of International
Trade during the 2008-2009 Crisis: In Search of the Smoking Gun.” NBER Working
Paper 16006, 2010.
Macdougall, Donald and Rosemary Hutt. “Imperial Preference: A Quantitative Analysis.”
Economic Journal 64, no. 254 (1954): 233-257.
MacKay, Robert A. “Imperial Economics at Ottawa.” Pacific Affairs 5, no. 10 (1932): 873-885.
Maddison, Angus. The World Economy: Historical Statistics. Paris: OECD, 2004.
Madsen, Jakob B. “Trade Barriers and the Collapse of World Trade during the Great
Depression.” Southern Economic Journal 67, no. 4 (2001): 848-868.
Marcus, Edward. Canada and the International Business Cycle, 1927-1939. New York:
Bookman Associates, 1954.
McDonald, Judith A., Anthony Patrick O’Brien, and Colleen M. Callahan. “Trade Wars:
Canada’s Reaction to the Smoot-Hawley Tariff.” Journal of Economic History 57, no. 4
(1997): 802-826.
O’Brien, Anthony Patrick and Judith A. McDonald. “Retreat from Protectionism: R.B. Bennett
and the Movement to Freer Trade in Canada, 1930-1935.” Journal of Policy History 21,
no. 4 (2009): 331-365.
Pomfret, Richard. “Trade Policy in Canada and Australia in the Twentieth Century.” Australian
Economic History Review 40, no. 2 (2000): 114-126.
Potter, Pitman B. “The British Imperial Economic Conference.” American Journal of
International Law 26, no. 4 (1932): 811-813.
Ritschl, Albrecht O. and Nikolaus Wolf. “Endogeneity of Currency Areas and Trade Blocs:
Evidence from a Natural Experiment.” Kyklos 64, no. 2 (2011): 291-312.
Rooth, Tim. British Protectionism and the International Economy: Overseas Commercial Policy
in the 1930s. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
27

Rooth, Tim. “Retreating from Globalisation: The British Empire/Commonwealth Experience
between the Wars.” University of Portsmouth (2010).
Safarian, A. Edward. “Trade and the Level of Economic Activity in Canada in the 1930’s.”
Canadian Journal of Economics 18, no. 3 (1952): 336-344.
Safarian, A. Edward. The Canadian Economy in the Great Depression. Toronto: McClelland and
Stewart Limited, 1970.
Santos Silva, J.M.C. and Silvana Tenreyro. “The Log of Gravity.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 88, no. 4 (2006): 641-658.
Snyder, Richard C. “Commercial Policy as Reflected in Treaties from 1931 to 1939.” American
Economic Review 30, no. 4 (1940): 787-802.
Taussig, Frank W. “The Tariff, 1929-30.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 44, no. 2 (1930a):
175-204.
Taussig, Frank W. “The Tariff Act of 1930.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 45, no. 1 (1930b):
1-21.
“The Imperial Economic Conference with Particular Reference to the United-Kingdom-Canada
Agreement.” International Affairs 13, no. 2 (1934): 245-252.
Toynbee, Arnold J. Survey of International Affairs 1934. London: Humphrey Milford, 1935.

28

Appendix I
This appendix simply enumerates the principal goods in each of the commodity classifications
introduced in section III. Although non-exhaustive, the list of goods in each sub-heading
represents the majority of the value of trade therein. Note that in this instance the Agricultural
and Vegetable Products and Animals and Animal Products categories are lumped together.
Agricultural and
other primary products

Fibres and textiles

Lumber, pulp, and paper

Iron and steel
and their manufactures

Non-ferrous metals
and their manufactures

Non-metallic minerals
and their manufactures

Exports
Apples; barley; oats; rye; wheat; oatmeal; wheat
flour; fresh beef and veal; dress or undressed
poultry; bacon and hams; cattle for improverment
of stock; dairy cattle over 700 pounds; cattle
over 700 pounds; cheese; condensed milk;
evaporated milk; dried egges; frozen eggs; eggs
in shell; fresh cod fillets; fresh halibut; fresh
lobster; fresh salmon; fresh whitefish; dried cod;
canned sea herring; canned lobster; canned
salmon; malt; maple sugar; whiskey; bright flue
cured tobacco; undressed beaver skins; undressed
black and silver fox; undressed mink; undressed
muskrat; cattle hides and skins; sole leather;
upper leather; linseed and flaxseed oil; alfafa
clover seed; hay.
Cotton fabric; raw wool; rayon and its products;
bags and waste; binder twine; other textiles.

Douglas fir logs; telegraph poles; birch planks
and boards; cedar planks and boards; Douglas
fir; hemlock; pine; spruce; Douglas fir square
timber; red cedar shingles; plywood; poplar
pulpwood; other peeled pulpwood; other unpeeled
pulpwood; sulphate woodpulp; bleached sulphite
dissolving pulp; bleached sulphite paper pulp;
unbleached sulphite strong pulp; unbleached
sulphite news pulp; mechanical woodpulp;
newsprint paper.
Ferro-manganese; ferro-silicon; steel and iron
billets; ingots; and blooms; scrap; railway rails;
locomotive and cars; agricultural implements;
motor vehicles and parts; machinery and parts.

Aluminum bars; ingots; and blooms; aluminum
rods; sheets; and circles; fine copper; copper
ingots; bars; and billets; copper rods; strips; and
sheets; lead in pigs; nickel in matte; nickel in
oxide; fine nickel; platinum in ore concentrates;
silver in ore concentrates; silver bullion; zinc
spelter; other manucatures (including clocks;
watches; print and electrical equipment).
Asbestos milled fibres; asbestos waste and
refuse; bituminous coal; crude artificial abrasives;

Chemicals and fertilizers

Ammonium sulphate; phosphate fertilizer; other
manufactured fertilizer; paints and paint materials;
soda and sodium compounds; other miscellaneous
chemicals.

Miscellaneous

Crude rubber; rubber boots and shoes; tire casings;
electrical energy; settlers' effects; donations
and gifts; other.

Imports
Bananas; grapefruit; oranges, mandarines, etc.;
dates; figs; prunes; raisings; dessicated cocont;
green peanuts; shelled almonds; shelled walnuts;
other shelled nuts; cabbage; carrots; onions;
potatoes, other than seed; tomatoes; Indian corn;
uncleaned rice; molasses; raw sugar for refining;
cocoa beans, not roasted; butter; whale oil; edible
gelatin; green coffee; black tea of Ceylon; black
tea of India; whiskey; bright flue-cured tobacco;
unstemmed cigar leaf; essential oil; palm oil;
crude peanut oil; tallow; undressed muskrat fur;
undressed Persian lamb fur; undressed rabbit fur;
other undressed fur; raw calf skins and kips; raw
cattle hides; raw sheep skins; hops; spirits of
turpentine.
Raw cotton; cotton fabrics, bleached or dyed;
unbleached cotton fabrics; wool in the grease;
washed or second wool; worsted tops; yarns or
warps for manufacture; worsted and serges; artsilk acetate yarn (singles); art-silk staple fibre;
synthetic fabric; unbleached jute fabric; sisal,
istle, and tampico fabric; rags and waste for
manufactures; waste for wiping rags; oilcloth and
floor linoleum.
Oak; furniture; unbleached sulphite woodpulp;
newspapers and periodicals; book and other paper.

Iron ore; wrought scrap; hot rolled bars and billets;
sheets 060 "and less thick"; sheets coated with tin;
skelp; angle beams, 35 pouns and over; machinery
and equipment; agricultural equipment; motor
vehicles and parts; hardware and other
manufactures.
Bauxite ore; tin in blocks, pigs, and bars;
manganese oxide.

Ground China clay; bricks and tiles; China
tableware; anthracite coal, domestic sizes;
anthracite smaller size; bituminous coal; coke;
glass; crude petoleum for refining; gasoline,
lighter than .8236 s.q.; natural casinghead gasoline;
lubricating oils, 25 cents and over; Portland
cement; silica sand; sulphur and brimstone.
Aniline dyes, 1 pound and over; quebracho extract;
phosphate rock; crude muriate of potash; superphosphate; acrids, drugs, and pharmaceuticals;
paints and paint material; sodium compounds;
compounds of tetraethyl lead; ethylene glycol.
Rubber; tire casings; vegetable and mineral wax;
house furnishings; apparel.

TABLE A.1
PRINCIPAL GOODS ACROSS COMMODITY CLASSIFICATIONS
Source: Dominion Bureau of Statistics, 1949.
29

Appendix II
This appendix explores the appropriateness of the PPML estimator. It simply replicates the
results for the last rows of Tables 1a and 1b in its first and fourth rows as well as reports the
results of equivalent regressions using the scaled OLS and Tobit estimators. A quick review of
the table reveals that although the results are broadly consistent with respect to the sign and size
of the coefficients, the PPML estimator delivers more precise results, thus, leading it to be
chosen as the preferred estimator for the purposes of the paper.
CANADIAN EXPORTS & IMPORTS

Total Merchandise Exports, one year out, PPML
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Exports, one year out, Scaled OLS
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Exports, one year out, Tobit
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Imports, one year out, PPML
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Imports, one year out, Scaled OLS
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Imports, one year out, Tobit
standard error
p-value

From announcement of conference, Q4 1931
Ottawa-time interaction
Time fixed effect
-0.2160
0.3479
0.12
0.12
0.06
0.01
-0.2343
0.1779
0.38
0.46
0.54
0.70
0.0015
-0.0579
0.13
0.23
0.99
0.80
-0.2604
0.3371
0.02
0.03
0.00
0.00
-0.3068
0.4053
0.46
0.56
0.51
0.47
-0.1972
0.2957
0.17
0.28
0.25
0.29
n=234

From announcement of results, Q3 1932
Time fixed effect
Ottawa-time interaction
0.3095
-0.1751
0.09
0.09
0.00
0.06
-0.1871
0.3021
0.41
0.45
0.65
0.50
0.1050
0.0100
0.15
0.19
0.48
0.96
0.2058
0.0324
0.06
0.03
0.00
0.20
0.2861
-0.1045
0.49
0.68
0.56
0.88
-0.1262
0.3078
0.16
0.37
0.43
0.41
n=236

From enactment of provisions, Q4 1932
Time fixed effect
Ottawa-time interaction
0.1864
0.0105
0.10
0.11
0.07
0.92
0.0692
0.2467
0.39
0.44
0.86
0.57
0.1464
0.1694
0.13
0.19
0.28
0.38
0.1605
0.0312
0.03
0.05
0.00
0.49
0.4837
-0.1118
0.55
0.71
0.38
0.87
0.1658
0.2061
0.13
0.34
0.20
0.55
n=236

Note: Standard errors clustered on countries.

TABLE A.2
CANADIAN EXPORTS & IMPORTS IN RESPONSE TO OTTAWA,
ALTERNATIVE ESTIMATORS

30

Monthly Exports, 1925-1939 (millions of 1990 CAD)
1500
1350
1200
1050
900
750
600
450
300
150
0
1925

1926

1927

1928

1929

1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

1937

1938

1939

1940

1938

1939

1940

Monthly Imports, 1925-1939 (millions of 1990 CAD)
1500
1350
1200
1050
900
750
600
450
300
150
0
1925

1926

1927

1928

1929

1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

1937

FIGURES 1a & 1b
CANADIAN REAL EXPORTS & IMPORTS

31

Monthly Balance of Trade, 1925-1939 (millions of 1990 CAD)
1000

800

600

400

200

0
1925

1926

1927

1928

1929

1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

1937

1938

1939

1940

-200

-400

FIGURE 2
CANADIAN BALANCE OF TRADE IN REAL TERMS

32

FIGURE 3
CANADIAN TRADE PARTNERS, 1925
Note: nations in white = no recorded trade; nations in black = recorded trade with Canada;
nations in red = recorded trade with Canada and member of the British Empire.

FIGURE 4
CANADIAN TRADE PARTNERS, 1939
Note: nations in white = no recorded trade; nations in black = recorded trade with Canada;
nations in red = recorded trade with Canada and member of the British Empire.
33

Export Shares, 1925-1939
0.70
0.65
0.60
0.55
0.50
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
1925

1926

1927

United States

1928

1929

1930

United Kingdom

1931

1932

1933

Rest of Empire

1934

1935

Europe

1936

1937

Latin America

1938

1939

Asia

Import Shares, 1925-1939
0.70
0.65
0.60
0.55
0.50
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
1925

1926

1927

United States

1928

1929

1930

United Kingdom

1931

1932

1933

Rest of Empire

1934
Europe

1935

1936

1937

Latin America

1938

1939

Asia

FIGURES 5a & 5b
CANADIAN EXPORT & IMPORT SHARES BY REGION

34

Export Shares, 1925-1939
0.50
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
1925

1926

1927

1928

1929

1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

Agriculture

Animals

Chemicals

Fibres & textiles

Misc.

Non-ferrous

Non-metallic

Paper & wood

1937

1938

1939

1938

1939

Iron

Import Shares, 1925-1939
0.50
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
1925

1926

1927

1928

1929

1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

Agriculture

Animals

Chemicals

Fibres & textiles

Misc.

Non-ferrous

Non-metallic

Paper & wood

1937
Iron

FIGURES 6a & 6b
CANADIAN EXPORT & IMPORT SHARES BY COMMODITY

35

Grubel-Lloyd Indices, 1925-1939
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1925

1926

1927

1928

1929

1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

Agriculture

Animals

Chemicals

Fibres & textiles

Misc.

Non-ferrous

Non-metallic

Paper & wood

1937

1938

1939

Iron

FIGURE 7
CANADIAN INTRA-INDUSTRY TRADE BY COMMODITY

36

Share of Countries with Zero Exports, 1925-1939

1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
1925

1926

1927

1928

1929

1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

1937

Agriculture

Animals

Chemicals

Fibres & textiles

Iron

Misc.

Non-ferrous

Non-metallic

Paper & wood

Total

1938

1939

Share of Countries with Zero Imports, 1925-1939

1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
1925

1926

1927

1928

1929

1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

1937

Agriculture

Animals

Chemicals

Fibres & textiles

Iron

Misc.

Non-ferrous

Non-metallic

Paper & wood

Total

1938

1939

FIGURES 8a & 8b
CANADIAN EXPORTS & IMPORTS ON THE EXTENSIVE MARGIN

37

CANADIAN EXPORTS

Agricultural and Vegetable Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Animals and Animal Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Chemicals and Allied Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Fibres, Textiles and Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Iron and Its Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Miscellaneous Commodities, one year out
standard error
p-value
Non-Ferrous Metal Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Non-Metallic Mineral Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Paper and Wood, one year out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Exports, one year out
standard error
p-value

From announcement of conference, Q4 1931
Time fixed effect
Ottawa-time interaction
-0.0059
0.2361
0.15
0.16
0.97
0.14
-0.4184
0.2181
0.11
0.11
0.00
0.05
0.3846
-0.4906
0.14
0.15
0.01
0.00
-0.3415
0.3917
0.36
0.43
0.34
0.36
0.5672
-0.0435
0.37
0.41
0.12
0.92
-0.3369
0.2384
0.03
0.05
0.00
0.00
-0.5319
0.5879
0.29
0.29
0.06
0.04
-0.4440
0.8367
0.11
0.28
0.00
0.00
-0.2969
0.1682
0.03
0.05
0.00
0.00
-0.2160
0.3479
0.12
0.12
0.06
0.01
n=234

From announcement of results, Q3 1932
Time fixed effect
Ottawa-time interaction
0.1350
-0.2040
0.19
0.19
0.47
0.28
0.3383
-0.1928
0.06
0.06
0.00
0.00
0.5211
-0.4305
0.12
0.14
0.00
0.00
1.2556
-0.9473
0.25
0.28
0.00
0.00
0.1558
0.1200
0.32
0.46
0.63
0.79
0.1920
-0.2725
0.06
0.07
0.00
0.00
0.6341
0.2131
0.12
0.18
0.00
0.25
0.5961
-0.0543
0.06
0.16
0.00
0.74
0.2988
-0.0555
0.02
0.08
0.00
0.48
0.3095
-0.1751
0.09
0.09
0.00
0.06
n=236

From enactment of provisions, Q4 1932
Time fixed effect
Ottawa-time interaction
-0.0014
-0.0164
0.23
0.23
0.99
0.94
0.2919
0.2604
0.05
0.06
0.00
0.00
0.1796
-0.0305
0.05
0.07
0.00
0.66
0.9610
-0.4586
0.40
0.42
0.02
0.27
0.3286
0.0475
0.32
0.41
0.31
0.91
0.4222
-0.9292
0.04
0.21
0.00
0.00
0.5961
0.0803
0.16
0.16
0.00
0.63
0.7765
-0.7087
0.15
0.18
0.00
0.00
0.1091
0.4584
0.04
0.08
0.01
0.00
0.1864
0.0105
0.10
0.11
0.07
0.92
n=236

From announcement of conference, Q4 1931
Time fixed effect
Ottawa-time interaction
-0.3280
0.3100
0.07
0.11
0.00
0.00
-0.2026
0.3573
0.10
0.18
0.04
0.05
-0.1064
0.4918
0.04
0.04
0.01
0.00
0.2389
-0.1440
0.12
0.12
0.05
0.23
-0.3534
0.3672
0.03
0.06
0.00
0.00
-0.2362
0.0966
0.01
0.04
0.00
0.02
-0.6378
0.9080
0.11
0.11
0.00
0.00
-0.1513
0.5078
0.02
0.03
0.00
0.00
-0.3497
0.4356
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
-0.2604
0.3371
0.02
0.03
0.00
0.00
n=234

From announcement of results, Q3 1932
Time fixed effect
Ottawa-time interaction
0.1190
-0.0877
0.07
0.24
0.08
0.71
0.2229
0.5564
0.11
0.20
0.03
0.01
0.5115
-0.0172
0.05
0.05
0.00
0.75
0.2338
0.2060
0.05
0.07
0.00
0.00
0.1527
0.3661
0.02
0.03
0.00
0.00
-0.1827
0.1599
0.03
0.03
0.00
0.00
-0.2851
0.1917
0.15
0.15
0.06
0.20
-0.1265
0.0350
0.04
0.04
0.00
0.34
0.0370
-0.0210
0.02
0.02
0.05
0.24
0.2058
0.0324
0.06
0.03
0.00
0.20
n=236

From enactment of provisions, Q4 1932
Time fixed effect
Ottawa-time interaction
0.1854
-0.1664
0.06
0.10
0.00
0.08
0.2194
0.1560
0.12
0.26
0.06
0.55
0.0276
0.0377
0.10
0.10
0.77
0.70
0.3096
0.1038
0.04
0.05
0.00
0.04
0.1904
0.2050
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.00
-0.0127
0.0198
0.03
0.05
0.70
0.69
0.3789
-0.6783
0.08
0.08
0.00
0.00
0.1092
0.0774
0.05
0.05
0.03
0.12
0.0417
-0.0279
0.01
0.03
0.00
0.33
0.1605
0.0312
0.03
0.05
0.00
0.49
n=236

Note: Standard errors clustered on countries.
CANADIAN IMPORTS

Agricultural and Vegetable Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Animals and Animal Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Chemicals and Allied Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Fibres, Textiles and Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Iron and Its Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Miscellaneous Commodities, one year out
standard error
p-value
Non-Ferrous Metal Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Non-Metallic Mineral Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Paper and Wood, one year out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Imports, one year out
standard error
p-value
Note: Standard errors clustered on countries.

TABLES 1a & 1b
CANADIAN EXPORTS & IMPORTS IN RESPONSE TO OTTAWA,
FULL SAMPLE

38

CANADIAN EXPORTS

Total Merchandise Exports, 1 quarter out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Exports, 2 quarters out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Exports, 3 quarters out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Exports, 5 quarters out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Exports, 6 quarters out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Exports, 7 quarters out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Exports, 2 years out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Exports, 9 quarters out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Exports, 10 quarters out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Exports, 11 quarters out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Exports, 3 years out
standard error
p-value

From announcement of conference, Q4 1931
Time fixed effect
Ottawa-time interaction
-0.2234
-0.3592
0.05
0.06
0.00
0.00
-0.2702
-0.2804
0.04
0.05
0.00
0.00
-0.3522
0.3143
0.09
0.10
0.00
0.00
-0.5542
0.1902
0.06
0.07
0.00
0.01
-0.3506
0.1396
0.04
0.06
0.00
0.02
0.1392
-0.0427
0.05
0.05
0.01
0.35
0.3584
-0.0296
0.06
0.06
0.00
0.60
-0.1714
0.2243
0.11
0.12
0.10
0.06
-0.2239
0.4160
0.06
0.08
0.00
0.00
0.4210
-0.0846
0.10
0.08
0.00
0.32
0.3759
0.0719
0.12
0.12
0.00
0.54
n=234

From announcement of results, Q3 1932
Time fixed effect
Ottawa-time interaction
0.1362
0.0336
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.69
-0.2020
-0.1241
0.10
0.10
0.04
0.21
-0.1747
0.0016
0.07
0.07
0.02
0.98
0.3226
0.0441
0.06
0.06
0.00
0.44
0.1808
-0.0900
0.16
0.17
0.27
0.61
0.1283
0.1017
0.10
0.11
0.21
0.36
0.2676
0.1067
0.14
0.16
0.06
0.49
0.4241
0.0616
0.18
0.18
0.02
0.74
0.2009
-0.0257
0.19
0.20
0.29
0.90
0.2615
-0.1185
0.19
0.21
0.18
0.57
0.8940
0.0927
0.23
0.24
0.09
0.70
n=236

From enactment of provisions, Q4 1932
Time fixed effect
Ottawa-time interaction
-0.3382
-0.1577
0.10
0.10
0.00
0.13
-0.2084
-0.1346
0.12
0.12
0.10
0.25
0.1732
-0.2088
0.14
0.14
0.21
0.14
0.0446
-0.1237
0.21
0.23
0.83
0.59
-0.0079
0.0681
0.16
0.17
0.96
0.69
0.1314
0.0731
0.19
0.21
0.49
0.73
0.2878
0.0280
0.23
0.23
0.21
0.90
0.0647
-0.0594
0.23
0.25
0.78
0.82
0.1253
-0.1522
0.24
0.26
0.61
0.56
0.2532
0.0591
0.29
0.30
0.38
0.84
0.3836
0.2022
0.25
0.26
0.13
0.43
n=236

From announcement of conference, Q4 1931
Ottawa-time interaction
Time fixed effect
-0.0107
-0.0377
0.05
0.11
0.82
0.73
-0.0494
-0.1849
0.02
0.11
0.03
0.09
-0.1810
0.1102
0.03
0.05
0.00
0.04
-0.4379
0.1839
0.05
0.06
0.00
0.00
-0.3658
0.1996
0.03
0.12
0.00
0.10
-0.1486
0.3160
0.02
0.05
0.00
0.00
-0.0999
0.3683
0.02
0.04
0.00
0.00
-0.1209
0.1829
0.07
0.11
0.10
0.11
0.0707
0.0876
0.04
0.09
0.08
0.34
0.1810
0.0192
0.07
0.03
0.01
0.58
0.0664
0.1799
0.03
0.05
0.01
0.00
n=234

From announcement of results, Q3 1932
Time fixed effect
Ottawa-time interaction
-0.0794
0.2269
0.02
0.05
0.00
0.00
-0.2569
0.0737
0.05
0.08
0.00
0.35
-0.1848
0.0894
0.02
0.11
0.00
0.42
0.0811
0.2581
0.03
0.04
0.01
0.00
0.0601
0.0727
0.06
0.11
0.35
0.50
0.2517
-0.0226
0.03
0.09
0.00
0.79
0.2002
0.0708
0.03
0.05
0.00
0.12
0.2474
0.0697
0.03
0.06
0.00
0.23
0.1924
-0.1355
0.07
0.10
0.01
0.16
0.2700
0.0340
0.03
0.06
0.00
0.54
0.2796
0.1111
0.03
0.05
0.00
0.02
n=236

From enactment of provisions, Q4 1932
Time fixed effect
Ottawa-time interaction
-0.1775
-0.1533
0.04
0.06
0.00
0.01
-0.1054
-0.1376
0.03
0.13
0.00
0.30
0.1118
-0.0212
0.03
0.07
0.00
0.75
0.1395
-0.1543
0.06
0.11
0.01
0.15
0.3311
-0.2495
0.03
0.09
0.00
0.01
0.2796
-0.1561
0.03
0.07
0.00
0.03
0.3267
-0.1573
0.03
0.06
0.00
0.01
0.2718
-0.3624
0.06
0.10
0.00
0.00
0.3494
-0.1929
0.03
0.06
0.00
0.00
0.3590
-0.1158
0.04
0.06
0.00
0.05
0.3978
-0.1990
0.05
0.07
0.00
0.01
n=236

Note: Standard errors clustered on countries.
CANADIAN IMPORTS

Total Merchandise Imports, 1 quarter out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Imports, 2 quarters out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Imports, 3 quarters out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Imports, 5 quarters out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Imports, 6 quarters out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Imports, 7 quarters out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Imports, 2 years out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Imports, 9 quarters out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Imports, 10 quarters out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Imports, 11 quarters out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Imports, 3 years out
standard error
p-value
Note: Standard errors clustered on countries.

TABLES 2a & 2b
CANADIAN EXPORTS & IMPORTS IN RESPONSE TO OTTAWA,
INCORPORATING DIFFFERENT TIME HORIZONS

39

CANADIAN EXPORTS AND IMPORTS

Total Merchandise Exports, one year out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Imports, one year out
standard error
p-value

Total Merchandise Exports, one year out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Imports, one year out
standard error
p-value

Total Merchandise Exports, one year out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Imports, one year out
standard error
p-value

From announcement of conference, Q4 1931
Time fixed effect
Ottawa-time interaction
-0.2219
0.3392
0.12
0.13
0.06
0.01
-0.2552
0.2781
0.02
0.05
0.00
0.00
n=234
From announcement of results, Q3 1932
Time fixed effect
Ottawa-time interaction
0.3104
-0.1665
0.09
0.10
0.00
0.09
0.0366
0.1628
0.03
0.08
0.20
0.03
n=236
From enactment of provisions, Q4 1932
Ottawa-time interaction
Time fixed effect
0.1923
-0.0016
0.11
0.11
0.07
0.99
0.1613
0.0256
0.03
0.05
0.00
0.59
n=236

Note: Standard errors clustered on countries.

TABLE 3
CANADIAN EXPORTS & IMPORTS IN RESPONSE TO OTTAWA,
INCORPORATING THE GREATER BRITISH EMPIRE

40

CANADIAN EXPORTS

Agricultural and Vegetable Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Animals and Animal Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Chemicals and Allied Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Fibres, Textiles and Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Iron and Its Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Miscellaneous Commodities, one year out
standard error
p-value
Non-Ferrous Metal Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Non-Metallic Mineral Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Paper and Wood, one year out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Exports, one year out
standard error
p-value

From announcement of conference, Q4 1931
Ottawa-time interaction
Time fixed effect
0.0002
0.2361
0.15
0.16
0.99
0.14
-0.4123
0.2181
0.11
0.11
0.00
0.05
0.3735
-0.4906
0.14
0.15
0.01
0.00
-0.3046
0.3917
0.36
0.43
0.40
0.36
0.4794
-0.0435
0.37
0.41
0.19
0.92
-0.3650
0.2384
0.03
0.05
0.00
0.00
-0.4940
0.5879
0.29
0.29
0.08
0.04
-0.6239
0.8367
0.11
0.28
0.00
0.00
-0.2366
0.1682
0.03
0.05
0.00
0.00
-0.2014
0.3479
0.12
0.12
0.08
0.01
n=234

From announcement of results, Q3 1932
Time fixed effect
Ottawa-time interaction
0.0298
-0.2059
0.19
0.19
0.87
0.28
0.2315
-0.1917
0.06
0.06
0.00
0.00
0.5223
-0.4334
0.12
0.14
0.00
0.00
1.2140
-0.9468
0.25
0.28
0.00
0.00
0.1653
0.1218
0.32
0.46
0.61
0.79
0.1941
-0.2743
0.06
0.07
0.00
0.00
0.5096
0.2103
0.12
0.18
0.00
0.25
0.7225
-0.0585
0.06
0.16
0.00
0.72
0.4361
-0.0553
0.02
0.08
0.00
0.48
0.2913
-0.1762
0.09
0.09
0.00
0.05
n=236

From enactment of provisions, Q4 1932
Time fixed effect
Ottawa-time interaction
-0.1011
-0.0164
0.23
0.23
0.66
0.94
0.1922
0.2604
0.05
0.06
0.00
0.00
0.1863
-0.0305
0.05
0.07
0.00
0.66
0.9197
-0.4586
0.40
0.42
0.02
0.27
0.3459
0.0475
0.32
0.41
0.28
0.91
0.4301
-0.9292
0.04
0.21
0.00
0.00
0.4581
0.0803
0.16
0.16
0.01
0.63
0.9085
-0.7087
0.15
0.18
0.00
0.00
0.2525
0.4584
0.04
0.08
0.00
0.00
0.1742
0.0105
0.10
0.11
0.09
0.92
n=236

From announcement of conference, Q4 1931
Ottawa-time interaction
Time fixed effect
-0.3111
0.3100
0.07
0.11
0.00
0.00
-0.1857
0.3573
0.10
0.18
0.06
0.05
-0.1627
0.4918
0.04
0.04
0.00
0.00
0.2389
-0.1586
0.12
0.12
0.05
0.19
-0.4670
0.3672
0.03
0.06
0.00
0.00
-0.2247
0.0966
0.01
0.04
0.00
0.02
-0.5790
0.9080
0.11
0.11
0.00
0.00
-0.2879
0.5078
0.02
0.03
0.00
0.00
-0.3927
0.4356
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
-0.3100
0.3371
0.02
0.03
0.00
0.00
n=234

From announcement of results, Q3 1932
Time fixed effect
Ottawa-time interaction
0.1411
-0.0845
0.07
0.23
0.04
0.72
0.2463
0.5572
0.11
0.20
0.02
0.01
0.5102
-0.0183
0.05
0.05
0.00
0.74
0.1214
0.2072
0.05
0.07
0.01
0.00
0.1909
0.3672
0.02
0.03
0.00
0.00
-0.1860
0.1607
0.03
0.03
0.00
0.00
-0.2849
0.0322
0.15
0.15
0.06
0.83
-0.0084
0.0340
0.04
0.04
0.82
0.36
0.0370
-0.0235
0.02
0.02
0.05
0.19
0.0426
0.2067
0.03
0.06
0.10
0.00
n=236

From enactment of provisions, Q4 1932
Time fixed effect
Ottawa-time interaction
0.2147
-0.1664
0.06
0.10
0.00
0.08
0.2487
0.1560
0.12
0.26
0.03
0.55
0.0328
0.0377
0.10
0.10
0.73
0.69
0.2037
0.1038
0.04
0.05
0.00
0.04
0.2353
0.2050
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.00
-0.0096
0.0198
0.03
0.05
0.77
0.69
0.2242
-0.6783
0.08
0.08
0.00
0.00
0.2328
0.0774
0.05
0.05
0.00
0.12
0.0454
-0.0279
0.01
0.03
0.00
0.33
0.1770
0.0312
0.03
0.05
0.00
0.49
n=236

Note: Standard errors clustered on countries.
CANADIAN IMPORTS

Agricultural and Vegetable Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Animals and Animal Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Chemicals and Allied Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Fibres, Textiles and Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Iron and Its Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Miscellaneous Commodities, one year out
standard error
p-value
Non-Ferrous Metal Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Non-Metallic Mineral Products, one year out
standard error
p-value
Paper and Wood, one year out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Exports, one year out
standard error
p-value
Note: Standard errors clustered on countries.

TABLES 4a & 4b
CANADIAN EXPORTS & IMPORTS IN RESPONSE TO OTTAWA,
INCORPORATING DIFFFERENT PRICE INDICES

41

CANADIAN EXPORTS AND IMPORTS
From announcement of conference, Q4 1931
Ottawa fixed effect Canada fixed effect Ottawa-Canada interaction Time fixed effect Ottawa-time interaction Canada-time interaction Canada-Ottawa-time interaction
5.8411
-2.3549
1.2804
-0.0467
0.3577
0.0104
0.2576
0.02
0.19
0.20
0.02
0.19
0.04
0.17
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.06
0.80
0.12
8.3700
-2.8837
2.2401
2.7460
-3.3540
0.5003
0.0582
0.10
0.19
0.35
0.01
0.05
0.10
0.10
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.55
n=380
From announcement of results, Q3 1932
Ottawa fixed effect Canada fixed effect Ottawa-Canada interaction Time fixed effect Ottawa-time interaction Canada-time interaction Canada-Ottawa-time interaction
9.1750
-2.1718
1.4764
-0.8403
0.5480
Total Merchandise Exports, one year out
-0.1967
0.4221
0.05
0.22
0.26
0.01
0.02
standard error
0.20
0.50
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
p-value
0.33
0.40
8.2748
-2.7120
2.2817
2.5235
-3.6351
Total Merchandise Imports, one year out
-0.2450
0.6479
0.15
0.22
0.45
0.01
0.03
standard error
0.20
0.43
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
p-value
0.22
0.13
n=380
From enactment of provisions, Q4 1932
Ottawa fixed effect Canada fixed effect Ottawa-Canada interaction Time fixed effect Ottawa-time interaction Canada-time interaction Canada-Ottawa-time interaction
5.8515
-2.0973
1.6381
-0.9897
1.2265
-0.2016
Total Merchandise Exports, one year out
0.1051
0.05
0.21
0.24
0.01
0.02
0.11
standard error
0.11
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.06
p-value
0.34
2.4634
-2.8254
2.7404
-1.1180
1.7789
0.1459
-0.5036
Total Merchandise Imports, one year out
0.15
0.19
0.36
0.01
0.03
0.08
0.12
standard error
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.07
0.00
p-value
n=380
Note: Standard errors clustered on countries.
Total Merchandise Exports, one year out
standard error
p-value
Total Merchandise Imports, one year out
standard error
p-value

TABLE 5
CANADIAN EXPORTS IN RESPONSE TO OTTAWA,
INCORPORATING MULTILATERAL RESISTANCE

42

