NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHINA AND INDIA AS SUPPLIERS OF AFFORDABLE MEDICINES TO DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES
Tamara Hafner
David Popp
Working Paper 17249
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17249

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2011

Funding support was provided by the Maxwell School at Syracuse University. We declare that we
have no conflict of interest. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Tamara Hafner and David Popp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

China and India as Suppliers of Affordable Medicines to Developing Countries
Tamara Hafner and David Popp
NBER Working Paper No. 17249
July 2011
JEL No. I10,O10,O34
ABSTRACT
As countries reform their patent laws to be in compliance with the Trade Related Intellectual Property
Rights Agreement, an important question is how increased patent protection will affect drug prices
in low-income countries. Using pharmaceutical trade data from 1996 to 2005, we examine the role
of China and India as suppliers of medicines to other middle- and low-income countries and evaluate
the competitive effect of medicine imports from these countries on the price of medicines from highincome countries. We find that imports of antibiotics and unspecified medicaments from India and
China significantly depress the average price of these commodities imported from high-income trading
partners, suggesting that India and China are not only important sources of inexpensive medicines
but also have an indirect effect by lowering prices through competition. As India is the leading supplier
of medicines in Sub-Saharan Africa, this region will likely be affected most adversely.

Tamara Hafner
Assistant Professor
Department of Public Administration and Policy
School of Public Affairs, American University
4400 Massachusetts Ave. NW
Ward Circle Building, Room 345
Washington, DC 20016
hafner@american.edu
David Popp
Associate Professor of Public Administration
Syracuse University
The Maxwell School
426 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
and NBER
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu

Introduction
The World Health Organization (WHO) cites high medicine prices and the underuse of
generics as a major inefficiency in national health systems (WHO, 2010). High prices can be
particularly burdensome to the poor in developing countries, many of who live on less than 1 USD
per day and pay for medicines and health services out-of-pocket. Approximately one third of the
global population lacks reliable access to medicines because they cannot afford to purchase them
(WHO, 2004). A recent study has shown that purchasing selected medicines out-of-pocket has the
potential to push a significant proportion of the population into poverty (Niëns et al., 2010). High
medicine prices are also a burden on government budgets, with medicines accounting for about 25%
of national health care budgets in developing countries as a whole (WHO, 2003).
Generic medicines have proven to be a cost-saving alternative to more expensive branded
equivalents (Lexchin, 2004). Developing countries, such as Brazil and India, have developed drug
manufacturing capacity and have emerged in the last decade as important sources of inexpensive
generic medicines for their domestic and regional consumers. India, for example, is often cited as
the lead source of inexpensive antiretroviral medicines that have helped to revolutionize HIV/AIDS
treatment in Sub-Saharan Africa. Given the anecdotal evidence regarding the importance of some of
these countries as suppliers of cheaper medicines, this paper attempts a systematic evaluation of the
importance of middle-income countries as suppliers of affordable medicines to other developing
countries.
The issue of access to affordable medicines is particularly salient given the implementation
of the Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights Agreement (TRIPS), which requires all members of
the World Trade Organization to guarantee intellectual property rights protection for
pharmaceuticals. Prior to the ratification of the TRIPS, many developing countries allowed very
little, if any, intellectual property rights protection for pharmaceutical products (Barton, 2004).

3

Many countries have since reformed their patent laws to be in compliance with the TRIPS and now
grant patents for new medicines (Arvind, 2004; Scherer & Watal, 2002). One possible implication of
this change in patent policy is that developing countries with an active generic drug industry will be
unable to continue copying innovative drugs from the developed world. This may decrease the
availability of affordable drugs for poor consumers in developing countries. However, in order to
fully assess the impact of such policy changes, we need to know the extent to which these countries
matter as a source of medicines for developing countries.
The purpose of this paper is two-fold: it explores the role of middle-income countries,
particularly China and India, as suppliers of medicines to other middle- and low-income countries;
and it examines the competitive effect of drug imports from these countries on the price of
medicines imported from high-income trading partners. Using the assumption that firms in
developing countries are primarily involved in imitative drug production, we exploit the variation in
trade with developing countries across time and pharmaceutical commodity classes to determine the
price impact of pharmaceutical products exported by China and India.

The Global Pharmaceutical Market
Developing countries tend to run a trade deficit on pharmaceuticals because most countries
lack manufacturing and innovative capability. They therefore depend on imports for their domestic
supply of medicines. Local pharmaceutical industries in developing countries, when they exist, tend
to be small and focused on the production of traditional medicines or generic medicines for
domestic consumption. Some middle-income countries are an exception to that trend. Argentina,
Brazil, China, Cuba, India, Mexico and South Africa, for example, have domestic pharmaceutical
industries with varying levels of innovative capability (Balance, 1992). India and China are important
suppliers of medicines, particularly in products such as antibiotics and ARVs that treat diseases

4

prevalent in developing countries. India produces both active ingredients and final products and is
among the leading suppliers of antiretrovirals to developing countries. The government
Pharmaceutical Organization in Thailand, for example, sources 90% of its materials for ARV
production from India and produces ARVs that are up to 25 times cheaper than their branded
equivalent. The Thai Public Health Ministry acknowledges that these savings would have been
impossible without the Indian supply (Grace, 2004). China is also a major supplier of ingredients for
antibiotics and has been ranked as the leading producer of penicillin, doxycyclin hydrochloride,
cephalosporin and teramycin, producing more than 50% of the global supply (Grace, 2004). Brazil
is regarded as a leader in its successful response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic which was partially
facilitated by domestic production of generic antiretrovirals (Flynn, 2008). Pharmaceutical
production capabilities in Africa are far less developed but the situation is likely to improve with
recent initiatives by the African Union and the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization (UNIDO) to strengthen local production (Berger et al., 2010). South Africa is the only
country with the ability to manufacture active pharmaceutical ingredients and account for 70% of
the estimated $1 billion in annual pharmaceutical production in Sub-Sahara Africa. Ghana, Nigeria
and Kenya are also regional players but to a lesser extent.
The ability of these countries to develop their generic industry has been facilitated by their
patent laws that, prior to TRIPS, did not allow patent protection for pharmaceuticals. India’s weak
intellectual property protection, for example, helped to facilitate the development of its local
pharmaceutical industry (Grace, 2004; Lanjouw, 1998; Kettler & Modi, 2001; Watal, 2000). After
India’s 1970 patent law reforms, the government allowed patents for the manufacturing process but
not the final product. This allowed companies to legally reverse engineer patented products
developed in high-income countries and provide cheaper generic copies produced using a different
process.

5

TRIPS, which was signed at the Uruguay Round of the World Trade Organization (WTO)
negotiations in 1995, establishes the framework for the protection of intellectual property
protection. Article 27 requires that all WTO members guarantee at least 20 years of market
exclusivity for patented medicines. Brazil amended its patent laws to become TRIPS-compliant in
1996. China and India took similar steps in 1999 and 2005 respectively. The public health
implications of TRIPS have been extensively discussed in the literature (see for example: Barton,
2004; Commission on Intellectual Property Rights Innovation and Public Health, 2006; Shadlen,
2007; Smith, Correa, & Oh, 2009; Trouiller et al., 2002). The issue of access to affordable medicines
has gained particular attention with the primary concern being TRIPS-compliance will eliminate the
supply of affordable generic medicines, in particular copies of drugs still on patent, for poor
consumers in low- and middle-income countries. It is also likely that enhanced intellectual property
protection will incentivize domestic firms to invest in R&D, as preliminary evidence in India
suggests (Lanjouw & Cockburn, 2001). However, it is not clear whether these firms are likely to
invest in products that target the health problems of the developing world or those of high-income
countries. Emerging evidence suggests that TRIPS compliance has changed the incentives for Indian
firms who are shifting their focus to R&D and high-income markets (Chaudhuri et al., 2010;
Shadlen, 2007). The emergence of TRIPS-plus, which tends to have even more stringent
requirements for intellectual property rights protection embedded in bilateral free-trade agreements,
has made the potential effects of TRIPS on access to medicines even more unclear and contentious
(Smith, Correa, & Oh, 2009). As such, a systematic evaluation of the role of middle-income
countries as medicine suppliers is a necessary precursor in studying the impact of TRIPS on access
to medicines.

6

Patents, Generic Competition and Medicine Prices
For most commodities, one of the most important determinants of price is the marginal cost
of production. In the case of pharmaceuticals, however, variations in marginal costs are unlikely to
affect the prices of drugs, particularly patent-protected branded drugs (Scherer, 2004). There are
very high fixed costs associated with the discovery and development of new a new drug but the
marginal costs of production are very low. The high fixed costs, which need to be recovered, dictate
the price of the drug more so than the marginal costs. Danzon (1998), for example, estimated that
fixed costs comprised 70% of pharmaceutical costs while manufacturing and short-run costs
accounted for the remaining 30%. The fixed costs for generic drug production are much lower than
those for innovative drugs because the high fixed costs associated with R&D are reduced as the
innovation has already been achieved. Marginal costs are also reduced because of lower production
costs for generic firms in developing countries. Generics are therefore expected to be cheaper than
branded drugs, but the price for any given drug will be more strongly determined by fixed costs
instead of marginal costs.
International reference pricing, a practice in which the price of a ‘basket’ of pharmaceutical
products in one or more countries is used to set a benchmark price for the same product in a given
country, is often a key determinant of medicine prices (Epsin et al., 2011). However, the method for
calculating prices varies across countries depending on regulatory capabilities, the reference
countries chosen and the basket of goods chosen for comparison. So even with this price
benchmarking, price differentials exist both across countries and across different groups of
consumers in a given country. Further, firms usually engage in price discrimination, an important
factor that affects the price differences. Drug firms face two markets, one (typically in low-income
countries) where consumers are price sensitive and seek the lowest cost possible, and another
(typically in high-income countries) where consumers are fairly price insensitive and are willing to

7

pay more. While the firm may choose setting a high, uniform price to target the price insensitive
consumers, more commonly, firms choose to price discriminate to capture as much of each market
as possible (Ridley, 2005). Therefore prices of pharmaceuticals are expected to vary with the ability
to pay across countries. There is evidence of this in the preferential pricing practices among
multinational pharmaceutical firms (Lichtenberg, 2010). The least developed countries are usually
sold medicines at lower prices compared to richer countries.
Intellectual property rights protection is a major incentive for innovation in the
pharmaceutical industry and is a key determinant in medicine pricing. Innovative medicines with
patent protection are granted limited market exclusivity within the jurisdiction of the patent, which
limits the legal competition to therapeutic equivalents in a different brand. For products with no
therapeutic equivalent and that are protected by a patent, the manufacturer can price the drug as
high as the market will bear. Upon patent expiration, these medicines usually face competition from
generic versions, which are therapeutically equivalent.
Copies of on-patented innovative drugs may also be marketed before patent expiration but
the legality of these generics will vary depending on patent jurisdiction. Prior to the ratification of
the TRIPS, many developing countries allowed very little, if any, intellectual property rights
protection for pharmaceutical products (Barton, 2004). Many countries have since reformed their
patent laws to be in compliance with the TRIPS and now grant patents for new medicines (Arvind,
2004; Scherer & Watal, 2002). Least developed countries have until 2016 to implement these
changes. Given this gradual reform of the patent laws across countries, it is expected that the same
drug may face different competition from generics depending on whether or not patents are allowed
in a given jurisdiction. This competition is limited to the extent that the given country has local
manufacturing capability and/or allows importation of generics from other countries with such
capability. The local industry, where it exists, can respond to local and regional health needs to the

8

extent that the trade and patent laws allow the legal copying of innovative drugs. In Brazil, for
example, local generic manufacturers have decreased the cost of anti-retroviral drugs by more than
70% (Samb, 2003).
The entry of generics will follow one of two price trajectories (Scherer, Anthony, &
Newhouse, 2000). Initial generic entry will lead to the price of generics being slightly less than
average of the brand name drugs. As more generic brands enter the market, competition develops
from just generics versus branded drugs to include competition among generic brands, which may
cause the average price of generics to decrease more substantially. In a developed country where
consumers can afford to pay or rely on insurance coverage, the branded drug firm may find it more
profitable to serve the market preferring the branded drug and maintain their high prices instead of
decreasing prices to compete with generics. In the developing world, however, where there is such a
high inability to pay, the branded drug firm may find it more profitable to decrease prices to
compete with the generics (Danzon & Towse, 2003; Ridley, 2005).
In developing countries, concerns over TRIPS are often with drugs that are still on patent,
meaning that western generic versions for those drugs are unavailable. The generic version of
branded on-patent drugs are therefore likely to only be sourced from middle-income countries like
India and Brazil, which up until recently did not grant patents for pharmaceutical products. The
presence of generic drugs competition from these middle-income countries is therefore likely to be a
chief determinant of pharmaceutical prices in developing countries. Thus, in addition to evaluating
the importance of select middle-income countries as sources of medicines, another primary objective
of this paper is to investigate the effect of the share of pharmaceutical imports from these countries
on the price of pharmaceutical imports from high-income trading partners. A key assumption here is
that the drugs marketed by developed countries are either patented branded drugs or generic copies
of drugs that have gone off patent (WHO, 2004). Developing countries on the other hand may

9

market generics of two kinds: those that are copies of drugs that are still on patent and generics that
are copies of branded drugs that have gone off patent.
On average, it is expected that generics of off-patent drugs are likely to be the same in terms
of price whether the drug is being marketed by firms from developed or developing countries.
Ideally, the focus should be on the other type of generics, those that are copies of drugs that are still
on patent, as they will present the biggest cost differential between generics and branded versions.
Further, it is for this group of generics that trade from developing countries with manufacturing
capability are expected to be different and most relevant to the implication of TRIPS on the
affordability of medicines. Unfortunately, the available data do not allow for differentiation between
these two types of generics.1 We therefore assume that, on average, drugs marketed by developing
country firms are generic copies of branded drugs while drugs offered by firms from developed
countries are innovator brands. If this is the case, it is expected that the importation of generics
from Brazil, China and India will depress the prices of drugs sold by firms from high-income
countries.2

Data
Three different types of data were used in this study: patent, trade, and economic
development indicators. Patent data were obtained from Delphion, a fee-based patent search service,
and the free-access database of the European Patent Office. The patent data were used for two
purposes: to identify the innovative developing countries to be used in the regressions for evaluating
the effect of trade; and to examine the patenting trends of innovators from high-income countries in
developing countries for which data are available.3 The International Patent Classification (IPC)
provides a hierarchical system in which technologies are divided into various groups. There are two
major subclasses of patents that classify pharmaceuticals, A61K and A61P. Subclass A61K classifies

10

pharmaceutical compounds based on their chemical structure while A61P classifies compounds
according to their therapeutic activity. Patent data were downloaded with the search restricted to
subclass A61K excluding the patent groups that relate to veterinary medicine, cosmetics and
dentistry (A61K 5/00, 6/00, 7/00, 8/00).4 These data were used to generate patent counts based on
the inventor’s country. Inventors need to file patent applications in each jurisdiction where they
desire patent protection. We examine the patenting activity of pharmaceutical innovators,
particularly from high-income countries.
The data on trade in pharmaceuticals are from the United Nations Statistical Division
Commodity Trade database (ComTrade) and the analysis is limited to the years 1995 to 2005. They
were used to examine trends in pharmaceutical trade. These trade data were also used along with
variables derived from the World Bank’s Development Indicators (WDI) in the regression analyses.
The ComTrade database uses the Harmonized Systems (HS), which is a six-digit internationally
standardized nomenclature used for classifying traded commodities. The trade values of exports and
imports between participating countries are recorded for different commodities in US dollars and
various quantity measures. Chapter 30, which deals specifically with pharmaceuticals, has six
headings at the 4-digit level. Only subheadings (six-digit level) under headings 3002, 3003 and 3004
are considered for the purposes of this research as they classify medicinal preparations for
prophylactic or therapeutic uses. This results in 15 different commodity classes that codify active
ingredients and finished products at the 6-digit level. We combined these 15 classes into 7
commodity groups for analysis as shown in Table 1.

[Table 1 about here]

11

For each trade event, both the exporter and the importer provide a report of the trade. We
used the importer-reported values because we use trade value and quantity to calculate price per
kilogram as a proxy for base market price in the importing country. The importer-reported trade is
therefore more suitable. The importer-reported value includes the transaction value of the goods,
the quantity of goods in kilograms, the value of services performed to deliver the goods to the
border of the exporting country and to the border of the importing country.5 The data do not allow
us to identify specific manufacturer brands, nor do they allow us to identify specific medicines and
their therapeutic classes. Second, the reported trade values do not represent the final purchase price
of the drug for a consumer. Additional taxes, local distribution costs and other retail markups also
help to determine the final purchase price. However, it is reasonable to treat the import value as an
indicator of aggregate base price before additional markups. The mean price per kilogram for a
pharmaceutical commodity from a given country can therefore be assessed based on the recorded
trade value and quantity. A primary advantage of using the trade data is that they allow us to
associate an approximated cost of pharmaceutical commodities with their country of production.

Trends in Patents and Trade
The trends in the patent data show that innovative capacity for pharmaceuticals has increased
tremendously since the 1990s for some developing countries (Fig. 1). While there is no clear
threshold indicating the point where the industry becomes innovative, it is clear from Figure 1 that
there is an increasing trend among these countries in the number of US-granted pharmaceutical
patents.6 There are two apparent groups of countries with India and China as the clear leaders. Both
India and China show a similar trend of explosive growth after 1993 with India surpassing China
and leading in total patent count in 1997 and thereafter (Fig. 1). The second group includes South

12

Africa, Argentina, Brazil, Mexico and Cuba which showed an increase in patent applications starting
in 1994 and which has remained constant on average but higher than their respective counts in the
1980s. These trends are consistent with the typology described by Ballance and colleagues (1992),
which cites these developing countries among those that have a pharmaceutical industry with some
level of innovative and reproductive capability.

[Figure 1 about here]

Of the seven countries included in Figure 1, we only have a close to full panel of data for
patents granted domestically in Brazil and India.7 As Figure 2 shows, pharmaceutical patents
granted in Brazil increased exponentially starting in 1997. This increase coincides with the
introduction of Brazil’s new TRIPS-compliant patent law, which allows patenting of pharmaceutical
products. Note that inventors need to file separate patent applications in each patent jurisdiction
where they need intellectual property protection. The increases in granted patents in Brazil are not
surprising but note that patents to US inventors increased exponentially relative to the other leading
innovators. The introduction of the new law changed patenting behavior among the leading
inventors and allowed innovators from countries like the US to strengthen the intellectual property
protection of their products in Brazil.
[Figure 2 about here]
The trends in India are different from those observed for Brazil. Unlike Brazil, India did not
make its patent laws TRIPS-compliant until 2005. As Figure 3 shows, pharmaceutical patent grants
started to increase in India in 1992. Domestic patents account for much of the increase and the
number of patents granted to the leading pharmaceutical innovating countries remain fairly constant

13

for much of the period. While there was a slight increase in the patent counts for the US, its counts
remained relatively low and stable compared to that of the domestic patents granted in India. So
while producers from the innovative high-income countries account for much of the increase in
granted patents in Brazil, much of the increase in granted patents in India were to local producers.
Note that this increase in patents in India started before TRIPS-compliance and therefore likely
indicates the growth of the local generic industry.
[Figure 3 about here]

Much of the trade activity in pharmaceuticals is attributable to just two commodity groups,
antibiotics and unspecified medicaments. Unspecified medicaments account for 85% of exports
from high-income countries, antibiotics account for 6% and vitamins account for 5%. On average
unspecified medicaments account for 75% and antibiotics account for 15% of exports from
Argentina, Brazil, China, India and Mexico. This is not surprising as these two groups include the
broadest classes of medicines for both chronic and infectious diseases. They also include
antiinfectives such as antibiotics and antiretrovirals, which are particularly relevant in some
developing country markets.
The polarization of the global pharmaceutical market is reflected in Figure 4, which shows
that high-income countries tend to trade among themselves with 77% of pharmaceutical export
volume for the period 1996 to 2005 going to other high-income countries. Europe and Central Asia
represented only 9% of the trade volume for that same period with the remaining volume almost
equally divided between the other regions. This pattern aligns with income-level and is consistent
with what is known about the global pharmaceutical market. High-income countries have a higher
purchasing power and pharmaceutical consumption rates and therefore account for the bulk of the
global pharmaceutical market.
14

[Figure 4 about here]

There is also some notable variation in the destination of the pharmaceutical exports from
Argentina, Brazil, China, India and Mexico. The majority of the exports from Argentina and
Brazil—95% and 96% respectively—were traded with other countries in the Latin American region
(Fig. 4). Thirty nine percent of the exports from Mexico are traded with high-income countries,
primarily the US, but the majority of its export is also traded within the region. The export trends
for the Latin American countries are in contrast to those of India and China, which have more
diverse regional markets (Fig. 5 & 6). What is most notable about the case of China is that exports to
high-income countries remained relatively stable between 1996 and 2005 while exports to both SubSaharan Africa and Asia Pacific increased during that period from 3 to 15 and 10 to 18 million
kilograms respectively (Fig. 5). India also had increases in its exports to all regions during that period
but particularly to Sub-Saharan Africa and high-income trading partners (Fig. 6). Much of the
increase began in 1999 with exports to Sub-Saharan Africa increasing from approximately 20 to 50
million kilograms between 1999 and 2006. On average, only 26% of India’s pharmaceutical exports
were traded with high-income countries, 35% was traded with Sub-Saharan African countries, 16%
with Asia and Pacific countries and 14% with Eastern and Central Europe (Fig. 4). Since 2000,
India’s share of exports to Sub-Saharan Africa has exceeded the amount traded with all other
regions.
We also examined the import trends across the different regions to see whether there is
variation in the reliance on Argentina, Brazil, China, India and Mexico as sources of pharmaceutical
products. Figure 7 shows the patterns in regional imports. With the exception of the Sub-Saharan
Africa region, high-income countries are the major source of pharmaceutical imports for developing

15

countries between 1996 and 2005. This is particularly evident in the Middle East and North Africa
Region which received an average of 88% of its imports from high-income countries for the entire
period. The lowest averages were in Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa where imports from
high-income countries represented only an average share of 53% and 33% respectively for the
period 1996 to 2005 (Fig. 7). The group of five countries is a major source of imports for SubSaharan Africa providing more than 50% of import volume for that period. Much of that trend is
driven by India, which on average supplies 40% of the region’s imports each year.
If we consider the percentage of imports based on trade value, the findings are similar.
However, while high-income countries on average account for 43% of import volume, they account
for almost 80% of imports in terms of trade value. Interestingly, for Latin America and the
Caribbean, and Sub-Saharan Africa regions the percent of import value coming from high income
countries is almost 8 times the percentage of imports coming from the group of five countries or
other developing countries. This is despite the import quantity being almost the same. This is
consistent with the expectation that imports from high-income countries are more expensive than
those from developing countries.

[Figure 7 about here]

These trade trends provide evidence that China and India have become increasingly more
important as sources of pharmaceutical imports for other low- and middle-income countries. While
Argentina, Brazil and Mexico also demonstrate a relatively high level of trade activity, they tend to
be active only in their regional market. There are two preliminary conclusions we can draw from
these trade trends. If middle-income countries do have a competitive effect on trade from high
income countries, we would expect the greatest effect in Sub-Saharan Africa given that India is the

16

largest supplier of pharmaceuticals on average. Second, of the five innovative developing countries
India is likely to have the most pronounced effect because it is the only country with a leading
market share relative to high-income countries as a trading block. We will therefore do a regression
analysis focusing on the effect of imports from India and China on the average price of imports
from high-income trading partners in the Sub-Saharan Africa region. We discuss our analysis in the
proceeding sections.

Model Estimation
Given that Argentina, Brazil and Mexico export, on average, 1% or less of their
pharmaceutical commodities to Sub-Saharan Africa, and trade the majority of their commodities
within the regions, we have chosen to focus on India and China. Specifically, the regression analysis
focuses on the effect of the share of pharmaceutical imports from China and India on the price of
pharmaceutical imports from high-income trading partners. We employ the following model to
estimate the effect:
Pitc = β +δCIitc + γXit + Ψi + Ωc +Τt + ξitc
Pitc is the average price per kilogram of commodity c imported from high-income trading partners by
developing country i in year t, with t ranging from 1996-2005. CIitc is the percent of drug imports
from China and India by developing country i in year t; Xit is a vector of country-level controls; Ψi
represents country fixed effects; Ωc represents commodity fixed effects and Τt represents year fixed
effects.
The dependent variable, Pitc is the mean annual price per kilogram of a given commodity
imported by country i from high-income countries as a group. Appendix I provides a list of the

17

country groups based on economy and region. The dependent variable is constructed by aggregating
the trade value (2000 US$) and trade quantity as reported by the importing country across related
commodity classes:
Pitc =

! value
! volume
j

ijtc

j

, where j is each high-income exporter.

ijtc

Table 1 shows the grouping for the commodities and Table 2 shows the descriptive statistics
for the variables used in the regression models. Note that the commodity groups are very general
and do not allow us to compare medicines that fall into specific therapeutic classes. As such each
group contains a mix of both innovative, and hence expensive, drugs along with older and less
expensive medicines. For example, the ‘other medicaments’ group will contain aspirin, a relatively
non-expensive and ubiquitous commodity, as well as more innovative medicines such as cancer and
HIV/AIDS therapeutics.
We need to address an endogeniety issue that is inherent in the model. The same variables
that help to determine the price of pharmaceutical imports from high-income countries may also
influence the share of imports from China and India, CI, so that CI may be correlated with ξitc. We
instrument for the share of imports from China and India to address this endogeneity issue. A
reasonable instrument will be correlated with CI but not with the mean price of pharmaceutical
imports from high-income countries. In order to identify a suitable instrument we note that there
are two factors that help to determine CI: (i) the existence of pharmaceuticals produced by China
and India on the global market; (ii) and the existence of a trade relationship between these two
countries and the importing country. The availability of medicines produced by China or India in a
given country is conditional on the production of that medicine and its availability on the global
market. A reasonable instrument for the supply of medicines from China or India is therefore the
18

percentage of medical imports worldwide from these countries to all countries excluding the country
of interest. We construct such a variable called PerGenElse. Existence of a trade relationship between
two countries will also determine the extent to which they trade a particular commodity. We
therefore lag CI as CIt-1 and CIt-2 and include them as an instrument. The reasoning is that CIt-1
and CIt-2 are measures of an existing relationship between the trading partners. We therefore expect
the lagged variable to be correlated with CI but not directly correlated with the dependent variable
in year t.8 So the first stage model was estimated using the following equation:
CIitc = γ0 + γ1PerGenElseitc + γ2CIic(t-1) + γ3CIic(t-2) + vicrt
One other variable related to the commodities is bulk, which represents the percent of
imports for a particular commodity group that is imported in bulk form. There are two types of
pharmaceutical products, finished products which are packaged in dosage formulation and coded
under the 3004 heading. The second type is active ingredients which are intended to be used in the
manufacture of a pharmaceutical product and as such packaged in bulk and not for retail sale and
coded under the 3003 heading. Vaccines are not differentiated between finished and active
ingredient formulation as shown in Table 1. Vitamins are also coded only under the 3004 heading.
It is expected that bulk products will be cheaper than the finished product which has gone through
full production and dosage formulation. It is therefore important to account for the amount of the
imported commodity group that is imported as active ingredient. We accomplish this by including
bulk, which represents the percent of imports for a particular commodity group as active ingredient
(or traded under the 3003 heading).
The model also includes a vector of control variables that attempt to account for the other
factors that affect the prices of medicines. National GDP per capita is included as a measure of
ability to pay. GDP is often used as a criterion in preferential pricing schemes in which countries

19

with a lower GDP are usually offered lower prices. Life expectancy (life), tuberculosis incidence (tb),
infant mortality (infmort) and physicians-population ratio (physi) are included as indicators of the
national disease profile and the demand for medicines. The model also includes country dummies to
account for time-invariant country specific effects. These variables control for other factors such as
tariffs and procurement practices, which will affect the price of imports but are unlikely to vary over
time. Year dummies are included to account for year-specific effects such as the licensing dispute in
South Africa in 2001, which may have impacted medicine pricing negotiations and pharmaceutical
procurement decisions across developing countries.
Results and Discussion
Column 1 of Table 3 presents the estimates for the effect of percentage imports from China
and India (CI) on the average price of antibiotics and unspecified medicaments imported from highincome trading partners. Columns 2 and 3 show the same regression with the sample restricted to
countries from the Asia and Pacific, Latin America and the Caribbean, and Sub-Saharan Africa
regions. All the pharmaceutical commodities are included in column 3. As shown in columns 1 and
2, the effect of the percentage imports from China and India is statistically significant and in the
expected direction. This effect is no longer significant when we include the full sample of
pharmaceutical commodities (Table 3, Column 3). This is not surprising because we know from
examining the trends in the trade data that antibiotics and other medicaments account for
approximately 90% of the pharmaceutical export volume for India and China.
In terms of magnitude, the effect of the CI variable is strongest when the model is applied to
the full sample of countries (Table 3, Column 1). On average, a one unit increase in the percent of
imports from India and China will result in a 87-cents decrease in the average price of a
pharmaceutical commodity imported from the high-income trading partners. While this may not
seem like a substantial effect, it is important to put these numbers in context. Since the average price
20

of antibiotics and unspecified medicaments from high income countries is around $40 (Table 2), on
average prices fall by over 2 percent for each one percentage point increase in imports from China
and India. Emphasizing the importance of such savings, Niëns and colleagues (2010) have
estimated the impoverishing effects of purchasing medicines out-of-pocket across 16 low- and
middle-income countries. In Uganda, for example, where 73% of the population subsists on less
than US$2 per day, purchasing generic amoxicillin (a common antibiotic) has the potential to
increase the proportion of the population below the poverty line (US$2 per day) to 74% compared
to 86% if the originator brand is purchased (Niëns et al., 2010).
[Table 3 about here]
In terms of country characteristics, GDP and TB incidence are generally insignificant. This is
not surprising given that both GDP and TB incidence do not show much variation from year to
year. The effect of life expectancy is positive and significant in all three models (Table 3).9 This
suggests that countries with higher life expectancy tend to pay higher prices for their medicines. It is
also possible that there is some collinearity between life expectancy and GDP in our model
specification. Countries with higher life expectancy also have a higher ability to pay because of
higher incomes. Further, income levels are one of the criteria used in preferential pricing to set lower
prices for the least developed countries. Countries with lower income levels, and hence lower life
expectancy, may therefore pay lower prices for their pharmaceutical imports.
We also tested the effect of the percentage of imports from all five innovative middleincome countries as an alternate key independent variable. The results for this model are presented
in Table 4, columns 1 and 2. While the sign on the coefficient is in the expected direction, the
variable is insignificant and the magnitude smaller whether for the full panel of commodities
(Column 1) or just antibiotics and medicaments (Column 2). The dummy variables for commodity

21

type are also strongly significant with unspecified medicaments being cheaper than antibiotics, and
antisera, vaccines and insulin being the most expensive commodity groups. However, note that our
instruments do not perform as well in the full panel (column 1), as the p-value for Hansen’s J test is
small, suggesting our instruments are not exogenous. Given that Argentina, Brazil and Mexico trade
the majority of their pharmaceutical commodities within the region and that antibiotics and
medicaments account for the bulk of export volume for all five countries, our instruments appear to
be picking up endogenous links between countries and commodities, rather than exogenous shifts in
supply.10 This is not a concern in column 2, however, where we once again limit the sample to those
commodities most likely to be traded. Here, the p-value for Hansen’s J test is greater than 0.1, and
the F-statistic testing for weak instruments is large.
We also tested the effect of imports from Argentina, Brazil and Mexico on the average prices
of pharmaceutical imports from high-income trading partners in Latin American countries only. The
results are shown in Table 4, columns 3 and 4. Again we fail to observe a significant effect of
import share.11 Another possible explanation for the lack of significance is that the US dominated as
the leading source of imports for much of the period under study and accounted for as much as
60% of the import volume in 2002 before its annual market share started to decrease. The
dominance of the market by one high-income producer suggests that the middle-income country
producers are likely to have little effect at the regional level especially if the focus is on their
domestic market. The patenting trends in Brazil, particularly if similar to those in other countries like
Argentina, may also explain the lack of significance observed for all three alternate key independent
variables for Latin America. As shown in Figure 2, all the high-income producers increased
patenting after Brazil introduced its new patent laws in 1997. However, the US, which dominated as
a source of regional imports, had a disproportionate amount of patents granted relative to the other
innovators. This suggests that much of the regional trade is for generics of drugs off-patent or

22

branded medicines produced by multinational subsidiaries or licensees, who can legally produce
patented medicines. Therefore, the group of medicines for which we would expect the biggest cost
differences, generics of patented medicines, do not comprise a substantial portion of the market.
The observations for the Latin American exporters are in contrast to the significant effect of
imports from China and India in the Sub-Saharan Africa region (Table 3). Again, both the patent
and trade trends are consistent with this finding. When we consider the regional imports, note that
India is the lead source of imports for Sub-Saharan, albeit not to the levels that the US was for Latin
America and Caribbean region. So India has a greater potential to compete with high-income
producers. It is also clear from the patent counts (Fig. 3) that domestic patents dominate the
increasing trend in patents granted in India. Note that India did not become TRIPS-compliant until
2005, so pharmaceutical patents on products were not allowed until 2005. The increase in patent
counts for India is therefore most likely from process patents. This suggests that India
pharmaceutical manufacturers could therefore legally produce generics for both off- and on-patent
medicines for much of the period being studied. This may therefore help to explain the significant
effect we observe for imports from India and China. Indian manufacturers are able to trade in both
on- and off-patent medicines therefore providing larger cost savings for consumers in that region.
The regression results suggest that only pharmaceutical imports from China and India—and
not all five innovative middle-income countries—have a significant effect on the average cost of
pharmaceutical imports from high-income trading partners in developing countries. However, this
effect is only observed for the antibiotics and unspecified medicaments and not the other
commodity groups. This is not surprising as antibiotics and unspecified medicaments together
account for 90% of the exports from China and India for the study period 1996 to 2005 and the
bulk of overall pharmaceutical trade. The findings are also consistent with the trade data that show
that China and India are the leading suppliers of medicines among the innovative middle-income

23

countries, with Argentina, Brazil, Mexico only playing a regional role. It is likely therefore, that only
China and India have a big enough market share to compete with high-income producers of
medicines.

Conclusions
The study provides evidence to support existing anecdotal evidence for the importance of
China and India as suppliers of inexpensive medicines to other developing countries. While Latin
America depends heavily on intraregional trade and imports from the U.S., Sub-Saharan Africa relies
on India for 45% of its imports. As such, the enforcement of TRIPS is likely to have differing
implications for the two regions. In Latin America where countries rely on domestic production and
regional trade, they are likely to more easily invoke compulsory licenses and negotiate cheaper
medicine prices as they can use their innovative capability as a bargaining tool. However, this will be
countered by the effect of more stringent intellectual property protection, which may limit the
export market for pharmaceutical products from these countries and reduce potential cost savings
regionally.
The effect in the Sub-Saharan Africa region is likely to be more adverse. Most countries have
until 2016 to become TRIPS-compliant but that is unlikely to have a direct effect on medicine prices
as most countries in the region lack the innovative capability to reverse engineer innovative
medicines for their domestic market. However, given the importance of India as a supplier of
inexpensive medicines, TRIPS is likely to negatively affect the availability of affordable medicines
not only from India but also high-income trading partners through reduced competition from some
generics.

24

Endnotes
1 There are existing studies that use private datasets but they tend to focus on prices in industrialized countries (Danzon
& Furukawa, 2008; Danzon & Kim, 1998). There is also the Health Action International drug price survey in
collaboration with the WHO but they do not take the source of imports into account and focus on another important
aspect of the issue, the differences at the point-of-purchase across select countries (Cameron, Ewen, Ross-Degnan, Ball,
& Laing, 2009; WHO & HAI, 2003).
2 As, of course, not all medicines imported from developing countries are generic copies of patented drugs, and not all
imports from developed countries are branded drugs, our estimates provide a lower bound of the effect of generics on
branded drugs.
3 The term innovative developing countries refers to those countries that have the capability to reverse engineer innovative
drugs. We hope to draw a distinction between such countries and others that merely manufacture or repackage bulk
formulations through local subsidiaries.
4 A61P would allow us to find patents that are related to specific diseases. For example, A61P 31/06 for drugs that treat
tuberculosis or A61P 33/06 for drugs that treat malaria. Unfortunately, this subclass was introduced in the 7th and 8th
(January 1, 2006) version of IPC and is therefore unavailable for earlier patents. We therefore use only subclass A61K to
generate the patent counts, which does not allow for distinction between innovations for different illnesses without
reading the bibliography of each patent.
5 This is because the importer-reported trade values are recorded as cost, insurance and freight (CIF-type) value—
includes the transaction value of the goods, the value of services performed to deliver the goods to the border of the
exporting country and top the border of the importing country. The exporter-reported values on the other hand, are
free-on-board (FOB-type) and only include the value of services performed to deliver the goods to the border of the
exporting country (United Nations, 2004).
6 We focus on patents granted in the US here because patent data from many individual developing country patent
offices is incomplete. Using the US data gives us complete coverage and focuses on patents applied for under a
common set of patent laws.
7 Unfortunately there are several noticeable gaps in the patent data, some of which have been documented by Inpadoc.
Argentina for example, granted 35 patents in 1992 but none thereafter or in the preceding 1985-1991 period.
8 Note that we also ran models based on imports from different combinations of the six middle-income countries. In
such cases we reconstruct our instruments using the correct combination of countries.
9 For all the regressions presented in Tables 3 and 4, both infant mortality and physicians per capita were included
together or separately as a measure of demand in other regressions (not shown). However, their inclusion did not
substantively change the estimates observed with life expectancy as a measure of demand. We therefore chose to use life
expectancy for which we had a more complete panel of countries and years.
10 In particular, pergenelse, which is intended to identify supply shifts, has almost no explanatory power in this model, with
a t-statistic of just 0.08.
11 Note that in column 4, where we only focus on antibiotics and medicaments, our instruments again perform poorly.
We thus have less confidence in this result, but are comforted by the fact that import share is also insignificant in the full
sample under column 3, where the instruments are valid.

25

References
Arvind, S. (2004). Medicines, Patents, and TRIPS. Finance & Development, 41(1), 22.
Balasubramaniam, K. (1996). Health and pharmaceuticals in developing countries: towards social justice and
equity. Penang, Malaysia: Consumers International-Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific.
Ballance, R., Pogany, J., & Forstner, H. (1992). The World's Pharmaceutical Industries: An international
perspective on innovation, competition, and policy. Vienna, Austria: UNIDO.
Barton, J. H. (2004). TRIPS and the global pharmaceutical market. Health Affairs (Millwood), 23(3),
146-154.
Berger, M., Murugi, J., Buch, E., Ijsselmuiden, C., Moran, M., Guzman, J., Devlin, M., & Kubata, B
(2010). Strengthening pharmaceutical innovation in Africa. Council on Health Research for
Development (COHRED); New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD).
Cameron, A., Ewen, M., Ross-Degnan, D., Ball, D., & Laing, R. (2009). Medicine prices, availability,
and affordability in 36 developing and middle-income countries: a secondary analysis. The
Lancet, 373(9659), 240-249.
Chaudhuri, S., Mackintosh, M., & Mujinja, P.G.M. (2010). Indian Generics Producers, Access to
Essential Medicines and Local Production in Africa: An argument with Reference to
Tanzania. The European Journal of Development Research, 22(4), 451-468.
Chien, C.V. (2007). HIV/AIDS Drugs for Sub-Saharan Africa: How do Brand and Generic Supply
Compare. PLOS One, 2(3), e278.
Danzon, P. M., & Chao, L. W. (2000). Does Regulation Drive Out Competition in Pharmaceutical
Markets?. The Journal of Law and Economics, 43(2), 311-358.
Danzon, P. M., & Furukawa, M. F. (2003). Prices and availability of pharmaceuticals: evidence from
nine countries. Health Affairs, 3(29.10), 2003.
Danzon, P. M., & Furukawa, M. F. (2008). International Prices And Availability Of Pharmaceuticals
In 2005. Health Affairs, 27(1), 221-233.
Danzon, P. M., & Kim, J. D. (1998). International price comparisons for pharmaceuticals.
Measurement and policy issues. Pharmacoeconomics, 14 Suppl 1, 115-128.
Danzon, P. M., & Towse, A. (2003). Differential pricing for pharmaceuticals: reconciling access,
R&D and patents. International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics, 3(3), 183-205.
Espin, J. Rovira, J., & Olry de Labry, A. (2011). Review Series on Pharmaceutical Pricing Policies and
Interventions. External Reference Pricing. WHO/HAI Project on Medicines prices and
Availability.
Flynn, M. (2008). Public Production of Anti-Retroviral Medicines in Brazil, 1990-2007. Development
and Change, 39(4), 513-536.
26

Frank, R. G. (2001). Prescription drug prices: why do some pay more than others do? Health Affairs
(Millwood), 20(2), 115-128.
Grace, C. (2004). The Effect of Changing Intellectual Property on Pharmaceutical Industry Prospects in India and
China: Considerations for Access to Medicines. London: DFID Health Systems Resource Centre.
Lanjouw, J. O., & Cockburn, I. M. (2001). New Pills for Poor People? Empirical Evidence after
GATT. World Development, 29(2), 265-289.
Lexchin, J. (2004). The effect of generic competition on the price of brand-name drugs. Health Policy,
68(1), 47-54.
Lichtenberg, F. R. (2010). Pharmaceutical Price Discrimination and Social Welfare. Capitalism and
Society 5(1): Vol. 5 : Iss. 1, Article 2.
Mendis, S., Fukino, K., Cameron, A., Laing, R., Filipe Jr, A., Khatib, O., Leowski. J., & Ewen, M.
(2007). The availability and affordability of selected essential medicines for chronic diseases
in Six Low- and Middle-Income Countries. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 856(4),
279-288.
Niëns, L.M., Cameron, A., Van de Poel, E., Ewen, M., Brouwer, W.B.F., et al. (2010). Quantifying
the Impoverishing Effects of Purchasing Medicines: A Cross- Country Comparison of the
Affordability of Medicines in the Developing World. PLoS Med 7(8): e1000333.
Ridley, D. B. (2005). Price differentiation and transparency in the global pharmaceutical marketplace.
Pharmacoeconomics, 23(7), 651-658.
Russo, G., McPake, B. (2010). Medicine Prices in Urban Mozambique: a Public Health and
Economic Study of Pharmaceutical Markets and Price Determinants in Low-Income
Settings. Health Policy & Planning, 25, 70-84.
Scherer, F. M. (2004). The pharmaceutical industry--prices and progress. New England Journal of
Medicine, 351(9), 927-932.
Scherer, F. M., Anthony, J. C., & Newhouse, J. P. (2000). Chapter 25 The pharmaceutical industry.
In Handbook of Health Economics (Vol. Volume 1, Part 2, pp. 1297-1336): Elsevier.
Scherer, F. M., & Watal, J. (2002). Post-TRIPS Options for Access to Patented Medicines in
Developing Nations. Journal of International Economic Law, 5(4), 913-939.
Shadlen, K. (2007). The Political Economy of AIDS Treatment: Intellectual Property and the
Transformation of Generic Supply. International Studies Quarterly, 51, 559-581.
Smith, R. D., Correa, C., & Oh, C. (2009). Trade, TRIPS, and pharmaceuticals. The Lancet,
373(9664), 684-691.
United Nations. (2004). International Merchandise Trade Statistics Compilers Manual (No.
ST/ESA/STAT/SER.F/87). New York: United Nations.

27

Vasan, A., Hoos, D., Mukherjee, J. S., Farmer, P. E., Rosenfield, A. G., & Perriens, J. H. (2006). The
pricing and procurement of antiretroviral drugs: an observational study of data from the
Global Fund. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 84(5), 393-398.
WHO. (2004). The World Medicines Situation (No. WHO/EDM/PAR/2004.5). Geneva: The World
Health Organization.
WHO, & HAI. (2003). Medicine Prices: A New Approach to Measurement (No.
WHO/EDM/PAR/2003.2). Geneva: World Health Organization and Health Action
International.

28

Table 1. A description of the commodity classes from the Harmonized Classification System used to
construct the seven commodity groups for analysis.
Commodity
Group
Antibiotics

Commodity
code
300310
300320
300410
300420

Antisera

300210

Hormones

300339
300439

Insulin
Other
Medicaments

300331
300431
300340
300390
300440

Vaccines
Vitamins

300490
300220
300450

Commodity description
Medicaments containing penicillins, streptomycins or derivatives
thereof, in bulk formulation
Medicaments containing antibiotics not elsewhere specified, in bulk
formulation
Medicaments containing penicillins, streptomycins or derivatives
thereof, in dosage formulation
Medicaments containing antibiotics not elsewhere specified, in
dosage formulation
Antisera and other blood fractions and modified immunological
products
Medicaments containing hormones not elsewhere specified,
formulated in bulk
Medicaments containing hormones not elsewhere specified, in
dosage formulation
Medicaments containing insulin, formulated in bulk
Medicaments containing insulin, in dosage formulation
Medicaments containing alkaloids or derivatives thereof but not
containing hormones or antibiotics
Medicaments not elsewhere specified, formulated, in bulk
Medicaments containing alkaloids or derivatives thereof but not
containing hormones or antibiotics, measured doses or packings for
retail sale
Medicaments not elsewhere specified, in dosage
Vaccines, human use
Vitamins, derivatives, in dosage

29

Table 2. Descriptive statistics for the full sample of countries.
Variable

Description

N

Mean

Average price of
imports sourced from
high income countries
(Constant 2000 US$)

5884

$110.37

Antibiotics
Antisera
Hormones
Insulin
Unspecified
medicaments
Vaccines
Vitamins
% of imports from
China and India
% of imports from
China and India
elsewhere

868
803
853
779
877

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

$203.91

$0.01

$4,965.64

$43.31
$213.40
$85.98
$197.90
$35.36

$62.50
$329.86
$136.76
$248.90
$37.08

$0.01
$0.01
$0.01
$0.01
$0.01

$1,060.95
$4,158.51
$2,127.72
$4,965.64
$607.54

847
557
5884

$186.72
$27.78
9.30%

$210.63
$138.66
19.08%

$0.01
$0.01
0%

$3,600.89
$3,709.11
100%

5884

12.59%

11.43%

0.05%

61.16%

20.65%

0.01%

100%

Dependent Variable:
Average
Price

Import Share
% Generics
Elsewhere
(PerGenElse)
% Bulk

% of imports in bulk
formulation

5884

8.77%

Antibiotics

Dummy variables for
each commodity group

5884

0.15

0.35

0

1

Antisera
Hormones
Insulin
Medicaments

5884
5884
5884
5884

0.14
0.14
0.13
0.15

0.34
0.35
0.34
0.36

0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1

Vaccines
Vitamins
GDP

5884
5884
5847

0.14
0.15
$2,097.97

0.35
0.35
$1,941.93

0
0
$104.64

1
1
$8,961.25

5884

152.65

164.09

4.87

1261.93

5849

64.12

11.09

34.97

78.95

TB Incidence
Life
Expectancy

GDP per capita
(constant 2000 US$)
Incidence of
tuberculosis (per
100,000 people)
Life expectancy at birth
(total years)

30

Table 3. Estimation results for the effect of imports from China and India on the average price of
pharmaceutical commodities imported from high-income trading partners.
Dependent Variable: Average price of pharmaceutical commodities from high-income trading partners
Excluded Instruments: Pergenelse, Percent of imports from China and India lagged t-1 and t-2
Explanatory Variables
(1)
(2)
(3)
Import Share (CI)
-0.867*
-0.689*
0.347
(0.353)
(0.279)
(0.419)
% Bulk
-0.073
-0.050
-0.360**
(0.091)
(0.095)
(0.110)
GDP
0.004
0.003
0.038***
(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.008)
TB Incidence
0.075
0.028
0.060
(0.062)
(0.054)
(0.106)
Life Expectancy
4.539*
2.335*
-2.742
(1.810)
(1.064)
(2.212)
Medicaments
-7.849***
-4.876**
-5.535
(2.250)
(1.693)
(3.560)
Antisera
115.138***
(11.942)
Hormones
34.274***
(5.688)
Insulin
128.376***
(8.121)
Vaccines
121.406***
(7.135)
Vitamins
-10.091
(8.082)
Constant
-292.504*
-111.797
103.163
(127.682)
(92.310)
(146.246)
N
1525
1075
3575
R2
0.345
0.416
0.269
Hansen J
4.274
2.865
3.386
Hansen J p-value
0.118
0.239
0.184
Kleibergen-Paap Wald F
10.939
8.984
42.275
Standard errors in parentheses. Significance: *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001
Notes: Column 1 includes the full sample of countries; Columns 2 and 3 are limited to
countries from the Asia and Pacific, Latin America and the Caribbean, and Sub-Saharan
Africa regions, Column 3 includes all seven commodity groups. All models included year
and country fixed effects.

31

Table 4. Estimation results for the effect of imports from Argentina, Brazil and Mexico on the
average price of pharmaceutical commodities imported by countries in the Latin America and
Caribbean region.
Dependent Variable: Average price of pharmaceutical commodities from high-income trading partners
Excluded Instruments
Pergenelse, Percent of imports from Argentina,
Pergenelse, Percent of imports from Argentina,
Brazil, China, India and Mexico lagged t-1 and Brazil and Mexico lagged t-1 and t-2
t-2
Explanatory Variables
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Import Share (ABM)
-0.106
-0.312
-0.535
0.239
(0.407)
(0.200)
(0.668)
(0.150)
% Bulk
-0.312
-0.069
-0.333
-0.224*
(0.182)
(0.090)
(0.189)
(0.103)
GDP
0.021*
0.004
-0.002
-0.012
(0.011)
(0.005)
(0.019)
(0.008)
TB Incidence
0.036
0.054
-0.174
-0.125
(0.114)
(0.060)
(0.198)
(0.068)
Life Expectancy
-3.208
3.743*
-11.713
-1.302
(3.714)
(1.645)
(15.697)
(1.739)
medicaments
-9.362*
-7.718***
-6.966
-6.070**
(4.218)
(2.091)
(5.421)
(2.127)
antisera
164.586***
110.101***
(14.018)
(21.435)
hormones
42.481***
35.095***
(6.242)
(6.608)
insulin
155.010***
155.894***
(7.629)
(9.641)
vaccines
140.125***
116.918***
(10.399)
(13.799)
vitamins
-21.086*
-5.199
(8.330)
(19.890)
Constant
188.297
-248.715*
871.153
154.796
(272.410)
(118.245)
(1118.373)
(133.991)
N
4856
1457
1408
415
R2
0.273
0.344
0.218
0.505
Hansen J
8.580
4.409
4.060
7.850
Hansen J p-value
0.014
0.110
0.131
0.020
Kleibergen-Paap Wald F
90.924
18.570
61.206
36.007
Standard errors in parentheses. Significance: *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001
Notes: Column 1 includes the full sample of countries; Column 2 is limited to countries from the Asia and Pacific,
Latin America and the Caribbean, and Sub-Saharan Africa regions. Columns 3 & 4 are restricted to just Latin
America and Caribbean countries but differ in the commodity groups included in the model. All models included
year and country fixed effects.

32

60

50

Patents

40

30

20

10

0
1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

Year Year
Publication
India

China

Argentina

Mexico

South Africa

Brazil

Cuba

Figure 1. Trends in patenting in the US among innovators from leading developing countries in the
US, 1986-2002. Only the top seven countries are included.

33

700
600

Patents

500
400
300
200
100
0
1986

1988

United States

1990
Germany

1992

1994

1996

1998

Publication Year
Brazil
Switzerland

2000

2002

United Kingdom

2004

2006
France

Figure 2. Trends in patents granted in Brazil to foreign inventors, 1986-2006. Only the top six
countries are included.

34

200
180
160
140
Patents

120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

Publication Year
India

United States

United Kingdom

Germany

France

Japan

Figure 3. Trends in patents granted in India to foreign inventors, 1987-2003. Only the top six
countries are included.

35

China

100

1.1%

0.4%

0.096%

1%

0.15%

1%

100

0

48%
2.6%

4.3%

1.9%

3.2%

3.7%

5%

3.4%

17%

77%
3.6%

9.2%

16%

14%

1.3%

0.02%

A&P

E&CA

26%

100

39%
0

Mexico

0.38%

2.8%

100

0

2.4%

0

India

2.2%
96%

25%

HIC

0.32%

100

0

Brazil

95%

100

0

Argentina

HIC

35%

60%

LA&C

0.075%

0.21%

ME&NA

SSA

Export destination

Figure 4. The regional markets for pharmaceutical exports from high-income countries (as a group),
Argentina, Brazil, China, India and Mexico, 1996 to 2005.
(NOTE: A&P = Asia & Pacific; E&CA = Europe and Central Asia; HIC = High income countries;
LA&C = Latin America & Caribbean; ME&NA = Middle East and North Africa; SSA = SubSaharan Africa)

36

Export quantity (million kg)

35

Latin America & Caribbean
Middle East & North Africa
Sub−Saharan Africa

30
25

!

!

Asia & Pacific
Europe & Central Asia
High income

!
!

!

!
!

!

!

20

!

!

!

!

15
10

!
!

!

!

!

!

!

!
!

5
0
1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

Year

Figure 5. Trends in pharmaceutical exports from China to regional markets, 1996 to 2005.

37

100

!

Export quantity (million kg)

!

80

Asia & Pacific
Europe & Central Asia
High income
Latin America & Caribbean
Middle East & North Africa
Sub−Saharan Africa
!

60
40
20

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

0
1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

Year

Figure 6. Trends in pharmaceutical exports from India to regional markets, 1996-2005.

38

100

0.017%

0.38%

4.2%

6.1%

0.92%

25%

5.7%

0.092%

3.7%

0.016%

1.7%

10%

24%

2.3%

0.11%

8.5%

66%
30%

53%

88%
0.056%

0.72%

0.0073% 0.092%

1.7%

Argentina

China

0.062%

33%

0

SSA

0.013%

100

0

ME&NA

4.7%

100

0

LA&C

0.074%

100

0

E&CA

65%
0.043%

100

0

A&P

Brazil

45%
0.033%

HIC

India

Mexico

21%

Other

Exporter

Figure 7. The source of pharmaceutical imports for each region, 1996-2005.
(NOTE: A&P = Asia & Pacific; E&CA = Europe and Central Asia; HIC = High income countries;
LA&C = Latin America & Caribbean; ME&NA = Middle East and North Africa; SSA = SubSaharan Africa)

39

Appendix I. Country groups based on region and economy.
High Income
Andorra
China, Macao SAR
Anguilla
Cyprus
Antigua and Barbuda
Denmark
Australia
Finland
Austria
France
Bahamas
French Polynesia
Bahrain
Germany
Belgium
Greece
Bermuda
Greenland
Brunei Darussalam
Iceland
Canada
Ireland
China, Hong Kong
SAR
Asia and Pacific Region
Bangladesh
Indonesia
Bhutan
Kiribati
Cambodia
Malaysia
Fiji
Mongolia
Middle East & North Africa
Algeria
Jordan
Egypt
Lebanon
Iran
Morocco
Latin America & the Caribbean
Argentina
Ecuador
Belize
El Salvador
Bolivia
Grenada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominica
Sub-Saharan Africa
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde

Israel
Italy
Japan
Kuwait
Luxembourg
Malta
Netherlands
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal

Qatar
Rep. of Korea
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
USA
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom

Nepal
Pakistan
Philippines
Sri Lanka

Thailand
Timor-Leste

Oman
Syria
Tunisia

Yemen

Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua

Guatemala
Guyana
Honduras

Panama
Paraguay
Peru

Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Vincent and the
Grenadines
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela

Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Kenya

Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda

Sierra Leone
South Africa
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo

40

Central African Rep.

Madagascar

Comoros
Cote d'Ivoire
Eritrea

Malawi
Mali
Mauritania

Sao Tome and
Principe
Senegal
Seychelles

Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Note: Based on the World Bank’s Country Classification available at http://go.worldbank.org/K2CKM78CC0.

41

