NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STEPPING STONES:
PRINCIPAL CAREER PATHS AND SCHOOL OUTCOMES
Tara Béteille
Demetra Kalogrides
Susanna Loeb
Working Paper 17243
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17243

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2011

This research was supported by grants from the Hewlett Foundation and the Spencer Foundation. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Tara Béteille, Demetra Kalogrides, and Susanna Loeb. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Stepping Stones: Principal Career Paths and School Outcomes
Tara Béteille, Demetra Kalogrides, and Susanna Loeb
NBER Working Paper No. 17243
July 2011
JEL No. I21
ABSTRACT
More than one out of every five principals leaves their school each year. In some cases, these career
changes are driven by the choices of district leadership. In other cases, principals initiate the move,
often demonstrating preferences to work in schools with higher achieving students from more advantaged
socioeconomic backgrounds. Principals often use schools with many poor or low-achieving students
as stepping stones to what they view as more desirable assignments. We use longitudinal data from
one large urban school district to study the relationship between principal turnover and school outcomes.
We find that principal turnover is, on average, detrimental to school performance. Frequent turnover
of school leadership results in lower teacher retention and lower student achievement gains. Leadership
changes are particularly harmful for high poverty schools, low-achieving schools, and schools with
many inexperienced teachers. These schools not only suffer from high rates of principal turnover but
are also unable to attract experienced successors. The negative effect of leadership changes can be
mitigated when vacancies are filled by individuals with prior experience leading other schools. However,
the majority of new principals in high poverty and low-performing schools lack prior leadership experience
and leave when more attractive positions become available in other schools.

Tara Béteille
The World Bank
MSN M9A-007
1900 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20431
tara.beteille@gmail.com
Demetra Kalogrides
Stanford University
520 Galvez Mall Drive
Stanford CA, 94305
dkalo@stanford.edu

Susanna Loeb
524 CERAS, 520 Galvez Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
sloeb@stanford.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
In 2009 the Obama administration allocated four billion dollars to transform some of the
nation’s worst schools. Persistently low-achieving schools are eligible to receive federal grants to
support intervention efforts but must make radical changes to their school in order to receive
funds, including replacing their principals and in some cases large portions of their teaching
staffs (Dillon 2011; Tucker 2010; U.S. Department of Education 2010).1 Though prior research
provides evidence that principals have important effects on school outcomes and, thus, suggests
that leadership change can be beneficial (Hallinger and Heck 1998; Hallinger and Heck 1996;
Leithwood, Louis, Anderson, and Wahlstrom 2004), frequently replacing principals may create
instability in schools that can potentially undermine improvement efforts (Dillon 2011).
Leadership changes in the lowest achieving schools sometimes result from involuntary
termination, however, voluntary principal exits are also quite common (Gates, Ringel,
Santibanez, Guarino, Ghosh-Dastidar, and Brown 2005; Loeb, Kalogrides, and Horng 2010;
Papa, Lankford, and Wyckoff 2002a). Many schools—particularly schools with disadvantaged
student populations—face high rates of principal turnover driven, in part, by principals’ desires
to move to schools that they find more appealing (Loeb, Kalogrides, and Horng 2010).
It is unclear a priori whether leadership changes are beneficial or detrimental to schools.
Studies of leadership turnover in other types of organizations suggest that turnover can have
either beneficial or detrimental effects on organizations depending on the circumstances
(Abelson and Baysinger 1984; Mobley 1982). Turnover can have beneficial effects if it helps
generate new ideas and innovation and purges an organization of ineffective leaders (Brown
1982; Denis and Denis 1995). If ineffective principals are the most likely to leave, then
1

See the following websites for more information: http://www2.ed.gov/programs/sif/nastid2.pdf and
http://www2.ed.gov/programs/sif/sigguidance11012010.pdf

2

leadership turnover may be beneficial to schools. At the same time, too much turnover can have
negative consequences if it leads to instability, loss of institutional memory, high training costs
or lower employee commitment (Abelson and Baysinger 1984; Grusky 1960; Mobley 1982).
The effects of leadership changes on school performance have not been rigorously
examined in prior research. Such analyses are complicated because in order to identify the
effects of principal turnover, researchers need to separate the effects of principal turnover from
the effects of factors that cause principals to leave their position that may also be associated with
school performance. In this paper we used detailed administrative data from one urban district to
describe principal turnover and examine its effects on teacher retention and student achievement.
We use changes over time within schools to identify these effects, carefully assessing the time
trends in teacher retention and student achievement pre and post principal turnover.
In describing principal turnover, we find that when principals leave a school it is usually
due to a transfer to another school in the district rather than attrition from the principal profession
via termination. Unlike studies of turnover in other organizations which tend to find that poor
performance is a precursor to managerial exits, we find that school performance bears little
association with principal turnover. Principals who transfer tend to move to schools with more
advantaged and higher achieving student bodies relative to where they start, suggesting that
principals may use their initial school assignments as stepping stones to more desirable future
positions in other schools. The patterns of principal movement we observe are consistent with
principals’ stated preferences for more advantaged and higher achieving schools.
In estimating the effects of principal turnover, we find that this mobility in principals’
career paths has detrimental consequences for schools. The departure of a principal is associated
with higher teacher turnover rates and lower student achievement gains. The negative effects of

3

principal turnover on student achievement are largest in schools with high concentrations of
novice teachers, high concentrations of poor students and in schools with the lowest performance
in the state’s accountability system. The latter group of schools is precisely the type that is the
target of the recent federal reforms previously discussed. Poorly performing schools and those
with high concentrations of poor students not only experience much higher principal turnover
rates than other schools, but they are also unable to attract experienced new principals when
vacancies arise.
2. BACKGROUND
Many districts face very high rates of leadership turnover. Annual principal turnover rates
in school districts throughout the country range from 15 to 30 percent each year with especially
high rates of turnover in schools serving more low-income, minority and low-achieving students
(Branch, Hanushek, and Rivkin 2008; DeAngelis and White 2011; Fuller and Young 2009; Gates
et al. 2005; Loeb, Kalogrides, and Horng 2010; Ringel, Gates, Chung, Brown, and GhoshDastidar 2004). A principal may leave his or her current school either because of involuntary
departure due to firing or reassignment or voluntary departure based on a preference to work in a
different school. The former is the type of turnover generated by reform efforts intended to turn
around failing schools by removing the leadership. Dismissal generally accounts for only a small
proportion of all principal exits. Though there are no national figures on the frequency of
principal firings, data from several school districts suggest that the majority of principal turnover
(as experienced by individual schools) comes from intra-district transfers and not from exits
(Gates et al. 2005; Loeb, Kalogrides, and Horng 2010; Ringel et al. 2004). District leadership
may also reassign principals because they believe that bringing new leadership into schools on a
regular basis is beneficial for school improvement (though we are aware of no empirical

4

evidence that supports this belief). However, there is evidence that principals’ movement across
schools is, at least in part, voluntary (Loeb, Kalogrides, and Horng 2010).
When principals transfer, they generally move to a school with more affluent and higher
achieving students relative to where they start (Loeb, Kalogrides, and Horng 2010; Papa,
Lankford, and Wyckoff 2002a). Principals usually do not receive pay increases when they
change schools within a district; therefore; intra-district transfers can improve only nonpecuniary benefits. Prior research suggests that many non-salary job characteristics affect teacher
and principal preferences including student characteristics, school culture, facilities, and safety
(Horng 2009; Loeb, Kalogrides, and Horng 2010; Loeb and Reininger 2004). These working
conditions vary considerably across schools. Schools with less appealing attributes generally
receive fewer applicants for vacant principal positions than do other schools, and therefore
cannot be as selective when hiring replacements (Roza 2003). Consequently, new principals in
such schools tend to have less experience leading other schools and are less likely to have
advanced degrees than principals in other schools (Loeb, Kalogrides, and Horng 2010).
2.1

Effects of Leadership Turnover

Whether leadership changes are beneficial or detrimental for schools is unclear. No other
study that we are aware of has examined the effects of principal turnover on school performance.
Studies on the effects of leadership turnover in other types of organizations start with conflicting
hypotheses and provide conflicting evidence. Some find that leadership turnover improves
organizational performance (Brown 1982; Denis and Denis 1995; Grusky 1963; Virany,
Tushman, and Romanelli 1992). This improvement happens when a manager in a struggling
organization is replaced by a more effective manager. Other studies postulate or find that
leadership turnover can be harmful for organizational performance (Audas, Dobson, and

5

Goddard 2002; Azoulay, Zivin, and Wang 2010; Grusky 1963). In particular, frequent turnover
may create instability in an organization. While poor performance may precede managerial
change, when changes are frequent, they can be disruptive and make matters worse rather than
better. Faltering organizations with high levels of turnover often have difficulty attracting
experienced successors, who tend to be more effective (Pfeffer and Davis-Blake 1986). As a
result, they become trapped in a “vicious circle” of high managerial turnover and declining
performance (Grusky 1963). The “vicious circle” concept suggests that poorly performing
organizations are especially vulnerable to the negative effects of leadership turnover. A final
relevant group of studies hypothesize that leadership change plays no role in organizational
performance (Brown 1982; Eitzen and Yetman 1972; Gamson and Scotch 1964; Smith, Carson,
and Alexander 1984). This hypothesis, originally posited by Gamson and Scotch (1964),
maintains that success results from organizational processes that are largely outside the control
of middle management. Dismissing a manager is a gesture aimed at appeasing stakeholders or of
deflecting attention from shortcomings at higher levels of management. Therefore, any
relationship between management succession and performance is spurious. Gamson and Scotch
(1964) refer to this idea as the “ritual scapegoating” theory. From this perspective, managers are
either relatively unimportant or they are all of similar quality such that it makes little difference
who fills the leadership role.
These hypotheses were developed in studies of involuntary leadership turnover when
managers in struggling organizations are replaced. The effects of leadership turnover in schools
may differ. Given the dynamics of the principal labor market described above and the voluntary
nature of most principal turnover, leadership change in schools may not provide the beneficial
mechanism of replacing less effective leaders with more effective leaders as often as it does in

6

the private sector. Moreover, research on school reform suggests that organizational stability is
an important component of a well running school and that frequent changes to staff undermine
efforts to effectively implement a school’s instructional program (Fuller and Young 2009;
Hallinger and Heck 1996; Weinstein, Jacobowitz, Ely, Landon, and Schwartz 2009). Because of
its disruptive effects, leadership turnover may be particularly likely to negatively impact school
performance (Brown 1982), particularly in faltering schools with lower resource levels, more
novice teachers, and consistently less effective leadership (Branch, Hanushek, and Rivkin 2008;
Condron and Roscigno 2003; Lankford, Loeb, and Wyckoff 2002).
2.2

Effects of Principals on School Performance

Leadership turnover may impact school outcomes because leadership itself can impact
school outcomes. A range of studies provide evidence that leadership effects can work through a
variety of mechanisms. These studies have assessed leaders’ abilities to recruit high quality
teachers, to motivate teachers, to articulate school vision and goals, to allocate resources and to
develop organizational structures to support instruction and learning (Eberts and Stone 1988;
Grissom and Loeb Forthcoming; Hallinger and Heck 1996; Harris, Rutledge, Ingle, and
Thompson 2010; Horng, Klasik, and Loeb 2010; Jacob and Lefgren 2005; Leithwood, Louis,
Anderson, and Wahlstrom 2004; Loeb, Kalogrides, and Béteille 2010). Strong school leadership
is also likely to be an essential component of school improvement efforts (Bryk, Sebring,
Allensworth, Luppescu, and Easton 2010).
Though logic suggests that principals are important for the performance of schools, it is
less clear from prior research which observable attributes of principals are associated with high
performance. Many prior studies that attempt to identify the effects of principal characteristics or
behaviors on school performance fail to account for factors that confound that relationship

7

(Ballou and Podgursky 1993; Brewer 1993; Eberts and Stone 1988; Hallinger and Heck 1996;
Louis, Leithwood, Wahlstrom, and Anderson 2010). More effective schools may attract
principals with different characteristics, even if those characteristics do not improve
effectiveness. Simple correlations could mistakenly attribute cause to these correlational
relationships.
Two recent studies have carefully examined the relationship between principal
experience and school performance using district panel data and methods similar to ours
(Branch, Hanushek, and Rivkin 2008; Clark, Martorell, and Rockoff 2009). These studies find a
positive relationship between principal experience and student test scores. No studies, however,
have rigorously examined the relationship between principal turnover and school outcomes.
Though principal tenure at a school is partially a function of principal turnover (i.e., schools with
high turnover rates employ principals with fewer years of school-specific experience), the two
measures are conceptually distinct. The effect of turnover on school performance may be
negative, in part, because it leads to a reduction in principal experience at schools that experience
turnover. However, turnover could have negative effects on school performance independent
from the relative inexperience of new principals to a school. Constant churning of principals in
and out of schools can create instability that may undermine performance. That is, the instability
created by principal turnover could have negative effects on school performance even if
succeeding principals are identical in their skills and knowledge to the exiting principals they
replace.
In this paper we use data from one of the largest public school districts in the United
States to examine the consequences of leadership change on school performance. We begin by
describing the principal labor market in this district, including rates of turnover from different

8

types of schools and the characteristics of the schools to which principals transfer. We then
examine the relationship between principal turnover and school-level outcomes and variations in
the magnitude of these relationships in different types of schools. We find that principal turnover
has negative effects on average achievement and particularly large negative effects on the
achievement of students attending high poverty schools, those receiving failing grades within the
state accountability system, and those with many first-year teachers. We conclude that principal
preferences for easier to staff schools leads to considerable leadership turnover in schools with
more disadvantaged students. These career pathways limit poor and low-achieving students’
exposure to stable leadership, which negative affects their achievement.
3. DATA
The data used in this study come from administrative files on all staff, students, and
schools in the Miami-Dade County Public Schools (M-DCPS) district from the 2003-04 through
the 2008-09 school years. The school district we study, M-DCPS, is the largest public school
district in Florida and the fourth largest in the United States, trailing only New York City, Los
Angeles Unified, and the City of Chicago School District. In 2008, M-DCPS enrolled almost
352,000 students, more than 200,000 of whom were Hispanic. Nearly 90 percent of students in
the district are either black or Hispanic and 60 percent qualify for free or reduced priced lunches.
Over our observation period there are between 360 and 400 schools in the district. This provides
ample power for identifying the effects of school characteristics (i.e., leadership turnover) on
student and teacher outcomes. Basic descriptive information for the principals, teachers, and
students that make up our sample is shown in Table 1.
The M-DCPS staff database includes demographic measures, prior experience in the
district, current position, and highest degree earned for all district staff from the 2003-04 through

9

the 2008-09 school years. We use this information to create five measures of principal
experience and turnover in each year. The first measure tracks whether the school has a new
principal in the current year. This measure captures only whether the principal is new to the
school and not whether he or she has prior experience as a principal in other schools in the
district. The second measure is whether the school has a first time new principal at their school.
These principals have no prior principal experience as principals in the district. The third
measure captures whether a school has a new principal who has previously served as principal at
another school in the district. Distinguishing between these last two measures allows us to gauge
whether achievement declines when schools are under the direction of a new principal because
new principals have less experience. A fourth measure of experience tracks whether the school
has a new principal who began with a temporary or interim status. Temporary/interim principals
are usually appointed by the Superintendent to fill a vacancy which occurs as the result of an
emergency situation — often in the middle of the school year. Finally, our fifth measure is a
simple measure of school-specific experience which each principal’s tenure at their current
school.
We also use the staff-level data to examine the association between principal turnover
and subsequent changes to teacher turnover. To examine teacher turnover following leadership
transitions we use the staff database which allows us to observe teacher transfers between
schools in the district as well as attrition from the district after any given year. These data also
include teacher race, gender, highest degree earned, experience, and age which we use as control
variables in our models.
In addition to these staff-level data, we have test score data and basic demographic
information for all students in the district which we can link to classrooms (teachers) and to

10

schools. The demographic variables include student race, gender, free/reduced price lunch
eligibility, and whether students are limited English proficient. These variables serve as control
variables in our models. The test score data include math and reading scores from the Florida
Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT). The FCAT is given in math and reading to students in
grades 3-10. It is also given in writing and science to a subset of grades, though we only use
math and reading tests in our analyses. The FCAT includes criterion referenced tests measuring
selected benchmarks from the Sunshine State Standards (SSS). We standardize students’ test
scores to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one within each grade and school-year.
4. METHODS
Our analysis includes three components: (1) we descriptively examine patterns of
principal turnover in the district; (2) we identify the relationship between principal turnover and
(a) teacher turnover and (b) student achievement; and (3) we describe variation in the
relationship between principal turnover and school outcomes by school characteristics (poverty
level, performance in the state accountability system, concentration of first-year teachers).
The second and third components of our analysis seek to isolate the effect of principal
transitions on school outcomes, recognizing that principal turnover may be endogenous to other
school characteristics. Schools with frequent principal turnover may differ from schools with
more stable leadership in a variety of ways — they may have less stable teacher and student
populations or other less favorable working conditions such as safety concerns, disciplinary
problems, or insufficient resources. Such factors are likely to be negatively associated with
school outcomes such as achievement. Though we do not have a perfect solution to this
endogeneity problem, we seek to minimize the potential bias by including a rich set of control

11

variables in all our models as well as school and/or student fixed effects. We also run analyses
to uncover the likelihood of bias. We describe these approaches and their implications below.
4.1

Teacher Turnover

To examine the relationship between principal and teacher turnover we use data on all
staff in the district and estimate a logistic regression predicting whether a teacher leaves their
current school at the end of the year as a function of the measures of principal turnover and
experience. In our full model we include controls for teacher characteristics (race, gender,
highest degree, age, experience), time-varying school characteristics (percent receiving
free/reduced priced lunches, percent minority, percent low achieving, enrollment), and school
fixed effects. The types of schools that have high principal turnover may also have high teacher
turnover with the former not necessarily causing the latter. We therefore prefer a model with
school fixed effects since it shows the relationship between principal turnover and teacher
turnover within the same school. That is, we are able to examine whether teacher turnover in a
given school is higher in years that the school has a new principal compared to years that the
school does not have a new principal. The model is estimated with the following equation:
1

Pr

(1)

The probability that teacher j leaves their current school s in year t is a function of whether their
school has a new principal in year t, teacher characteristics (
schools (

, year fixed effects (

and school fixed effects

, time varying attributes of
. In other models we replace

the new principal variable with the other measures of principal turnover and experience
discussed above.
4.2

Student Achievement
12

In order to examine the relationship between principal turnover and student achievement,
we merge the principal database with our student data base. Given concerns about the
endogeneity of principal turnover, we estimate specifications of our student achievement models
that include school and/or student fixed effects. This approach allows us to discern whether
students learn less in years that their schools have a new principal compared to how much
students in the same school learn in other years when their school does not have a new principal.
The school fixed effect removes any stable characteristics of schools that may be
associated with both the likelihood of principal turnover and lower student achievement.
However, there may still be time-varying negative shocks that influence both turnover and
achievement declines. While we do not have a perfect solution to this endogeneity problem, we
use two approaches which reduce the potential for bias. First, in all models we control for the
percentage of teachers at a school that are new in each year. If something bad happened at a
school in the year before a new principal arrived, we expect that this will be absorbed by the
teacher turnover rate. Second, as checks of the robustness of our estimates we include a control
for the year before a new principal arrived in addition to the school fixed effect which takes out
the average for the school across all years. If schools that experience a decrease in achievement
in a given year are more likely to see their principal leave, then controlling for the year before
the new principal arrives should account for this. Our estimates are generally unaffected by the
inclusion of this measure or by the inclusion/exclusion of the teacher turnover rate.
Our estimates for the effect of principal turnover on student achievement are identified
from students attending schools that experience at least one principal transition over the years in
which they are tested. The following equation describes the model:
(2)

13

where the achievement of student i in school s in year t is a function of their prior achievement
(

, time varying-attributes of students (

, their classes (

),

, and student, school, and

whether the student’s school has a new principal
year fixed effects. The parameter of interest is

) and their schools (

which shows the difference in the average

achievement of students in years when their school has a new principal compared to years in
which they do not. In other models we replace the new principal variable with the other measures
of principal turnover and experience discussed above.
4.3

Interaction Models

In the analyses described previously, we examine the average effect of principal turnover
on school outcomes. However, we expect that the magnitude of this effect might depend on
characteristics of schools. Certain types of schools may have higher rates of principal turnover
and more difficulty attracting effective and experienced principals as successors. For example, if
schools with high concentrations of poor or low achieving students attract less effective or
experienced principals, then turnover might have larger negative effects in such schools.
To examine variation in the relationship between principal turnover and student
achievement, we include interactions between school characteristics and whether the school has
a new principal. We examine whether the effect of turnover is different for high poverty schools
relative to lower poverty schools and whether the effect is different for failing schools (i.e.,
schools that receive an F grade from the Florida accountability system) relative to higher
performing schools.2 We also expect that leadership turnover might be more consequential for

2

School grades are determined by a formula used by the district that weighs the percentage of students meeting high
standards across various subjects tested, the percentage of students making learning gains, whether adequate
progress is made among the lowest 25 percent of students, and the percentage of eligible students who are tested.
For more information, see: http://schoolgrades.fldoe.org/pdf/0708/2008SchoolGradesTAP.pdf

14

schools that employ more novice teachers. Strong school leadership may be especially important
for novice teachers who may benefit most from mentoring and support from their principal.
Schools with a more stable senior teaching force may be better equipped to handle the departure
of a principal since teachers in such schools are more familiar with their jobs and are likely to
work more autonomously with less oversight from the school leadership. To examine whether
the effects of principal turnover is different for schools with many novice teachers we include an
interaction between whether the school has a new principal and a measure of whether the school
is in the top quartile in terms of the percentage of their teachers who are in their first year.
5. RESULTS
We begin by describing principal turnover rates in M-DCPS as well as in several other
school districts and professions for comparison purposes. Table 2 lists principal turnover rates as
well as turnover rates for other managerial professions. In M-DCPS, 22 percent of principals
leave their current school each year and most of those who leave transfer to another school in the
district. The rates are similar in other districts: Milwaukee and North Carolina schools have
annual turnover rates of around 20 percent, San Francisco has a turnover rate of 26 percent, New
York City has a turnover rate of 24 percent, and Texas has a turnover rate of 30 percent. As
Table 2 shows, in general, managerial turnover is fairly high in other professions as well —
ranging anywhere from 10 percent to 35 percent depending on the industry (Denis and Denis
1995; DiPrete and Krecker 1991; Fee and Hadlock 2004; Larsen 1993).
The turnover rate of principals varies across schools. Table 3 shows the principal
turnover rate in M-DCPS for schools serving different student populations. The first column lists
the total percentage of principals who left their current school at the end of the year, while the
second and third columns separate exits via transfer to another school in the district from exits

15

via attrition from the district. Principal turnover rates are highest in schools serving high
concentrations of poor, minority and low achieving students. In M-DCPS, 28 percent of
principals in schools in the top quartile of students receiving subsidized lunches (high poverty)
leave each year compared to 18 percent of principals in schools in the bottom quartile (low
poverty). Nearly 30 percent of principals in schools with high concentrations of low achieving
students leave each year compared to only 16 percent of principals in schools with low
concentrations of low achieving students. We find similar results in Milwaukee and San
Francisco from which we also have data (not shown), as do Gates et al. (2004) in their study of
North Carolina and Ringel et al. (2004) in their study of Illinois.
5.1

Are Principals More Likely to Leave Following a Year of Poor Performance?

Prior studies of leadership turnover in other professions have found that leaders are more
likely to leave following a period of poor performance (Allen, Panian, and Lotz 1979; Brown
1982; Denis and Denis 1995). We examine whether principal exits are associated with the
performance of their school by predicting student test score gains in a given year as a function of
whether a school’s principal leaves at the end of that year. We also separate principal exists via
transfer and via attrition. The results are shown in Table 4. The coefficients are all essentially
zero and not statistically significant. This suggests that poor school performance is not, on
average, a precursor to principal turnover. This analysis also suggests that schools that
experience principal exits are not necessarily experiencing a downward achievement trajectory
which could confound our estimates of the effect of turnover on student achievement.
Since the majority of principal turnover results from principals transferring schools
within the district, we next turn to an analysis of principals’ school preferences and transfer
patterns. In Table 5 we compare the characteristics of principals’ current schools with the

16

characteristics of the schools they report they would most like to work in. The self-report data
come from a survey of principals in Miami that we administered in 2010.3 We asked principals if
they could work in any school in the district (other than their current school) which would be
their first choice. We compare the characteristics of the student bodies in their current school
with their first choice school. The results show that principals’ first choice schools have fewer
poor, black and low achieving students than their current school as well as fewer students who
are suspended or chronically absent.
Principals’ stated preferences mirror their actual transfer patterns. We compare the
characteristics of principals’ initial schools to the characteristics of the schools to which they
transfer in Table 6. There is one observation for each principal-school combination and we
predict a school characteristic as a function of whether the school is the principals’ first, second,
third, or fourth or more school. The models also include a principal fixed effect. Principals’ first
school is the omitted category, thus the coefficients show the difference in school characteristics
between a principal’s first school and each subsequent school. The models are only identified
from principals who serve at more than one school. The results from these analyses show that
principals who transfer tend to move to schools with higher achieving students, fewer poor
students, fewer minority students, and fewer students with attendance problems. For example,
principals’ second and third schools have about 9 percent fewer low achieving students than their
first schools, 4 percent more high achieving students than their first schools, 8-9 percent fewer
poor and minority students than their first school and 3-6 percent fewer students who are
chronically absent. Few principals serve at four or more schools during our observation period so
those coefficients are less precisely estimated. These results are consistent with principals’
reports of their school preferences.
3

We administered an online survey to all principals in M-DCPS in May of 2010 with a response rate of 55 percent.

17

Taken together, the results presented thus far suggest that principals are not leaving when
their school is performing poorly but, rather, they tend to leave when vacancies arise at easier to
staff schools given that they find such schools more appealing.
5.2

Principal Turnover and School Outcomes

Next, we turn to an examination of the relationship between principal turnover and both
teacher turnover (Table 7) and student achievement (Tables 8 and 9). We run two models for
each analysis. The first model includes a detailed set of control variables and shows whether the
outcome differs in schools and years when there is a new principal in comparison to similar
schools and years.4 The second model includes school fixed effects asking whether within a
school the outcome differs in years where there is a new principal compared to years when there
is not a new principal. While the last specification is the cleanest causally, it identifies the effect
only from the small variation within schools across years. Tables 8 and 9 include one additional
model that adds a student fixed effect to the model with school fixed effects and the controls.
In Table 7 we find that turnover among teachers is higher when a new principal takes
over at a school. The first row of the Table shows that the odds that a teacher leaves his or her
current school are about 17 percent higher in years and schools that have a new principal. The
direction of the results remains in the next two models which aim to identify the causal effect of
principal turnover on teacher turnover. Within schools, the odds of teacher turnover are
approximately 8.7 percentage points higher in the years in which there is a new principal. These
results are marginally significant and not substantially different from the model with controls
4

The control variables used in our teacher turnover models include: race, gender, age, age2, highest degree earned,
experience (entered as dummies and top coded at 21 or more years), percentage of students receiving free/reduced
priced lunches at the school, percent minority at the school, logged school enrollment, average math achievement at
the school and year fixed effects. The control variables used in our student achievement models include: prior
achievement, race, gender, whether the student is limited English proficient, free/reduced priced lunch receipt,
whether the student was retained in the prior year, school and class percentage free/reduced priced lunches, limited
English proficient and average prior achievement as well as year and grade fixed effects.

18

instead of fixed effects (11.3 percentage points) which is strongly statistically significant and has
greater statistical power.
Teacher turnover might be higher in years when schools have a new principal because of
the relative inexperience of new principals. More experienced principals might be more skilled in
developing effective policies to retain their teachers or supporting a collegial environment that
curbs turnover. In addition, a new principal might be more likely than a more experienced
principal to bring a new approach to the school that is in conflict with teachers’ preferences; thus
causing teachers to seek other positions. In the second panel of Table 7 we add a control for the
number of prior years of experience that the principal has as a principal in any school.
Controlling for this measure reduces the magnitude of the new principal effect on turnover
somewhat but there is still a significant positive relationship between principal and teacher
turnover in the model with control variables (model 2). This result suggests that the lack of
experience of a new principal to a school explains some but not all of the positive relationship
between principal and teacher turnover. The final model that includes school fixed effects does
not show a significant relationship but most of the difference between models 2 and 3 comes
from an increase in the standard error, likely due to the substantially reduced variation when we
include school fixed effects.
Another way of gauging the importance of experience in explaining the relationship
between principal and teacher turnover is to distinguish between cases when the new principal is
a first time new principal and cases when the new principal has prior experience as a principal in
another school. This analysis is shown in the third panel of Table7. The relationship appears
somewhat stronger for new principals with prior experience than for new principals without prior
experience, though the differences are not statistically significant in any of the specifications.

19

The similarity in the magnitude of the effects of having a new first time principal and a new
principal with prior experience at another school suggests that whether the new principal is
experienced or not is not an important influence on teacher turnover. Taken together these results
suggest that leadership instability tends to generate greater instability among the teaching force
that goes beyond the turnover associated with having a less experienced principal.
The final two panels of Table 7 give estimates of the effects of having a temporary or
interim principal and of principal experience on teacher attrition. We see that on average
teachers turn over more under temporary or interim principals but that this relationship is small
(3.6 percent in the model with controls and 1.6 percent in the school fixed effects model) and not
statistically different from zero. The final panel shows that teachers are less likely to leave under
principals with longer tenure at their school.

An extra year of experience at a school is

associated with a 4 percentage point reduction in the odds of turnover in the school fixed effects
model, but these estimates are not statistically significant.
In Table 8 (math) and Table 9 (reading) we examine the relationship between principal
turnover and student achievement. Model 1 includes a measure of lagged achievement, the
percentage of new teachers at the school, student, school, and classroom control variables as well
as grade and year fixed effects. Model 2 adds a school fixed effect and model 3 adds a student
fixed effect. We focus our discussion on models 2 and 3 since they bring us closest to identifying
a causal effect of principal turnover on achievement. These models use variation in the presence
of new leaders within schools (across time) to examine whether students learn less in years when
their school has a new principal compared to years when their school does not have a new
principal.

20

The effects are relatively small but consistent across models and outcome measures. In
Table 8 we find that students make lower achievement gains in math when their school has a
new principal (first panel), when their school has a new first time principal (without prior
experience in another school) (third panel), and when their school has a temporary or interim
principal (fourth panel). Students also have higher learning gains in math when their principal
has longer tenure at their school (fifth panel). Interestingly, there is no negative effect on math
achievement when a school has a new principal who previously served as a principal at another
school in the district (third panel). This suggests that the skills and experience that principals
bring to their new schools are important and that lack of prior experience explains much of the
negative effect of turnover on math achievement.
One concern with these models is that schools that are on a downward achievement
trajectory might also be more likely to experience principal turnover, which could potentially
bias our estimates. We account for this possibility in the second panel by controlling for the year
prior to the new principal (similar to the analysis shown in Table 4). Our estimates of the effect
of having a new principal on math achievement remain relatively unchanged with the inclusion
of this control.
The results for reading achievement in Table 9 are fairly similar to those discussed for
math thus far. We see a negative relationship between achievement and having a new principal
and we see a positive relationship between achievement and principal experience at the school.
On the other hand, for reading the effect of having a new principal with prior experience is just
as negative as having a new principal without prior experience and we do not find a negative
effect for temporary or interim principals.

21

In the sixth panel of Tables 8 and 9 we add interactions between years of prior principal
experience and the new principal indicator. This principal experience measure reflects years of
experience in any school in the district and is distinct from the measure of experience used in
panel five of Tables 8 and 9, which only captures years of experience at the current school. For
math (Table 8) the main effect on new principal in model 4 suggests that student achievement is
about .013 standard deviations lower when schools have a new principal without any prior
principal experience (i.e., when prior years of experience is equal to zero). However, the
interaction between new principal and prior principal experience is positive and statistically
significant. This suggests that the negative effect of having a new principal is smaller when new
principals to a school have more prior experience serving as a principal in other schools. The
results for reading achievement in Table 9 are a bit different. These results suggest that overall
years of principal experience is positively related to reading achievement and the magnitude of
that relationship is similar or slightly smaller in schools with a new principal. Though the
negative interaction term in models 1 and 2 suggests that principal experience is less important in
schools with a new principal, the interactions are still smaller than the main effect on principal
experience suggesting that principal experience is still related to reading achievement in schools
with new principals. These results suggest that principal experience is important in schools with
new principals and that the negative effect of leadership turnover on student achievement can be
mitigated through the recruitment of experienced succeeding principals.
In sum, we find that principal turnover is positively associated with teacher turnover and
negatively associated with student achievement. These results provide fairly consistent evidence
that greater instability among leadership is detrimental to school outcomes and that new

22

principals without any prior experience seem to be less effective than their more experienced
counterparts.
5.3

Interaction Models

In our final set of analyses we examine whether the association between leadership
changes and student achievement is different in low performing schools, high poverty schools,
and in schools with high concentrations of novice teachers. In Table 10 we predict student
achievement as a function of our full set of student, school, and classroom controls as well as the
relevant fixed effects. In models 1 and 2 we include a variable indicating whether the school
received a failing accountability grade (i.e., an “F” grade) in the prior year as well as an
interaction between whether the school had a new principal in the current year and earned a
failing grade in the prior year. In models 3 and 4 we include a variable indicating whether the
school was in the top quartile of students receiving subsidized lunches (high poverty) and an
interaction between this variable and whether the school has a new principal. In models 5 and 6
we include a variable indicating that the school was in the top quartile in terms of their
proportion of first-year teachers and interact this variable with the new principal indicator. We
are interested in the interaction terms in these models since they show whether principal turnover
is more consequential for students attending failing schools, high poverty schools, or schools
with many first-year teachers. We also estimate these models using a measure of principal
experience at a school in lieu of the new principal indicator.
The negative relationship between principal turnover and math and reading achievement
is stronger in failing schools and in high poverty schools. The negative effect of principal
turnover on math achievement is also larger in schools with high concentrations of novice
teachers, though we do not find similar effects for reading achievement. Here we focus our

23

discussion of the models with student fixed effects (models 2, 4, and 6) though most of these
results are similar in models that exclude them (models 1, 3, and 5). While there is little or no
relationship between having a new principal and achievement in non-poor schools, higher
performing schools, or schools with fewer novice teachers (shown by the main effects), students
in failing schools have reading and math achievement that is about .04-.06 standard deviations
lower in years when they have a new principal, students in high poverty schools have reading
and math achievement that is .02-.03 standard deviations lower in years when they have a new
principal, and students in schools with high concentrations of novice teachers have math
achievement that is about .02 standard deviations lower in years when they have a new principal.
Similarly, principal tenure at a school bears a stronger relationship to achievement gains in high
poverty schools, failing schools, and schools with high concentrations of novice teachers than in
more advantaged and higher performing schools. Instability among school leadership is therefore
more consequential for high poverty and failing schools, schools which also tend to have more
frequent turnover.
The effect of turnover may be different for high poverty and failing schools if such
schools differ in their ability to attract experienced successors. We examine this descriptively in
Table 11, which shows the characteristics of new principals in different types of schools. We list
the proportion of new principals with prior experience, years of prior principal experience in the
district, and the proportion of principals with master’s degrees. As expected, new principals in
high poverty schools have less prior experience as a principal and are less likely to have a
master’s degree or higher compared to new principals in schools with fewer low-income
students. About 65 percent of new principals in low poverty schools have previously served as
principal at another school in the district compared to only 30 percent of new principals in high

24

poverty schools. Similarly, new principals in high poverty schools have about half as many prior
years experience as principals in low poverty schools (roughly 4 versus 2 years). New principals
in high poverty schools are also less likely to have a masters degree (65 percent in low poverty
schools compared to 56 percent in high poverty schools). Therefore, the effect of having a new
principal may be more negative for high poverty schools because such schools are unable to
attract the most experienced and credentialed successors.
6. DISCUSSION
Many school districts throughout the country—including the district studied in this
paper—face high rates of principal turnover (Branch, Hanushek, and Rivkin 2008; Gates, Ringel,
Santibanez, Ross, and Chung 2003; Papa, Lankford, and Wyckoff 2002b). While turnover
averages approximately 20 percent in the district we study as a whole, it is about a third higher in
schools with high concentrations of poor, minority and low achieving students. Though we do
not have data on why principals choose to leave their schools, we find evidence that suggests that
one likely reason is a desire to move to easier to staff schools. When asked via a survey,
principals indicate that they would prefer to work at a school that is higher achieving than the
school in which they are currently employed. Those who switch schools tend to move to schools
with fewer students in poverty and fewer low achieving students compared to where they start.
This is consistent with previous work studying principals’ preferences for schools

(Loeb,

Kalogrides, and Horng 2010).
Schools are not the only type of organization that experiences voluntary turnover—for
example, managers may also move among similar firms in the for-profit sector. However,
schools are more constrained than private firms in the resources they can deploy to keep
effective employees. Given the rigidities of the salary schedule for teachers and school

25

administrators in most districts, there are few opportunities to increase one’s earnings outside of
acquiring more experience or further credentials. The career trajectories of school personnel
therefore may be more affected by non-pecuniary benefits such as positive working conditions
than are other workers (Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin 2004; Lankford, Loeb, and Wyckoff 2002;
Loeb, Kalogrides, and Horng 2010).
Since much of the turnover we document is likely to be voluntary and driven by a
preference to move to easier to serve schools, it is not surprising that we find no evidence of a
relationship between school performance and the likelihood that a principal leaves a school.
While some principals whose schools are performing poorly may leave either via termination or
by their own accord, some principals whose schools are performing well also leave. A proven
track record in improving the performance of a school is likely to make a principal a viable
candidate for vacancies in other, more appealing schools. Prior research on the effects of
leadership turnover on organizational performance suggests that turnover can be beneficial in
instances where ineffective leaders are replaced (Grusky 1963; Virany, Tushman, and Romanelli
1992). But the dynamics of the principal labor market we document suggest that the majority of
turnover is not driven by an attempt to replace ineffective leaders.
The consequences of the turnover we document are clearly negative, on average. There
are a variety of possible explanations for these negative effects and we do not distinguish them in
this paper. For example, others have hypothesized that turnover may undermine reform efforts
and reduce employee buy-in, fracture professional networks developed among employees and
leadership, create unclear goals and expectations, and make for a less stable and desirable
working environment (Abelson and Baysinger 1984; Fuller and Young 2009; Hallinger and Heck
1996; Steinberg 2000). These disruptive effects of turnover for schools could be cause for

26

concern, particularly in high poverty and failing schools where turnover rates are quite high and
the negative effects of turnover are large. Our results suggest that practices that bring in
experienced (and effective) administrators can mitigate some of the problems created by
turnover. Turnover’s negative effects are smaller when vacancies are filled with principals who
have prior experience leading other schools in the district. At the same time, the types of schools
that hire less experienced new principals (i.e., high poverty schools) tend to suffer more harm
from leadership instability.
Turnover might have less detrimental effects on more advantaged schools because they
have less frequent turnover and because they attract more experienced replacements. It is also
possible that principals matter less in these schools – these schools have more advantaged and
higher achieving students and likely have an easier time attracting strong teachers. Turnover in
these schools might also occur more often from retirement rather than a desire to move to an
easier to serve school. In instances where the principal’s exit is anticipated (i.e., due to
retirement) there might be more mechanisms in place to ensure a smoother transition. Overall,
our results suggest that principals’ desire to work in schools with more affluent and high
achieving students reduces disadvantaged students’ exposure to experienced and stable school
personnel (both teachers and principals) which has negative consequences for their learning.

27

REFERENCES:
Abelson, Michael A. and Barry D. Baysinger. 1984. "Optimal and Dysfunctional Turnover:
Toward an Organizational Level Model." The Academy of Management Review 9:331341.
Allen, Michael Patrick, Sharon K. Panian, and Roy E. Lotz. 1979. "Managerial Succession and
Organizational Performance: A Recalcitrant Problem Revisited." Administrative Science
Quarterly 24:167-180.
Audas, Rick, Stephen Dobson, and John Goddard. 2002. "The Impact of Managerial Change on
Team Performance in Professional Sports." Journal of Economics and Business 54:633650.
Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua Graff Zivin, and Jialan Wang. 2010. "Superstar Extinction." Quarterly
Journal of Economics 25:549-589.
Ballou, Dale and Michael J. Podgursky. 1993. "What Makes a Good Principal? How Teachers
Assess the Performance of Principals." Economics of Education Review 14:243-52.
Branch, Gregory F., Eric A. Hanushek, and Steven G. Rivkin. 2008. "Principal turnover and
effectiveness." in Meetings of the American Economics Association San Francisco, CA.
Brewer, Dominic J. 1993. "Principals and Student Outcomes: Evidence from U.S. High
Schools." Economics of Education Review 12:281-292.
Brown, M. C. 1982. "Administrative Succession and Organizational Performance- The
Succession Effect." Administrative Science Quarterly 27:1-16.
Bryk, Anthony, Penny Bender Sebring, Elaine Allensworth, Stuart Luppescu, and John Q.
Easton. 2010. Organizing Schools for Improvement: Lessons from Chicago. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.

28

Clark, Damon, Paco Martorell, and Jonah Rockoff. 2009. "School Principals and School
Performance." National Center for Analysis of Longitudinal Data in Education Research.
Condron, Dennis J. and Vincent J. Roscigno. 2003. "Disparities within: Unequal Spending and
Achievement in an Urban School District." Sociology of Education 76:18-36.
DeAngelis, Karen J. and Bradford R. White. 2011. "Principal Turnover in Ilinois Public Schools,
2001-2008." Illinois Education Research Council.
Denis, David J. and Diane K. Denis. 1995. "Performance Changes Following Top Management
Dismissals." The Journal of Finance 50:1029-1057.
Dillon, Sam. 2011. "U.S. Plan to Replace Principals Hits Snag: Who Will Step In?" in New York
Times. New York.
DiPrete, Thomas A. and Margaret L. Krecker. 1991. "Occupational Linkages and Job Mobility
within and across Organizations." Research in Social Stratification and Mobility 10:91131.
Eberts, Randall W. and Joe A. Stone. 1988. "Student Achievement in Public Schools: Do
Principals Make a Difference?" Economics of Education Review 7:291-299.
Eitzen, D.Stanley and Norman R. Yetman. 1972. "Managerial Change, Longevity, and
Organizational Effectiveness." Administrative Science Quarterly 17:110-116.
Fee, Edward C. and Charles J. Hadlock. 2004. "Management Turnover Across the Corporate
Hierarchy." Journal of Accounting and Economics 37:3-38.
Fuller, Ed and Michelle D. Young. 2009. "Tenure and Retention of Newly Hired Principals in
Texas." University Council for Educational Administration, Austin, Texas.
Gamson, William A. and Norman A. Scotch. 1964. "Scapegoating in Baseball." American
Journal of Sociology 70:69-72.

29

Gates, Susan M., Jeanne S. Ringel, Lucrecia Santibanez, Cassandra Guarino, Bonnie GhoshDastidar, and Abigail Brown. 2005. "Mobility and Turnover among School Principals."
Economics of Education Review 25:289-302.
Gates, Susan M., Jeanne S. Ringel, Lucrecia Santibanez, Karen E. Ross, and Catherine H.
Chung. 2003. "Who is Leading Our Schools? An Overview of School Administrators and
Their Careers." RAND Santa Monica.
Grissom, Jason and Susanna Loeb. Forthcoming. "Triangulating Principal Effectiveness: How
Perspectives of Parents, Teachers, and Assistant Principals Identify the Central
Importance of Managerial Skills." American Educational Research Journal Available
Online:
http://aer.sagepub.com/content/early/2011/03/26/0002831211402663.full.pdf+html.
Grusky, Oscar. 1960. "Administrative Succession in Formal Organizations." Social Forces
39:105-115.
Grusky, Oscar. 1963. "Managerial Succession and Organizational Effectiveness." American
Journal of Sociology 69:21-31.
Hallinger, Philip and Ronald H. Heck. 1998. "Exploring the principal's contribution to school
effectiveness: 1980-1995." School Effectiveness and School Improvement 9:157-191.
Hallinger, Phillip and Ronald H. Heck. 1996. "Reassessing the Principal's Role in School
Effectiveness: A Review of Empirical Research, 1980-1995." Educational
Administration Quarterly 32:5-44.
Hanushek, Eric, John F. Kain, and Steven G. Rivkin. 2004. "Why Public Schools Lose
Teachers." Journal of Human Resources 39:326-354.

30

Harris, Douglas N., Stacey A. Rutledge, William K. Ingle, and Cynthia C. Thompson. 2010.
"Mix and Match: What Principals Look for when Hiring Teachers and Implications for
Teacher Quality Policies." Education Finance and Policy 5:228-246.
Horng, Eileen. 2009. "Teacher Tradeoffs: Disentangling Teachers' Preferences for Working
Conditions and Student Demographics." American Educational Research Journal
46:690-717.
Horng, Eileen, Daniel Klasik, and Susanna Loeb. 2010. "Principal's Time Use and School
Effectiveness." American Journal of Education 116:491-523.
Jacob, Brian A and Lars Lefgren. 2005. "Principals As agents: Subjective performance
measurement in education." in NBER Working Paper Series. Cambridge: NBER.
Lankford, Hamilton, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff. 2002. "Teacher Sorting and the Plight
of Urban Schools: A Descriptive Analysis." Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis
24:37-62.
Larsen, P.D. 1993. "Factors Influencing Retention of Directors of Nursing at Rural Long-Term
Care Facilities. What Difficulties do Rural LTC Facilities Face in Attracting and
Retaining Qualified NA/DONs?" Geriatric Nursing 14:261-264.
Leithwood, Kenneth, Karen Seashore Louis, Stephen Anderson, and Kyla Wahlstrom. 2004.
"How leadership influences student learning." Learning from Leadership Project,
Minneapolis, MN.
Loeb, Susanna, Demetra Kalogrides, and Tara Béteille. 2010. "Effective Schools: Teacher
Hiring, Assignment, Development, and Retention." Cambridge: National Bureau of
Economic Research, Working Paper #17177.

31

Loeb, Susanna, Demetra Kalogrides, and Eileen Horng. 2010. "Principal Preferences and the
Unequal Distribution of Principals Across Schools." Education Evaluation and Policy
Analysis 32:205-229.
Loeb, Susanna and Michelle Reininger. 2004. "Public Policy and Teacher Labor Markets: What
we Know and Why it Matters." The Education Policy Center at Michigan State
University, East Lansing.
Louis, Karen Seashore, Kenneth Leithwood, Kyla L. Wahlstrom, and Stephen E. Anderson.
2010. "Learning from Leadership Project: Investigating the Links to Improved Student
Learning." Center for Applied Research and Educational Improvement.
Mobley, William. 1982. "Some Unanswered Questions in Turnover and Withdrawal Research."
The Academy of Management Review 7:111-116.
Papa, Frank C., Hamilton Lankford, and James Wyckoff. 2002a. "The Attributes and Career
Paths of Principals: Implications for Improving Policy." Teacher Policy Research Center.
Papa, Frank C., Hamilton Lankford, and James Wyckoff. 2002b. "The attributes and career paths
of principals: Implications for improving policy." University at Albany, SUNY, New
York.
Pfeffer, Jeffrey and Alison Davis-Blake. 1986. "Administrative Succession and Organizational
Performance: How Administrator Experience Mediates the Succession Effect." The
Academy of Management Journal 29:72-83.
Ringel, Jeanne, Susan Gates, Catherine Chung, Abigail Brown, and Bonnie Ghosh-Dastidar.
2004. "Career Paths of School Administrators in Illinois: Insights from an Analysis of
State Data." RAND, Santa Monica, CA.

32

Roza, Marguerite. 2003. "A Matter of Definition: Is There Truly a Shortage of School
Principals." Center on Reinventing Public Education, University of Washington.
Smith, Jonathan E., Kenneth P. Carson, and Ralph A. Alexander. 1984. "Leadership: It Can
Make a Difference." The Academy of Management Journal 27:765-776.
Steinberg, Jacques. 2000. "Nation's Schools Struggling to Find Enough Principals." in New York
Times, vol. September 3, 2000. New York City.
Tucker, Jill. 2010. "5 S.F. School Principals Under Fire." in San Francisco Chronicle. San
Francisco.
U.S. Department of Education. 2010. "Guidance on Fiscal Year 2010 School Improvement
Grants." Wasington, D.C.
Virany, Beverly, Michael L. Tushman, and Elaine Romanelli. 1992. "Executive Succession and
Organizational Outcomes in Turbulent Environments: An Organizational Learning
Approach." Organization Science 3:72-91.
Weinstein, Meryle, Robin Jacobowitz, Todd Ely, Kate Landon, and Amy Ellen Schwartz. 2009.
"New Schools, New Leaders: A Study of Principal Turnover and Academic Achievement
at New High Schools in New York City." The Institute for Education and Social Policy,
New York University.

33

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics
Mean
SD
Principal Characteristics
Total Years of Experience in District
22.37
8.14
Years Experience as Principal
3.88
3.61
White
0.26
Black
0.36
Hispanic
0.38
Female
0.67
Masters Degree or Higher
0.70
Total Principal Observations
2041
Percentage of Principals who Serve Two or More Schools
0.35
Percentage of Principals who Serve Three or More Schools
0.10
Teacher Characteristics
Total Yearsof Experience in District
9.55
9.29
White
0.28
Black
0.27
Hispanic
0.43
Female
0.76
Age
42.23
11.72
Master's Degree or Higher
0.40
Total Teacher Observations (all teachers)
102646
Student Characteristics
Black
0.27
Hispanic
0.60
Female
0.49
Limited English Proficient
0.16
Retained in Year Prior
0.04
Eligible for Subsidized Lunch
0.61
Total Student Observations (all students)
2145115
Total Student Observations (with test scores)
1246335
Notes: Data from administrative files from Miami-Dade County Public Schools from 200304 to 2008-09.

34

Table 2. Principal Turnover Rates in Various School Districts and Comparisons with Turnover Rates in Other
Leadership Professions
Source
Profession
School District(s)
Time Period Annual Turnover Rate
PRINCIPALS
Authors' calculations from data
provided by district

Principals

Miami‐Dade County
Public Schools

2003‐2009

22% (Total); 16%
(Transfer); 6% (Attrit)

Authors' calculations from data
provided by district

Principals

Milwaukee Public
Schools

2000‐2008

19% (Total); 11%
(Transfer); 8% (Attrit)

Authors' calculations from data
provided by district
Authors' calculations from data
provided by district

Principals

San Francisco Unified
School District

2003‐2009

26% (Total); 18%
(Transfer); 8% (Attrit)

Principals

New York City

1999‐2008

24% (Total)

Papa, Lankford, Wyckoff (2002)

First Time Principals

New York State

1992

36% (Total)

Gates et al. (2004)

Principals

North Carolina State

1987‐2001

18% (Total); 9%
(Transfer); 9% (Attrit)

Ringel et al. (2004)

Principals

Illinois State

1987‐2001

14% (Total); 7%
(Transfer); 7% (Attrit)

Illinois State

2001‐2008

20% (Total)

Texas State
Washington State

1995‐2001
1999

30% (Total)
15% (Attrit)

‐‐‐
‐‐‐
‐‐‐

1980s
1953‐1988
1972‐1999

10%
15%
36%

‐‐‐
‐‐‐

1977‐1981
1950‐1993

25%
15‐16%

‐‐‐
‐‐‐
‐‐‐

1920‐1973
1985‐1988
1993

36%
22%
35%

DeAngelis and White (2011)
Prinicpals
Branch, Hanushek, and Rivkin
(2009)
Principals
Steinberg (2000)
Principals
OTHER LEADERSHIP PROFESSIONS
Professional and
DiPrete and Krecker (1991)
Managerial Workers
Sorensen (2000)
TV Station Supervisors
Audas et al. (1999)
English Soccer Coaches
National Basketball
Association Coaches
Pfeffer and Davis‐Blake (1986)
Fee and Hadlock (2000)
Newspaper Managers
Major League Baseball
Coaches
Allen, Panian, and Lotz (1979)
Denis and Denis (1995)
CEOs
Larsen (1993)
Nurse Managers

35

Table 3. Average Annual Principal Turnover Rate by School Type
in Miami­Dade County Public Schools
Total %
%
%
Left
Transfer
Attrit
All Schools
22%
16%
5%
Percent Free Lunch
Quartile 1
18%
12%
5%
Quartile 4
28%
21%
6%
Percent Minority
Quartile 1
20%
14%
5%
Quartile 4
28%
23%
4%
Percent Low Achieving(Math)
Quartile 1
16%
9%
6%
Quartile 4
29%
22%
6%
Percent Being Suspended
Quartile 1
19%
12%
7%
Quartile 4
27%
22%
5%
Percent Absent 21 or More Days
Quartile 1
17%
10%
6%
Quartile 4
27%
22%
5%
School Accountability Grade
A
19%
13%
6%
B
20%
14%
5%
C
26%
20%
6%
D
25%
19%
6%
F
48%
43%
5%
School Level
Elementary
21%
16%
5%
Middle
23%
18%
4%
High
25%
20%
4%
Notes: Transfer refers to the percentage of principals who transfer to
another school in the district at the end of an academic year. Attrition
refers to the percentage of principals who are no longer observed as a
principal in the district following the end of an academic year.

36

Table 4. Relationship between Student Achievement and Principal
Turnover
Math
Reading
Model 1
Year Prior to Principal Exit
‐0.001
0.000
(0.004)
(0.003)
Model 2
Year Prior to Principal Exit (via Attrition)
0.001
0.001
(0.006)
(0.005)
Year Prior to Principal Exit (via Transfer)
‐0.003
0.000
(0.005)
(0.004)
Control for Lag of Outcome
X
X
Time‐Varying Student Controls
X
X
Time‐Varying School Controls
X
X
Time‐Varying Classroom Controls
X
X
School Fixed Effect
X
X
Grade Fixed Effect
X
X
Year Fixed Effect
X
X
Clustered Standard Errors (by School‐Year)
X
X
Notes: +p<.10*p<.05, **p<.01, ***p<.001

37

Table 5. Comparison of School Characteristics­ Principals' Current School and Other Schools they
Would Like to Work In

Percent F/R Lunch
Percent Black
Percent Lowest Achievement Level in Math
Percent Highest Achievement Level in Math
Percent Lowest Achievement Level in Reading
Percent Highest Achievement Level in Reading
Standardized Math Score
Standardized Reading Score
Percent Students Suspended this Year
Percent Students Chronically Absent this Year

Current
School (A)
0.73
0.30
0.19
0.09
0.25
0.07
‐0.14
‐0.12
0.08
0.10

First Choice
School (B)
0.68
0.24
0.11
0.12
0.18
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.05
0.06

Difference
(A­B)
0.05
0.06
0.08
‐0.03
0.07
‐0.02
‐0.23
‐0.21
0.03
0.04

Notes: Figures are from a 2010 survey of principals in Miami‐Dade. Principals were asked if they could
work at any school in the district other than the one they are currently in, what would be their first choice.

38

Table 6. Change in School Characteristics among Principals who Transfer
Percent Low Percent High
Percent
Mean Math Proficiency Proficiency
Percent F/R
Black
Score
in Math
in Math
Lunch
Second School Served as Principal
17.944 *** ‐0.093 ***
0.037 ***
‐0.081
**
‐0.091 **
(2.449)
(0.014)
(0.006)
(0.025)
(0.031)
Third School Served as Principal
19.768 *** ‐0.093 ***
0.036 **
‐0.088
+
‐0.093
(4.650)
(0.026)
(0.012)
(0.046)
(0.058)
Fourth or Fifth School Served as Principa 24.930 *
‐0.156 **
0.035
‐0.005
‐0.081
(9.880)
(0.056)
(0.026)
(0.100)
(0.126)
Constant
304.685 ***
0.250 ***
0.060 ***
0.727 ***
0.400 ***
(0.996)
(0.006)
(0.003)
(0.010)
(0.013)
Principal Fixed Effect
X
X
X
X
X
N (Principals)
516
518
518
522
522
N (Observations)
690
696
696
704
704
Notes: +p<.10*p<.05, **p<.01, ***p<.001 The first school at which the principal served is the omitted category.

Percent
Chronically
Absent
‐0.027 *
(0.012)
‐0.057 **
(0.022)
‐0.040
(0.050)
0.107 ***
(0.005)
X
522
704

39

Table 7. Logistic Regression of Teacher Turnover by Principal Experience
(Odds Ratios/t­Statistics)
1
2
1. New Principal at School
New Principal
1.168 ***
1.112
(4.464)
(3.405)
2. New Principal at School with Control for Prior Experience
New Principal
1.114 **
1.086
(2.801)
(2.439)
Prior Years of Principal Experience (in Any School)
0.983 ***
0.991
(‐3.370)
(‐1.976)
3. First­Time New Principal at School
First Time New Principal This Year
1.141 **
1.086
(2.989)
(2.172)
New Principal to School, but with Prior Experience
1.207 ***
1.149
at another School in District
(3.743)
(2.883)
4. Temporary/Interim Principal
Temporary/Interim Principal
1.101 *
1.036
(2.225)
(0.915)
5. Principal Experience
Years at Current School
0.950 **
0.972
(‐2.698)
(‐1.584)

3
***

1.087 *
(2.352)

*

1.074
(0.794)
0.995
(‐0.168)

*

*
**

1.075
(1.072)
1.102
(1.549)
1.016
(0.086)
0.960
(‐0.336)

Time‐Varying Teacher Controls
‐‐‐
X
X
Time‐Varying School Controls
‐‐‐
X
X
School Fixed Effect
‐‐‐
‐‐‐
X
Year Fixed Effect
‐‐‐
X
X
Clustered SE (School by Year)
X
X
X
Notes: +p<.10*, p<.05, **p<.01, ***p<.001 The outcome is whether the teacher left their school at the end of
the year. The models are restricted to teachers under the age of 62 (to omit those who leave due to
retirement). Each numbered panel represents a different model.

40

Table 8. Regression of Standardized Math Achievement Test Scores on Principal Experience
1
2
3
1. New Principal at School
New Principal This Year
‐0.005
**
‐0.004
*
‐0.005 **
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Proportion of New Teachers at School
0.000
‐0.019
+
‐0.080 ***
(0.006)
(0.011)
(0.015)
2. New Principal, Control for Year before New Principal
Year Before New Principal
‐0.002
‐0.004
*
‐0.001
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
New Principal This Year
‐0.005
**
‐0.005
**
‐0.006 ***
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Proportion of New Teachers at School
0.002
‐0.023
*
‐0.082 ***
(0.006)
(0.011)
(0.016)
3. First­Time New Principal at School
First Time New Principal This Year
‐0.012
*** ‐0.011
***
‐0.010 ***
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
New Principal to School, but with Prior Experience
0.002
0.003
‐0.000
at another School in District
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Proportion of New Teachers at School
‐0.005
‐0.024
*
‐0.088 ***
(0.006)
(0.011)
(0.015)
4. Temporary/Interim Principal
Temporary/Interim Principal
‐0.004
+
‐0.004
*
‐0.011 ***
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Proportion of New Teachers at School
‐0.007
‐0.018
*
‐0.064 ***
(0.005)
(0.008)
(0.011)
5. Principal Experience (Continuous)
Years at Current School
0.001
0.004
**
0.003 **
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Proportion of New Teachers at School
0.003
‐0.018
+
‐0.081 ***
(0.006)
(0.011)
(0.015)
6. New Principal with Interactions
New Principal This Year
‐0.002
‐0.013
***
(0.003)
(0.003)
Prior Years of Principal Experience (Any School)
0.002
*** 0.000
(0.000)
(0.001)
New Principal*Prior Years Principal Experience
0.001
0.004
***
(0.001)
(0.001)
Control for Lag of Outcome
X
X
X
Time‐Varying Student Controls
X
X
X
Time‐Varying School Controls
X
X
X
Time‐Varying Classroom Controls
X
X
X
School Fixed Effect
‐‐‐
X
X
Student Fixed Effect
‐‐‐
‐‐‐
X
Grade Fixed Effect
X
X
X
Year Fixed Effect
X
X
X
Notes: +p<.10, *p<.05, **p<.01, ***p<.001 Test scores are standardized to have a mean of 0 and a
standard deviation of 1 within each year and grade. Each numbered panel represents a separate
model. Time‐varying student‐level controls include limited English proficiency, free or reduced priced
lunch eligibility, and retention status. Class characteristics include percent black, percent female,
percent eligible for free or reduced priced lunches, percent limited English proficicient and average
prior achievement. School‐level controls include percent minority and percent eligible for free or
reduced priced lunches.

41

Table 9. Regression of Standardized Reading Achievement Test Scores on Principal Experience
1
2
3
1. New Principal at School
New Principal This Year
‐0.011
***
‐0.005
*
‐0.004
*
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Proportion of New Teachers at School
‐0.007
‐0.022
+
‐0.022
(0.006)
(0.011)
(0.017)
2. New Principal, Control for Year before New Principal
Year Before New Principal
‐0.010
***
‐0.002
‐0.003
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
New Principal This Year
‐0.012
***
‐0.005
*
‐0.005
*
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Proportion of New Teachers at School
‐0.007
‐0.023
*
‐0.022
(0.006)
(0.011)
(0.017)
3. First­Time New Principal at School
First Time New Principal This Year
‐0.016
***
‐0.005
*
‐0.004
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.002)
New Principal to School, but with Prior Experience
‐0.007
**
‐0.004
+
‐0.005
*
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.002)
at another School in District
Proportion of New Teachers at School
‐0.010
‐0.022
*
‐0.021
(0.006)
(0.011)
(0.017)
4. Temporary/Interim Principal
Temporary/Interim Principal
‐0.007
**
0.000
‐0.002
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Proportion of New Teachers at School
‐0.019
***
‐0.017
*
‐0.022
+
(0.005)
(0.008)
(0.012)
5. Principal Experience (Continuous)
Years at Current School
0.006
***
0.004
***
0.004
**
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Proportion of New Teachers at School
‐0.001
‐0.020
+
‐0.020
(0.006)
(0.011)
(0.017)
6. New Principal with Interactions
New Principal This Year
0.002
‐0.001
(0.003)
(0.003)
Prior Years of Principal Experience (Any School)
0.003
***
0.002
***
(0.000)
(0.001)
New Principal*Prior Years Principal Experience
‐0.002
**
‐0.000
(0.001)
(0.001)
Control for Lag of Outcome
X
X
X
Time‐Varying Student Controls
X
X
X
Time‐Varying School Controls
X
X
X
Time‐Varying Classroom Controls
X
X
X
School Fixed Effect
‐‐‐
X
X
Student Fixed Effect
‐‐‐
‐‐‐
X
X
X
X
Grade Fixed Effect
Year Fixed Effect
X
X
X
Notes: +p<.10, *p<.05, **p<.01, ***p<.001 Test scores are standardized to have a mean of 0 and a
standard deviation of 1 within each year and grade. Each numbered panel represents a separate
model. Time‐varying student‐level controls include limited English proficiency, free or reduced priced
lunch eligibility, and retention status. Class characteristics include percent black, percent female,
percent eligible for free or reduced priced lunches, percent limited English proficicient and average
prior achievement. School‐level controls include percent minority and percent eligible for free or
reduced priced lunches.

42

Table 10. Principal Turnover and Student Achievement with Interactions by School Characteristics
School Characteristic=
Failing School
(1)
(2)
MATH ACHIEVEMENT
1. New Principal at School
New Principal
New Principal*School Characteristics
2. Principal Experience at a School
Principal Experience
Principal Experience*School Characteristic
READING ACHIEVEMENT
1. New Principal at School
New Principal
New Principal*School Characteristics
2. Principal Experience at a School
Principal Experience
Principal Experience*School Characteristic
Control for Percent New Teachers to School
Control for Lag of Outcome
Time‐Varying Student, School, Class Controls
School Fixed Effect
Student Fixed Effect
Grade Fixed Effect
Year Fixed Effect

‐0.001
(0.002)
‐0.047
(0.016)

**

0.003
(0.002)
‐0.008
(0.067)

*

‐0.005
(0.002)
‐0.020
(0.016)

*

0.005
(0.001)
‐0.261
(0.063)
X
X
X
X
‐‐‐
X
X

***
***

‐0.003
(0.002)
‐0.038
(0.016)
0.002
(0.002)
0.120
(0.070)

‐0.004
(0.002)
‐0.062
(0.015)
0.003
(0.001)
‐0.018
(0.065)
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

School Characteristic=
Top Quartile of First Year
Teachers
(5)
(6)

School Characteristic=
High Poverty School
(3)
(4)

*

+

*
***

+

‐0.003
(0.002)
‐0.006
(0.006)
0.003
(0.001)
0.007
(0.004)

*
+

‐0.000
(0.002)
‐0.020
(0.005)

‐0.002
(0.002)
*** ‐0.017
(0.005)

‐0.003
(0.002)
*** ‐0.015
(0.004)

0.002
(0.001)
0.013
(0.004)

0.002
(0.001)
0.011
(0.003)

0.001
(0.001)
*** 0.010
(0.003)

**

0.000
(0.002)
‐0.016 **
(0.005)

0.000
(0.002)
‐0.032
(0.005)

‐0.004
(0.002)
*** ‐0.005
(0.005)

+

‐0.003
(0.002)
‐0.006
(0.005)

0.002 +
(0.001)
0.009 **
(0.004)
X
X
X
X
‐‐‐
X
X

0.001
(0.001)
0.018
(0.004)
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

0.004
(0.001)
*** 0.002
(0.003)
X
X
X
X
‐‐‐
X
X

**

0.004
(0.001)
‐0.001
(0.003)
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

+
***

***

*

Notes: +p<.10, *p<.05, **p<.01, ***p<.001 Test scores are standardized to have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1 within each grade
and year. Failing schools are those that received an accountability grade of F in the prior year. High poverty schools are those in the top
quartile of students receiving free or reduced priced lunches. Poverty status, accountability grades, and the first year teacher measure vary
within schools across years so all models also include a main effect for these measures that are not shown in the table.

43

Table 11. Characteristics of Principals by School Type
New Principals to a School
% with Prior
Yrs Prin
Master's
Prin Exp
Experience
Degree
Free Lunch Quartiles
Quartile 1 (Low Poverty)
0.65
3.94
0.65
Quartile 4 (High Poverty)
0.30
2.21
0.56
Math Low Ach Quartiles
Quartile 1 (Few Low Ach)
0.66
3.34
0.55
Quartile 4 (Many Low Ach)
0.38
2.40
0.61
Reading Low Ach Quartiles
Quartile 1 (Few Low Ach)
0.61
3.63
0.61
Quartile 4 (Many Low Ach)
0.47
2.79
0.64
School Accountability Grades
A
0.46
2.92
0.57
F
0.50
3.10
0.30

Yrs Prin
Experience

All Principals at a School
Yrs Prin
Master's
at School
Degree

First Yr
Principal

4.75
3.43

3.07
2.48

0.70
0.62

0.11
0.20

5.50
2.99

3.77
2.37

0.72
0.65

0.07
0.21

5.47
2.84

3.63
2.22

0.73
0.64

0.09
0.23

5.08
2.47

3.43
1.97

0.69
0.67

0.13
0.26

44

