                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           STORIES OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST

                                       Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
                                           Maurice Obstfeld

                                         Working Paper 17252
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17252


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2011




Prepared for the American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics session on "Financial Crises and Macroeconomics"
at the American Economic Association annual meeting, Denver, CO, January 8, 2011. We thank Galina
Hale, Philip Lane, Alan Taylor and seminar participants at the European Central Bank and Columbia
University for comments and data. We benefited also from the comments of the editors and three anonymous
referees. Johannes Wieland, Vladimir Asriyan, and Victoria Vanasco provided dedicated research
assistance. Financial support was provided by the International Growth Centre at the London School
of Economics (project numbers RA-2009-11-002 and 004) and the Coleman Fung Risk Research Center
at UC Berkeley. All errors are our sole responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas and Maurice Obstfeld. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Stories of the Twentieth Century for the Twenty-First
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas and Maurice Obstfeld
NBER Working Paper No. 17252
July 2011
JEL No. E32,E51,F32,F34,G15,G21

                                             ABSTRACT

A key precursor of twentieth-century financial crises in emerging and advanced economies alike was
the rapid buildup of leverage. Those emerging economies that avoided leverage booms during the
2000s also were most likely to avoid the worst effects of the twenty-first century's first global crisis.
A discrete-choice panel analysis using 1973-2010 data suggests that domestic credit expansion and
real currency appreciation have been the most robust and significant predictors of financial crises,
regardless of whether a country is emerging or advanced. For emerging economies, however, higher
foreign exchange reserves predict a sharply reduced probability of a subsequent crisis.


Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
508-1 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and CEPR
and also NBER
pog@econ.berkeley.edu

Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
508-1 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and CEPR
and also NBER
obstfeld@econ.berkeley.edu
      In September 1976, Britain’s Labour government announced that it would seek a rescue
loan from the International Monetary Fund. Italy, Portugal, and Spain also had stand-by
arrangements with the IMF around that time, and even the United States, facing a weakening
dollar, drew down its reserves at the IMF and exchanged Special Drawing Rights for foreign
currencies.1 But after Portugal’s subsequent approach to the IMF in 1983, a quarter century
would pass before another high-income country sought the institution’s support – a period
during which the Fund lent exclusively to crisis-stricken countries in the developing world.
Iceland’s approach to the Fund in the autumn of 2008 was, however, soon followed by
sovereign debt crises in Greece, Ireland, and Portugal virulent enough to force them, too, to
seek official external support. At the time of writing (July 2011), the governments of other
high-income countries such as Spain and Italy face credible threats of losing access to credit.
Of course, these startling recent developments arose in part as collateral damage from the
much broader global financial crisis that began in 2007 in the financial markets of the United
States.
      The financial and economic collapse in advanced countries caught most academic, busi-
ness, and policy economists off guard. After the mid-1970s, an unstated consensus developed
that financial crises were mainly emerging-market affairs. True, advanced countries such as
Finland, Norway, Sweden, and Japan experienced systemic banking crises in the 1980s and
1990s. Around the same time, European countries also went through currency devaluation
crises, in some cases related to banking crises. While painful, these crises were less frequent
and generally less devastating than widespread cataclysms such as the 1980s developing-
country debt crisis or the 1997-98 Asian and Russian crises. Only countries in the lower
income groups, it was believed, would ever need any more to seek IMF support because of a
  1
      See Boughton (2001, p. 138).



                                              1
sudden stop in external finance. Sovereign default by an advanced country was unthinkable.
Nothing of the sort had happened since the 1930s, when many developing countries likewise
defaulted, and the early post-World War II period (Dı́az-Alejandro (1983)).
      Buttressing the consensus view of emerging markets as much more vulnerable to financial
crisis was a large catalog of mutually reinforcing structural weaknesses that researchers iden-
tified over the years. These range from limited financial development, to faulty governance
structures, to over-regulated markets, to extensive dollarization of domestic and external
liabilities, to “fear of floating” the exchange rate. The mature advanced countries, it was
held, were much more robust in all of these areas, and therefore were in a position to derive
big net benefits from liberalized and open financial markets. But after the Asian crisis (if
not before), most economists accepted the need for emerging markets to tread cautiously.
      In the light of this narrative, and in the light of late twentieth-century crisis experience,
the global crisis of 2007-2009 therefore produced another surprise. While some emerging
countries – notably several in the former Soviet bloc – suffered greatly in the crisis, others
proved remarkably resilient, often experiencing smaller output declines and faster recoveries
than those in the advanced countries. Unlike in past global crises, emerging economies as
a group experienced an output decline similar to that of the advanced economies, rather
than greater; in general, their outputs fell from pre-crisis levels that were higher relative
to trends; and their outputs returned to trend more quickly than did the outputs of the
advanced economies.
      Figure 1, which shows detrended real GDP growth rates for the advanced countries
and the six groups of emerging market economies (EMEs), illustrates these patterns.2 The
  2
    Data come from the IMF’s April 2011 World Economic Outlook (WEO); growth rates for 2011 are IMF
forecasts. For each country grouping, the growth rate of GDP is a weighted average of constant-price GDP
growth rates for individual countries, the country weights being shares of GDP (measured at purchasing
power parity) in group GDP (also measured at PPP). For the purpose of Figure 1 we define a group’s trend


                                                   2
Commonwealth of Independent States and Central and Eastern Europe suffered the harshest
growth declines, with the former losing 11.0 percent in 2009 and the latter 7.7 percent,
relative to trend. (We will discuss some reasons for these steep losses below.) Outside of
these regions, the advanced countries – primarily the United States, the European Union,
and Japan – suffered most, with detrended growth rates of –2.3 percent in 2008, –5.9 percent
in 2009, and 0.2 percent in 2010. The figure also shows, however, that the Asia, Middle East-
North Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa groups had relatively mild slowdowns in 2009 (–1.0,
–2.3 and –1.3 percent respectively). While EMEs in Latin America suffered a 2009 growth
loss not too far below that of the advanced countries (–4.7 percent), this group fared much
better in both 2008 and 2010 (1.5 and 3.3 percent). And there is considerable heterogeneity
within the region. Brazil, for example, suffered only a minor slowdown in 2009 (–0.6 percent),
while growing very strongly in both contiguous years (5.2 and 7.5 percent).
    Figure 1 also shows that the decade of the 2000s until 2009 was a boom period for EMEs,
with growth generally far above the long-run trend. Supporting this exceptional growth were
low interest rates in the advanced economies and rising world commodity prices. Indeed, a
notable absence of major emerging-market crises for several years following the 2002 crises
in Argentina and Uruguay led some to speculate that the “Great Moderation” had funda-
mentally altered prospects for financial stability in EMEs; and the IMF, which derives its
operating revenue from crisis lending, felt obliged both to downsize and to rethink its global
role. Historically, EME booms often have led to crashes, and while this pattern recurred
just east of the euro zone, the retrenchment elsewhere in the developing world was milder.
real growth rate as the average of annual growth rates over 1980-2011, except for the Russian federation and
Central and Eastern Europe, where we use the 1994-2011 average. (In the econometric analysis later in this
paper, we use a different method to detrend the level of real GDP, as is explained below.) The grouping of
countries is discussed in more details in section 2.2. A number of other studies have analyzed the relative
output performance of EMEs and advanced economies in the recent global crisis. For surveys, see Kose and
Prasad (2010) and Didier et al. (2011).


                                                     3
Following the September 2008 Lehman Brothers failure, financial flows to emerging markets
certainly contracted abruptly, world export demand collapsed temporarily, and many EME
currencies depreciated sharply. But most of the emerging world escaped systemic banking
crises and sovereign defaults. The outcome was very different from that of the 1980s debt
crisis, which also originated in a context of deep global recession.
    In this paper we compare features of economic crises in advanced and developing economies.
The 2007-2009 crisis, with its seemingly divergent impacts on the advanced economies and
different groups of EMEs, can yield clues about the fundamental causes and consequences of
crises. We can hope to learn by comparing the characteristics of crises in different epochs, by
comparing across economies at distinct stages of development, and by distinguishing among
different types of crisis and different mechanisms of international transmission or contagion.
    An important conclusion is that crises in emerging and advanced economies have their
origins in very similar underlying factors. Two seem especially important: a buildup of
domestic and external leverage in a context of explicit or implicit government guarantees
to a liberalized financial sector, and real currency appreciation.3 Thus, the recent advanced
country experience, like that of some euro zone economies, has many hallmarks of earlier
“emerging market” crises in Latin America and Asia. An economy’s structural features
determine the likelihood that one or more causal factors triggers a crisis, as well as the
severity of its effects; but these are differences of degree, not of kind. At least over the
first decade of the twenty-first century, structural evolution appears to have raised the crisis
sensitivity of advanced economies relative to that of many emerging economies, making the
   3
     The role of credit booms is familiar from studies such as Dı́az-Alejandro (1985), McKinnon and Pill
(1996), Sachs et al. (1996), Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999), Corsetti et al. (1999), Dooley (2000), Gourinchas
et al. (2001), Tornell (2001), Glick and Hutchison (2001), Hernandez and Landerretche (2002), Mendoza and
Terrones (2008), Schularick and Taylor (2009), and Reinhart and Reinhart (2011). Among macroeconomists,
however, real appreciation as a prologue to crises received much more attention than credit-market factors
until the latter 1990s. Dornbusch et al. (1995), among a host of others, stress the role of real appreciations.


                                                      4
latest global crisis work out quite differently so far from twentieth-century crises for many
EMEs. We add the qualifier “so far” because, as we shall see below, current EME financial
inflows and credit expansion, fueled by both the EMEs’ relative economic strength and
continuing expansive monetary policies in richer countries, may signal financial problems
down the road.
    The plan of the paper is as follows. In section I we distinguish among alternative varieties
of financial crisis and discuss the structural weaknesses of EMEs that have tended over the
past to make them especially susceptible to crises. We document the frequency of different
types of crisis in advanced economies and EMEs. Section II analyzes key economic data from
advanced economies and EMEs around different types of crisis. Our goal is to compare salient
features of similar crises in advanced and emerging economies, as well as differences between
past crises (from 1973 to 2006) and the 2007-2009 crisis. We employ two complementary
methodologies to explore the data: event studies of how key economic variables behave
around different categories of crisis, as well as logit analyses of crisis probabilities. In the
light of that evidence and a developing body of empirical research, Section III advances
hypotheses about why less-developed countries on the whole did not fare worse than advanced
economies in the current crisis, and why the impact differed so markedly across different
emerging regions. Section IV concludes.



1     Crisis Types and Emerging Market Vulnerabilities

Economists have studied many types of financial crisis, but our analysis is restricted to three
that tend to be closely interrelated in practice: currency crises (in which a managed exchange
rate falls to speculative pressure), banking crises (including instability in the shadow banking



                                               5
system), government default crises (involving default or market fears of explicit default on
internal or external public debt). Banking crises can involve a limited range of institutions,
so that their collateral impact on the core of the financial system is contained, as in the
United States Savings and Loan crisis. We focus instead on systemic banking crises, which
endanger the entire economy (and possibly, through various channels of contagion, foreign
economies).
      The links between “twin” banking and currency crises are well known. As documented
by Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999), banking crises tend to begin ahead of currency crises
when the two occur together, with flight from the financial system and government liquidity
support for banks soon leading to flight from the currency and thus, massive depreciation.
Currency depreciation fears exacerbate (and may themselves cause) banking problems as
domestic-currency depositors switch into foreign exchange perhaps due to higher interest
rates as authorities try (usually in vain) to defend the currency. If banks or bank borrowers
have unhedged debts denominated in foreign currency, currency depreciation inflates the real
value of bank liabilities or, by rendering bank borrowers insolvent, reduces bank assets.
      A systemic banking crisis, especially if exacerbated by currency depreciation, can jeop-
ardize the public finances as the government intervenes to guarantee bank liabilities, acquire
impaired bank assets, or inject capital. If sufficiently expensive, these bailout measures may
add a third sibling – a sovereign default crisis – to the twins. Of course, a default crisis may
originate in simple fiscal profligacy rather than a private-sector financial collapse, although
currency and banking problems are likely to follow. Default on public debt must be explicit
if government bonds are indexed or foreign-currency denominated, but for debts in domestic
currency, default may (but need not) take the form of surprise inflation.4 In this paper we
  4
      See Reinhart and Rogoff (2009, partIII).



                                                 6
consider only explicit default episodes.
    Data from the 1970s through 2007 (covering the impact as well as the frequency of
events) suggest that emerging markets were particularly susceptible to currency, banking,
and sovereign default crises prior to the recent global crisis. A large empirical literature seeks
to document the timing of financial crises, and while alternative criteria can yield somewhat
different conclusions (especially with regard to timing), the broad empirical regularities con-
cerning crisis incidence are fairly uncontroversial. We draw our dating of systemic banking
crises and sovereign default crises from Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), Caprio et al. (2003),
Laeven and Valencia (2010), Cantor and Packer (1995), Chambers (2011), Moody’s (2009),
and Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer (2007). To date EME currency crises we use the criterion
of Frankel and Rose (1996) – a 25 percent or greater nominal currency depreciation over a year
that is also a 10 percentage point increase in the annual rate of depreciation. For advanced
economies we use the chronology of Bordo et al. (2001), which extends through 1997. After
1997 there were no true currency crises in advanced countries until 2008, notwithstanding
the ersatz crises some authors have identified using mechanical criteria.
    Table 1 shows that in the past, crises in general have been much more prevalent in EMEs.
All of the 74 (external and internal) sovereign default episodes occurred in EMEs, although
several peripheral euro zone are now on the brink of joining the list. Fifty seven of the 62
pre-2007 systemic banking crises took place in EMEs, and EMEs had about twice as many
currency crises, often-times not in conjunction with banking crises.5
    Several characteristics of EMEs differentiate them from advanced economies and made
them especially crisis-prone in the past. Countries naturally differ among each other, making
   5
     The five systemic advanced-country banking crises occurred in Spain, Japan, Norway, Finland, and
Sweden. Notice that while the number of currency crises per country is not especially low for advanced
economies, our criterion for an advanced-country currency crisis, described earlier, is more lenient than for
EMEs.


                                                     7
generalizations imperfect, but a majority of the features we describe below have applied to
most EMEs. In turn, these distinctive features mostly stem from a deeper source: a level of
institutional quality generally lower than that in advanced economies.
       Economists believe that the efficacy of a country’s governance institutions is central to un-
derstanding its income per capita, as well as other key features of its economic performance.
While quantitative measures of institutional quality are necessarily crude, they uniformly
point to lower average quality in the emerging world compared with mature economies.6 In
turn, these shortcomings in governance are closely linked to most of the items on economists’
standard list of emerging-market weaknesses, which emerged out of twentieth-century expe-
rience:

    • Political and economic instability. Political instability breeds economic instability,
         as illustrated by the relatively more variable EME growth rates through 2007 shown
         in Figure 1 (see, for example, Acemoglu et al. (2003)). Macro policies tend to be
         procyclical (Kaminsky et al. (2005)) due to conflicts over windfalls in good times and
         the absence of predictable and widely accepted mechanisms to allocate losses in bad.
         Inflation is a favored method of resolving distributional disputes that the political
         process cannot settle (Rajan and Tokatlidis (2005)). Difficulty in levying and collecting
         taxes worsens the fiscal position overall, contributing both to procyclicality and the
         reliance on inflation. Volatility may be heightened by undiversified export mixes, for
         example, reliance on a few main commodity exports.
   6
    Naturally there are exceptions. For example, Chile in 2010 surpassed the United States on Transparency
International’s inverse index of corruption (and in the same year entered the OECD). Nonetheless, there is
a strong positive correlation between the Transparency International index and real per capita GDP. The
World Bank’s Worldwide Governance Indicators project measures institutional quality along six dimensions:
voice and accountability, political stability and absence of violence, government effectiveness, regulatory
quality, rule of law, and control of corruption. All of these measures correlate positively with per capita
income. Of course, there is a two-way causality, since institutional imperfections impede wealth accumulation
but likewise are more likely when resources for investment in institutional quality are low.

                                                     8
• Undeveloped and unstable financial markets. Unreliable contract enforcement dictates
  a reliance on relatively simple, information-insensitive, noncontingent financial con-
  tracts. Imperfect protection of equity investors fosters ownership concentration and
  limits gains from risk sharing, domestic and international (Stulz (2005)). At the same
  time, government restrictions may discourage competition and innovation in financial
  markets, allowing connected lending and other forms of cronyism to flourish. A lack
  of financial depth limits the economy’s ability to absorb economic shocks. While bu-
  reaucratic restrictions abound, effective enforcement of prudential standards often lags
  because of opaque accounting practices, corruption, and a lack of expertise. Weak
  political institutions limit the checks and balances needed to minimize abuses. As
  Dı́az-Alejandro (1985, p. 20) observes in his classic analysis of Latin American finan-
  cial instability, “[D]emocracy, whatever its more fundamental virtues, is an important
  technical input for a healthy domestic financial system.” An expectation that gov-
  ernment will bail out failing financial institutions, validated by experience in Latin
  America, Asia, and elsewhere, creates moral hazard. This spells trouble when finan-
  cial transactions are liberalized (externally or domestically) without adequate prior
  safeguards (see, for example, Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache (2000); Honohan and
  Klingebiel (2003)).

• Dollarization, original sin, and currency mismatches. Frequent recourse to inflationary
  finance in the past has created a tendency for financial contracts to be denominated
  in a stable foreign currency, such as the U.S. dollar or euro (Eichengreen et al. (2007);
  Goldstein and Turner (2004); Rajan and Tokatlidis (2005)). This tendency applies both
  to internal contracts and external loan agreements; in the latter context, the inability to
  borrow from foreigners in domestic currency is conventionally referred to as “original

                                           9
  sin.” Domestic liability dollarization has an important advantage for creditors over
  alternative form of real principal protection, such as price-level indexation: it does not
  depend on government discretion with respect to inflation measurement or the timing
  of inflation adjustment. Unfortunately, dollarization of liabilities is likely to entail a
  short position in dollars for the home banking system, either explicitly or implicitly,
  because even bank loans to domestic customers that are denominated in dollars on
  paper are likely to go bust when a sudden currency depreciation raises the real value of
  the loan. For a sample of about a hundred developing economies, Nicolò et al. (2005)
  document the links between macro instability and dollarization of bank deposits and
  between dollarization and financial instability. At the national level, original sin implies
  that currency depreciation will raise the real value of external debt. Through these
  mechanisms, as we have noted, sharp currency depreciations can lead to financial crises.

• Fear of floating. Even where emerging markets have not literally pegged their cur-
  rencies’ foreign exchange values, they have shown less willingness to tolerate sharp
  nominal exchange rate movements than the advanced countries (Calvo and Reinhart
  (2002); Hausmann et al. (2001)). Fear of sharp appreciation and its negative effect on
  exports is evidenced in the recent controversy over “currency wars.” Particularly when
  an EME is financially open and faces financial inflows, as has been the case for many
  in recent years, intervention to resist currency appreciation, coupled with incomplete
  sterilization of reserve inflows, may undermine domestic inflation targets, bid up asset
  prices, and push domestic credit expansion to dangerous levels. EMEs also have feared
  sharp currency depreciation, as depreciation can cause debt deflation (in the presence
  of currency mismatch) and a jump in inflation. Indeed, once the domestic currency
  begins to depreciate, dollar debtors may scramble for that currency in order to un-

                                           10
      wind short positions, leading to further depreciation and heightened financial distress.
      Some argue that the government’s reluctance to allow sharp exchange rate movements
      in the past has itself contributed to currency mismatch – there may be an expectation
      that official intervention to support the exchange rate will allow dollar debtors to close
      out their short positions at public expense (Mishkin (1998); Burnside et al. (2001);
      Schneider and Tornell (2004)).7

   • Sudden stops and debt intolerance. EMEs have been vulnerable to sudden stops in
      foreign lending, which may require not only a sharp reduction in the current account
      deficit also but abrupt demands for repayment of short-term external debt (Calvo
      and Reinhart (2000); Milesi-Ferretti and Razin (2000); Edwards (2004); Forbes and
      Warnock (2011)). Unless the country can draw on official foreign exchange reserves or
      relatively liquid gross assets held abroad by the private sector, such events typically
      will be associated with abrupt currency depreciation and the associated financial reper-
      cussions. Financial fragility and the government’s weakness in generating resources for
      debt repayment are conducive to volatility in capital flows. At the same time, credit
      rationing may occur at external debt levels far below those that advanced countries
      seem able to sustain – a phenomenon that has been labeled “debt intolerance” by
      Reinhart et al. (2003).

   • Over regulation of nonfinancial markets. Heavy regulation in product and labor mar-
      kets reduces flexibility in resource reallocation following economic shocks. In particular,
      structural rigidities help explain the fear of floating, because unexpected exchange rate
      movements have magnified effects on sectoral imbalances and intersectoral adjustment
   7
     For the argument that fixed exchange rates are not a primary cause of currency mismatch, see Honig
(2009).



                                                  11
         costs. Thickets of administrative barriers to economic activity, such as licensing re-
         quirements, promote corruption as well as inefficiency.

       In view of this array of structural defects, it is all the more impressive that emerging
markets did not suffer even more in the recent global crisis. As we discuss below, many
observers believe that some EMEs have made progress repairing or at least compensating
for these weaknesses. On the other hand, recent events make mature economies appear
suddenly vulnerable to some aspects of these “emerging-market” weaknesses. Advanced
countries still score generally well in terms of political and economic stability, ability to use
the exchange rate as a shock absorber, and flexibility in nonfinancial markets.8 But their
financial markets have caused problems.9
       Consider financial development. This area of relative advanced country “strength” ar-
guably exacerbated the effects of the crisis in the rich economies. Table 2 shows ratios of
total commercial bank assets relative to GDP in 2003 and 2007 for a range of countries.
(Total banking system assets are greater.) As is apparent, emerging markets, in general,
have smaller banking systems than the mature economies.10 Furthermore, there is a remark-
able divergence in the growth of banking assets between 2003 and 2007. EU bank assets
increased by a staggering 97.6 percent of EU GDP , whereas EME bank assets grew by far
less – emerging Europe showing the biggest increase. The growth of United States bank-
   8
     Of course there are exceptions, for example, the structural labor-market rigidities leading to high unem-
ployment in some advanced countries.
   9
     Arguably the widespread resistance to recognizing advanced-country financial weaknesses until now
represents past escapes from disaster, as well as an important element of denial. Reviewing the U.S. financial
market turmoil of late 1998, for example, Lamfalussy (2000) (p. 140f) wrote, “If such developments can take
place in the model market of the world, what is the practical value of recommending that emerging markets
copy this model?”
  10
     United States banking assets appear moderate in relation to GDP due to the importance of the shadow
banking sector, which is much less developed in other high-income countries. The Asia aggregate in Table 2
includes the (now) high-income “newly industrialized Asia” group consisting of Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore,
and Taiwan. These countries generally have banking systems more extensive than those in poorer emerging
Asian countries.

                                                     12
ing assets that the table reports seems moderate, but omits a substantial contribution from
off-balance-sheet vehicles.
   In EU and other rich countries, lax prudential oversight in the face of the rapid financial-
market expansion of the 2000s has increased the level of financial risk. In marked contrast to
the pre-2007 experience summarized in Table 1, ten advanced countries had systemic banking
crises in 2007-2009 and a further six had milder (but still costly) “borderline” systemic crises
(according to the classifications of Laeven and Valencia (2010)). Only two EMEs (Latvia and
Ukraine) had systemic banking crises in those years, while four more (Hungary, Kazakhstan,
Russia, and Slovenia) had borderline systemic crises.11
   Experience in emerging and advanced economies alike shows that no government will
allow a domestic financial system collapse if it can marshal the resources to prevent it.
Apparently, moral hazard does not discriminate across income levels. The sizes of some
advanced country bank balance sheets, however, make obvious the dangers to the rich coun-
tries’ public finances of broad banking system guarantees Other things equal, fiscal support
of the banking system in times of stress may be more feasible for the government budget
of an EME, whereas for some advanced economies even a year’s GDP might not suffice to
handle a severe systemic crisis. While all the industrial countries currently face aggravated
fiscal adjustment challenges as a result of past interventions to support their financial sectors,
countries with banking-system balance sheets that are multiples of GDP are especially at
risk for the future. Sovereign defaults (which themselves are likely to have adverse political
consequences) are no longer unthinkable for rich countries. The events leading to Ireland’s
recent sovereign debt problems are a case in point.12
  11
     In 2008, Mongolia, which we consider to be a non-emerging developing country, also had a systemic
banking crisis according to Laeven and Valencia (2010). Their list does not include some more limited
events, such as Nigeria’s 2009 banking stress.
  12
     Even leaving aside their partial coverage of the banking system, the numbers in Table 2 may not ac-


                                                  13
    High levels of intermediation in mature financial markets have likewise given rise to
substantial currency mismatches. Extensive European bank investments in U.S. subprime-
related securities, financed by short-term wholesale dollar borrowing, led to dollar shortages
in 2007-2009 when dollar funding markets froze. The dollar appreciated sharply. Federal
Reserve swap lines, first extended in December 2007 and renewed several times since then,
were particularly helpful for European banks seeking to avoid distress sales of dollar assets
(although the swaps were made available to a small group of EMEs as well). The Euro-
pean banks’ plight demonstrates how, even in an advanced country crisis, maturity or other
mismatches between foreign currency assets and liabilities can rapidly morph into currency
mismatch.
    Finally, advanced economies also saw sudden stops in the aftermath of the Lehman
collapse. United States balance of payments data, for example, show that from 2008:IV
through 2009:II, foreign lenders ceased lending to the U.S. and indeed, liquidated nearly
$165 billion in U.S. assets. Unlike emerging markets, however, U.S. residents hold a stock
of gross foreign assets that is higher than GDP. As a result, they were able to meet foreign
repayment demands, at the same time financing a continuing current account deficit, by
selling off their own assets located abroad. Since the sell-off included claims on emerging
markets, it is all the more striking that a majority of EMEs did not suffer financial collapse
in the crisis.
    We summarize as follows. Crises of several types have been frequent since 1970 (and
of course were common in earlier epochs). Because of several structural weaknesses in the
polities and economies of emerging markets, crises have been much more common there.
curately represent the potential claim on public sector resources arising from bank rescues. Some of the
assets measured in these numbers are held by banks with primarily foreign operations, and little connection
on either the asset or liability side to the domestic economy. On the other hand, a government could face
pressures to rescue a domestically-owned bank with primarily foreign operations.


                                                    14
However, some features of advanced economies that sometimes are viewed as strengths –
notably financial depth – pose threats as well, given limited prudential oversight, bailout
expectations, and other market incentives for socially excessive risk taking. At the same time,
some EMEs have labored over the early twenty-first century to reduce their vulnerabilities,
and these efforts may have borne fruit in the recent crisis. We next turn to the data to
compare EME and advanced country performance.



2     Some Empirics of Crises: Emerging and Advanced

      Economies, Then and Now

Two types of comparison, across country types and across time, interest us. These are
motivated by two questions: How have crises differed, in their precursors and aftermaths,
between emerging and advanced economies? And in both sets of countries, how does the
crisis of 2007-2009 differ from earlier crises? Ultimately, we hope the data will help us
to understand the different experiences of advanced and emerging economies, as well as
of different regional groupings of emerging economies, in the recent crisis. The structural
features of EMEs listed in the last section change slowly over time and thus are not easily
amenable to time series analysis. However, our comparisons across country groups and time
periods are intended to capture broad structural differences.
    In the spirit of Eichengreen et al. (1995), Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999), and several sub-
sequent authors, we examine the behavior of key economic variables around crisis episodes.
We focus on variables which, according to theory and earlier empirical research, are likely
to play a causal role in determining the probability of a crisis, are likely to be affected by a
crisis, or both. While Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) average their data over cross sections


                                              15
consisting of country-crisis pairs, relying on different cross sections for information on dif-
ferent crisis types, we take an alternative approach. Instead, we estimate directly how an
economic variable’s conditional expectation depends on temporal distance from each of three
types of crisis – default (internal or external), banking, and currency – given the proximity
of other crisis types.
   More specifically, we examine the behavior of output, domestic credit, the current ac-
count balance, external leverage, the real interest rate, the real exchange rate, international
reserves, and fiscal variables. The relevance of most of these variables will be obvious. For
example, a rapid buildup of domestic credit can undermine a currency peg as the central
bank loses foreign exchange reserves, while simultaneously setting the stage for a private
banking collapse and a setback to government solvency. Likewise, significant real currency
appreciation has often preceded financial crises.
   We then tackle the obvious question: to what extent are the same macroeconomic and
financial variables useful in predicting the onset of crises? Do emerging markets collapse every
time credit growth is high? Do the currencies of advanced economies’ crash systematically in
the aftermath of a significant real appreciation? We answer this question by using discrete-
choice models to estimate the probability of a given type of crisis as a function of the same
set of variables.


2.1    Methodology

Consider a variable of interest yit , where subscript i refers to the country and subscript t
to the period. Our approach is to estimate the conditional expectation of yit as a function
of the temporal distance from various types of crisis, relative to a common “tranquil times”
baseline. As discussed in the previous section, our benchmark estimation considers four


                                              16
possible crisis types: domestic and external default, systemic banking crisis, currency crisis,
and the global financial crisis of 2008.13
       We postulate the following fixed-effects panel specification:


                           yit = αi + βds δds + βbs δbs + βcs δcs + βgs δgs + it .                           (1)


In equation (1), δjs denotes a dummy variable equal to 1 when country i is s periods away
from a crisis of type j in period t.The index j denotes, respectively, default (d), systemic
banking crisis (b), currency crisis (c) and the 2008 global financial crisis (g). We set the
event window around crisis episodes to 11 years (five years before, five years after) so as to
allow the relatively slow adjustment that typically follows a financial crisis (Reinhart and
Rogoff (2009); Reinhart and Reinhart (2011)). The regression also allows for country fixed
effects αi . Finally, the error term it captures all the remaining variation in the realization
of the variable of interest.
       A number of observations about our empirical specification are relevant at this stage.
First, the coefficients βjs are our primary parameters of interest. They measure the condi-
tional effect of a crisis of type j on variable y over the event window −5 ≤ s ≤ 5 relative
to “tranquil times.”14 Since the “tranquil time” baseline is common to all types of crisis,
we are measuring the impact of different crises relative to a common reference level. This
is important because it will allows us to measure directly and compare how different macro
and financial variables evolve over different crisis episodes. In particular, comparison of βgs
  13
     As noted earlier, we date domestic and external defaults following Reinhart and Rogoff (2009); systemic
banking crises according to Laeven and Valencia (2010); EME currency crises following the criteria set out
in Frankel and Rose (1996); and advanced countries currency crisis according to the Bordo et al. (2001)
classification. We assume that all countries were potentially affected by the global financial crisis, which we
view as starting in 2008, when it first became truly systemic.
  14
     Tranquil times are implicitly defined as the country-year observations that do not fall into any crisis-event
window.


                                                       17
and βjs for j 6= g, provides us with a direct assessment of the similarities between the recent
global financial crisis and earlier crises of various kinds.
    Second, because we consider that all countries are “treated” by the recent global financial
crisis, the coefficients βgs have the interpretation of year-effects for the period 2003-2010.
Hence, βgs measures the deviation of the cross section average in the corresponding years
from the “tranquil time” baseline, itself estimated over the period 1973-2002 and purged
of crisis episodes. Unlike simple deviations from trend (which potentially include earlier
crisis episodes), we therefore construct a potentially cleaner estimate of the build-up and
subsequent impact of the global financial crisis.15
    Third, our specification easily handles repeat or multiple crises, of the same type or of
different types, with one important caveat. For instance, the estimated conditional mean
for a country one year away from a currency crisis and one year after a banking crisis is
simply β̂−1c + β̂1b . There is no need to decide whether recurrent episodes are really part of a
single larger crisis, or to extend event-windows to encompass different crisis manifestations.
The caveat, as the formula above illustrates clearly, is that our specification does not allow
for interaction effects. In other words, it does not allow for the amplification and feedback
effects between different types of crisis or repeated crises. The effect of a twin banking
and currency crisis, in the simplified setting we assume, is simply the sum of the effect
of an isolated banking crisis, β̂b , and an isolated currency crisis, β̂c . This simplification
has potentially important drawbacks, as our earlier discussion of potential two-way feedback
loops between currency and banking crises shows.16 Potential linkages also exist also between
banking crisis and domestic or sovereign defaults episodes.
  15
     Obviously, our approach still requires that we control for non-stationarities in the data; otherwise the
“tranquil time” benchmark would not be appropriate.
  16
     There are numerous discussions in the literature, including Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999), Obstfeld
(2004), Rajan and Tokatlidis (2005), and references therein.


                                                     18
    These concerns can be addressed by estimating a variation of equation (1) that includes
interaction effects:


                                               X                X
                                 yit = αi +         βjs δjs +        βjks δjks + it .                            (2)
                                                j               jk

In equation (2) δjks is a dummy equal to one when country i is s periods away from joint
crisis of type j and k in period t.17 The corresponding coefficients βjks have a particularly
simple interpretation in the case where δjk = δj δk , that is, when δjk is simply the interaction
of the crisis dummies of type j and k. In that case, βjks represents the difference-in-difference
estimator of the effect of a joint crisis, over and above the effect of an isolated crisis. In theory,
this specification allows us to test directly for interaction effects of the kind described in the
literature.18 In practice, including all types of crisis and all possible interactions quickly
makes all coefficients statistically insignificant. Given the focus in the literature on twin
banking and currency crises, we implemented a version of equation (2) involving banking
and currency crisis episodes only (along with their interaction).19 Nevertheless, we found
that estimates of the interaction terms βcbs , while sometimes large in magnitude, were most
often statistically insignificant. This finding suggests that, while banking and currency crises
can potentially interact in major ways, the effects do not appear systematic. In what follows,
we therefore omit interaction terms.
  17
     In practice, we allow for the fact that joint crises have some dynamic features and need not necessarily
happen in exactly the same year. We set δjk0 equal to 1 if a crisis of type j or k occurs in year t, a crisis of
type j or k occurs in year t + 1, but there is no crisis of type j or k in year t − 1.
  18
     By contrast, Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) do not estimate the treatment effect of a joint crisis, relative
to an isolated crisis. They report estimates of the effect of a joint crisis, that is, βc +βb +βcb , and unconditional
estimates of the effect of a crisis of type j. For example, for a currency crisis, the unconditional effect they
estimate corresponds to the βc + βb E [δb |δc = 1] + βcb E [δcb |δc = 1].
  19
     Indeed, twin banking-currency crises are quite prevalent in our sample. Of the five systemic banking
crises for advanced economies, three are twin banking-currency crises – Spain (1977), Finland (1991), and
Sweden (1991) – whereas the remaining two – Norway (1991) and Japan (1997) – are isolated banking crises.
Of the 42 banking crises in EMEs, 36 are twinned with currency crises according to our classification.


                                                         19
       Finally, we implement equation (1) separately on advanced and emerging market economies.
As the discussion of the preceding section made clear, allowing for different crisis dynamics
for the two groups of countries will allow us to answer two important questions: How have
                                                                              eme
the crises of EMEs and advanced economies differed in the past (that is, is β̂js  different
       adv                                                                              adv     eme
from β̂js  )? And how does the current crisis differ from earlier crises (that is, is β̂gs  or βgs
             adv      eme
similar to β̂js  or β̂js  )?


2.2        What Happens Before, During and After Crises?

We now systematically evaluate the relative behavior of various macroeconomic and financial
variables around crises events by estimating equation (1). We consider 11 variables, covering
various aspects of the domestic, external, real, and financial environment.20
       Our sample of emerging market economies comprises all countries for which data are
available that are included in either J.P.Morgan’s EMBIG index, the FTSE’s Group of
Advanced or Secondary Emerging markets, the MSCI-Barra classification of Emerging or
Frontier economies, and the Dow-Jones list of Emerging Markets Economies. These outlets
determine lists of emerging market economies based on indicators of economic development
and financial market infrastructure. To these countries, we add Israel, Hong Kong and Singa-
pore, all countries that recently graduated to the group of advanced economies but properly
belong to the group of emerging market economies for most of our sample period. Because
our discussion stresses international financial linkages and financial vulnerabilities, we also
exclude from consideration lower-income developing countries with relatively undeveloped
financial sectors and relatively limited financial openness.21 Our final list contains 57 emerg-
  20
       All data sources are described in appendix B.
  21
       For these reasons, our group of EMEs differs from that used by the IMF’s World Economic Outlook..




                                                     20
ing market economies distributed among six regional groupings.22 In addition, we compile
data for 22 advanced economies.23
       We begin with a measure of real activity, the output gap, constructed as the deviation of
the log of real output from a Hodrick-Prescott (HP) trend.24 The results from the estimation
of equation (1) are presented in the top panel of figure 2. Because we will make repeated use
of that figure, let us spend a moment describing the information it contains. The top row,
labeled “EM,” reports the estimates for our sample of 57 emerging market economies. The
bottom row, labeled “ADV,” reports the coefficients of advanced economies. Each column
(labeled, respectively “Default,” “Banking,” “Currency,” and “2008”) refers to a different
type of crisis, with the first three columns referring to pre-2007 crises only. Finally, in each
panel the solid line reports the coefficients β̂js over the event window, together with a 95
percent confidence interval.25 The beginning of a crisis (s = 0 in event time) is indicated by
  22
      The list of EMEs is as follows. Middle East and North Africa (10 countries): Egypt, Iraq, Israel,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Morocco, Oman, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates. Latin America (13 countries):
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Jamaica, Mexico, Panama,
Peru, Uruguay, Venezuela. Asia (11 countries): China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia,
Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand. Sub-saharan Africa (3 countries): Côte d’Ivoire,
Nigeria, South Africa. Commonwealth of Independent States (5 countries): Belarus, Georgia, Kaza-
khstan, Russian Federation, Ukraine. Central and Eastern European (15 countries): Bosnia, Bulgaria,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Macedonia, Poland, Romania, Serbia, Slovak
Republic, Slovenia, Turkey.
   23
      The list of advanced economies is follows: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States.
   24
      We set the smoothing coefficient of the HP filter at 100. With annual data, this filters out more than
30% of cycles of periodicity higher than 16 years (64 quarters) – see King and Rebelo (1993, p. 220). Typical
U.S. business cycle applications usually set the smoothing parameter at 1600 (on quarterly data) or 6.25 on
annual data – see Ravn and Uhlig (2002). This filters out more than 30% of cycles of periodicity higher than
32 quarters. Because boom-crisis-bust dynamics often occur on a timescale slower than U.S. business cycles,
we view our focus on lower frequencies as sensible. Our results are robust to reasonable variation in the
smoothing coefficient, as long as our estimate of the output gap includes medium-run frequencies, including
linear detrending at one extreme.
   25
      That is, we graph approximately two standard deviations on each side of the estimated coefficients,
unlike Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999), who graph only one standard deviation on each side. Our estimates
are based on robust (White) standard errors. Similar results (but with somewhat larger standard errors) are
obtained when clustering EMEs by region. Given the global propagation of trade and especially financial


                                                     21
a vertical dashed line.
    Figure 2(a) presents patterns relating to real GDP. The first three columns for EMEs
show that output tends to be significantly above trend (a positive output gap) in the years
preceding default and banking crises, relative to tranquil times.26 This is true for advanced
countries as well (bottom row), though, given the small number of banking crises, the es-
timated deviations are less significant. By contrast, in the run up to a currency crisis, the
output gap is negative – slightly for advanced economies but more so for EMEs. The pat-
terns are consistent with the view that banking crises are often preceded by exuberant and
unsustainable levels of economic activity, fueled by cheap credit. The contrasting morose
environment that precedes currency crises often reflects in part the contractionary efforts
imposed by a central bank trying to defend a currency peg under attack. Currency crises
can occur precisely when economic conditions take a turn for the worse and investors lose
confidence in the willingness of authorities to defend the peg, or following a period of above
average domestic inflation that appreciates the currency and worsens external balances, de-
pressing aggregate activity.
    All crises are associated with a significant decline in the output gap relative to tranquil
times. Output falls relatively less in advanced countries and recovers faster than for EMEs
in the aftermath of a currency crisis, perhaps because of negative wealth effects in EMEs of
the type highlighted in the literature on contractionary devaluation.
    A quantitative comparison between advanced and EME banking crises reveals several
differences. Both groups of countries experience abnormally high economic activity before
a banking crisis, around 2 percent above potential for advanced countries and 4.6 percent
for EMEs. But the decline in output is larger for the latter group (8.5 percent from peak
shocks, however, the theoretical basis for regional clustering seems weak.
  26
     However, output growth seems to slow before both types of crisis.


                                                     22
to trough) as compared to advanced economies (5.2 percent). Levels of economic activity
also remain depressed for a significant period following an advanced country banking crisis,
a finding similar to those of Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and Reinhart and Reinhart (2011).
Indeed, our point estimates suggest that the recovery from banking crises is slower for ad-
vanced countries. Five years after the beginning of the systemic phase of the banking crisis
(which may itself have been preceded by an extended period of financial distress), output
remains significantly depressed for these countries (1.6 percent below potential). By con-
trast, emerging markets appear somewhat more resilient faced with banking crises, and their
output recovers within five years.27 This last result may be a consequence of the higher level
of development and sophistication of advanced economies’ banking and financial sectors. As
the example of Japan illustrates, an economy with a complex financial system may take
much more than five years to recover once that system is impaired. Our findings do not
contradict the view that past financial crises were on the whole relatively more costly for
EMEs, because EME banking crises often coincided with currency crises, default crises, or
both.
       Finally, a comparison of previous crises and the recent global crisis reveals a number of
facts. First, the run up to the 2008 crisis, like earlier financial crises, was characterized by
above-trend economic activity. The positive output gap is especially salient for emerging
countries (reaching a peak of 3.8 percent in 2008), but also for advanced economies (3.3
percent in 2007). From that point on, two findings are worth noting. First, the post-crisis
absolute deviation of output from trend has been somewhat smaller in emerging than in ad-
vanced economies (2.6 percent versus 3.6 percent). This confirms the evidence presented in
figure 1: on the whole, emerging markets displayed resilience compared to their performance
  27
     A formal statistical test, however, would likely not reject the hypothesis that the post-crisis output paths
for the two groups are the same.


                                                       23
in past crises. Second, the overall slowdown in advanced economies is even larger than those
experienced during earlier major banking crises. Based on the severity of the output slow-
down, the recent experience of advanced economies resembles most that of earlier systemic
banking crisis episodes, except on a larger and broader scale.
       The bottom panel of figure 2 reports our findings for consumer price inflation.28 Inflation
was an endemic issue for many emerging economies in the last part of the twentieth century.
It appears elevated, relative to tranquil times, before all types of crisis. It increases signif-
icantly afterward as any constraint on looser monetary policy disappears after a currency
crisis, or as the temptation to inflate nominal claims away proves irresistible. In the year
following a currency or a banking crisis, inflation rates are 10 to 15 percent above normal
times. For advanced economies, in contrast, inflation remained subdued, especially around
banking crises. The contrast with the recent crisis is striking: Consumer price inflation in
emerging economies, although increasing between 2003 and 2008 as a result of the rapid
increase in food and commodity prices, has remained significantly below the tranquil-rime
average after 2008.
       Next we investigate the public finances. The top panel of figure 3 reports our estimates
for the dynamics of gross public debt (as a fraction of GDP) around crises.29 While many es-
timates are statistically insignificant or borderline, the overall patterns presents some notable
features for emerging and advanced economies alike. First, the fiscal position is estimated
to worsen substantially in the aftermath of any crisis, for both country groups. The ratio of
public debt to GDP increases most dramatically for advanced country banking crises (27.2
  28
     Because some countries in our sample experienced high or even hyper inflations, we estimate equation
(1) using median regression. Notably, Argentina, Brazil, Peru, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Ukraine, Bulgaria,
Croatia, Macedonia, and Slovenia all experienced annual inflation rates in excess of of 1,000 percent at some
point in our sample. The standard errors on the median regression were constructed by bootstrap.
  29
     Data on public debt refer to either central or general government debt, as collated by Reinhart and
Rogoff (2009). See appendix B for details.


                                                     24
percent of GDP between t−1 and t+5), with the next most dramatic effect being after EME
currency crises (9.2 percent of GDP). A number of channels are probably responsible for the
advanced country deterioration. First, government bailouts of insolvent domestic financial
sectors constitute direct fiscal costs. Second, as the economy slows down markedly in the
aftermath of crisis, the ratio of public debt to GDP tends to increase both for mechanical
reasons – the denominator in the ratio decreases – but also because of rapidly growing public
deficits, themselves the result of additional outlays and lost revenues.30 In the case of EME
currency crises, devaluation or depreciation raises the home-currency value of public debt
denominated in foreign currency, worsening the fiscal position through an adverse valuation
effect. There is little evidence, however, that measured public debts are especially high prior
to pre-2008 crises.
       Consider now the 2008 crisis. While emerging countries started the 2000s with relatively
high public debt levels, the period from 2003 to 2008 was one of rapid fiscal consolidation,
with an improvement in the ratio of public debt to GDP representing 11.2 percent of output
between 2003 and 2008. On average, emerging economies approached the crisis in a position
of unprecedented fiscal strength, allowing them to apply countercyclical fiscal stimulus when
needed much more freely than in the past. The fiscal health of the advanced economies,
however, was significantly stretched even before the crisis, with a public debt in excess of
baseline values by about 10 percent of GDP. The subsequent deterioration in fiscal position,
by an additional double-digit percentage of GDP (14.2 percent between 2008 and 2010), is
threatening the sustainability of a number of industrial countries’ public debts. Examining
public deficits rather than debts (not reported), we find a similar pattern.
       The bottom part of figure 3 reports our estimates for the real interest rate, measured
  30
    Our estimates indicate that for advanced economies, the public deficit worsens on average by 9 percent
of GDP following a banking crisis.


                                                   25
as the ex post real rate on three-month treasury bills.31 . Contrary to some theories of the
financial boom-crash cycle, we find little statistically significant evidence that crises before
the 2008 one were preceded by periods of historically low real interest rates, except perhaps
a few years prior to EME banking crises.32 In the recent period, however, interest rates have
been historically and persistently low for both EMEs and advanced economies, between 2.4
and 5.2 percent below baseline for EMEs and 1.2 and 2.5 percent for advanced economies.
While prior episodes of low real interest rates may have fueled consumption and borrowing
bonanzas in EMEs, laying the groundwork for a subsequent crisis, this does not seem to
have been the case this time around. Perhaps the recent period of low interest rates helped
various EME agents, public and private, to strengthen their balance sheets. We have already
documented the behavior of government debt.
       We now turn to the evolution of two measures of leverage, internal and external. Our
measure of internal leverage is the ratio of domestic credit to output. Based on data avail-
ability, our preferred measure of domestic credit consists of the total claims of depository
corporations, minus net claims on central government, as collected in the International Mon-
etary Fund’s International Financial Statistics (IFS).33 For economies with simple financial
systems, the outstanding credit to GDP ratio is likely to be a good proxy for total bank
assets (cf. Table 2). The top panel of figure 4(a) reports our estimates. Two main re-
sults are apparent. First, past banking crises were associated with significant build-ups in
  31
      As for inflation, we estimate a median regression for the real interest rate
  32
      Of course, we are using ex post measures of the real rate of interest. Given the higher and more variable
ex post inflation rates (over time and across countries) that prevailed in the past in EMEs, it is inevitably
difficult to produce tight estimates.The contrast with the generally low-inflation period leading up to 2008
is striking.
   33
      While excluding claims on the central government, our measure of credit includes claims on state and
local governments. As discussed in detail in appendix B, we also correct the domestic credit data for a few
spurious jumps arising from changes in data coverage.




                                                      26
credit relative to GDP.34 At its peak, excess credit represents 25 percent of output prior
to advanced country banking crises, and 8.6 percent for EMEs. Second, while the level of
excess credit in the years prior to the recent crisis was of a similar magnitude for advanced
countries, the build-up was more dramatic in the more recent episode (24.8 percent, as com-
pared to 9.3 percent in earlier advanced economies banking crises. While the build-up for
emerging economies also seems significant (peaking at 6.3 percent of GDP), it is entirely
concentrated in the Central and Eastern European countries while other emerging regions
display no significant increase in credit to GDP (see panel (b) of figure 7). Emerging Europe
also fared particularly poorly in the crisis, as we have seen. Within that region, increases
in domestic credit are widespread and particularly pronounced in Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia,
Lithuania and Slovenia. We conjecture that the explosion in domestic credit in most of these
countries is intimately tied to the process of their integration into the European Union and
the adoption of the euro.35
    Next we turn to our measure of external leverage. By analogy with the balance sheet
of a financial institution, we propose to define external leverage as the ratio of a country’s
total assets to its gross equity liabilities (domestic and foreign). High leverage indicates that
a country is financing a large portion of its asset holdings through external debt issuance.36
    Figure 4(b) reports our estimates of external leverage, based on the updated Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti (2007) data on gross external positions (which extend through 2007). While
external leverage appears to have been high prior to earlier emerging market default and
currency crises, it was marginally below the tranquil-times baseline in the most recent crisis.
  34
     That the build-up is larger for advanced economies is not surprising, given these countries’ higher level
of financial development.
  35
     EU membership was an advantage to these countries once the crisis broke, since even those not in the
euro zone benefited from central EU sources of financial support, as well as support from Sweden, whose
banks were heavily invested in emerging Europe.
  36
     Appendix A provides details on the construction of our measure of external leverage.


                                                     27
Advanced economies, on the other hand, show an elevated and increasing level of external
leverage before 2008. By 2007, the deviation from tranquil times indicates that through
foreign borrowing, each unit of domestically owned equity was leveraged 32 percentage points
more than in tranquil times.
       To summarize our findings so far: we see several dimensions along which emerging mar-
kets became more resilient, relative to advanced economies, in the years prior to the recent
global crisis. On the macroeconomic side, they achieved price stability and a sounder fiscal
position. On the financial side, with the exception of some Central and Eastern European
countries, EMEs did not sharply increase domestic leverage, despite relatively low real inter-
est rates. They also maintained historically low levels of external leverage. In contrast, fiscal
conditions in advanced economies deteriorated markedly prior to the crisis, reducing the
fiscal space for the authorities to respond. At the same time, advanced countries’ domestic
and external leverage levels increased markedly.
       The top panel of figure 5 reports the evolution of the current account surplus relative to
output. We observe a significant improvement in the current account in the aftermath of
defaults and currency crises, especially for emerging market economies (around 3.5 percent
of output). For EMEs, the sharp current account reversals associated with sudden stops are
evident. Perhaps surprisingly, the largest and most persistent current account deficits seem
to appear prior to advanced countries’ systemic banking crises (estimated at –4.3 percent).
For the recent crisis, the estimates indicate that emerging markets were running, on average,
larger surpluses relative to tranquil times (around 2.2 percent of GDP). Current account
balances generally decline, on average, as the crisis approaches and then bounce back to
higher surpluses in 2009 as spending falls.37
  37
    Of course, not all countries can be above average since the world’s current account sums to zero by
definition. However, since our estimates are unweighted, our results are consistent with a few large countries


                                                     28
    The bottom panel of figure 5 reports the log real exchange rate, with trend estimated and
removed through an HP filter in a procedure identical to that used to estimate output gap.
(In the figures, an increase in the real exchange rate is a real depreciation of the domestic
currency.) Both defaults and currency crises in EMEs are associated with significant real
depreciations (for currency crises 22 percent), and are preceded by real appreciations relative
to tranquil times (around 8 percent). These currency movements are larger and more abrupt
than those generally observed for advanced countries, although the latter group displays the
same general pattern (including significant real appreciation prior to crises). In 2008, by
contrast, we notice smaller movements in real exchange rates, for either country group,
although EME exchange rates were generally stronger (compared to tranquil times) ahead
of the crisis, in part a result of buoyant commodity prices.38
    Figure 6 shows the behavior of two variables that have been prominent in discussions of
crisis effects on EMEs: foreign exchange reserves and short-term external debt (both relative
to output). For EMEs and advanced countries alike, but most markedly for the former,
reserves (upper panel) are low prior to currency crises and tend to be rebuilt afterward.
They fall prior to default crises but then continue downward, presumably as alternative
external finance sources dry up. The large buildup of EME reserves prior to the 2008 crisis
is evident (10.9 percent above baseline in 2007), as is the fall in EME reserves in 2008 itself
and the subsequent return to rapid accumulation (12.4 percent above baseline by 2009).
World Bank data on short-term foreign debt are available only for EMEs. Levels appear
such as the U.S. running large deficits, while many other countries are in balance or surplus. In addition,
a large statistical discrepancy characterizes global current account data for the mid-2000s: The world as a
whole appears to be substantially in surplus.
  38
     The real exchange rates shown are bilateral rates against a “canonical” central currency. See appendix
B for details. The unavailability of multilateral effective rates for most countries dictated this choice. Thus,
for the advanced countries, the 2008 depreciation shown in panel (b) of figure 5 does not include the behavior
of the U.S. dollar (whose real exchange rate against itself is constant).



                                                      29
elevated before defaults and currency crises, as well as the 2008 crisis, but the marginal
increase in prior debt associated with default crises per se is rather small and insignificant.
It is notable that after banking crises, short-term debts seem to rise. Shortening of maturities
could reflect an unwillingness of foreign lenders to extend longer-term credits after a banking
crisis.
    In figure 7 we look more closely at an emerging region hit particularly hard by the 2008
crisis, Central and Eastern Europe (CEE), and we compare it to an average of other EMEs.
CEE had a bigger output boom and a much bigger crash (panel (a)). It had a much bigger
domestic credit boom (panel (b)). Its external leverage was high relative to tranquil times
and rose, whereas it was low and stationary relative to tranquil times in other EMEs (panel
(c)). For emerging Europe, the current account was in deficit relative to tranquil times
prior to the crisis, while it was in surplus elsewhere in the emerging world, and there was
a dramatic move from deficit to surplus in 2009 (panel (d)). The CEE countries, but not
other EMEs, show a high and rising ratio of short-term foreign debt to GDP prior to 2008
(panel (e)). Finally, CEE real exchange rates (expressed as deviations from trend) appear
quite competitive initially and appreciate between 2003 and 2008, before depreciating after
2008 as a result of nominal depreciation and/or deflation (panel(f)). By contrast, for the
remaining EMEs, many of which export primary commodities, detrended real exchange rates
appeared be strong relative to tranquil times and to strengthen further in the years leading
to the crisis. With the exception of the real appreciation indicator, the CEE countries thus
appear markedly more vulnerable than other EMEs on a range of standard fragility measures.
Thus, the greater output cost they bore is consistent with theory.39 Other recent empirical
  39
     Of course, there is heterogeneity among CEE countries, both in preconditions and in policy response,
so one must be cautious in generalizing. The Baltic countries, for example, maintained fixed exchange rates
against the euro throughout the crisis. That choice contributed to especially big output declines, as well
as substantial internal deflation. It seems likely that fixed exchange rates also promoted the prior domestic


                                                     30
work on the incidence of the crisis, which we describe in section 2.4, generally supports this
conclusion.


2.3     What Determines Crises?

The preceding results emphasize that many crisis episodes were preceded by significant build-
ups in domestic credit as well as large real appreciations of the currency. Of course, as a
matter of logic, it does not necessarily follow that countries collapse every time credit growth
is high or every time the currency appreciates sharply. Similarly, while we fail to find any
evidence that crises prior to 2008 were preceded by periods of elevated public debt, it is very
possible that high levels of public debt increase a country’s vulnerability. In addition, while
suggestive, our event-study results do not always allow us to assess statistical significance
with confidence. To explore these questions more systematically, we estimate panel discrete-
choice models with country fixed effects. Discrete choice models are commonly used in the
“early-warning” literature on crisis prediction.40
    As in Bussière and Fratzscher (2006), we focus on the occurrence of a crisis in a given
window, not its particular timing. That is, for each type of crisis j and period t, we define
                                      k
a forward looking indicator variable yjt that takes the value 1 if a crisis (of type j) occurs
between periods t + 1 and t + k, and 0 otherwise. We vary k between 1 and 3 years. Our
benchmark specification assumes a panel logit model with country fixed-effects,41 in which
the crisis probability depends on a vector x of macroeconomic variables:

                                                                 0 k
                                                              ex γj
                                            yjk
                                                      
                                        P         = 1|x =             0 k
                                                                            .
                                                            1 + e x γj
credit booms in the Baltics, contributing in an ex ante sense to the severity of the subsequent collapse.
  40
     See, among others, Eichengreen et al. (1995), Frankel and Rose (1996), Berg and Pattillo (1999), Bussière
and Fratzscher (2006), and Chamon et al. (2012).
  41
     Essentially identical results come from a panel probit specification.

                                                      31
       Following Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache (2000), we drop crisis observations as well
as the post-crisis observations for four years afterward, so as to avoid the post-crisis bias
discussed in Bussière and Fratzscher (2006).42 We estimate the model over the full sample,
1973 to 2010.43 Table 3 reports the estimates for advanced economies and Table 4 the
estimates for EMEs. We consider the following potential precursors of crises: the ratio of
public debt to output, the ratio of domestic credit to output, the ratio of the current account
balance to output, the real exchange rate, and the output gap, the last two expressed as
percentage deviations from trends as discussed in the previous section. In addition, we
consider the following variables for emerging economies: official reserves and short term
external debt, both relative to output. Each table reports the overall probability of crisis
occurrence p(y = 1) evaluated at the pre-crisis sample mean;44 for each explanatory variable
xi in the vector x, its standard deviation sd. (xi ) over the pre-crisis sample; and the marginal
effect ∂p/∂xi = p (xi ) (1 − p (xi )) γi along with White-robust standard errors, evaluated at
the pre-crisis sample mean.45 Finally the column labeled ∆p reports the change in probability
  42
      For example, public debt tends to rise sharply right after crises. From this fact one might erroneously
conclude that relatively low public debt levels make crises more likely.
   43
      To do so, we extend the list of default, banking crisis, and currency crisis events to the years 2003-
2010 as described in appendix C. This adds six external default episodes (Uruguay in 2003, Nigeria in 2004,
Dominican Republic and Venezuela in 2005, Ecuador in 2008 and Jamaica in 2010); 21 banking crises, mostly
in advanced economies (the U.K. and the U.S. in 2007; Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece,
Iceland, Ireland, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland in 2008, the Dominican Republic
in 2003, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Russia, Slovenia, and Ukraine in 2008); and nine currency crises (Dominican
Republic, Egypt, and Iraq in 2003, Iceland, Korea, Pakistan, South Africa and Turkey in 2008, Belarus in
2009). The set of additional banking crisis episodes includes ‘borderline’ systemic crisis under the Laeven
and Valencia (2010) classification, since some of the recent crisis episodes, such as Spain, Portugal, France
or Greece, may yet have to play out fully.
   44
      To be specific, this is the predicted probability of crisis, evaluated at the pre-crisis sample mean of the
explanatory variables. The pre-crisis sample, for a given type of crisis, excludes crisis years as well as the
following four years.
   45
      The standard deviation of each variable is obtained from the residual of a regression on country fixed
effects, so as to remove differences in average levels of each variable across countries. White-robust standard
errors correct for heteroscedasticity in the residuals. If there are omitted serially correlated determinants of
crises, then our standard errors might be underestimates.



                                                       32
resulting from a one-standard deviation increase in x, evaluated at the pre-crisis sample mean,
∆p = p (xi + sd. (xi )) − p (xi ) , with the corresponding standard error evaluated by the delta
method, also at the pre-crisis sample mean.
    We notice first that the model of banking crises for advanced economies (Table 3, panel
A) performs relatively poorly. While the logit parameters (not reported), and therefore the
effect of the variables on the log odds ratio, are often significant, the marginal effects remain
economically and statistically negligible, except for domestic credit and public debt, in large
part because of the very low frequency of systemic banking crises in most of the advanced
sample (only five occurrences between 1973 and 2006).
    For advanced economy currency crises, the model performs relatively well. The real
exchange rate emerges consistently as a significant predictor. A real currency depreciation of
7 percent (one standard deviation) reduces significantly the unconditional probability of crisis
at the three-year horizon, from 8.8 percent to 3.3 percent.46 At a three-year horizon, three
other variables play a significant role: domestic credit, the current account, and public debt.
An increase in domestic credit above trend significantly increases the chances of a currency
crisis within three years. The effect is sizable, with a one-standard deviation change (an
increase of 23 percent of GDP) increasing the predicted probability of crisis in the following
three years, evaluated at the pre-crisis sample mean, from 8.8 percent to 11.9 percent. A
larger current account surplus reduces somewhat the likelihood of a currency crisis, although
the effect is modest. A 3.9 percentage point improvement in the current account balance
(as a fraction of output) reduces crisis probabilities only from 8.8 to 7 percent. Perhaps
surprisingly, the estimates indicate that higher levels of public debt predict a decreased
  46
     Of course, given the nonlinear shape of the logit functional form, and the relatively rare occurrence of
crises in sample, the positive effect of a real appreciation on the probability of crisis would be significantly
larger.



                                                      33
chance of a currency crisis.
    The results from Table 4 for EMEs are consistently strong. Across all types of crisis,
three variables play a statistically and economically significant role: the ratio of domestic
credit to output, the real exchange rate, and the ratio of official reserves to output.47 It is
striking, in particular, to observe that the marginal effect of a higher domestic credit-GDP
ratio is almost always smaller in magnitude and opposite in sign to the coefficient on official
reserves. For instance, for banking crises at a three-year horizon, the marginal effects are
0.468 percent for credit, and –1.099 for reserves. This finding provides some justification
for prudential policies that seek to accumulate official reserves as a buffer against financial
fragility resulting from excessively rapid domestic credit growth, as suggested by Obstfeld
et al. (2010).48
    The coefficients on credit, the real exchange rate, and reserves are always economically
large. A one standard deviation increase in the credit-GDP ratio (around 9 percent), in-
creases the probability of default over the next three years by 11.5 percent, of banking crisis
by 6.4 percent, and of currency crisis by 9.4 percent. Similarly a one-standard deviation
depreciation of the real exchange rate (around 19 percent) reduces the same probabilities
by 4.3 percent, 4.7 percent, and 2.5 percent respectively. Short term debt clearly matters
for default episodes. A relatively modest 5 percentage point increase in short term debt
(relative to GDP) increases the probability of default by 6.4 percent at a three-year horizon.
Finally, the output gap matters only for banking crises, where a 4 percent increase in output
above potential yields a 7.3 percent increase in the probability of a banking crisis over the
  47
     Frankel and Saravelos (2010), who survey a large number of earlier empirical studies on crisis prediction,
identify reserves and currency overvaluation as the two most consistently important predictors in a body of
work spanning developed as well as developing countries. They also identify a significant role for domestic
credit.
  48
     Countries may be unable to control their reserve levels just prior to a crisis, because reserves tend to fall
as capital flees, so it is perhaps not surprising that reserves have predictive power.


                                                       34
following three years. The finding is suggestive of a boom-bust cycle over the sample period
as a whole.
       The panel logit estimates yield statistically and economically significant probability ef-
fects of several key variables. The results are consistent with our event-study analysis and
indicate that several of the macro indicators that appear elevated before crises, notably do-
mestic credit and real currency strength, also contain significant predictive power for the
occurrence of crises. As a further check on the robustness of our results, we estimated the
model for the period preceding the global financial crisis, from 1973 to 2002. We then used
those estimates to calculate, out of sample, the one-year-ahead average predicted probabil-
ity of crisis for emerging and advanced countries between 2003 and 2009.49 The predicted
probability of currency crisis increased for emerging economies from 9.3 percent in 2003 to
20.3 percent in 2009 and somewhat more modestly for advanced countries from 5.7 to 13.1
percent.50 By contrast, the probability of a banking crisis for EMEs remained consistently
low: between 1.8 in 2003 and 4.8 percent in 2009, after decreasing from 13 percent in 1995,
a finding that is consistent with the increased resilience of emerging economies documented
in this paper. The out-of-sample probability of banking crisis for advanced economies, on
the other hand, soared from 8 percent in 2003 to 72 percent in 2009!51 The prime drivers
of this increasing financial fragility of advanced economies relative to emerging ones were
the rapid growth of domestic credit and of public debt in advanced countries, as well as the
rapid accumulation of official reserves by emerging countries.
  49
      These results are available upon request.
  50
      The increased probability for EMEs comes from the increase in domestic credit to GDP for these countries
from 3 percent below trend to 4 percent above trend. For advanced countries, while the increase in domestic
credit was larger, the estimates for the pre-2003 period indicate that this variable has a smaller effect on
currency crisis probabilities, as in Table 3.
   51
      The predicted probability of default for EMEs also remained low, around 4 percent between 2003 and
2009.



                                                     35
2.4     Related Empirical Research

A number of econometric studies, conducted as the crisis unfolded and during the course of
recovery, have attempted to link crisis severity in individual countries to various macroeco-
nomic characteristics and preconditions. Some of the studies also attempt to ascertain the
nature of the shocks hitting different economies.52 Are the findings in these papers consistent
with the conclusions of our own comparisons of crisis experience across country groups and
across time?
    The preceding studies generally differ from each other in the country groups they study, in
their measurement of declines in economic activity, and in the period over which economic
decline is measured. Moreover, they all face the difficulty of accurately controlling for a
variety of relevant differences across diverse groups of economies. Nonetheless, a few factors
stand out as predictors of crisis intensity in several of the exercises. Among the variables that
appear important in several studies are prior financial liberalization, prior current account
deficits, short-term external debt levels, and prior domestic credit growth.53 These findings
match theoretical expectation. A liberalized financial system that is lending heavily is likely
more susceptible to a crash if financial supervision is week. A country that is borrowing
abroad to support home expenditure is vulnerable to a sudden stop, which will be magnified
if short-term foreign debts simultaneously cannot be renewed.
    It seems reasonable that a larger stock of international reserves would have mitigated
  52
     A partial list of contributions includes Chamon et al. (2012), Berglöf et al. (2010), Berkmen et al.
(2009), Blanchard et al. (2010), Claessens et al. (2010), Frankel and Saravelos (2010), Giannone et al.
(2011), International-Monetary-Fund (2010), Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2011), and Rose and Spiegel (2009),
Rose and Spiegel (2010), Rose and Spiegel (2011).
  53
     These broad generalizations naturally still leave individual country observations such as Germany, which
suffered a banking crisis because of financial contagion, notwithstanding a large current account surplus, no
real estate appreciation, and a competitive real exchange rate. The recent findings are consistent with earlier
work, for example that of Gupta et al. (2007), who found that post-1970 currency crises were more likely to
be contractionary for financially open economies that had experienced large capital inflows.



                                                      36
crisis effects, as these can be spent down in the event of a sudden stop. But several
studies, including Rose and Spiegel (2011), detect no role for reserves. On the contrary,
Frankel and Saravelos (2010) argue that reserves affected several measures of crisis inci-
dence, International-Monetary-Fund (2010) argues for a positive but diminishing marginal
productivity of reserves, and Didier et al. (2011) find a positive role for reserves in aiding the
output growth recovery between 2009 and 2010.54 It may be that many countries (notwith-
standing a few exceptions such as Russia) hoarded reserves during the crisis, as suggested
by the rather moderate average decline shown in the figure above. Policy makers in EMEs
apparently view large reserve stocks as having been useful, if the recent resumption of rapid
EME reserve accumulation is any indication.
      Rose and Spiegel (2011), following up on their two earlier papers (Rose and Spiegel (2009);
Rose and Spiegel (2010)), provide a useful compendium and critique of the econometric
literature and findings. In particular, they provide a set of univariate regressions, for various
country groupings, of different measures of output loss on some of the key vulnerability
indicators stressed in the literature. Among the variables entering significantly in those
regressions are credit market regulation (more regulation lessens crisis intensity); the prior
current account surplus (a bigger surplus lessens crisis intensity); prior short-term foreign
debt (more debt raises crisis intensity); prior real estate appreciation (more appreciation
raises crisis intensity); and prior growth (but not level of) bank credit (higher growth raises
crisis intensity). For example, as we saw above, countries in emerging Europe had current
account deficits and credit booms, and these are empirically correlated with larger output
declines in the recent recession. Rose and Spiegel find no econometric evidence that exchange
rate pegs played a role but anecdotal evidence still suggests that exchange-rate flexibility
 54
      Obstfeld et al. (2009) find an effect of reserves on currency depreciation.



                                                       37
was an advantage. Thanks in part to maintaining fixed exchange rates (as noted above), the
Baltic countries suffered especially steep declines in output (see Berglöf et al. (2010)). The
current problems of peripheral euro zone countries might be mitigated if they could devalue
their currencies.
       The findings above are quite consistent with the most of the empirical regularities we
discussed earlier, both regarding the recent global crisis and earlier ones. Rose and Spiegel
(2011) go on to show, however, that the statistical significance of the preceding factors is
much lower when subsets of them are entered jointly in various regressions measuring crisis
intensity. To us, this does not contradict the idea that crises (especially banking crises
such as prevailed over 2007-08) are generated and intensified by factors (such as financial
development in an environment of lax supervision and moral hazard) that simultaneously
generate a nexus of collinear responses: bigger external deficits and debt, domestic asset-
price inflation, and credit booms. Thus, we view the evidence as supportive of the view that
where EMEs’ showed resilience in the recent crisis, this was due in part to their avoidance
of excessive foreign and domestic leverage.55



3        Conclusion

The paper has investigated the dynamics of key macroeconomic variables before, during, and
after different types of financial crisis, contrasting the experiences of advanced and emerging
economies in the 2007-2009 global crisis and in earlier post-1973 crises. We find that the
patterns seen in emerging and advanced economies’ crises are qualitatively similar, although
emerging markets have tended to suffer greater output losses during currency crises.
  55
    An interesting case study is that of Lim (2012), who documents how Korean corporations reduced
leverage and increased liquidity after the 1997-98 crisis. See Cho (2012) for a more general discussion of
Korean reforms after the late 1990s.

                                                   38
   The two most robust predictors of crises in general, for emerging and advanced economies
alike, are domestic credit growth and real currency appreciation. Thus, financial vulnerabili-
ties, in the form of excessive leverage, and real vulnerabilities, in the form of low international
competitiveness, both seem to play important roles. Credit booms typically promote real
currency appreciation, and countries that experience both simultaneously are likely to be
especially susceptible to financial crisis.
   Many advanced economies experienced big credit booms prior to the 2007-2009 crisis.
On average, however, credit growth was more moderate in EMEs before the crisis, and those
countries also have tended to recover more rapidly. But average EME behavior disguises het-
erogeneity among different countries. Looking across different emerging regions, we find that
Central and Eastern Europe experienced very rapid domestic credit growth (accompanied by
large current account deficits and short term foreign borrowing), as well as especially sharp
output collapses. The view that differing susceptibility to credit booms is a central factor
behind the incidence of the 2007-2009 crisis is consistent with the much longer historical
experience analyzed by Schularick and Taylor (2009).
   We also find a third robust determinant of EMEs’ crisis probabilities: An emerging coun-
try’s level of foreign exchange reserves is a statistically and economically significant factor
determining the probability of future crises. Our analysis does not reveal the mechanism at
work, and there is surely two-way causality. On the one hand, greater international liquidity
makes an economy less vulnerable to a sudden stop; on the other, if crisis expectations rise for
reasons that may be little related to reserve holdings, reserves are bound to fall sharply. Fu-
ture research should aim to elucidate these channels empirically, as there remains substantial
disagreement among researchers as to the role of reserves in shielding emerging economies
during 2007-2009.


                                                39
   The Great Depression of the 1930s resulted from an international monetary system fea-
turing financial instability, severe and seemingly intractable global imbalances, and fixed
exchange rates. The crisis of 2007-2009 likewise emerged in a setting of unstable finance
and global imbalances, though only a few countries – mainly on the internal or external
peripheries of the euro zone – have borne the additional burden of fixed exchange rates this
time (Eichengreen and Temin (2010)).
   As Dı́az-Alejandro (1983) pointed out, countries in Latin America were able partially to
decouple from richer countries during the 1930s by leaving the gold standard and defaulting
on foreign debts. This strategy ushered in a long period of inward looking and ultimately
destructive politics and policies. To the extent that emerging economies escaped the worst
of the global crisis of 2007-2009, they did so in part through economic and institutional
reforms that may have altered the old patterns of the twentieth century. Some of these
reforms resulted in greater economic openness, although relatively low levels of financial
development and financial globalization (compared to the advanced economies) may have
been advantages in withstanding the forces that generated the 2007-2009 crisis. It remains
to be seen if emerging economies can preserve their financial and economic stability without
reducing current levels of economic openness.




                                            40
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James Robinson, and Yunyong Thaicharoen,
 “Institutional Causes, Macroeconomic Symptoms: Volatility, Crises and Growth,” Journal
 of Monetary Economics, January 2003, 50 (1), 49–123.

Berg, Andrew and Catherine Pattillo, “Predicting currency crises:: The indicators
 approach and an alternative,” Journal of International Money and Finance, August 1999,
 18 (4), 561–586.

Berglöf, Erik, Yevgeniya Korniyenko, Alexander Plekhanov, and Jeromin
 Zettelmeyer, “Understanding the Crisis in Emerging Europe,” Public Policy Review,
 2010, 6 (6), 985–1008.

Berkmen, Pelin, Gaston Gelos, Robert Rennhack, and James P Walsh, “The
 Global Financial Crisis: Explaining Cross-Country Differences in the Output Impact,”
 IMF Working Papers 09/280, International Monetary Fund December 2009.

Blanchard, Olivier J., Hamid Faruqee, and Mitali Das, “The Initial Impact of the
  Crisis on Emerging Market Countries,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring
  2010, 41(2), 263–307.

Bordo, Michael, Barry Eichengreen, Daniela Klingebiel, and Maria Soledad
 Martinez-Peria, “Is the Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?,” Economic Policy, April
 2001, 16 (32), 51–82.

Boughton, James, Silent Revolution: The International Monetary Fund, 1979-1989, Wash-
 ington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 2001.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, “Hedging and Financial
 Fragility in Fixed Exchange Rate Regimes,” European Economic Review, 2001, 45 (7),
 1151–1193.

Bussière, Matthieu and Marcel Fratzscher, “Towards a new early warning system of
 financial crises,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 2006, 25 (6), 953–973.

Calvo, Guillermo A. and Carmen M. Reinhart, “When Capital Flows Suddenly Stop:
 Consequences and Policy,” in Peter B. Kenen and Alexander K. Swoboda, eds., Reforming
 the International Monetary and Financial System, International Monetary Fund Washing-
 ton D.C. 2000.

   and , “Fear of Floating,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2002, 117 (2),
  379–408.

                                          41
Cantor, Richard and Frank Packer, “Sovereign Credit Ratings,” Current Issues in
 Economics and Finance, June 1995, 1 (3), 1–6.

Caprio, Gerard, Daniela Klingebiel, Luc Laeven, and Guillermo Noguera,
 “Banking Crises Database,” http://www1.worldbank.org/finance/html/database_
 sfd.html, 2003. Accessed July 10, 2011.

Chambers, John, “Sovereign Defaults and Rating Transition Data, 2010 Update,” Stan-
 dard & Poor’s Global Credit Portal, February 2011.

Chamon, Marcos, Atish Ghosh, and Jun Kim, “Are All Emerging Market Crises
 Alike?,” in Maurice Obstfeld, Dongchul Cho, and Andrew Mason, eds., Global Economic
 Crisis: Impacts, Transmission, Recovery, Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2012.

Cho, Dungchul, “Responses of the Korean Economy to the Global Economic Crisis: An-
 other Currency Crisis?,” in Maurice Obstfeld, Dongchul Cho, and Andrew Mason, eds.,
 Global Economic Crisis: Impacts, Transmission, Recovery, Cheltenham, UK: Edward El-
 gar, 2012.

Claessens, Stijn, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, Deniz Igan, and Luc Laeven, “Cross-
  Country Experiences and Policy Implications from the Global Financial Crisis,” Economic
  Policy, April 2010, 25 (62), 267–93.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti, and Nouriel Roubini, “Paper Tigers? A Model
 of the Asian Crisis,” European Economic Review, June 1999, 43 (7), 1211–1236.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Enrica Detragiache, “Financial Liberalization and Financial
 Fragility,” in Gerard Caprio, Patrick Honohan, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, eds., Financial
 liberalization: How far, how fast?, Cambridge University Press Cambridge, UK 2000,
 pp. 96–122.

Dı́az-Alejandro, Carlos F., “Stories of the 1930s for the 1980s,” in Pedro Aspe Armella,
  Rudiger Dornbusch, and Maurice Obstfeld, eds., Financial policies and the world capital
  market: The problem of Latin American countries, University of Chicago Press Chicago,
  IL 1983, pp. 5–35.

  , “Good-bye Financial Repression, Hello Financial Crash,” Journal of Development Eco-
  nomics, February 1985, 19 (1-2), 1–24.

Didier, Tatiana, Constantino Hevia, and Sergio Schmukler, “How Resilient Were
 Emerging Economies to the Global Crisis?,” Policy Research Working Paper 5637, World
 Bank April 2011.


                                           42
Dooley, Michael, “A Model of Crises in Emerging Markets,” Economic Journal, 2000, 110
 (1), 256–72.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, Ilan Goldfajn, and Rodrigo O. Valdés, “Currency Crises and
 Collapses,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1995, 26 (2), 219–293.
Dow-Jones, “Dow Jones Total Stock Market Index,” http://www.djindexes.com/
 mdsidx/downloads/brochure_info/Dow_Jones_Total_Stock_Market_Indexes_
 Brochure.pdf, 2011. Accessed June 26, 2011.
Edwards, Sebastian, “Thirty Years of Current Account Imbalances, Current Account
 Reversals, and Sudden Stops,” IMF Staff Papers, 2004, 51(Special Issue), 1–49.
Eichengreen, Barry and Peter Temin, “Fetters of Gold and Paper,” Oxford Review of
  Economic Policy, 2010, 26 (3), 370–84.
  , Andrew Rose, and Charles Wyplosz, “Exchange Market Mayhem: The Antecedents
  and Aftermath of Speculative Attacks,” Economic Policy, October 1995, 0 (21), 249–96.
  , Ricardo Hausmann, and Ugo Panizza, “Currency Mismatches, Debt Intolerance and
  Original Sin: Why They Are Not the Same and Why it Matters,” in Sebastian Edwards,
  ed., Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices, and
  Consequences, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2007, pp. 121–64.
Forbes, Kristin J. and Francis E. Warnock, “Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight
  and Retrenchment,” mimeo, MIT and University of Virginia May 2011.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Andrew K. Rose, “Currency crashes in emerging markets:
  An empirical treatment,” Journal of International Economics, November 1996, 41 (3-4),
  351–366.
   and George Saravelos, “Are Leading Indicators of Financial Crises Useful for Assessing
  Country Vulnerability? Evidence from the 2008-09 Global Crisis,” NBER Working Papers
  16047, National Bureau of Economic Research June 2010.
FTSE, “FTSE Global Equity Index Series Country Classification,” http://www.ftse.com/
 Indices/Country_Classification/, September 2010. Accessed June 26, 2011.
Giannone, Domenico, Michele Lenza, and Lucrezia Reichlin, “Market Freedom and
 the Global Recession,” IMF Economic Review, 2011, 59 (1), 111–35.
Glick, Reuven and Michael M. Hutchison, “Banking and Currency Crises: How Com-
 mon are Twins?,” in Ramon Moreno Reuven Glick and Mark M. Spiegel, eds., Financial
 Crises in Emerging Markets, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2001, pp. 35–
 69.

                                           43
Goldstein, Morris and Philip Turner, Controlling Currency Mismatches in Emerging
 Markets, Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics, 2004.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Rodrigo O. Valdés, and Oscar Landerretche, “Lending
 Booms: Latin America and the World,” Economia, Spring 2001, 1 (2), 47–99.

Gupta, Poonam, Deepak Mishra, and Ratna Sahay, “Behavior of Output During
 Currency Crises,” Journal of International Economics, July 2007, 72 (2), 428–450.

Hausmann, Ricardo, Ugo Panizza, and Ernesto Stein, “Why Do Countries Float the
 Way They Float?,” Journal of Development Economics, December 2001, 66 (2), 387–414.

Hernandez, Leonardo and Oscar Landerretche, “Capital Inflows, Credit Booms, and
 Macroeconomic Vulnerability: The Cross-Country Experience,” in Leonardo Hernandez
 and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel, eds., Banking, Financial Integration, and International Crises,
 Central Bank of Chile Santiago, Chile 2002, pp. 199–233.

Honig, Adam, “Dollarization, Exchange Rate Regimes and Government Quality,” Journal
 of International Money and Finance, March 2009, 28 (2), 198–214.

Honohan, Patrick and Daniela Klingebiel, “The Fiscal Cost Implications of an Accom-
 modating Approach to Banking Crises,” Journal of Banking & Finance, August 2003, 27
 (8), 1539–1560.

International-Monetary-Fund, “How Did Emerging Markets Cope in the Crisis?,”
  Mimeo, Strategy, Policy, and Review Department June 2010.

J.P.Morgan, “Index Packages,” http://www.jpmorgan.com/pages/jpmorgan/investbk/
  research/indexresearch/vendor/packages, 2011. Accessed June 26, 2011.

Kaminsky, Graciela L. and Carmen M. Reinhart, “The Twin Crises: The Causes of
 Banking and Balance of Payments Problems,” American Economic Review, June 1999, 89
 (3), 473–500.

  , , and Carlos A. Végh, “When It Rains, It Pours: Procyclical Capital Flows and
  Macroeconomic Policies,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2004, 2005, 19, 11–82.

King, Robert and Sergio Rebelo, “Low frequency filtering and real business cycles,”
 Journal of Economics Dynamics and Control, 1993, 17, 207–231.

Kose, M. Ayhan and Eswar S. Prasad, Emerging markets: Resilience and growth amid
 global turmoil, Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 2010.



                                           44
Laeven, Luc and Fabian Valencia, “Resolution of Banking Crises: The Good, the Bad,
  and the Ugly,” IMF Working Papers 10/146, International Monetary Fund June 2010.

Lamfalussy, Alexandre, Financial crises in emerging markets: An essay on financial
  globalisation and fragility, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2000.

Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, “The External Wealth of Nations
  Mark II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004,”
  Journal of International Economics, November 2007, 73 (2), 223–250.

   and , “The Cross-Country Incidence of the Global Crisis,” IMF Economic Review,
  2011, 59 (1), 77–110.

Lim, Kyung-Mook, “Structural Fundamentals of Korean Corporations: This Time Was
  Different,” in Maurice Obstfeld, Dongchul Cho, and Andrew Mason, eds., Global Economic
  Crisis: Impacts, Transmission, Recovery, Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2012.

McKinnon, Ronald I. and Huw Pill, “Credible Liberalizations and International Capital
 Flows: The Overborrowing Syndrome,” in Takatoshi Ito and Anne O. Krueger, eds.,
 Financial Deregulation and Integration in East Asia, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
 Press, 1996, pp. 7–42.

Mendoza, Enrique G. and Marco E. Terrones, “An Anatomy of Credit Booms: Evi-
 dence from Macro Aggregates and Micro Data,” NBER Working Papers 14049, National
 Bureau of Economic Research May 2008.

Milesi-Ferretti, Gian-Maria and Assaf Razin, “Current Account Reversals and Cur-
 rency Crises,” in Paul Krugman, ed., Currency Crises, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
 Press, 2000, pp. 285–323.

Mishkin, Frederic, “The Dangers of Exchange-Rate Pegging in Emerging-Market Coun-
 tries,” International Finance, 1998, 1 (1), 81–101.

Moody’s, “Sovereign Default and Recovery Rates, 1983-2008,” Moody’s Global Credit Pol-
 icy, March 2009.

MSCI-Barra, “Index Country Membership,” http://www.msci.com/products/indices/
 tools/index_country_membership/, 2011. Accessed June 26, 2011.

Nicolò, Gianni De, Patrick Honohan, and Alain Ize, “Dollarization of Bank Deposits:
 Causes and Consequences,” Journal of Banking & Finance, July 2005, 29 (7), 1697–1727.




                                           45
Obstfeld, Maurice, “Globalization, Macroeconomic Performance, and the Exchange Rates
 of Emerging Economies: Keynote Speech,” Monetary and Economic Studies, 2004, 22 (S1),
 29–55.

  , Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor, “Financial Instability, Reserves, and
  Central Bank Swap Lines in the Panic of 2008,” American Economic Review, May 2009,
  99 (2), 480–86.

  , , and , “Financial Stability, the Trilemma, and International Reserves,” American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, April 2010, 2 (2), 57–94.

Rajan, Raghuram G. and Ioannis Tokatlidis, “Dollar Shortages and Crises,” Interna-
 tional Journal of Central Banking, September 2005, 1 (2), 177–220.

Ravn, Morten O. and Harald Uhlig, “On adjusting the Hodrick-Prescott filter for the
 frequency of observations,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2002, 84 (2), 371–375.

Reinhart, Carmen, “Dates for banking crises, currency crashes, sovereign domestic or ex-
 ternal default (or restructuring),” http://terpconnect.umd.edu/~creinhar/Courses.
 html, 2011. Last accessed June 26, 2011.

Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff, This time is different: Eight centuries
 of financial folly, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2009.

   and Vincent R. Reinhart, “After the Fall,” in “Macroeconomic Challenges: The
  Decade Ahead” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, MO 2011, pp. 17–60.

  , Kenneth S. Rogoff, and Miguel A. Savastano, “Debt Intolerance,” Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2003, 34, 1–74.

Rose, Andrew K. and Mark M. Spiegel, “Cross-Country Causes and Consequences
 of the 2008 Crisis: Early Warning,” NBER Working Papers 15357, National Bureau of
 Economic Research September 2009.

   and     , “Cross-Country Causes and Consequences of the 2008 Crisis: International
  Linkages and American Exposure,” Pacific Economic Review, 2010, 15 (3), 340–363.

   and , “Cross-Country Causes and Consequences of the Crisis: An Update,” European
  Economic Review, 2011, 55 (3), 309–24.

Sachs, Jeffrey D., Aaron Tornell, and Andrés Velasco, “Financial Crises in Emerging
  Markets: The Lessons from 1995,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1996, 27 (1),
  147–216.


                                            46
Schneider, Martin and Aaron Tornell, “Balance Sheet Effects, Bailout Guarantees and
  Financial Crises,” Review of Economic Studies, 2004, 71, 883–913.

Schularick, Moritz and Alan M. Taylor, “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy,
  Leverage Cycles and Financial Crises, 1870-2008,” NBER Working Papers 15512, National
  Bureau of Economic Research November 2009.

Stulz, René M., “The Limits of Financial Globalization,” Journal of Finance, 2005, 60
  (4), 1595–1638.

Sturzenegger, Federico and Jeromin Zettelmeyer, Debt Defaults and Lessons from a
  Decade of Crises, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2007.

Tornell, Aaron, “Lending Booms and Currency Crises: Empirical Link,” in Takatoshi Ito
  and Anne O. Krueger, eds., Regional and global capital flows: Macroeconomic causes and
  consequences, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2001, pp. 47–67.




                                          47
                                            Appendices

A       Measuring External Leverage
Consider the balance sheet of a country i. The asset side includes V i , the value of domestic assets;
E ji (resp. Dji ), the value of gross holdings of equity and direct investment in the rest of the world
(resp. of foreign debt, loans and portfolio debt). The liability side includes E ij (resp. Dij ), the
gross foreign holdings of domestic equity and direct investment (resp. domestic debt); a residual
item, W i , that measures the ‘net worth’ of country’s residents. Consider this balance sheet as the
balance sheet of a financial intermediary, that borrows abroad (Dij ), raises equity (E ij ) and invests
in foreign (E ji and Dji ) and domestic (V i ) assets. Viewed as a financial intermediary, the balance
sheet is particularly vulnerable when most of the assets are financed with senior claims such as
debt. A measure of this vulnerability is our measure of external leverage, defined as the ratio of
total assets (V i + E ji + Dji ) relative to equity liabilities (W i + E ij ):

                                                      V i + E ji + Dji
                                               li =
                                                          W i + E ij

Gross external assets Ai satisfy: Ai = E ji + Dji . Similarly, gross external liabilities Li satisfy:
Li = E ij + Dij and net foreign assets are simply N Ai = Ai − Li . Using these definitions, external
leverage is:

                                                           V i + Ai
                                            li =                        ,                                    (3)
                                                      V i + N Ai + E ij
    A simple expression in terms of observables comes from assuming that the market value of
domestic assets is a proportional to output:V i = πY i .56 A reasonable value for π is probably
somewhere between 2 and 4 and we will set π = 3 for our calculations. Under this assumption, the
external leverage ratio can be written as:

                                                    π + Ai /Y i
                                        li =                             .                                   (4)
                                               π + N Ai /Y i + E ij /Y i

This expression has a number of intuitive features. First, observe that because N Ai + E ij ≤ Ai ,
external leverage is always larger than 1. It is exactly equal to 1 when all gross external liabilities
are financed by equity: N Ai = Ai − E ij . Second, the notion of external leverage is different from
the gross or net asset position. The reason is simple: A country may have large but offsetting gross
positions financed by equity. Because equity claims do not entail a fixed payment stream, and are
junior to debt claims they do not threaten a country with external illiquidity or insolvency. 57
  56
     This assumption is an obvious oversimplification. Yet it is a reasonable approximation if Tobin’s average
q is constant, since in that case the market value of domestic assets is proportional to the domestic capital
stock (replacement value), which is quite stable relative to output.
  57
     The leverage ratio is positive as long as π + N Ai /Y i + E ij /Y i > 0, that is, as long as the net foreign
position is not too negative. Since E ij /Y i > 0, the right hand side is always larger than π. So with π between
2 and 4, this definition would be problematic only when the net foreign asset position is below −200 to −400


                                                           48
B      Data
    • Table 1: See appendix C for the list of countries and crisis.

    • Table 2: IMF, Global Financial Stability Reports, September 2004–October 2010, Statistical
      Appendix, Table 3.

    • Figure 1: IMF’s October 2010 World Economic Outlook (WEO). Growth rates for 2010 are
      IMF forecasts. For each country grouping, the growth rate of GDP is a weighted average of
      constant-price GDP growth rates for individual countries, the country weights being shares
      of GDP (measured at purchasing power parity) in group GDP (also measured at PPP). We
      define a group’s trend real growth rate as the average of annual growth rates over 1980-
      2010 (except for the Russian federation and Central and Eastern Europe, where we use the
      1994-2010 average).

    • Figure 2(a): Output Gap. Real output is constructed from nominal output in local currency
      units divided by the GDP deflator. Annual data on nominal GDP and GDP deflator come
      from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI), the IMF’s International Finan-
      cial Statistics (IFS) and WEO databases and the Organization for Economic Cooperation
      and Development’s (OECD) National Accounts database. The output gap is constructed
      with an Hodrick-Prescott filter, with a smoothing parameter set to 100.

    • Figure 2(b): Inflation Rate. Rate of change of the Consumer Price Index. Source: WDI, IFS
      and OECD. Inflation for 2010 constructed from IMF forecasts in the October 2010 WEO.

    • Figure 3(a): Gross Public Debt. Gross central government debt as a ratio to GDP from
      Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). When central government debt is not available, we use Gross
      general government debt, also from Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). Data are available at
      http://terpconnect.umd.edu/ creinhar/Courses.html

    • Figure 3(b): Real Interest Rate. Ex post real interest rate defined as the 3-month annualized
      domestic treasury bill rate from IFS and the Global Financial Database (GFD), deflated by
      realized CPI-inflation rate over the following year.

    • Figure 4(a): Domestic Credit. Domestic credit measured in domestic currency comes from the
      IFS. Based on availability, our benchmark data consist of total domestic claims of depository
      corporations (central banks and other depository corporations) – IFS line 32 – minus net
      claims on central government – IFS line 32an. Exceptions are as follows: Brazil (Claims
      on private sector and other financial corporations of other depository institutions – IFS lines
      22d+22g); Argentina, Australia and Ivory Coast (Claims on private sector and other financial

percent of GDP.


                                                 49
      corporations of depository institutions – IFS lines 32d+32g); Norway (domestic credit data
      from Schularick and Taylor (2009)). Domestic credit divided by nominal GDP in domestic
      currency. Due to changes in the IFS presentation of monetary statistics as well as changes
      in data coverage, we visually identified 11 permanent jumps in the time series (for example,
      Sweden in 2001). To correct for these jumps, while allowing for low-frequency trends in
      financial deepening, we first adjust the credit/GDP variable after each jump by estimating
      a linear trend on prior observations and removing the observed residual in the period of the
      jump from all subsequent observations. We then construct the residuals from a regression on
      a linear time trend.

    • Figure 4(b): External Leverage. Constructed according to equation (4). Gross external
      assets, gross external liabilities, gross equity and direct investment liabilities in US dollar
      from Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007). All data are divided by nominal GDP in US dollars
      from WDI.

    • Figure 5(a): Current Account. Annual data in US dollars from IFS Balance of Payments
      statistics. Divided by output in US dollars from WDI.

    • Figure 5(b): Real Exchange Rate. Except as noted below, the real exchange rate denotes
      the bilateral US dollar real exchange rate constructed as the nominal end-of-period exchange
      rate against the US dollar (from IFS and GFD, expressed in domestic currency units per US
      dollar) times the US GDP deflator and divided by the domestic GDP deflator. For members
      of the eurozone, CEE countries, and Ivory Coast, the real exchange rate denotes instead
      the bilateral real exchange rate against Germany, using the nominal exchange rate against
      the euro after 1999 (against the Deutschemark before that date), and the German GDP
      deflator. The log-deviation from trend is constructed usingh a Hodrick-Prescott filter, with
      the smoothing parameter set to 100.

    • Figure 6(a): Foreign Reserves. Total foreign exchange reserves in US dollars from IFS (line
      1.d.d), divided by GDP in US dollars from WDI.

    • Figure 6(b): Short-Term External Debt. data from the World Bank’s Global Development
      Finance database. Divided by GDP in US dollars from WDI.


C      List of Countries and Crises
C.1     Currency Crises.
See Table 5. To date EME currency crises we use the criterion of Frankel and Rose (1996) – a 25
percent or greater nominal currency depreciation agains the US dollar over a year that is also a 10
percentage point increase in the annual rate of depreciation.

                                                 50
    For advanced economies we use the chronology of Bordo et al. (2001), which extends through
1997. After 1997 there were no true currency crises in advanced countries until 2008, notwith-
standing the ersatz crises some authors have identified using mechanical criteria. We also include
Iceland in 2008.58 The 2003-2010 crisis are marked with a ‘*’ in Table 5.


C.2      Systemic Banking Crises.
See Table 6. We draw our dating of systemic banking crises from Laeven and Valencia (2010).
2003-2010 crisis episodes are marked with a ‘*’ in Table 6. This set of additional banking crisis
episodes includes ‘borderline’ systemic crisis under the Laeven and Valencia (2010) classification,
since some of the recent banking crisis may yet have to play out fully.


C.3      Default Crisis.
We draw our dating of domestic and external default episodes from Reinhart and Rogoff (2009),
Cantor and Packer (1995), Chambers (2011), Moody’s (2009), and Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer
(2007). 2003-2010 crisis episodes are marked with a ‘*’ in Table 7.




  58
    A number of advanced countries experienced a significant depreciation of their currency relative to the
US dollar in 2008. Since this reflected mostly the strength of the dollar during that year, we do not classify
these events as currency crisis, except for Iceland.


                                                     51
                        Currency      Banking      Default    # Countries
         Advanced           43             5         0                22
         Emerging           84            57         74               57
         Total             127            62         74               79
         Source: Authors’ calculations.

Table 1: Crisis Incidence in Advanced and Emerging Economies, 1970-2006




                                           2003     2007     Change
                                                             (percent of GDP)
    European Union                         210.3    307.9                   97.6
    United States                           71.0     81.1                   10.1
    Japan                                  168.4    230.1                   61.7
    Asia                                   144.2    151.3                    7.1
    Emerging Europe                         33.6     66.2                   32.6
    Latin American and Caribbean            51.9     62.1                   10.2
    Middle East and North Africa            78.7     85.7                    7.1
    Sub-saharan Africa                      71.3     78.5                    7.1
    World                                  136.5    174.6                   38.1
    Source: IMF, Global Financial Stability Report, various issues.

        Table 2: Commercial Bank Assets as a Percentage of GDP




                                          52
                  Panel A: Banking Crisis                   1 year              1-2 years

                                             sd.(x)    ∂p/∂x         ∆p      ∂p/∂x          ∆p


                  Public Debt/GDP            20.59      0.006       0.26      0.028     1.28∗
                                                      (0.007)     (0.24)    (0.020)    (0.69)
                  Credit/GDP                 19.01      0.013       1.38      0.066    7.64∗∗
                                                      (0.015)     (0.96)    (0.048)    (2.26)
                  Current Account/GDP         3.75      0.016       0.08      0.080      0.44
                                                      (0.022)     (0.12)    (0.078)    (0.47)
                  Real Exchange Rate          6.78     -0.003      -0.02     -0.029     -0.16
                                                      (0.007)     (0.04)    (0.023)    (0.13)
                  Output Gap                  2.26      0.057       0.31      0.211      0.89
                                                      (0.078)     (0.42)    (0.195)    (0.86)
                  p (percent)                              0.08                0.41
                  N:18; NxT: 547

                  Panel B: Currency Crisis                  1 year              1-3 years

                                             sd.(x)    ∂p/∂x         ∆p      ∂p/∂x          ∆p


                  Public Debt/GDP            22.19      -0.025      -0.49    -0.140∗   -2.66∗∗
                                                       (0.029)     (0.51)    (0.078)    (1.27)
                  Credit/GDP                 22.75       0.031       0.85     0.119∗     3.12∗
                                                       (0.021)     (0.65)    (0.062)    (1.81)
                  Current Account/GDP         3.86       0.100       0.42    -0.508∗    -1.77∗
                                                       (0.114)     (0.53)    (0.308)    (0.98)
                  Real Exchange Rate          7.28    -0.414∗∗    -1.51∗∗   -1.138∗∗   -5.48∗∗
                                                       (0.128)     (0.66)    (0.211)    (0.83)
                  Output Gap                  2.22     -0.542∗     -0.89∗     -0.277     -0.60
                                                       (0.288)     (0.47)    (0.657)    (1.37)
                  p (percent)                              1.88                8.80
                  N: 15; NxT: 373



 Note: *(**): significant at 10%(5%). The table reports estimates of a panel logit with country fixed-effects
for the occurrence of crisis at horizon t + 1 : t + k where k varies between 1 and 3. All variables in percent.
Real Exchange Rate: deviation from HP-trend. Credit/GDP: deviation from linear trend. Output gap:
deviation from HP-trend. p: estimated probability of crisis, evaluated at the pre-crisis sample mean.
sd.(x): standard deviation of variable over tranquil periods. ∂p/∂x: marginal effect (in percentage) for
variable x, evaluated at tranquil sample mean. ∆p = p (x + sd. (x)) − p (x) evaluated at tranquil sample
mean. Robust (White) standard errors evaluated by delta-method when necessary. N: number of crisis
events; NxT: number of observations.


       Table 3: Panel Logit Estimation: Advanced Economies. Sample: 1973-2010.



                                                      53
                        Panel A: Default                              1 year             1-3 years

                                                    sd.(x)     ∂p/∂x           ∆p     ∂p/∂x          ∆p


                        Public Debt/GDP             18.78      -0.021        -0.37    -0.193∗   -3.11∗∗
                                                              (0.050)       (0.86)    (0.105)    (1.49)
                        Credit/GDP                   7.64     0.417∗∗       4.89∗∗    1.138∗∗   11.49∗∗
                                                              (0.129)       (1.70)    (0.197)    (2.44)
                        Current Account/GDP          4.03       0.236         1.08      0.150      0.63
                                                              (0.249)       (1.27)    (0.548)    (2.36)
                        Reserves/GDP                 4.58    -0.593∗∗      -1.93∗∗   -1.309∗∗   -5.15∗∗
                                                              (0.299)       (0.69)    (0.516)    (1.56)
                        Real Exchange Rate          20.60      -0.052       -0.94∗   -0.257∗∗   -4.26∗∗
                                                              (0.032)       (0.51)    (0.089)    (1.24)
                        Short Term Debt/GDP          5.42     0.255∗∗        1.66∗    1.010∗∗    6.43∗∗
                                                              (0.125)       (0.94)    (0.270)    (1.99)
                        Output Gap                   3.79      -0.248        -0.83      0.195      0.75
                                                              (0.205)       (0.61)    (0.489)    (1.93)
                        p (percent)                                 3.68               11.82
                        N: 17; NxT: 360

                        Panel B: Banking Crisis                       1 year             1-3 years

                                                    sd.(x)     ∂p/∂x           ∆p     ∂p/∂x          ∆p


                        Public Debt/GDP             22.27       0.017         0.41    0.152∗∗    4.01∗∗
                                                              (0.023)       (0.58)    (0.055)    (1.68)
                        Credit/GDP                  10.59     0.181∗∗       2.70∗∗    0.468∗∗    6.35∗∗
                                                              (0.060)       (1.13)    (0.127)    (2.11)
                        Current Account/GDP          5.02       0.090         0.49      0.188      0.99
                                                              (0.165)       (0.97)    (0.285)    (1.57)
                        Reserves/GDP                 6.91     -0.323∗      -1.55∗∗   -1.099∗∗   -5.22∗∗
                                                              (0.176)       (0.61)    (0.295)    (1.02)
                        Real Exchange Rate          19.99    -0.075∗∗      -1.17∗∗   -0.326∗∗   -4.71∗∗
                                                              (0.028)       (0.36)    (0.073)    (0.84)
                        Short Term Debt/GDP          5.19       0.083         0.47     0.334∗      1.89
                                                              (0.108)       (0.65)    (0.202)    (1.24)
                        Output Gap                   3.93       0.334         1.66    1.414∗∗    7.34∗∗
                                                              (0.206)       (1.21)    (0.415)    (2.61)
                        p (percent)                                 2.81                 8.94
                        N:26; NxT: 571

                        Panel C: Currency Crisis                      1 year             1-3 years

                                                    sd.(x)     ∂p/∂x           ∆p     ∂p/∂x          ∆p


                        Public Debt/GDP             17.17       0.050         0.96      0.097      1.85
                                                              (0.037)       (0.80)    (0.062)    (1.32)
                        Credit/GDP                   9.58     0.329∗∗       4.99∗∗    0.656∗∗    9.36∗∗
                                                              (0.101)       (2.29)    (0.149)    (3.07)
                        Current Account/GDP          4.71       0.127         0.65      0.224      1.13
                                                              (0.158)       (0.88)    (0.359)    (1.93)
                        Reserves/GDP                 6.89    -0.667∗∗      -2.56∗∗   -1.372∗∗   -5.36∗∗
                                                              (0.172)       (0.68)    (0.252)    (0.94)
                        Real Exchange Rate          18.15      -0.023        -0.40   -0.170∗∗   -2.53∗∗
                                                              (0.033)       (0.53)    (0.069)    (0.89)
                        Short Term Debt/GDP          4.38       0.136         0.65      0.450      2.23
                                                              (0.163)       (0.84)    (0.300)    (1.66)
                        Output Gap                   3.78      0.387∗        1.80∗      0.451      1.90
                                                              (0.202)       (1.07)    (0.288)    (1.33)
                        p (percent)                                 3.44                 7.21
                        N:26; NxT: 381



Note: *(**): significant at 10%(5%). See table 3 for definitions.



 Table 4: Panel Logit Estimation: Emerging Market Economies. Sample: 1973-2010.
                                         54
                     Table 5: Currency Crisis Episodes, 1973-2010.

Country               Year                                    Source                              Remarks
Advanced Economies
Australia             1976, 1983, 1985                        Bordo    et   al.   (2001)
Belgium               1982                                    Bordo    et   al.   (2001)
Canada                1981, 1986                              Bordo    et   al.   (2001)
Denmark               1976, 1992, 1993                        Bordo    et   al.   (2001)
Finland               1986, 1991, 1993                        Bordo    et   al.   (2001)
France                1992                                    Bordo    et   al.   (2001)
Greece                1983, 1985                              Bordo    et   al.   (2001)
Iceland               1975, 1978, 1981, 1984, 2008∗           Bordo    et   al.   (2001)          2008: authors calculation.
Ireland               1976, 1986, 1992                        Bordo    et   al.   (2001)
Italy                 1976, 1992, 1995                        Bordo    et   al.   (2001)
Japan                 1979                                    Bordo    et   al.   (2001)
New Zealand           1975, 1978, 1980, 1984, 1988            Bordo    et   al.   (2001)
Norway                1986                                    Bordo    et   al.   (2001)
Portugal              1976, 1978, 1983                        Bordo    et   al.   (2001)
Spain                 1976, 1982, 1992, 1995                  Bordo    et   al.   (2001)
Sweden                1992                                    Bordo    et   al.   (2001)
Switzerland           1977                                    Bordo    et   al.   (2001)
United Kingdom        1976, 1992                              Bordo    et   al.   (2001)
Total                 44, of which 43 in 1973-2006

Emerging Economies
Argentina             1975,   1981, 1987, 2002                Frankel   and       Rose   (1996)
Belarus               1996,   2000, 2009                      Frankel   and       Rose   (1996)
Brazil                1976,   1983, 1987, 1992, 1999, 2008∗   Frankel   and       Rose   (1996)
Bulgaria              1990,   1996                            Frankel   and       Rose   (1996)
Côte d’Ivoire        1994                                    Frankel   and       Rose   (1996)
Chile                 1975,   1982                            Frankel   and       Rose   (1996)
China                 1984,   1994                            Frankel   and       Rose   (1996)
Columbia              1985,   1997                            Frankel   and       Rose   (1996)
Dominican Republic    1985,   1990, 2003∗                     Frankel   and       Rose   (1996)
Ecuador               1982,   1995                            Frankel   and       Rose   (1996)
Egypt                 1979,   1989, 2003∗                     Frankel   and       Rose   (1996)
El Salvador           1986,   1990                            Frankel   and       Rose   (1996)
Georgia               1998                                    Frankel   and       Rose   (1996)
India                 1991                                    Frankel   and       Rose   (1996)
                                                                                                  continued on next page




                                               55
        Table 5 continued from previous page

        Country         Year                              Source                          Remarks
        Indonesia       1978, 1983, 1997                  Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Iraq            2003∗                             Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Israel          1977, 1983                        Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Jamaica         1978, 1983, 1991                  Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Jordan          1988                              Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Kazakhstan      1999                              Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Korea           1980, 1997, 2008∗                 Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Lebanon         1983, 1990                        Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Macedonia       1997                              Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Malaysia        1997                              Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Mexico          1976, 1982, 1994                  Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Nigeria         1986, 1992, 1999                  Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Pakistan        1982, 2008∗                       Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Peru            1976, 1982, 1987                  Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Philippines     1983, 1997                        Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Poland          1978, 1986, 1992                  Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Romania         1990, 1997                        Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Russia          1998                              Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Serbia          2000                              Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        South Africa    1984, 2001, 2008∗                 Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Sri Lanka       1977                              Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Thailand        1997                              Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Turkey          1978, 1988, 1994, 1999, 2008∗     Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Ukraine         1998, 2008∗                       Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Uruguay         1982, 1989, 2002                  Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Venezuela       1984, 1994, 2002                  Frankel   and   Rose   (1996)
        Total           91, of which 84 in 1973-2006

* indicates crisis used only in the panel logit analysis of section 2.3 of the paper




                                                  56
               Table 6: Systemic Banking Crisis Episodes, 1973-2010.

Country              Year                     Source                             Remarks
Advanced Economies
Austria              2008∗                    Laeven   and   Valencia   (2010)
Belgium              2008∗                    Laeven   and   Valencia   (2010)
Denmark              2008∗                    Laeven   and   Valencia   (2010)
Finland              1991                     Laeven   and   Valencia   (2010)
France               2008∗                    Laeven   and   Valencia   (2010)   borderline
Germany              2008∗                    Laeven   and   Valencia   (2010)
Greece               2008∗                    Laeven   and   Valencia   (2010)   borderline
Iceland              2008∗                    Laeven   and   Valencia   (2010)
Ireland              2008∗                    Laeven   and   Valencia   (2010)
Japan                1997                     Laeven   and   Valencia   (2010)
Netherlands          2008∗                    Laeven   and   Valencia   (2010)
Norway               1991                     Laeven   and   Valencia   (2010)
Portugal             2008∗                    Laeven   and   Valencia   (2010)   borderline
Spain                1977, 2008∗              Laeven   and   Valencia   (2010)   2008 borderline
Sweden               1991, 2008∗              Laeven   and   Valencia   (2010)   2008 borderline
Switzerland          2008∗                    Laeven   and   Valencia   (2010)   borderline
United Kingdom       2007∗                    Laeven   and   Valencia   (2010)
United States        2007∗                    Laeven   and   Valencia   (2010)
Total                20 of which 5 in 1973-2006

Emerging Economies
Argentina            1980, 1989, 1995, 2001   Laeven and Valencia       (2010)
Bosnia               1992                     Laeven and Valencia       (2010)
Brazil               1990, 1994               Laeven and Valencia       (2010)
Bulgaria             1996                     Laeven and Valencia       (2010)
Côte d’Ivoire       1988                     Caprio et al. (2003)
Chile                1976, 1981               Laeven and Valencia       (2010)
China                1998                     Laeven and Valencia       (2010)
Columbia             1982, 1998               Laeven and Valencia       (2010)
Croatia              1998                     Laeven and Valencia       (2010)
Dominican Republic   2003∗                    Laeven and Valencia       (2010)
Ecuador              1982, 1996, 1998         Laeven and Valencia       (2010)   1986 in Caprio et al. (2003)
Egypt                1980                     Laeven and Valencia       (2010)
El Salvador          1989                     Laeven and Valencia       (2010)
Estonia              1992                     Laeven and Valencia       (2010)
                                                                                   continued on next page




                                              57
          Table 6 continued from previous page

          Country             Year           Source                              Remarks
          Georgia             1991           Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Hungary             1991           Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Indonesia           1997           Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Israel              1977           Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Jamaica             1996           Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Kazakhstan          2008∗          Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)   borderline
          Korea               1997           Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Kuwait              1982           Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Latvia              1995, 2008∗    Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Lebanon             1990           Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Lithuania           1995           Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Macedonia           1993           Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Malaysia            1997           Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Mexico              1981, 1994     Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Morocco             1980           Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Nigeria             1991           Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Panama              1988           Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Peru                1983           Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Philippines         1983, 1997     Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Poland              1992           Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Romania             1990           Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Russia              1998, 2008∗    Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)   2008 borderline
          Slovak Republic     1998           Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Slovenia            1992, 2008∗    Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)   2008 borderline
          Sri Lanka           1989           Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Thailand            1983, 1997     Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Turkey              1982, 2000     Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Ukraine             1998, 2008∗    Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Uruguay             1981, 2002     Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Venezuela           1994           Laeven    and   Valencia   (2010)
          Total               62, of which 57 in 1973-2006

* indicates crisis used only in the panel logit analysis of section 2.3 of the paper




                                                  58
                     Table 7: Default Episodes, 1973-2010.
Country              Year    Source                                 Remarks
Emerging Economies
Argentina            1982    Reinhart   (2011)                      Domestic and external
                     1989    Reinhart   (2011)                      Domestic
                     2001    Reinhart   (2011)                      External
Brazil               1983    Reinhart   (2011)                      External
                     1986    Reinhart   (2011)                      Domestic
                     1990    Reinhart   (2011)                      Domestic
                     2002    Reinhart   (2011)                      Domestic and external
Bulgaria             1990    Reinhart   and Rogoff (2009, p.23)     External
Côte d’Ivoire       1983    Reinhart   (2011)                      External
                     2000    Reinhart   (2011)                      External
Chile                1974    Reinhart   (2011)                      External
                     1983    Reinhart   (2011)                      External
Croatia              1993    Reinhart   and Rogoff (2009, p.115)    Domestic
Dominican Republic   1975    Reinhart   (2011)                      Domestic
                     1982    Reinhart   (2011)                      External
                     2005∗   Reinhart   (2011)                      External
Ecuador              1982    Reinhart   (2011)                      External
                     1999    Reinhart   (2011)                      Domestic and external
                     2008∗   Reinhart   (2011)                      External
Egypt                1984    Reinhart   (2011)                      External
El Salvador          1981    Reinhart   (2011)                      Domestic
India                1973    Reinhart   (2011)                      External.
                                                                    Default started in 1972.
Indonesia            1997    Reinhart (2011)                        Domestic
                     1998    Reinhart (2011)                        External
                     2002    Reinhart (2011)                        External
Iraq                 1990    Reinhart and Rogoff   (2009, p.23)     External
Jamaica              1978    Reinhart and Rogoff   (2009, p.23)     External
                     2010∗   Chambers (2011)                        External
Jordan               1989    Reinhart and Rogoff   (2009, p.23)     External
Kuwait               1990    Reinhart and Rogoff   (2009, p.115)    Domestic
Mexico               1982    Reinhart (2011)                        Domestic and external
Morocco              1983    Reinhart (2011)                        External
                     1986    Reinhart (2011)                        External
Nigeria              1982    Reinhart (2011)                        External
                                                                   continued on next page




                                         59
Table 7 continued from previous page

Country        Year    Source                                              Remarks
               2001    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
               2004∗   Reinhart (2011)                                     External
Pakistan       1981    (Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer, 2007, Table 1)       External
               1999    Chambers (2011)                                     External
Panama         1983    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
               1987    Cantor and Packer (1995)                            External
               1988    Reinhart (2011)                                     Domestic
Peru           1976    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
               1978    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
               1980    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
               1984    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
               1985    Reinhart (2011)                                     Domestic
Philippines    1983    Reinhart and Rogoff (2009, p.115)                   External
Poland         1981    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
Romania        1981    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
               1986    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
Russia         1991    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
               1993    Cantor and Packer (1995)                            Domestic
               1998    Reinhart (2011), Reinhart and Rogoff (2009, p.23)   Domestic and external
Serbia         1983    Cantor and Packer (1995)                            External (Yugoslavia)
               1992    Cantor and Packer (1995)                            External (Yugoslavia)
South Africa   1985    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
               1989    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
               1993    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
Sri Lanka      1979    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
               1981    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
               1996    Reinhart (2011)                                     Domestic
Tunisia        1979    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
Turkey         1978    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
               1982    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
               2001    Reinhart (2011)                                     Domestic and external
Ukraine        1998    Reinhart and Rogoff (2009, p.115), Moody’s (2009)   Domestic and external
               2000    Moody’s (2009)                                      External
Uruguay        1983    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
               1987    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
               1990    Reinhart (2011)                                     External
               2003∗   Reinhart (2011)                                     External
Venezuela      1982    Reinhart and Rogoff (2009, p.23)                    External
                                                                       continued on next page



                                              60
          Table 7 continued from previous page

          Country     Year     Source                                Remarks
                      1990     Reinhart (2011)                       External
                      1990     Reinhart (2011)                       Domestic and external
                      1995     Reinhart (2011)                       External
                      1998     Reinhart and Rogoff (2009, p.115)     Domestic
                      2005∗    Chambers (2011)                       External
          Total       76, of which 74 in 1973-2006

* indicates crisis used only in the panel logit analysis of section 2.3 of the paper




                                                  61
                      (a) Emerging Asia                                                           (b) Emerging Latin America

      8                                                                                   8
      6                                                                                   6
      4                                                                                   4
      2                                                                                   2
      0                                                                                   0
      ‐2                                                                                  ‐2
      ‐4                                                                                  ‐4
       6
      ‐6                                                                                   6
                                                                                          ‐6
      ‐8                                                                                  ‐8
     ‐10                                                                                 ‐10
     ‐12                                                                                 ‐12
           1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998 2001 2004 2007 2010                              1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998 2001 2004 2007 2010
                               Advanced   ASIA                                                                    Advanced    LATAM




  (c) Emerging Middle East & North Africa                                                  (d) Emerging Sub-Saharan Africa

      8                                                                                   8
      6                                                                                   6
      4                                                                                   4
      2                                                                                   2
      0                                                                                   0
      ‐2                                                                                  ‐2
      ‐4                                                                                  ‐4
       6
      ‐6                                                                                   6
                                                                                          ‐6
      ‐8                                                                                  ‐8
     ‐10                                                                                 ‐10
     ‐12                                                                                 ‐12
           1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998 2001 2004 2007 2010                              1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998 2001 2004 2007 2010
                              Advanced    MENA                                                                     Advanced    SSA




                                     (e) Emerging Central & Eastern Europe &
                                     CIS

                                                 8
                                                 6
                                                 4
                                                 2
                                                 0
                                                 ‐2
                                                 ‐4
                                                  6
                                                 ‐6
                                                 ‐8
                                            ‐10
                                            ‐12
                                                      1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998 2001 2004 2007 2010
                                                                        Advanced   CIS   CEE




Source: World Economic Outlook, October 2010. Author’s Calculations. Each panel reports the growth
rate of output of the corresponding regions in deviation from the region’s average growth rate.

                  Figure 1: Detrended Real Output Growth, by regions (percent p.a.)
                                                62
                     (a) Output Gap (log deviation from trend in percent p.a.)

                 EM, Default               EM, Banking        EM, Currency       EM, 2008




        10
        5
        0
        −5




                 ADV, Default          ADV, Banking          ADV, Currency      ADV, 2008
        10
        5
        0
        −5




              −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5
                −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4
                                                 Crisis year + T
        Graphs by Region and Crisis Type



                                       (b) Inﬂation Rate (percent p.a.)

                 EM, Default               EM, Banking        EM, Currency       EM, 2008
        20
        10
        0
        −10




                 ADV, Default          ADV, Banking          ADV, Currency      ADV, 2008
        20
        10
        0
        −10




              −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5
                −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4
                                                 Crisis year + T
        Graphs by Region and Crisis Type




Source: Author’s Calculations. Estimation of equation 1 on annual data, between 1973 and 2010. The
estimates of conditional means of each variable, relative to ‘tranquil times’ are reported on the vertical axis.
The horizontal axes represents the number of years before (negative sign) and after a crisis of a given type
(in the diﬀerent columns). Estimates in the top row are for emerging market economies; in the bottom row
for advanced economies. The dots denote a 95% conﬁdence interval for each conditional mean. For inﬂation,
a median regression is estimated.

Figure 2: Empirical Regularities during Past and Present Crisis (1): Output Gap and Inﬂa-
tion                                        63
                                    (a) Gross Public Debt percent of GDP)

                     EM, Default           EM, Banking        EM, Currency       EM, 2008




        60
        40
        20
        0
        −20




                     ADV, Default      ADV, Banking          ADV, Currency      ADV, 2008
        60
        40
        20
        0
        −20




                  −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5
                    −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4
                                                 Crisis year + T
        Graphs by Region and Crisis Type



                                     (b) Real Interest Rate (percent p.a.)

                     EM, Default           EM, Banking        EM, Currency       EM, 2008
        20
        10
        0
        −20 −10




                     ADV, Default      ADV, Banking          ADV, Currency      ADV, 2008
        20
        10
        0
        −20 −10




                  −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5
                    −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4
                                                 Crisis year + T
        Graphs by Region and Crisis Type




Source: Author’s Calculations. Estimation of equation (1) on annual data, between 1973 and 2010. The
estimates of conditional means of each variable, relative to ‘tranquil times’ are reported on the vertical axis.
The horizontal axes represents the number of years before (negative sign) and after a crisis of a given type
(in the diﬀerent columns). Estimates in the top row are for emerging market economies; in the bottom row
for advanced economies. The dots denote a 95% conﬁdence interval for each conditional mean. For the real
interest rate, a median regression is estimated.

Figure 3: Empirical Regularities during Past and Present Crisis (2): Public Debt and Real
Interest Rates                              64
                                  (a) Domestic Credit (percent of GDP)

                 EM, Default               EM, Banking        EM, Currency       EM, 2008




        40
        20
        0
        −20




                 ADV, Default          ADV, Banking          ADV, Currency      ADV, 2008
        40
        20
        0
        −20




              −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5
                −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4
                                                 Crisis year + T
        Graphs by Region and Crisis Type



                                               (b) External Leverage

                 EM, Default               EM, Banking        EM, Currency       EM, 2008
        40
        20
        0
        −20




                 ADV, Default          ADV, Banking          ADV, Currency      ADV, 2008
        40
        20
        0
        −20




              −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5
                −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4
                                                 Crisis year + T
        Graphs by Region and Crisis Type




Source: Author’s Calculations. Estimation of equation (1) on annual data, between 1973 and 2010. The
estimates of conditional means of each variable, relative to ‘tranquil times’ are reported on the vertical axis.
The horizontal axes represents the number of years before (negative sign) and after a crisis of a given type
(in the diﬀerent columns). Estimates in the top row are for emerging market economies; in the bottom row
for advanced economies. The dots denote a 95% conﬁdence interval for each conditional mean.

Figure 4: Empirical Regularities during Past and Present Crisis (3): Internal and External
Leverage
                                            65
                                  (a) Current Account (percent of GDP)

                 EM, Default               EM, Banking        EM, Currency       EM, 2008




        5
        0
        −5
        −10




                 ADV, Default          ADV, Banking          ADV, Currency      ADV, 2008
        5
        0
        −5
        −10




              −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5
                −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4
                                                 Crisis year + T
        Graphs by Region and Crisis Type



                   (b) Real Exchange Rate (log deviation from trend in percent)

                 EM, Default               EM, Banking        EM, Currency       EM, 2008
        40
        20
        0
        −20




                 ADV, Default          ADV, Banking          ADV, Currency      ADV, 2008
        40
        20
        0
        −20




              −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5
                −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4
                                                 Crisis year + T
        Graphs by Region and Crisis Type




Source: Author’s Calculations. Estimation of equation (1) on annual data, between 1973 and 2010. The
estimates of conditional means of each variable, relative to ‘tranquil times’ are reported on the vertical axis.
The horizontal axes represents the number of years before (negative sign) and after a crisis of a given type
(in the diﬀerent columns). Estimates in the top row are for emerging market economies; in the bottom row
for advanced economies. The dots denote a 95% conﬁdence interval for each conditional mean.

Figure 5: Empirical Regularities during Past and Present Crisis (4): Current Account and
Real Exchange Rate
                                           66
                                  (a) Foreign Reserves (percent of GDP)

                 EM, Default               EM, Banking         EM, Currency      EM, 2008
        15
        10
        5
        0
        −5




                ADV, Default           ADV, Banking            ADV, Currency    ADV, 2008
        15
        10
        5
        0
        −5




             −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5 −5 −3 −1 1 3 5
               −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4    −4 −2 0 2 4
                                                 Crisis year + T
        Graphs by Region and Crisis Type



                           (b) Short-Term External Debt (percent of GDP)

                 EM, Default               EM, Banking         EM, Currency      EM, 2008
        10
        5
        0
        −5




Source: Author’s Calculations. Estimation of equation (1) on annual data, between 1973 and 2010. The
estimates of conditional means of each variable, relative to ‘tranquil times’ are reported on the vertical axis.
The horizontal axes represents the number of years before (negative sign) and after a crisis of a given type
(in the diﬀerent columns). Estimates in the top row are for emerging market economies; in the bottom row
for advanced economies. The dots denote a 95% conﬁdence interval for each conditional mean. Short-term
external debt only available for EMEs.

Figure 6: Empirical Regularities during Past and Present Crisis (5): Foreign Reserves and
Short Term External Debt




                                                          67
                     (a) Output Gap             (b) Domestic Credit        (c) External Leverage

                       CEE, 2008                    CEE, 2008                       CEE, 2008




                                                                          20
          10




                                          30
          5




                                          20




                                                                          10
          0




                                          10




                                                                          0
          −10 −5




                                          0




                                                                          −10
                                          −10
                    EME\CEE, 2008                EME\CEE, 2008                   EME\CEE, 2008




                                                                          20
          10




                                          30
          5




                                          20




                                                                          10
          0




                                          10




                                                                          0
          −10 −5




                                          0




                                                                          −10
                   −5 −3 −1 1 3 5         −10   −5 −3 −1 1 3 5                  −5 −3 −1 1 3 5
                    −4 −2 0 2 4                  −4 −2 0 2 4                     −4 −2 0 2 4
                   Crisis year + T              Crisis year + T                 Crisis year + T



                  (d) Current Account       (e) Short-Term Debt           (f ) Real Exchange Rate

                       CEE, 2008                    CEE, 2008                       CEE, 2008
         10




                                         30




                                                                          20
         5




                                                                          10
                                         20
         0




                                         10




                                                                          0
         −10 −5




                                                                          −10
                                         0




                    EME\CEE, 2008                EME\CEE, 2008                   EME\CEE, 2008
         10




                                         30




                                                                          20
         5




                                                                          10
                                         20
         0




                                         10




                                                                          0
         −10 −5




                                                                          −10
                                         0




                   −5 −3 −1 1 3 5               −5 −3 −1 1 3 5                  −5 −3 −1 1 3 5
                    −4 −2 0 2 4                  −4 −2 0 2 4                     −4 −2 0 2 4
                   Crisis year + T              Crisis year + T                 Crisis year + T


Source: Author’s Calculations. Estimation of equation (1) on annual data, between 1973 and 2010. The
estimates of conditional means of each variable, relative to ‘tranquil times’ are reported on the vertical axis.
The horizontal axes represents the number of years before (negative sign) and after a crisis of a given type
(in the diﬀerent columns). Estimates in the top row are for central and eastern european economies; in the
bottom row for other emerging economies. The dots denote a 95% conﬁdence interval for each conditional
mean. Output gap and Real exchange rate in percentage deviation from trend. Domestic credit, current
account surplus, short-term external debt in percent of output. See appendix A for a description of external
leverage.

Figure 7: Empirical Regularities during the 2008 Crisis: CEE vs other Emerging Market
Economies

                                                          68
