NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GLOBAL ASSET PRICING
Karen K. Lewis
Working Paper 17261
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17261

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2011

This paper was prepared for the Annual Review of Financial Economics, DOI: 10.1146/annurev-financial102710-144841. All opinions expressed in this review are mine alone. Nevertheless, I am grateful
for comments from a number of people including Markus Brunnermeier, Choong Tze Chua, Max Croce,
Bernard Dumas, Cam Harvey, Bob Hodrick, Andrew Karolyi, Sandy Lai, Edith Liu, Emilio Osambela,
Lasse Pedersen, Nick Roussanov, and Frank Warnock. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Karen K. Lewis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Global Asset Pricing
Karen K. Lewis
NBER Working Paper No. 17261
July 2011
JEL No. G11,G12,G13,G14,G15
ABSTRACT
Financial markets have become increasingly global in recent decades, yet the pricing of internationally
traded assets continues to depend strongly upon local risk factors, leading to several observations that
are difficult to explain with standard frameworks. Equity returns depend upon both domestic and
global risk factors. Further, local investors tend to overweight their asset portfolios in local equity.
The stock prices of firms that begin to trade across borders increase in response to this information.
Foreign exchange markets also display anomalous relationships. The forward rate predicts the wrong
sign of future movements in the exchange rate, implying that traders can make profits by borrowing
in lower interest rate currencies and investing in higher interest rate currencies. Furthermore, the sign
of the foreign exchange premium changes over time, a fact difficult to reconcile with consumption
variability. In this review, I describe the implications of the current body of research for addressing
these and other global asset pricing challenges.

Karen K. Lewis
Department of Finance, Wharton School
2300 SHDH
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
lewisk@wharton.upenn.edu

Contents
1 Introduction

2

2 International Equity Pricing

3

2.1

2.2

2.3

2.4

Global and Local Factors: The Empirical Evidence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

2.1.1

Explaining Aggregate International Equity Returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

2.1.2

Explaining Firm-Level International Equity Returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

2.1.3

Global versus Local Factors: The Scope for Diversification . . . . . . . . . . .

8

Local Market Risks and International Equity Pricing Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.2.1

Purchasing power parity deviations and exchange rate risk . . . . . . . . . . . 11

2.2.2

Emerging markets and capital market liberalizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

2.2.3

Information Diﬀerences across Markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

2.2.4

International Equity Pricing Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

Other Implications of Equity Pricing Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.3.1

Home Equity Preference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

2.3.2

Foreign capital inflows and equity returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

2.3.3

International equity cross-listing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

International Equity Market Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

3 Foreign Exchange and International Bond Returns
3.1

3.2

3.3

19

Foreign Exchange Returns: Structure and Empirical Evidence . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.1.1

Euler Equation Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

3.1.2

The Fama Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

3.1.3

The Carry Trade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

Predictable Foreign Exchange Returns Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.2.1

The Foreign Exchange Risk Premium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24

3.2.2

Rare Events, Crash Premia, and Skewed Returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

3.2.3

Heterogeneous Investors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28

3.2.4

Other Low Frequency Movement Explanations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28

Foreign Bonds and Sovereign Risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

1

3.4

Foreign Exchange and International Bond Returns: Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

4 Integrating Financial Markets and Consumption Risk-Sharing

31

5 Concluding Remarks

33

1

Introduction

Financial markets have become increasingly global in recent decades. Indeed, the recent financial
crisis highlighted the strong interlinkages among global capital markets. Therefore, the casual observer might logically presume that internationally traded assets are globally priced. Nevertheless,
the body of international financial research shows that prices of globally traded assets depend upon
local country-specific risks. While the importance of these local factors may be diminishing over
time, studies continue to point to the significance of both global and local eﬀects.
What are the country-specific eﬀects that matter in a global financial market?
tors naturally surround diﬀerences in capital markets that are inherently national.
countries maintain their own monetary policy.

These facFirst, many

Therefore, asset prices across countries often in-

corporate aspects of currency risk. Moreover, these diﬀerences in aggregate price policy can aﬀect
asset pricing relationships in models without money through real exchange rate changes. Second,
countries often diﬀer in the openness of the capital markets. These diﬀerences can either be explicit as in the case of a government policy to restrict capital movements.

Or they can arise in

more subtle forms due to higher informational costs to foreigners. Collectively, these diﬀerences
are often called segmented capital markets.

Finally, countries diﬀer through government fiscal

policy, aﬀecting returns in various ways. For example, the government may tax returns directly
or increase the perceived risk of future taxes. Alternatively, the government’s fiscal behavior may
generate perceived sovereign risk that impacts the returns of all securities from that country.
While monetary policy, fiscal policy, and segmented markets identify convenient groupings of
factors aﬀecting international asset pricing, they are by no means mutually exclusive. For example,
international investors may perceive greater sovereign risk in a country with a large fiscal deficit
and that country may also have more segmented capital markets.
Incorporating country-specific diﬀerences across countries into standard asset pricing relation-

2

ships leads to several observations that are diﬃcult to explain with standard models. For example,
equity returns depend upon both domestic and global risk factors.

Moreover, this dependence

on local factors is mirrored by a tendency for local investors to overweight their asset portfolios
in local equity, an observation called the "home equity bias." Equity cross-listing events across
international borders are also cited as evidence for segmentation. The stock price on these crosslisted firms increase around the listing date.

Foreign exchange markets also display anomalous

relationships. The most studied of these relationships is the "forward discount bias." The forward
rate predicts the wrong sign of future movements in the exchange rate. Since forwards are tied to
interest diﬀerences across countries, this bias implies that traders can make profits by borrowing at
lower interest rate currencies and investing in higher interest rate currencies, generating a moneymaking strategy called the "carry trade." Furthermore, the sign of the foreign exchange premium
changes over time, a fact diﬃcult to reconcile with consumption variability.
In Section 2, I describe the literature on international equity markets and its relationship to
the anomalies above. In Section 3, I illustrate the forward discount bias relationship along with
proposed explanations.

Section 4 provides a short discussion of research that has attempted to

bring together diﬀerent markets. Concluding remarks are provided in Section 5.

2

International Equity Pricing

To frame the discussion of international asset returns, consider a canonical framework based upon
the seminal Lucas (1982) model.

Representative consumer-investors live in  countries indexed

by , each endowed with a "tree" that pays out dividends in units of non-durable goods.

The

dividend payout at time  to investors in country  is defined as  . Further, investors in each
country  have common time additive utility, with period utility,  ( ), and discount factor .1
Thus, the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution of investor of country , hereafter called the


stochastic discount factor (SDF), is defined as: +1
=  0 (+1
) 0 ( ) and the discount factor

Q


between time  and any future period period  is defined as:   ≡
+
=  0 (+
) 0 ( ).
=1

1

If the economy is fully segmented so that  =  , the stock price of this country, b , is given

Below I describe the implications of relaxing the time-additive utility assumption. To match many features of
asset pricing data both in the closed and open economy, recursive utility such as in Epstein and Zin (1989) is required
along with low frequency uncertainty in consumption.

3

by the standard closed-economy pricing relationship:
b = 

∞ 
P

b
  +

(1)

 =1


where in the closed-economy case the discount factor depends only on domestic output: b
  =
h
i

Q



b+
=  0 (+
) 0 ( ) =  0 (+
) 0 ( ) .

=1

Assume now that capital markets are open so that investors can trade claims on the endowment

streams from other countries. If investors share the same time-additive isoelastic utility function
such as CRRA and the endowments follow stationary processes, investors optimally choose to
hold a world mutual fund paying out dividends from the aggregate endowments across countries:

P
 ≡
 . Thus, the consumption of the investor in country  is now equal to its equity share
=1

in world output and is therefore proportional to world output so that  =    2 . In this case,

the open economy price of country  in world markets,   , is:
  = 

∞
P


 + +

(2)

 =1

where the stochastic discount factor is now shared across countries so that  + =
£
¤

 0 (+
) 0 ( ) =  0 ( + ) 0 (  ) .


Q

+ =

=1

This very simple framework illustrates a key feature of the canonical international equity pricing.

Under segmented markets, the equity price is determined by the stochastic discount factor derived
from domestic output alone. In this case, relationships between equity prices simply depend upon
the exogenous correlation of the endowment processes,  . On the other hand, integrated markets
imply that prices endogenously comove according to the common stochastic discount factor,  .
This straightforward implication was one of the first international asset pricing relationships
considered in the literature using excess returns of equities across countries. Defining the gross
¢ ¤
£¡ 


real return on equity as +1
 and the gross real risk free rate as  , the
≡ +1
+ +1

Euler equation implies:

2

h
i


 +1
+1
=0

(3)

For more discussion of this result, see for example Obstfeld (1994) and Lewis (2000). The share of consumption
in world output is constant only under certain assumptions such as common time-additive iso-elastic utility and i.i.d.
consumption growth. Below, I describe recent approaches that extend these assumptions.

4



where +1
≡ +1
−  , the excess return.

Thus, when international equity markets are

integrated, equation (3) and equation (2) imply that returns are priced by the covariance with
a common global factor.

By contrast, when markets are segmented as in equation (1) excess

returns will be priced according to their covariance with local factors, potentially generating 
many factors.
In this section, I review the literature on these relationships in three steps. First, I summarize
the extensive literature that rejects the hypothesis that returns depend upon a set of common world
factors in favor of models including local factors. Second, I discuss models that have attempted
to relate these local factors to sources of country-specific idiosyncratic risk and to behavioral and
informational asymmetries.

Finally, I describe other features related to these models such as

portfolio holdings and capital flows.

2.1

Global and Local Factors: The Empirical Evidence

The potential for a common global risk factor to determine international expected equity returns
carries an obvious appeal.

In early work, Solnik (1974b) and Grauer, Litzenberger, and Stehle

(1976) described a world capital asset pricing model in which the standard Sharpe-Littner CAPM
holds but the world market portfolio replaces the domestic market. Stulz (1981b) developed an
intertemporal version of this model showing that all returns are determined by a common global
source of risk under purchasing power parity.

Solnik (1974a) and Stehle (1977) found that the

World CAPM pricing relationship could not be rejected based upon unconditional mean returns.
However, subsequent papers using conditional models found that the simple framework can be
rejected and that local risks are important.3 Nevertheless, the appeal of the simple model continues
until today as the World CAPM is often used as a benchmark.4
To understand the implication of these rejections for international equity pricing, I next describe three groups of papers that empirically evaluate the World CAPM either directly or indirectly through global factors. The first group of papers analyzes the expected equity returns across
countries at an aggregate market index level.

The second group considers international equity

pricing at the firm level. The third group of empirical studies assesses the importance of global
3

See Karolyi and Stulz (2003) for a survey.
For example, the World CAPM is used as a benchmark in some studies of home bias (e.g., Ahearne, Griever, and
Warnock (2004)).
4

5

relative to local or country level risks. The results from these three diﬀerent angles give a profile of
international equity return behavior that have motivated various international asset pricing models
I describe later in this review.
2.1.1

Explaining Aggregate International Equity Returns

Some of the earliest conditional tests of international equity returns were based upon the Euler
equation relationship given in equation (3) following the pioneering work in foreign exchange by
Hansen and Hodrick (1983). Rewriting the investor’s Euler equation in terms of covariances and
dropping the superscript on  without loss of generality implies:


 +1
= − (+1
 +1 ) .

(4)

Since equation (4) holds for any asset, the risk free rate can be substituted out to obtain the
relationship:

 +1
=

 
 (+1
+1 )

 +1

 (+1  +1 )

(5)


is the excess return on an arbitrary benchmark asset. A number of authors including
where +1

Cumby (1990), Lewis (1991), Campbell and Hamao (1992), and Bekaert and Hodrick (1992) tested
these restrictions across several international asset markets including equity. These papers generally
rejected the hypothesis of a priced risk factor structure across markets that could be attributed to
a common stochastic discount factor.
An independent but related line of research examined the factor pricing relationships in excess
returns using the World CAPM as a benchmark. The first set of studies assumed purchasing power
parity. Harvey (1991) and Ferson and Harvey (1993) considered whether expected excess returns
of market indices across a set of industrialized countries could be explained by their covariance with
the world equity return. They found that the model had explanatory power for returns. However,
the latter paper showed that the expected returns were better explained by multiple factor models
that include local sources of risk.
Dumas and Solnik (1995) estimated both unconditional and conditional versions of the world
CAPM. They found that while the unconditional version of the model was not rejected, the

6

conditional version was rejected. Their results are reported in Table 1, Panel A. The unconditional
version of the model is not rejected at a p-value of 0.16, but the conditional version is strongly
rejected at a p-value less than 0.001. Furthermore, they strongly reject the hypothesis that the price
of global and currency risks are constant, suggesting that the unconditional tests lack power. When
they consider the same hypotheses for an asset pricing model that allows for exchange rate risk ,
the "international asset pricing model" (Adler and Dumas (1983), they find that the unconditional
version is only marginally rejected at 5% while the conditional version is not rejected. Moroever,
the hypothesis that exchange rate risk is not priced is strongly rejected. The general conclusions
that exchange rate risk is priced and that the price of risk is time-varying appears in a number of
papers including De Santis and Gerard (1997) and Vassalou (2000).
2.1.2

Explaining Firm-Level International Equity Returns

Firm-level stock return behavior presents another dimension of international equity pricing. The
World CAPM represents a straightforward extension of the domestic CAPM to the international
market. However, as has been demonstrated in the domestic empirical literature (e.g., Fama and
French (1992), Carhart (1997), this model does not explain the cross-section of returns as well as a
model augmented by factors that depend upon size, the value of the firm, and possibly momentum.
The obvious questioned raised by this evidence is: What model best explains firm-level returns
internationally?

Since no empirically implementable theoretical model has yet been derived to

explain the importance of factors such as size and value, papers that address this question typically
rely on a simple factor structure to explain returns.5

The eﬀect on expected equity returns from

risk exposure to these factors are measured empirically by the sensitivity or "factor loadings" to
factor-mimicking portfolios
Fama and French (1998) studied an international cross-section of firm equity returns using a
global market factor and a factor based upon book value relative to market value.

They found

that the value premium, characteristic of US firm returns, is pervasive in the 13 countries studied.
Griﬃn (2002) included the size factor and also considered whether the eﬀects on equity returns diﬀer
depending on whether the factors are domestic or foreign. He found that country-specific versions
5
On the other hand, Gomes, Kogan, and Zhang (2003) developed a theoretical model that matches the domestic
empirical findings.

7

of the three-factor model were more useful at explaining portfolio and individual stock returns
than a world three-factor model.

Hou, Karolyi, and Kho (2011) provide an extensive analysis

of 27,000 stocks from 49 countries to investigate the factors that drive firm-level returns across
countries. The model that best explains variation in returns across these stocks is a multifactor
model that depends upon the ratio of cash-flow to price as well as momentum. Fama and French
(2010) examine returns using size, value, and momentum factors for four regions, considering both
integrated and local models.

They find that the local model explains returns best across three

regions.
2.1.3

Global versus Local Factors: The Scope for Diversification

Although studies find that local factors are important to explain cross-sectional expected returns,
the restriction that intercepts equal zero is usually rejected.
returns often cannot be measured with much precision.

Therefore, expected foreign equity

Nevertheless, the importance of local

and country risks in international equity returns together with the low correlation across markets
suggests that holding foreign equity can help to reduce the risk of the domestic equity portfolio.
Along these lines, Heston and Rouwenhoerst (1994), hereafter HR, asked whether firm-level
returns are driven by country or industry eﬀects. For this purpose, they studied all of the firms in
the Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) indices of 12 European countries. They grouped
these firms into industries and then considered cross-sectional regressions for each firm’s return,
 , according to:
 =  +  +   + 

(6)

where  is a time fixed eﬀect and thus a base level of return at time , and where  and  
are coeﬃcients on dummy variables if the firm operates in industry , or comes from country ,
respectively, and  is the firm-specific shock. Instead of choosing country and industry returns as
benchmark factors for these returns, they constructed an "average firm" from an equally weighted
portfolio. Using these estimates, they found that the country eﬀect explained an average of 24%
across industries while the industry eﬀect only explained an average of 5% across countries. They
also discovered that 62% of the variance on an average stock can be eliminated by diversifying
across industries within a country, while diversifying across countries within an industry eliminates

8

80% of this variance. They concluded that country diversification is more important than industry
diversification.
Bekaert, Hodrick, and Zhang (2009) considered various factor models to ask which one best
explains the variation in international equity returns for all of the firms in the MSCI world index.
Since first moments of equity returns are imprecisely estimated, they focused upon time-varying
second moments. They then ran a horse-race both with and without local factors for four diﬀerent models: the world CAPM, the model augmented with Fama-French factors, an APT model
estimated by principal components, and the HR model.
Table 1 B provides some summary information about these tests. The table reports t-statistics
for the diﬀerence in Mean-Squared-Errors (MSE)6 of the model in the row minus the MSE of the
model in the column. Thus, the first line shows that the MSE of the World CAPM is significantly
higher than both the MSE of the World Fama French (-6.77) and the World APT (-3.10) models.
Clearly, the World CAPM is dominated by these other models. However, the second line shows
that all of these models are improved by adding local factors. As such, all the versions of models
with local factors significantly dominate world-only factor models. Since the HR model inherently
imposes the restriction that the factor loadings are eﬀectively one, it does not explain returns as
well as any of the other models except the World CAPM.
A number of papers have suggested that industry eﬀects are becoming more important than
country eﬀects. These papers include Cavaglia, Brightman, and Aked (2000), Ferreira and Gama
(2005), Carrieri, Errunza, and Hogan (2007) and Carrieri, Errunza, and Sarkissian (2008). Bekaert,
Hodrick and Zhang (2009) reconciled their results with this literature by testing for diﬀerences in
trend correlations over time.

Using more recent data, they found that country eﬀects are still

significantly important in explaining international equity returns even after controlling for industry
eﬀects
Another feature of global and local factors is the relatively high comovement between company
returns and local factors, as demonstrated by the coeﬃcients on the World plus Local CAPM
model. This factor sensitivity aﬀects the ability to diversify internationally. Although Bekaert,
Hodrick and Zhang (2009) showed that other models explain returns better, this simple two factor
model continues to be a benchmark for many studies that consider international events such as
6

The Mean Squared Error is the time-series weighted mean of errors between the sample data and the model.

9

cross-listings. To illustrate this relationships, Panel C1 reports the cross-sectional mean of a set
of time series regressions for all foreign multinational companies that have listed on a US equity
exchange since 1975 through 2010, approximately 1100 total.

These companies are important

because they are the most likely to be globally priced. Nevertheless, a simple mean of coeﬃcients
from return regressions of these foreign companies on the US market suggest they would be an
excellent hedge since the beta is essentially zero while the coeﬃcient on the local market is about
0.8.
This simple statistic ignores the correlation across US and foreign returns as well as the increase
in that correlation over time, however. Even early studies such as Longin and Solnick (1995) showed
that the correlation across major countries increased from 1960 to 1990.

The evolution toward

more integrated equity return exposures has been substantiated in later studies (e.g., Baele (2005),
Eun and Lee (2010), Bekaert, Harvey, Lundblad, and Siegel (2007)). This relationship is likely
to hold true in firm returns as well. Indeed, as Panel C shows under section 2, the relationship
between the firm returns and the market returns changes significantly after cross-listing.

The

table reports results from Chua, Lai, and Lewis (2010) for a market-weighted set of firms that are
listed on US exchanges in 2004. Using a test that endogenously chooses break dates, they found
that the foreign firm betas on the US market increased over time after cross-listing. These results
corroborate evidence from a number of authors that condition on cross-listing dates, beginning with
Foerster and Karolyi (1999,2000). Section 3 of Panel C restates some of their estimates showing
that the average global beta increased after cross-listing while the local beta even declined.7 Thus,
while foreign firms tend to have low betas against the US and other world markets, these betas
appear to be increasing over time.

2.2

Local Market Risks and International Equity Pricing Models

Overall, the evidence on international equity returns shows that the standard world CAPM and the
associated single factor model of returns is rejected by the data. Empirical international equity
pricing studies show that returns depend upon more than a single factor and that at least some
of these additional factors depend upon local sources of risk. Developing models to explain both
global and local sources of risk is challenging since the two are typically associated with diﬀerent
7

Karolyi (2006) provides a review of the literature and describes the robustness of these relationships.

10

views of market integration.

In the simple framework above, equity prices are either priced in

completely segmented markets as in equation (1) so that all factors are local or else they are priced
in fully integrated markets as in equation (2) so that all factors are global. The evidence, therefore,
poses a challenge to develop models that allow for investors to have access to international markets
yet retain exposure to local shocks that cannot be diversified away.
2.2.1

Purchasing power parity deviations and exchange rate risk

Purchasing power parity deviations generate one potential answer to this challenge. In a seminal
paper, Adler and Dumas (1983) showed how purchasing power parity deviations aﬀect equity returns.

Even though investors may trade in fully open capital markets, purchasing power parity

deviations imply that the real return to investors vary across countries. As a result, investors view
the expected return and risk from investing in securities diﬀerently depending upon their country
of residence. The pricing of international securities therefore depends upon the covariance of the
security returns with the home investor’s inflation, a "local" risk factor, and also the covariance of
this security’s returns with all the rest of the world’s purchasing power parity deviations, a set of
"global" risk factors.
A necessary condition for this model to hold in the data is that exchange rate risk be priced, a
condition established in the literature I described above. However, since individual equity returns
also depend upon other local factors, currency appears to be only part of the explanation for
international equity returns.
2.2.2

Emerging markets and capital market liberalizations

Some governments restrict access to their countries’ capital markets.

Since these restrictions

segment global capital markets, they provide another reason for local factors to aﬀect equity returns.
This explanation was described in theoretical papers as early as Black (1974) and Stulz (1981a).
These papers considered the impact on equity returns if the domestic investor must pay extra
costs on the foreign relative to domestic investments. Errunza and Losq (1985,1989) developed
a framework to consider more direct capital market restrictions among countries.

While these

papers did not relate the equity returns directly to a world and local factor model, they generally
found that the capital market equilibrium returns diﬀer across countries and, as emphasized by
11

Stulz (1981a), need not correspond to a completely segmented or integrated model.
Bekaert and Harvey (1995) examined this relationship in equity returns of emerging markets.
They considered an empirical model that switched between two regimes. In the first, markets are
completely integrated as in equation (2). Rewriting the stochastic discount factor into components
of the world price of risk, the Euler equation (3) under integration implies that the market returns
for country  depend upon the covariance with the world according to:8



 +1
=   (+1
 +1
)

(7)

 is the return on the world market and  is the time  expected world price of risk.
where +1


Alternatively, for an emerging market with closed capital markets, the returns within a country are
determined solely by their covariance with the domestic market as in equation (1). In this case,
the stock market return for country  is given by:


 +1
=    (+1
)

(8)

where  is the corresponding price of country  risk. They pointed out that an econometrician
analyzing emerging market returns would observe data over both regimes. Thus, the returns would
be explained by both the integrated world factor in equation (7) and the segmented local market
factor in equation (8) according to:




 +1
=     (+1
 +1
) + (1 −   )   (+1
)

(9)

where   is the probability of country  being in an integrated regime based upon time  information.
They estimated this model and found that indeed there is time-varying integration generated by
the probability of being in the two regimes.
The potential for time-varying integration poses issues for valuing assets in emerging markets.
Bekaert and Harvey (1997) considered the implications for measuring volatility and pricing behavior. Henry (2000) and Chari and Henry (2008) looked at the impact on aggregate and individual
stock returns when markets announce a liberalization.
8

Bekaert and Harvey (2000) consider a

Dumas and Solnik (1995) describe the steps required for this rewriting.

12

present value model based upon dividend yields to measure the eﬀects on cost of capital from liberalization. Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002) used data on stock market returns together
with macroeconomic variables to estimate the date of the liberalization across a number of episodes.
They found that the dates estimated with returns align well with the announcements. Surveys of
the implications of liberalization on equity pricing and on capital markets perspective are given in
Bekaert and Harvey (2003) and in Henry (2007), respectively.
Overall, the empirical equity pricing literature on emerging markets and liberalizations provides
one explanation for the presence of global and local factors in returns. These two sets of factors
co-exist in returns as countries transition to more open markets. However, transition to openness
seems less likely to explain the importance of local and global factors in equity returns of developed
countries.
2.2.3

Information Diﬀerences across Markets

Equity returns depend upon both global and local sources of risk. These sources of risk can result
from diﬀering real returns as with purchasing power parity deviations or explicit restrictions to
capital movements as with emerging markets. However, these sources of risk can also arise from
more subtle impediments such as informational diﬀerences across international markets.
Several papers developed asymmetric information models to consider international investment
flows.

The basic model in Brennan and Cao (1997) has become a benchmark for this literature.

In this model, domestic and foreign investors receive public and private signals about payoﬀs on
investments in the home and foreign market.

The precision of the signals to investors is higher

in their own market, capturing the idea that these investors have more information about home
securities.

A random supply of exogenous "liquidity traders" arrive every period, purchase the

assets, and help determine the price.

Thus, the equilibrium price depends upon the signals of

the two sets of investors. While the models in this literature are developed to explain investment
flows rather than returns per se, the stock price solutions illustrate the intuition that asymmetric
information will generate both local and foreign risk factors in returns.
Dumas, Lewis and Osambela (2010) considered whether diﬀerences in the ability to assess
information across countries can generate an asset pricing model with local and global risk factors,
among other empirical regularities. In their model, domestic and foreign investors observe signals
13

about the expected growth of dividends. In contrast to the asymmetric information literature, all
signals are public but domestic investors understand better how to use that information to forecast
future dividends. Since investors react to the same information diﬀerently, this behavior induces an
additional source of risk. The model implies that returns have a two-factor structure that depends
upon both home consumption and foreign consumption. Moreover, the equilibrium equity returns
depend upon all of the state variables in their model, including up to seven factors, consistent with
the number of factors found in Bekaert, Hodrick, and Zhang (2009).
2.2.4

International Equity Pricing Overview

No single asset pricing model appears to fit the empirical result that returns are simultaneously
priced with local and global factors across a wide range of countries and firms.

Nevertheless,

there is some support for each explanation. Equity returns appear to include the pricing of foreign
exchange, consistent with the importance of inflation diﬀerences. Equity returns from emerging
markets depend upon a combination of segmented and integrated market risks and the shifts in
these patterns correspond to liberalization dates. Finally, diﬀerences in information across markets
generate sources of domestic and foreign risks that should theoretically be priced in equilibrium,
though these risks are diﬃcult to measure.

2.3

Other Implications of Equity Pricing Models

So far, I have described research related to international equity pricing relationships. But many
of the models used to describe these relationships have other capital market implications as well.
I next highlight three of these: home equity preference by investors; the relationship between
international capital flows and returns; and equity responses to international cross-listing.
2.3.1

Home Equity Preference

Domestic investors hold a disproportionate share of their equity portfolio in domestic firms. This
observation was noted in the US at least as early as Grubel (1968) and Levy and Sarnat (1970)
and was shown in a data set across several developed countries by French and Poterba (1991).
Moreover, Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock (2004) have shown that the proportion of foreign equity

14

holdings in the US portfolio is only about 12%, while the foreign portfolio share in world markets
is about 50%. Thus, the so-called "home bias" phenomenon appears to persist.
Whether this phenomenon is puzzling clearly depends upon how well the domestically-biased
portfolios achieve the objectives of home investors. If international equity returns are determined
by a single factor model such as the World CAPM, then domestic investment in foreign equities
indeed fall short of the optimal holdings implied by a market-weighted share of foreign equities in
the world portfolio.

However, as described above, the literature on international equity pricing

demonstrates that this simple version of the model is rejected by the data. Thus, whether home
equity preference is surprising must be put into the context of other asset pricing models that can
potentially fit the data better. Toward this purpose, I now reconsider home equity preference in
the context of the asset pricing models described above.9
One reason why investors may hold diﬀerent portfolio allocations than the world market portfolio
is that returns diﬀer according to the country of residence.

In their seminal paper, Adler and

Dumas (1983) derived the equilibrium portfolio holdings for investors facing purchasing power
parity deviations and, hence, real exchange rate risk.

The desired portfolio for an investor in a

given country depends upon two components: a common portfolio across investor that maximizes
the log of mean gross returns and a country-specific portfolio that hedges the real exchange rate
risk. Cooper and Kaplanis (1994) combined moments of equity returns and portfolio holdings to
ask whether currency risk can explain home bias. They found that it cannot. They then used
their estimates to back out the size of implicit transactions costs required to prevent investors from
holding these positions. These estimates appear unrealistically high.
While country-specific risk in the form of real exchange rate variation may not be suﬃcient to
explain home bias, investors may consider other idiosyncratic risks that may be diversified with
foreign assets.

These country-specific risks may include shocks to non-tradeable goods (Baxter,

Jermann, and King (1998)) and human capital (Baxter and Jermann (1997), Jermann (2002)).
Whether these argument help or hurt the home equity bias explanation depends upon how well
foreign assets hedge these country-specific risks relative to domestic assets. If domestically traded
assets can provide diversification opportunities without the need to directly invest in foreign assets,
9

A full survey of home equity preference is beyond the scope of this paper. For a longer but dated survey, see
Lewis (1999). Coeurdacier and Rey (2010) give an excellent recent survey of home bias in macroeconomic models.

15

even small transactions costs and informational asymmetries may induce investors to overweight
domestic equities. To investigate this possibility, Errunza, Hogan, and Hung (1999) constructed
optimally weighted portfolios of US-traded securities that are likely to have foreign risk components,
securities such as US multinationals, foreign stocks listed on US exchanges (ADRs), and country
funds. They then tested whether these US-traded portfolios span the risk in foreign market indices.
Interestingly, they could not reject this hypothesis except for some of the emerging markets. Their
results call into question the benefits of holding foreign equities directly on foreign stock exchanges
since this diversification can be duplicated on the domestic exchange with lower transactions costs.
Stocks from emerging markets form an exception to this result, but for these stocks capital market
restrictions may be more significant.
Another potential problem with the standard home equity preference argument involves the
time-varying variances of international equity returns. A number of papers such as King, Sentana,
and Wadhwani (1994), and Longin and Solnik (1995, 2001) showed that the correlation between international equity returns are higher when the market declines than when it increases. If so,argued
Ang and Bekaert (2002), the diversification potential of foreign equity may be diminished since correlations are high when hedging motives are most needed. Nevertheless, these authors showed that
the benefits of international diversification remained during bear markets as well as bull markets.
On the other hand, Chua, Lai, and Lewis (2010) showed that foreign equities traded in the US
would not have provided diversification benefits during the recent financial crisis.
Finally, asymmetric information between domestic and foreign investors may generate a tendency to hold domestic assets. Gehrig (1993) showed that if domestic investors have more precise
information about home equity compared to foreign investors, they will choose to hold relatively
more domestic equity. Intuitively, foreign stocks will seem riskier because domestic investors are
less informed about them. In this framework, home bias stems from the assumption that domestic
investors are more informed about domestic securities, leading one to ask why foreign investors do
not become more informed about the domestic securities.
To address this question, Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2009,2010) developed a model in
which investors choose how informed they wish to be about a group of assets. In this model,
domestic investors have more initial information about the domestic asset so that they have a
comparative advantage in local information acquisition. In equilibrium, they endogenously choose
16

to remain less informed about the foreign assets in favor of domestic assets.
This line of research would seem to suggest that home bias results simply from an informational
disadvantage in foreign assets. However, Dumas, Lewis, and Osambela (2011) showed that this view
is too simplistic. In their model, foreign investors have an informational disadvantage in processing
domestic signals.10 As such, they overreact to domestic dividend changes. The foreign investor
views the domestic equity as being riskier because he does not understand how to interpret all the
publically available information. The presence of confused foreign investors creates sentiment risk
in domestic equity returns, thereby reducing desired domestic equity holdings by domestic investors.
Dumas, Lewis, and Osambela (2011) found that the informational advantage eﬀect dominates the
foreign sentiment risk eﬀect on average, but that these two eﬀects generate time-varying home bias.
2.3.2

Foreign capital inflows and equity returns

The relationship between capital flows and equity returns is another relationship that depends upon
global asset pricing. Bohn and Tesar (1996) found that monthly US portfolio flows are positively
related to contemporaneous flows in most large equity markets. The standard asset pricing model
with complete information and markets provides little guidance about capital flows since prices can
equilibrate without any associated capital flows.

By contrast, asset pricing models based upon

asymmetric information generate capital flow predictions as investors attempt to trade on their
private information.
Brennan and Cao (1997) developed these implications by assuming that investors in the home
country have access to more precise private signals about domestic dividend pay-outs.

As a

result, foreign investors over-react to common public signals, thereby creating a positive correlation
between domestic returns and foreign capital inflows. They empirically studied this relationship
for both developed and emerging markets.

Similar to Bohn and Tesar(1996), they found that

the purchases of US equities by foreign developed countries and US purchases of equities in these
same countries were generally positively related to returns, though the results were more mixed
for emerging markets.

Using a model with international diﬀerences in opinion described above,

Dumas, Lewis, and Osambela (2011) also generate covariation between domestic returns and foreign
10
This informational assumption builds on the frameworks in Dumas, Kurshev, and Uppal (2009) and Scheinkman
and Xiong (2003).

17

capital inflows.
While the Brennan and Cao (1997) model implies a contemporaneous movement between returns
and capital flows, in practice empirical studies relate lagged capital flows to contemporaneous
returns in order to adjust for information lags.

As such, the relationship is typically associated

with "trend-following" behavior by foreigners, as found in several papers.11 Brennan, Cao, Strong,
and Xu (2005) argued that diﬀerences in lags of portfolio flows make the trend-following evidence
diﬃcult to interpret.

Instead, they used surveys of institutional investors to study how market

returns across countries aﬀect the "bullishness" of these investors. Consistent with their model,
they found that the fraction of foreign institutional investors that are bullish about a given market
increases with the return on that market. However, Curcuru, Thomas, Warnock, and Wongswan
(2011) examined newly available data on country allocations and showed that U.S. investor trades
are consistent with portfolio rebalancing, not with an informational advantage.
Baker, Wurgler and Yuan (2010) examined more directly the empirical implications of potential diﬀerences of opinion on international returns.

Following the approach taken by Baker and

Wurgler (2006) for US alone, they constructed a "Sentiment Index" for six developed countries
using principal components of several data variables related to bullishness of the market.

They

then used the common component across these markets to characterize a global sentiment index.
They found that the global sentiment index rather than the local sentiment index was important
for explaining the cross-section of returns. As they argued, capital flows are one mechanism for
this sentiment to spread across countries.
2.3.3

International equity cross-listing

The stock price response of firms that cross-list in other markets is often cited as evidence of
market segmentation. For example, Table 1 Panel C3 reports the abnormal returns from Foerster
and Karolyi (1999) for the window of one year prior to the cross-listing event at about 15 basis
points weekly or about 7% annually.

The listing week displays another 12 basis point increase

(not shown), and then the returns decline by about 14 basis point, though not significantly. As
11

See for example, Froot, O’Connell, and Seasholes (2001), Choe, Kho, and Stulz (1999, 2005), Grinblatt and
Keloharju (2000), Griﬀen, Nardari, and Stulz (2004), Edison and Warnock (2008), and Dahlquist and Robertsson
(2004). However, Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000) find that foreign institutional investors make more profits on their
investments.

18

surveyed in Karolyi (2006), this pattern is robust. Across a variety of studies, returns on stocks
tend to be abnormally high around their cross-listing event with estimates ranging from 15% and
7% per annum.

Even with an event window as long as ten years, Sarkissian and Schill (2009)

found significant abnormal returns.
The dramatic eﬀect on firm returns raises obvious questions about the reason.

Obvious ex-

planations such as risk-sharing are easily ruled out. As described by Karolyi (2006), firms do not
appear to be motivated by lower beta in the US. Indeed, most of the cross-listed firms come from
countries such as Canada that already comove strongly with the US. However, the biggest price
eﬀects are documented for firms from countries with more lax disclosure requirements than the US.
Coﬀee (2002) argued that these eﬀects are generated by a "bonding" eﬀect. Foreign cross-listed
companies bond themselves to a more stringent set of disclosure requirements by committing to
abide by US GAAP and regulations from the SEC. As a result, the market views these firms as
less risky and accordingly their stock price rises.

2.4

International Equity Market Summary

Equities comprise an important global asset market.

Despite the increase in integration across

countries over time, equity returns continue to depend strongly on local factors. Models developed
to understand this codependency range from country-specific risks, like exchange rates, to capital
market restrictions and informational asymmetries. These models also highlight some well-known
regularities in these markets such as home bias, the comovement of returns and foreign capital
flows, and international equity cross-listing. These models provide a context for considering other
global asset markets such as currency and fixed income.

3

Foreign Exchange and International Bond Returns

Currency is an obvious risk characteristic that distinguishes one country’s return from another.
Indeed, exchange rate risk appears to be priced in international equity returns, as described above.
The price of exchange rate risk can be addressed directly by analyzing the expected return from
borrowing in one currency and investing in another currency.

Standard foreign exchange risk

models treat the borrowing and investing interest rates as short term risk-free rates. However, as

19

recent concerns regarding Europe have shown, returns across countries can also embody sovereign
default risk as well as potential credit risk diﬀerences. In this section, I begin by describing the
behavior of foreign exchange returns and its associated literature before turning to the implications
for sovereign default risk.

3.1

Foreign Exchange Returns: Structure and Empirical Evidence

Foreign exchange returns are typically characterized by a long-short strategy often used to motivate
interest parity. The investor borrows at a domestic currency nominal risk free rate, owing gross
e , and then invests the proceeds per unit of domestic currency in a foreign nominal
return 


e ∗ in foreign currency units. Thus, the investor engaged
risk-free asset earning gross return 

³
´ ³
´

∗
e
e in units of domestic currency, where  is the
in such a strategy will earn +1 
  



spot domestic currency price of foreign currency. Defining the nominal home and foreign currency
risk-free rates as  and ∗ , respectively the logarithm of this strategy can be written as:
  ≡ +1 −  + ( − ∗ )
e ), 1 + ∗ ≈ ln(
e ∗ ), and where lower-case letters refer to the logarithm of
where 1 +  ≈ ln(



the variable. The forward premium equals the diﬀerence between the domestic and foreign interest
rate by covered interest parity; that is,  −  =  − ∗ . Rewriting this strategy in terms of the
forward rate implied by covered interest arbitrage, the excess returns from the strategy becomes:
  ≡ +1 − 

(10)

The foreign exchange return is therefore equivalent to taking a long position in the foreign currency
and short position in the domestic currency.

If the foreign currency appreciates relative to the

forward rate, the future spot price of foreign currency exceeds the forward rate so that the position
generates profits.
If the forward rate is an unbiased predictor of the future exchange rate, then interest parity
holds and foreign exchange returns earn zero profits on average. Studies find that interest parity
holds over long horizons, but shorter term deviations can be significant conditional on interest rates.

20

To provide a structure to describe this phenomenon, I first restate the Euler equation structure in
Section 2. I then use this structure to consider the empirical evidence.
3.1.1

Euler Equation Implications

To consider the foreign exchange return using the Euler equation above, I rewrite the stochastic
discount factor in nominal terms12 . Defining the price index of the consumption good in the home
country as  and that of the foreign country as ∗ , the nominal stochastic discount factor for
domestic and foreign currency can be written as  and ∗ where:

 +1
 ∗+1

∙

¸
 0 (+1 )+1
e
= 1
≡ 

 0 ( )
∙ 0 ∗
¸
∗
 (+1 )+1
e ∗
≡ 
= 1

∗
∗
 0 ( )

(11)

Thus, +1 is the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution of one unit of domestic currency
between period  and  + 1, and similarly for ∗+1 . The spot rate is simply the contemporaneous
ratio of nominal rates of substitution in consumption implying:
¡
¢
(+1  ) = ∗+1 +1

(12)

Using the risk-free rates in equation (11) and the spot rates in equation (12) the foreign exchange
risk premium can be rewritten as:13
µ

 +1 − 


¶

= 

µ

∗+1
+1

¶

−

 ∗+1
 +1

(13)

In other words, the risk premium depends upon the diﬀerence between the expected ratio of
SDFs and the ratio of their expectations. Euler equation-based explanations.must depend upon
variation in this relationship.
12
See for example Backus, Gregory and Telmer (1993). The approach can also be written in real terms by including
two goods that provide a role for real exchange rate variability. For an early example, see Hodrick and Srivastava
(1984).
13
Taking the expectation of eqn (12) implies that  +1  =  (∗+1 +1 ). Using the fact
 that   =

  ∗ by covered interest parity, equation (11) implies that   =  ∗+1  +1 . Then,
 (∗+1 +1 ) −  ∗+1  +1 . verifying equation (13).

21

 +1 −


=

3.1.2

The Fama Result

Early papers on interest parity noted that the forward rate is not an unbiased predictor of the
future exchange rate (e.g., Bilson (1981)). Subsequent papers explored the nature of deviations
from interest parity. In an influential paper, Fama (1984) used a regression test to demonstrate
the significance of these deviations. The test regresses the change in the spot rate on the forward
premium,  −  , as given by:
∆+1 =  0 +  1 ( −  ) + +1
where ∆ is the lagged diﬀerence,   are regression coeﬃcients and +1 is the residual.

(14)

The

probability limit of the coeﬃcient on the forward premium can be written:

1 =

 [ ∆+1  ( −  )]
  ( −  )

(15)

Fama (1984) showed that if the coeﬃcient is less than a half, then the variance of expected returns
exceeds the variance of the expected change in the exchange rate. In other words, if  1  12 , then
³
´
        ( ∆+1 ).14
Studies typically find that the estimate of  1 is not only less than (12) but negative.15 Negative

 1 implies that the exchange rate is predicted to move in the opposite direction of the forward
premium. Panel A of Table 2 illustrates the basic result for monthly returns between Augsut 1978
and October 2010 for the US dollar relative to three representative currencies, the Japanese Yen,
the Swiss Franc, and the British Pound.16 The estimate of  1 is significantly negative for all three
currencies. As a result, the hypothesis that  1 is less than 12 is rejected at marginal significance
levels less than 1%.

To see why, note that the predicted return on foreign exchange can be written as  +1
≡  [∆+1 + ( −  )],
and the variance of the forward
can be related to the variance of the expected return on the foreign exchange

 premium
strategy according to:      =   ( ∆+1 ) − 2 [ ∆+1  ( −  )] +   ( −  ). Substituting


equation (15) into this expression and rewriting implies:      =   ( ∆+1 ) + (1 − 2 1 )   ( −  ).
14

Then considering  1  12 shows the result.
15
Surveys of this literature can be found in Lewis (1995), and Engel (1996). Bansal and Dahlquist (2000) and
Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2007) found that emerging market returns display diﬀerent behavior than developed country returns, although deposit rates in these countries may exhibit sovereign risk making the connection to
foreign exchange risk alone unclear.
16
All spot rate data are from MSCI through Data stream and forward rates are implied through covered interest
parity using Datastream Eurocurrency 30 day deposit rates.

22

Figure 1A reports the predicted returns for the Yen and Pound against the Dollar based upon
this simple regression along with 90% significance bands. The magnitude of the predictable returns
is large, sometimes reaching 30% per annum, and changes sign over time.
These two sets of results highlight the challenges for models explaining the foreign-exchange risk
premium. First, the model must deliver a negative relationship between the forward premia and
future exchange rates, further requiring the variance of the risk premium to exceed the variance of
the exchange rate change. In other words, the variance of nominal SDFs in equation (13) must
exceed the variance of the ratio of expected nominal SDFs themselves in equation (12). Second,
the model must produce the alternating sign pattern of foreign exchange returns found in the
data. Therefore, the conditional relationship between SDFs in equation (13) must change signs in
a pattern consistent with predictable foreign exchange returns.
For standard consumption-based models to explain the foreign exchange relationship, the consumption growth rate must be relatively volatile.

However, Panel C of Table 2 shows that the

variability of US consumption is only about 1.765% and standard studies find this variance is fairly
stationary. On the other hand, the variances of foreign exchange returns are typically greater than
20%.

The challenge for risk-based models of the foreign exchange risk premium is therefore to

generate greater stochastic volatility in the SDFs than readily apparent from casual observation.
3.1.3

The Carry Trade

The negative relationship between the forward premium and the subsequent exchange rate change
suggests a simple strategy often called the "carry trade." The forward premium equals the diﬀerence
between the domestic and foreign interest rate by covered interest parity, i.e,  −  =  − ∗ where
 and ∗ are the nominal home and foreign currency risk free rates, respectively.17

Thus, the

Fama result says that if the foreign interest rate is higher than the domestic interest rate, the
foreign currency is likely to appreciate. The "carry trade" strategy then consists of borrowing in
the low-interest rate currencies and investing in the high-interest rate currencies. The carry trade
return can therefore be rewritten as:  ( −  ) ∗ (+1 −  ).
Table 2 Panel B reports the results from regressing these carry trade returns on the absolute
17

 ) − ln(
 ∗ ).
These rates are related to the gross returns according to:  − ∗ ≈ ln(

23

value of the forward premium.18 The coeﬃcients are significant and the mean returns are positive,
as reported in the final column. Figure 1B illustrates the predicted values of this regression over
time for the dollar relative to the Yen and the Pound, while Figure 1C shows the level of interest
rates behind this trade. Despite some reversals, the carry trade exhibits prolonged periods of gains.
While these figures report the returns using the dollar interest rate alone, in reality speculators
typically use a much wider range of currencies to implement the strategy. Nevertheless, the returns
from the strategy are clearly risky.

3.2

Predictable Foreign Exchange Returns Models

Much of the literature has sought to develop models that can generate these relationships between
expected returns and interest rate diﬀerentials across countries. I begin by describing the models based upon risk-based explanations before considering alternative explanations including rare
events, crash risk, and informational asymmetries.
3.2.1

The Foreign Exchange Risk Premium

Any consumption-based model of the foreign exchange risk premium must confront the two challenges I noted above: the higher variance of conditional covariances of SDFs across currencies than
the variance of these SDFs themselves; and the changing sign pattern of conditional covariances
of SDFs.19

Both of these results require high variability in the marginal utility of consumption.

However, early studies beginning with Mark (1985) found that standard consumption volatility is
not suﬃcient to generate this foreign exchange risk premium. Backus, Gregory, and Telmer (1993)
and Backus, Foresi and Telmer (1993) considered a model with habit persistence that implicitly
increased marginal utility variability, but still rejected the model.

Bekaert (1996) combined a

variety of modifications to the standard model including habit persistence and heteroskedasticity,
that improved the ability of the model to fit the data. However, the model still could not account
for the foreign exchange risk premium. Moreover, as described in Section 2, Euler equation models
18

Similarly, Bansal (1997) found that the coeﬃcient depends on the sign of interest diﬀerentials. He also relates
this phenomenon to a term structure model.
19
Spot exchange rates provide another problem with these types of models. As a long literature beginning with
Meese and Rogoﬀ (1983) has shown, exchange rates cannot be explained by standard fundamentals. As labeled by
Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2001), this "exchange rate disconnect problem" continues to plague international macroeconomic
models. I do not discuss this literature in the text since exchange rate pricing is inherently a macroeconomic issue
and, hence, beyond this review’s scope.

24

imply a single latent variable generated by a common SDF, while a large body of research rejects
these restrictions.
These early papers focused upon bilateral returns from borrowing in one country and investing
in another. However, Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) (LV) formed portfolios of carry trade portfolios
according to low relative to high interest rates, rebalanced each year.
increasing Sharpe ratio in the currencies with higher interest rates.

They found a generally
They then used a utility

function that nests several diﬀerent versions of utility including durables and non-durables and
Epstein and Zin (1989) preferences. Based upon this model, they estimated a factor model using
US consumption data, finding that it explains up to 87% of the cross-sectional variation in annual
returns on the portfolios. To obtain this result, Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011) showed
that the time-varying covariation between the SDF and the global factor is important.
While the LV model focused upon the cross-sectional variation in the predictable excess returns,
Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2010) examined the time variation in similar portfolios. They
found that the predicted foreign currency excess returns are counter-cyclical, using US macro
variables. As a result, they demonstrated that the foreign exchange returns portfolios can provide
a hedge against cyclical variations so that the predictable returns are, indeed, compensation for
risk
Overall, these more recent results suggest that portfolios of foreign exchange returns may have
more power to uncover risk-based explanations than the earlier bilateral time series relationships
3.2.2

Rare Events, Crash Premia, and Skewed Returns

Currency markets have a long history of infrequent realignments, as a matter of either explicit or
anticipated government reactions. Perhaps not surprisingly, therefore, the impact of rare events
on asset prices was first noted in foreign exchange markets. According to standard folklore, Milton
Friedman coined the term "peso problem" in the early 1970s to describe why Mexican peso interest
rates remained substantially higher than the US dollar interest rates even though the exchange rate
had been fixed for a decade. The forward rates continued to predict a weaker Mexican peso than
was realized until the peso was devalued in the late 1970s.20
20
Empirical analysis of this phenomenon first appeared in Rogoﬀ (1980) and Krasker (1980).
provided a theoretical model.

25

Lizondo (1983)

Clearly, the potential for rare devaluations appears most prominent in currencies with fixed
exchange rates. However, the term has also been applied when discrete changes are anticipated
in asset prices other than currency.21
ence infrequent shifts.

Moreover, flexible exchange rates also appear to experi-

For example, studies such as Engel and Hamilton (1990) and Kaminsky

(1993) found that the dollar exchange rate follows persistent regimes of appreciation and depreciation. Therefore, Evans and Lewis (1995) asked whether anticipated discrete shifts in exchange rate
regimes could explain the forward discount bias. They found that the anticipated switch from an
appreciating to a depreciating regime does, indeed, bias downward the  1 coeﬃcient in the Fama
regression by as much as −1 and increases the bias in measured risk premium by 3% to 20%. Still,
the hypothesis that the true  1 is equal to 1 is strongly rejected.
If investors anticipate an infrequent shift in rates, those with exposure to this event would like
to buy insurance against adverse eﬀects on utility. Thus, the price of options against this event
would be driven up in equilibrium. This relationship is the insight of Bates (1996a,1996b). He
showed that infrequent exchange rate jumps are necessary to explain the higher price of out-of-the
money options, the so-called "volatility smile." However, the jumps priced in the options do not
appear to predict actual rates, though this finding may reflect the short sample period. A number
of studies also found that hedges against jumps appear to be priced in currency and other option
prices.22
More recently, Burnside, Eichenbaum, Kleshchelski, and Rebelo (2011) and Jurek (2009) used
options data to reexamine the foreign exchange return by combining it with hedged positions. They
characterized the position as the combination of a "carry trade", borrowing in the low interest rate
and investing in the high interest rate currency, plus an option to hedge against the possible
depreciation in the high interest rate currency. Burnside,et al (2011) examined these returns using
at-the-money options for a sample ending before the financial crisis, finding significant positive
gains.

Jurek conducted his analysis over various out-of-the-money strike prices and included a

sample extended through the financial crisis period of 2008. While the hedged carry trades earned
positive Sharpe ratios through 2007, he found that excess returns to crass-neutral carry trades were
21

The peso problem has been considered as an explanation of asset pricing behavior ranging from the term premium
(Bekaert, Hodrick, and Marshall (2001), Evans and Lewis (1994), to IPO underpricing (Ang, Gu, and Hochberg (2007).
For more references see Lewis (2008).
22
See for example, Bates (1991) for stocks and Bakshi, Carr and Wu (2008) for currency.

26

insignificantly diﬀerent from zero once the crisis was taken into account. The pattern of positive
returns that are eliminated once an infrequent event occurs is consistent with a peso problem
explanation.
The original Mexican "peso problem" was envisioned as an eﬀect on the forward premium that
would arise even with risk neutral investors. As such, the early literature typically treated the risk
premium as an exogenous persistent component to predictable excess returns or as an empirical
characterization of the risk-neutral distribution in options. However, risk averse agents would want
to hedge against the utility loss from a rare disaster event, thus generating a premium to positions
that bear the risk. This observation was made in the context of the equity premium puzzle by Rietz
(1988) and more recently restated by Barro (2006). Along these lines, Farhi and Gabaix (2009)
proposed a model of a rare global event that aﬀects all countries, but with a diﬀering mean-reverting
risk exposure by country.23

They combined these two ingredients to show that those countries

more exposed to disaster risk commanded higher risk premia manifested in a depreciated exchange
rate and higher interest rate. As the risk premium mean reverts, the exchange rate appreciates so
that currencies with higher interest rates appreciate, consistent with the Fama result.
Farhi, Fraiberger, Gabaix, Ranciere and Verdelhan (2009) developed a framework for assessing
the importance of disaster risk in currency markets using currency options and foreign exchange
returns.

They combined both the insights from the cross-sectional behavior of portfolios of carry

trades as in Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2009) and the disaster risk story in Farhi and
Gabaix (2009) to evaluate disaster risk. For this purpose, they used a two country, two period
model of disaster risk and considered both hedged and unhedged carry trade returns as in Jurek
(2009). They found evidence in favor of the link between exchange rates and asymmetries in the
option prices, but more limited evidence of exchange rate predictability, similar to Bates (1996a,b).
Brunnermeier, Nagel, and Pedersen (2009) showed that carry trades exhibit negative skewness.
That is, most of the time carry trades earn a positive return but infrequently there are large
reversals. One interpretation of their results is that carry trade positions are subject to "liquidity
spirals" (Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009)).

According to this explanation, speculators invest

in these positions because they have positive average return.
23

However, these positions are also

In the standard model, exchange rates are simply determined by the contemporaneous marginal utility between
goods. To generate a forward-looking exchange rate, Farhi and Gabaix (2009) assumed that the exchange rate is a
discounted present value of future export productivity.

27

subject to "crash risk" captured by negative skewness in these returns.

Since these speculators

have funding constraints, shocks that lead to losses are amplified as they unwind their positions.
The authors indeed found that carry trade positions are positively related with trading volume in
futures positions, consistent with their story.
3.2.3

Heterogeneous Investors

The endurance of the forward discount bias and the apparent profitability of the carry trade has
led some researchers to consider models with heterogeneous investors.
Alvarez, Atkeson, and Kehoe (2008) considered a model that assumes investors diﬀer in their
financial market participation. In their model, households must pay a fixed cost to participate in
the financial market. Those who pay the cost are active, but the others simply consume current
real balances.

The model generates a relationship between money growth and the risk premium

though it is unclear how much of the forward discount bias can be explained by this relationship.
Osambela (2010) develops a model that allows for domestic and foreign investors to diﬀer in
their beliefs about the information content of publicly observed signals. He shows that the Fama
regression omits one regressor:

a heterogeneous beliefs risk premium, which compensates for

deviations in beliefs about the expected exchange rate depreciation. He then simulates his model
and reruns the Fama regression, finding that the slope coeﬃcient is biased downward away from
one.
3.2.4

Other Low Frequency Movement Explanations

Infrequent crashes in currency markets with or without consumption-based micro-foundations form
the basis for the models described above. These stories suggest that a low frequency factor may
help explain foreign exchange returns. Similarly, motivations for persistent underlying risk in asset
markets have been proposed to help explain well-known domestic market anomalies such as the
equity premium puzzle (Mehra and Prescott (1985)) and the risk-free rate puzzle (Weil (1989)).
The two main approaches in this line of work are based upon the habit-persistence framework of
Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and the long-run risk specification of Bansal and Yaron (2004).
While the two approaches diﬀer, they both generate low-frequency variability in the stochastic
discount factor. Given the importance of low-frequency risk in currency markets, researchers have
28

been led to ask whether these approaches may plausibly help resolve the forward discount puzzle.
Using the habit-persistence framework, Verdelhan (2010) developed a two country model in
which the consumption-surplus ratio induced by the habit is correlated across countries. In this
framework, the exchange rate change depends upon both consumption and the interaction of consumption and interest diﬀerentials. As a result, when the foreign interest rate is higher than the
domestic rate, the domestic investor faces more consumption growth risk. Accordingly, the model
generates the Fama relationship as well as the equity premium.
Using long run risk, Colacito and Croce (2010b) considered a two-country model with an exogenous endowment process in each country that has a long-run risk component. The two endowments
are combined to create a consumption good in each country and each country has a bias toward
their own endowment. Among other empirical regularities, this model generates a negative Fama
coeﬃcient and the attendant excess volatility of the risk premium relative to expected exchange
rates. This relationship arises endogenously through the time-varying market prices of risk across
the two countries.
Bansal and Shaliastovich (2010) also used a two country model with long run risk but focused
upon regularities in the term premium in the bonds market and the equity premium. They found
that the slope coeﬃcients in the foreign exchange projections are negative at one month horizons
though they increase with maturity, becoming positive at one year.

3.3

Foreign Bonds and Sovereign Risk

So far, I have discussed research on international equity markets and foreign exchange, reflecting
the concentration of the literature.

However, a growing literature examines aspects related to

bond markets. Recent events concerning sovereign risk have highlighted the importance of these
studies. The potential pricing of bonds in international markets was described by Stulz (1983) and
Adler and Dumas (1983), who showed that foreign bonds provide a means to hedge currency risk.
However, these papers treat bonds as risk-free, similar to the foreign exchange literature above.
The history of sovereign debt has been anything but risk-free, however. As Reinhart and Rogoﬀ
(2009) showed over many centuries and countries, governments can and do default on government
debt.

This default risk generates diﬀerences in yield spreads across countries.

Erb, Harvey,

and Viskanta (1999) and Arellano and Ramanarayanan (2010), among others, studied the yields
29

on spreads in emerging markets. Aguiar and Gopinath (2006) and Arellano (2008) examined the
spreads on sovereign lending in the presence of default assuming risk-neutral investors. By contrast,
Borri and Verdelhan (2010) analyzed these spreads from the perspective of risk-averse investors,
finding that the returns can be explained by a risk-based model.
While the literature has largely focused upon sovereign bond yields, the more recent credit
default swap market provides direct evidence on the pricing of credit risk. Longstaﬀ, Pan, Pedersen,
and Singleton (2011) used CDS spreads across countries to analyze whether the risks priced in
these spreads are primarily country-specific or driven by global factors.

They found that the

excess returns from investing in sovereign credit are largely compensation for bearing global risk.
This result suggests that sovereign credit risk is largely influenced by an integrated world market,
unlike the relationships we have seen in equity markets above. More recently, Dieckman and Plank
(2011) used CDS spreads during the recent financial crisis to evaluate the implied risk of a group
of mostly OECD countries.

Since they discovered that the risk is positively related to the size

of banking in the economy, they argued that market participants incorporate expectations about
financial industry bailouts into the pricing of CDFs.
The literature has largely focused upon international fixed income asset pricing in the form
of short term risk-free rates or sovereign default risk and not international corporate credit risk.
However, recent papers have considered the implications of foreign bonds for domestic investors.
Using data for forty countries, Burger and Warnock (2007) found that foreigners shun bonds from
countries with high variance. Liu (2010) analyzed the return dynamics of international corporate
bonds, finding that foreign bonds provided a significantly better hedge against US risk factors than
did foreign equity during the recent crisis.

3.4

Foreign Exchange and International Bond Returns: Summary

The large literature on foreign exchange returns has generated a number of challenges for typical
asset pricing models. Currency forward rates conditionally predict a change in the exchange rate
in the opposite direction and excess foreign exchange returns change sign over time.

However,

standard models based upon constant relative risk aversion and i.i.d. consumption cannot explain
this behavior. The variance of consumption volatility is too low and the covariance of consumption
growth rates across countries do not change signs in a pattern that matches predictable returns.
30

Studies have more success when these standard conditions are modified. Carry-trade portfolios
appear to be priced with risk-based measures in the cross-section and over the cycle. Moreover,
the skewness in carry trade returns appear to be priced in options so that there are no long term
gains, consistent with a crash-risk interpretation. Sucesses have also been found when allowing for
heteregeneity in investor responses to financial market information through limited participation
or diﬀerences in opinion. Similarly, allowing for low frequency movements in consumption risk can
generate some features of the forward premium anomaly.
Since foreign exchange risk depends upon interest rate diﬀerentials, foreign bonds can provide
a hedge against this exchange rate risk. On the other hand, foreign fixed income securities may
depend upon sovereign debt risk. While sovereign debt risk appears to be priced in global markets,
the size of the banking sector also appears to be important.

4

Integrating Financial Markets and Consumption Risk-Sharing

So far, I have discussed the equity markets and the fixed income-foreign exchange markets separately.

From an asset pricing perspective, these markets are related, of course.

A common

component across all markets is the intertemporal consumption decision of each country investor
embodied in the Euler equation (3). As shown above, the common SDF implied by such a model
is rejected for returns across markets. Also, as pointed out by Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1992),
under complete markets and constant relative risk aversion utility, consumption should be perfectly
correlated across countries though it typically has a lower correlation than output.24 Using data
across a wide cross-section of countries, Lewis (1996) showed that not only is the first-order condition for consumption risk-sharing rejected for standard non-durable consumption, this rejection
cannot be explained by the country-specific eﬀects of non-tradeable and durables consumption.
Brandt, Cochrane, and Santa-Clara (2006) used the Euler equation relationship between exchange
rates and SDFs in equation (12) as a benchmark for consumption risk-sharing.

Using data on

stock returns and exchange rates, they noted that the variance of exchange rates is high but the
volatility of SDFs implicit in stock returns is even higher implying that risk-sharing is relatively
high or, alternatively, exchange rates are not variable enough. However, their result is based upon
24
A full survey of the voluminous literature on international consumption risk-sharing is beyond the scope of this
paper. Lewis (1999) provides a partial survey.

31

asset prices and not consumption. Indeed, when the authors used consumption data to recompute
their risk-sharing index, they found the standard result that consumption risk sharing is quite low.
Another way to assess the degree of global integration using information across markets is to
analyze the correlations, as proposed in Dumas, Harvey, and Ruiz (2003).

They showed that

the correlation of stock returns can be used to evaluate integration only after conditioning on
macroeconomic fundamentals such as income.

They found that the correlations in the data are

more consistent with integration than segmentation of markets.
These papers focus upon analyzing the second moments of returns without addressing the first
moments. As noted above, one approach toward explaining risk premia levels is to incorporate low
frequency risk in consumption. Colacito and Croce (2011) analyzed the SDFs across countries by
incorporating a long run risk as in Bansal and Yaron (2004), using data for the US and the UK.
Assuming each country consumes a unique good, they extracted the low frequency component in
consumption and found that they could match both the correlation between exchange rates and
equity returns as well as individual variances.
While rejection of the Euler equation implies a rejection of perfect risk-sharing under the canonical model, it does not provide direct evidence for the reason behind this rejection. One possible
source of rejection is that the gains from risk-sharing are not very large. If so, even small transactions costs can generate imperfect risk-sharing. Consumption-based models tend to find that the
gains are modest (Tesar (1995), van Wincoop (1994), Hoxha, Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vollrath (2009)),
while models using financial data as in Brandt, Cochrane, and Santa-Clara (2006) suggest the gains
are large. Indeed, Lewis (2000) showed that the diﬀerences chiefly reflect the discrepancy between
consumption-based models and the behavior of SDFs required to match asset pricing returns. Colacito and Croce (2010c) used a two-good model with long run risk to consider the implications on
gains from risk-sharing. They found that the gains can be high over plausible parameter ranges.
Lewis and Liu (2010) also used a long run risk model to evaluate the gains from risk-sharing using
a single composite good. They found that the gains from risk-sharing depend strongly upon the
correlation of long-run risk across countries. While the verdict is still out on the appropriate model
for relating consumption to asset returns, the international risk-sharing gains appear to exceed the
apparently low costs of international diversification.
Another problem with tests that reject risk sharing derives from the utility and stochastic as32

sumptions of the model. In particular, risk-sharing tests typically assume time-additive iso-elastic
utility either implicitly or explicitly. On the other hand, recent research that reconciles consumption and asset price behavior requires preferences that are either recursive or habit dependent, as
discussed above. Furthermore, early work using recursive preferences to look at international risk
sharing as in Obstfeld (1994) assumed i.i.d. processes for consumption. However, recent models
that attempt to match the asset pricing behavior with consumption data typically assume persistent
consumption growth together with recursive preferences.

In these models, consumption growth

rates need not be perfectly correlated even when there is perfect risk-sharing.25 Indeed, Colacito
and Croce (2010a) show in a two-country model that even with iid output processes the timevariation in consumption weights can generate significant movements in the mean and variances of
returns.
Heterogeneous beliefs present another set of models that can generate imperfectly correlated
consumption, even with perfect risk-sharing. For example, Dumas, Lewis, and Osambela (2010)
showed that the risk generated by foreign reaction to public signals implies the consumption correlations across countries are less than one, even under complete international risk-sharing.

5

Concluding Remarks

Despite decades of increased globalization, the prices of many internationally traded assets continue
to depend upon local risk factors. Some of these local factors, such as exchange rate risk, are
consistent with fully integrated markets.

However, other local risk factors seem to suggest that

international asset markets are still segmented.

For example, firm-level equity returns depend

significantly on domestic equity risk factors such as value, size, and market return, even when
conditioned on global equity counterparts. At the aggregate market-index level, the dependence
of equity returns on local factors seems most pronounced for emerging markets, suggesting some
degree of market segmentation.
The continuation of market segmentation does not imply that globalization has had no impact,
however.

Indeed, a number of studies document the increasing trend toward integration across

25

Even if the investor’s preferences are recursive, the social planner’s problem is not recursive leading to possibly
time varying consumption allocation weights across investors. See, for example, Dumas, Uppal, and Wang (2000)
and Duﬃe, Geoﬀard, and Skiadas (1994).

33

a variety of capital markets.

This trend has increased correlations in returns and other sources

of risk-sensitivities, thereby reducing the gains to international portfolio diversification.

While

diversification gains still appear to be important at this time, increasing globalization of asset
markets will likely reduce their importance in the future.
Globalization has yet to eliminate other well-known international asset market anamolies that
may be related to market segmentation. Foreign assets, fixed income securities and equity alike,
continue to provide substantial diversification opportunities yet these assets are underweighted in
the standard domestic investor portfolio. Stocks that are cross-listed across international borders
experience abnormal returns at the time of listing.

Deviations from uncovered interest parity

continue to be predictable in the short run as forward premia predict the wrong direction of future
exchange rates.

Whether these anomalies are due to explicit barriers to capital flows or more

implicit eﬀects such as heterogeneous information processing will only be revealed over time as
capital market restrictions are removed.
Even if asset markets could be considered fully integrated across countries, models of global asset
pricing face a number of challenges beyond the standard closed economy models.

For example,

a typical closed-economy problem is that the investor’s intertemporal marginal utility is not large
or variable enough to explain asset return premia or their volatility. Open economy asset pricing
models confront even more dimensions since the diﬀerences in marginal utility across countries
must explain cross-country phenomena such as the exchange rate risk premium or the correlation
of stock returns. Some promising research has emerged by allowing for low frequency variation in
consumption risk to address pieces of this global asset pricing picture.
come together, a clearer picture will surely emerge.

34

As these research pieces

LITERATURE CITED

Adler M, Dumas B. 1983. International portfolio choice and corporation finance: A synthesis.
Journal of Finance 38: 925-84
Aguiar M, Gopinath, G. 2006. Defaultable debt, interest rates and the current account. Journal
of International Economics 69: 64-83
Ahearne A, Griever W, Warnock, F. 2004. Information costs and home bias: An analysis of US
holdings of foreign equities. Journal of International Economics. 62: 313-336
Alvarez F, Atkeson A, Kehoe PJ. 2009. Time-varying risk, interest rates, and exchange rates
in general equilibrium. Review of Economic Studies 76: 851-78
Ang A, Bekaert G. 2002. International asset allocation with regime shifts. Review of Financial
Studies, 15:1137-87
Ang A, Gu L, Hochberg YV. 2007. Is IPO underperformance a peso problem? Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis. 42:565-94
Arellano C. 2008. Default risk and income fluctuations in emerging economies. American Economic Review. 98:690-712
Arellano C, Ramanarayanan A. 2010. Default and maturity structure in soveriegn bonds.
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper 19
Backus DK, Foresi S, Telmer CI. 1995. Interpreting the forward premium anomaly. Canadian
Journal of Economics. 28:108-19
Backus DK, Gregory AW, Telmer CI. 1993. Accounting for forward rates in markets for foreign
currency. Journal of Finance. 48:1887-1908
Backus DK, Kehoe PJ, Kydland FE. 1992. International real business cycles. Journal of
Political Economy. 100:745-75
Baele L. 2005. Volatility spillover eﬀects in European equity markets. Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis. 40:373-401.
Baker M, Wurgler J. 2006. Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock returns. Journal
of Finance. 61:1645-80
Baker M, Wurgler J, Yuan Y. 2010. Global, local, and contagious investor sentiment. Social
Sciences Research Network 1675971
35

Bakshi G, Carr P, Wu L. 2008. Stochastic risk premiums, stochastic skewness in currency
options, and stochastic discount factors in international economies. Journal of Financial Economics.87:132-56
Bansal R. 1997. An exploration of the forward premium puzzle in currency markets. Review of
Financial Studies. 10:369-403
Bansal R, Dahlquist M. 2000. The forward premium puzzle: Diﬀerent tales from developed and
emerging economies. Journal of International Economics 51:115-44
Bansal R, Shaliastovich I. 2010. A long-run risks explanantion of predictability puzzles in bond
and currency markets. Wharton School Working Paper.
Bansal R, Yaron A. 2004. Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing
puzzles.Journal of Finance. 59:1481-1509
Barro RJ. 2006. Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century. Quarterly Journal
of Economics 121:823-66
Bates DS. 1991. The crash of 87: Was it expected? The evidence from options markets. Journal
of Finance 46: 1009-44.
Bates DS. 1996a. Dollar jump fears, 1984-1992: Distributional abnormalities implicit in currency futures options. Journal of International Money and Finance. 15:65-93
Bates DS. 1996b. Jumps and stochastic volatility: Exchange rate processes implicit in Deutsche
Mark options. Review of Financial Studies. 9:69-107
Baxter M, Jermann UJ. 1997. The international diversification puzzle is worse than you think.
American Economic Review. 87:170-80
Baxter M, Jermann U, King RG. 1998. Nontraded goods, nontraded factors, and international
non-diversification. Journal of International Economics 44:211-29
Bekaert G. 1996. The time variation of risk and return in foreign exchange markets: A general
equilibrium perspective. Review of Financial Studies. 9:427-70
Bekaert G, Harvey CR. 1995. Time-varying world market integration. Journal of Finance.
50:403-44
Bekaert G, Harvey CR. 1997. Emerging equity market volatility. Journal of Financial Economics. 43:29-77
Bekaert G, Harvey CR. 2000. Foreign speculators and emerging equity markets. Journal of
36

Finance. 55:565-613
Bekaert G, Harvey CR. 2003. Emerging markets finance. Journal of Empirical Finance. 10:3-55
Bekaert G, Harvey CR, Lumsdaine RL. 2002. Dating the integration of world equity markets.
Journal of Financial Economics. 65:203-47
Bekaert G, Harvey CR, Lundblad C, Siegel S. 2007. Global growth opportunities and market
integration. Journal of Finance. 62:1081-1137
Bekaert G, Hodrick RJ. 1992. Characterizing predictable components in excess returns on
equity and foreign exchange markets. Journal of Finance. 47:467-509
Bekaert G, Hodrick RJ, Marshall DA. 2001. Peso problem explanations for term structure
anomalies. Journal of Monetary Economics 48: 241-70.
Bekaert G, Hodrick RJ, Zhang X. 2009. International Stock Return Comovements. Journal of
Finance. 64: 2591—2626
Bilson JFO. 1981. The "speculative eﬃciency" hypothesis. Journal of Business. 54:435-51
Black F. 1974. International capital market equilibrium with investment barriers. Journal of
Financial Economics.1:337-52
Bohn H, Tesar L. 1996. U.S. equity investment in foreign markets: Portfolio rebalancing or
return chasing? American Economic Review. 86:77-81
Borri N, Verdelhan A. 2010. Sovereign risk premia. MIT Sloan Working Paper
Brandt MW, Cochrane JH, Santa-Clara P. 2006. International risk sharing is better than you
think, or exchange rates are too smooth. Journal of Monetary Economics. 53:671-98
Brennan M, Cao H. 1997. International portfolio investment flows. Journal of Finance. 52:185180
Brennan M, Cao H, Strong N, Xu X. 2005. The dynamics of international equity market
expectations. Journal of Financial Economics. 77:257-288
Brunnermeier MK, Nagel S, Pedersen LH. 2009. Carry trades and currency crashes. In NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2008. Vol. 23, ed. D Acemoglu, K Rogoﬀ, M Woodford, Cambridge:
NBER.
Brunnermeier MK, Pedersen LH. 2009. Market liquidity and funding liquidity. Review of
Financial Studies. 22:2201-38
Burger JD, Warnock FE. 2007. Foreign participation in local currency bond markets. Review
37

of Financial Economics. 16:291-304
Burnside C, Eichenbaum M, Rebelo S. 2007. The returns to currency speculation in emerging
countries. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings. 97:333-8.
Burnside C, Eichenbaum M, Kleshchelski I, Rebelo S. 2011, Do Peso Problems Explain the
Returns to the Carry Trade? Review of Financial Studies. 24:853-91
Campbell JY, Cochrane JH. 1999. By force of habit: A consumption-based explanation of
aggregate stock market behavior. Journal of Political Economy. 107:205-51
Campbell JY, Hamao Y. 1992. Predictable stock returns in the United States and Japan: A
study of long-term capital market integration. Journal of Finance. 47:43-69
Carhart MM. 1997. On persistence in mutual fund performance. Journal of Finance. 52:57-82
Carrieri F, Errunza V, Hogan K. 2007. Characterizing world market integration through time.
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis. 42:915-40
Carrieri F, Errunza V, Sarkissian S. 2008. Industrial structure, market integration and international portfolio diversification, McGill University Working Paper.
Cavaglia S, Brightman C, Aked M. 2000. The increasing importance of industry factors. Financial Analysts Journal. 56:41-54
Chari A, Henry PB. 2008. Firm-specific information and the eﬃciency of investment. Journal
of Financial Economics 87:636-55
Choe H, Kho BC, Stulz RM. 1999. Do foreign investors destabilize stock markets? The Korean
experience in 1997. Journal of Financial Economics. 54:227-64
Choe H, Kho BC, Stulz RM. 2005. Do domestic investors have an edge? The trading experience
of foreign investors in Korea. Review of Financial Studies.18:795-829
Chua CT, Lai S, Lewis KK. 2010. Is the international diversification potential diminishing for
foreign equity inside the US? Wharton-SMU Research Centre, Working Paper.
Coeurdacier N, Rey H. 2010. Home bias in open economy financial macroeconomics. London
Business School Working Paper.
Coﬀee J. 2002. Racing towards the top? The impact of cross-listings and stock market competition on international corporate governance. Columbia Law Review. 102:1757—1831
Colacito R, Croce MM. 2011. Risks for the long run and the real exchange rate. Journal of
Political Economy 119:153-81
38

Colacito R, Croce MM. 2010a. International asset pricing with risk sensitive rare events Working
Paper 1547248, Social Sciences Network.
Colacito R, Croce MM. 2010b. Risk sharing for the long run: A general equilibrium approach
to international finance with recursive preferences and long-run risks. UNC Kenan-Flagler Business
School, Working Paper.
Colacito R, Croce MM. 2010c. The short and long run benefits of financial integration. American Economic Review. 100:527-31
Cooper I, Kaplanis E. 1994. Home bias in equity portfolios, inflation hedging, and international
capital market equilibrium. Review of Financial Studies. 7:45-60
Cumby RE. 1990. Consumption risk and international equity returns: Some empirical evidence.
Journal of International Money and Finance. 9:182-92
Curcuru, S, Thomas C, Warnock F, Wongswan J. 2011. U.S international equity investment
and past and prospective returns American Economic Review In press.
Dahlquist M, Robertsson G. 2004. A note on foreigners’ trading and price eﬀects across firms.
Journal of Banking and Finance. 28:615-32
De Santis G, Gerard B. 1997. International asset pricing and portfolio diversification with
time-varying risk. Journal of Finance. 52:1881-1912
Dieckmann S, Plank T. 2011. Default risk of advanced economies: An empirical analysis of
credit default swaps during the financial crisis. Review of Finance In press
Duﬃe D, Geoﬀard PY, Skiadas C. 1994. Eﬃcient and equilibrium allocations with stochastic
diﬀerential utility. Journal of Mathematical Economics. 23:133-146.
Dumas B, Harvey C, Ruiz P. 2003. Are correlations in international stock returns justified by
subsequent changes in national outputs? Journal of International Money and Finance. 22:777-811
Dumas B, Kurshev A, Uppal R. 2009. Equilibrium portfolio strategies in the presence of sentiment risk and excess volatility. Journal of Finance. 64:579 - 629
Dumas B, Lewis KK, Osambela E. 2011. Diﬀerences of opinion and international equity markets.
Working Paper 16726 National Bureau of Economic Research
Dumas B, Solnik B. 1995. The world price of foreign exchange risk. Journal of Finance.
50:445-79
Dumas B, Uppal R, Wang T. 2000. Eﬃcient intertemporal allocations with recursive utility.
39

Journal of Economic Theory. 93:240-259
Edison HJ, Warnock FE. 2008. Cross-border listings, capital controls, and equity flows to
emerging markets. Journal of International Money and Finance. 27:1013-27
Engel C. 1996. The forward discount anomaly and the risk premium: A survey of recent
evidence. Journal of Empirical Finance. 3:123-192.
Engel C, Hamilton JD. 1990. Long swings in the dollar: Are they in the data and do markets
know it? American Economic Review 80: 689-713.
Epstein LG, Zin SE. 1989. Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework. Econometrica. 57:937-69
Erb CB, Harvey CR, Viskanta TE. 1999. New perspectives on emerging market bonds. Journal
of Portfolio Management. 25:83-92
Errunza V, Hogan K, Hung MW. 1999. Can the gains from international diversification be
achieved without trading abroad? Journal of Finance. 54:2075-2107
Errunza V, Losq E. 1985. International asset pricing under mild segmentation: Theory and
test. Journal of Finance. 40:105-24
Errunza V, Losq E. 1989. Capital flow controls, international asset pricing, and investors’
welfare: A multi-country framework. Journal of Finance. 44:1025-37
Eun CS, Lee J. 2010. Mean-variance convergence around the world. Journal of Banking and
Finance. 34:856-70
Evans MDD, Lewis KK. 1994. Do stationary risk premia explain it all? Evidence from the term
structure. Journal of Monetary Economics. 33:285-318
Evans MDD, Lewis KK. 1995. Do long-term swings in the dollar aﬀect estimates of the risk
premia? Review of Financial Studies 8: 709-42.
Fama EF. 1984. Forward and spot exchange rates. Journal of Monetary Economics. 14:319-38
Fama EF, French KR. 1992. The cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal of Finance.
47:427-65
Fama EF, French KR. 1998. Value versus growth: The international evidence. Journal of
Finance. 53:1975-99
Fama EF, French KR. 2010. Size, value, and momentum in international stock returns. Social
Sciences Research Network 1720139.
40

Farhi E, Fraiberger SP, Gabaix X, Ranciere R,Verdelhan A. 2009. Crash risk in currency
markets. NBER Working Paper, No. 15062.
Farhi E, Gabaix X. 2009. Rare disasters and exchange rates. NYU Stern School Working Paper.
Ferreira MA, Gama PM. 2005. Have world, country, and industry risks changed over time? An
investigation of the volatility of developed stock markets. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis. 40:195-222
Ferson WE, Harvey CR. 1993. The risk and predictability of international equity returns. The
Review of Financial Studies. 6:527-66.
Foerster SR, Karolyi GA. 1999. The eﬀects of market segmentation and investor recognition
on asset prices: Evidence from foreign stocks listing in the United States. Journal of Finance.
54:981-1013
Foerster SR, Karolyi GA. 2000. The long-run performance of global equity oﬀerings. Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis. 35:499-528
French KR, Poterba JM. 1991. Investor diversification and international equity markets. American Economic Review. 81:222-26
Froot KA, O’Connell PGJ, Seasholes MS. 2001. The portfolio flows of international investors.
Journal of Financial Economics. 59:151-93
Gehrig T. 1993. An information based explanation of the domestic bias in international equity
investment. Scandinavian Journal of Economics. 95:97-109
Gomes J, Kogan L, Zhang L. 2003. Equilibrium cross section of returns Journal of Political
Economy 111:693-732
Grauer FLA, Litzenberger RH, Stehle RE. 1976. Sharing rules and equilibrium in an international capital market under uncertainty. Journal of Financial Economics. 3:233-56
Griﬃn JM. 2002. Are the Fama and French factors global or country specific? Review of
Financial Studies. 15:783-803
Griﬃn JM, Nardari F, Stulz RM. 2004. Are daily cross-border equity flows pushed or pulled?
Review of Economics and Statistics. 86:641-57
Grinblatt M, Keloharju M. 2000. The investment behavior and performance of various investor
types: A study of Finland’s unique data set. Journal of Financial Economics. 55:43-67
Grubel H. 1968. Internationally diversified portfolios: Welfare gains and capital flows. American
41

Economic Review. 58:
Hansen LP, Hodrick RJ. 1983. Risk averse speculation in the forward foreign exchange market:
An econometric analysis of linear models. In Exchange Rates and International Macroeconomics,
ed. J.A. Frenkel Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Harvey CR. 1991. The world price of covariance risk. Journal of Finance. 46:111-57
Henry PB. 2000. Stock market liberalization, economic reform, and emerging market equity
prices. Journal of Finance. 55:529-64
Henry PB. 2007. Capital account liberalization: Theory, evidence, and speculation. Journal of
Economic Literature. 45:887-935
Heston S, Rouwenhorst G. 1994. Does industrial structure explain the benefits of international
diversification? Journal of Financial Economics. 36:3-27
Hodrick RJ, Srivastava S. 1984. An investigation of risk and return in forward foreign exchange.
Journal of International Money and Finance. 3:5-29
Hou K, Karolyi A, Kho BC. 2011. What factors drive global stock returns? Review of Financial
Studies. In press.
Hoxha I, Kalemli-Ozcan S, Vollrath D. 2009. How big are the gains from international financial
integration? National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 14636.
Jermann UJ. 2002. International portfolio diversification and endogenous labor supply choice.
European Economic Review. 46:507-22
Jurek JW. 2009.

Crash-neutral currency carry trades.

Social Sciences Research Network

1262934
Kaminsky G. 1993. Is there a peso problem? Evidence from the dollar/pound exchange rate:
1976-1987. American Economic Review 83: 450-72.
Karolyi GA. 2006. The world of cross-listings and cross-listings of the world: Challenging
conventional wisdom. Review of Finance. 10:99-152
Karolyi GA, Stulz RM. 2003. Are financial assets priced locally or globally? Handbook of the
economics of finance. Vol 1B: 975-1020
King M, Sentana E, Wadhwani S. 1994. Volatility and links between national stock markets.
Econometrica. 62:901-33
Krasker WS. 1980. The peso problem in testing the eﬃciency of forward exchange markets.
42

Journal of Monetary Economics 6: 269—76.
Levy H, Sarnat M. 1970. International diversification of investment porfolios. American Economic Review. 60: 668-675.
Lewis KK. 1991. Should the holding period matter for the intertemporal consumption-based
CAPM? Journal of Monetary Economics. 28:365-89
Lewis KK. 1995. Puzzles in international financial markets. In Handbook of International
Economics, ed. G. Grossman and K. Rogoﬀ, Amsterdam: North Holland
Lewis KK. 1996. What can explain the apparent lack of international consumption risk-sharing?
Journal of Political Economy. 104:267-297
Lewis KK. 1999. Trying to explain home bias in equities and consumption. Journal of Economic
Literature. 37:571-608
Lewis KK. 2000. Why do stocks and consumption imply such diﬀerent gains from international
risk sharing? Journal of International Economics. 52:1-35.
Lewis KK. 2008. Peso problem. In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition,
ed. SN Durlauf, LE Blume, London: Macmillan Press
Lewis KK, Liu E. 2010. What do international asset returns imply about consumption risksharing? Wharton School Working Paper.
Liu E. 2010. Diversifying credit risk with international corporate bonds. Cornell University
Working Paper
Lizondo, J.S. 1983. The eﬃciency of the Mexican peso market. Journal of International Economics 14: 69—84.
Longin F, Solnik B. 1995. Is the correlation in international equity returns constant: 1960-1990?
Journal of International Money and Finance. 14:3-26
Longin F, Solnik B. 2001. Extreme correlation of international equity markets. Journal of
Finance. 56:649-76
Longstaﬀ FA, Pan J, Pedersen LH, Singleton KJ. 2011. How sovereign is sovereign credit risk?
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics. In press.
Lucas RE, Jr. 1982. Interest rates and currency prices in a two-country world. Journal of
Monetary Economics. 10:335-59
Lustig H, Roussanov N, Verdelhan A. 2010. Countercyclical currency risk premia. Working
43

Paper 16427 National Bureau of Economic Research
Lustig H, Roussanov N, Verdelhan A. 2011. Common risk factors in currency markets. Wharton
School Working Paper
Lustig H, Verdelhan A. 2007. The cross section of foreign currency risk premia and consumption
growth risk. American Economic Review. 97:89-117
Mark NC. 1985. On time varying risk premia in the foreign exchange market: An econometric
analysis. Journal of Monetary Economics. 16:3-18
Meese RA, Rogoﬀ K.1983. Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies: Do they fit out of
sample? Journal of International Economics. 14:3-24
Mehra R, Prescott EC 1985. The equity premium: A puzzle. Journal of Monetary Economics.
15:145-61
Obstfeld M. 1994. Risk-taking, global diversification, and growth. American Economic Review.
84:1310-29
Obstfeld M, Rogoﬀ K. 2001.The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeconomics: Is There a
Common Cause? In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Volume 15, ed. BS Bernanke, K Rogoﬀ,
Cambridge: NBER Press.
Osambela E. 2010. Heterogeneous beliefs and deviations from the uncovered interest rate parity.
GSIA Working Paper 2010-E86
Reinhart CM, Rogoﬀ K. 2009. This Time Is Diﬀerent: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Rietz TA. 1988. The equity risk premium: A solution. Journal of Monetary Economics 22:
117-31.
Rogoﬀ K. 1980. Tests of the martingale model for foreign exchange futures markets. In Essays on Expectations and Exchange Rate Volatility, Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.
Sarkissian S, Schill M. 2009. Are there permanent valuation gains to overseas listing? Review
of Financial Studies. 22:371-412
Scheinkman J,. Xiong W. 2003. Overconfidence and speculative bubbles. , Journal of Political
Economy. 111:1183-1219
Solnik BH. 1974a.The international pricing of risk: An empirical investigation of the world
44

capital market structure. Journal of Finance. 29:365-78
Solnik BH. 1974b. An equilibrium model of the international capital market. Journal of Economic Theory. 8:500-24
Stehle RE. 1977. An empirical test of the alternative hypotheses of national and international
pricing of risky assets. Journal of Finance. 32:493-502
Stulz RM. 1981a. On the eﬀects of barriers to international investment. Journal of Finance.
36:923-34
Stulz RM. 1981b. A model of international asset pricing. Journal of Financial Economics.
9:383-406
Stulz RM. 1983.The demand for foreign bonds. Journal of International Economics. 15:225-38
Tesar L.1995. Evaluating the Gains from International Risksharing.Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy. 42:95-143.
Van Nieuwerburgh S, Veldkamp L. 2009. Information immobility and the home bias puzzle.
Journal of Finance. 64:1187-1215.
Van Nieuwerburgh S, Veldkamp L. 2010. Information acquisition and under-diversification.
Review of Economic Studies. 77:779 - 805.
Van Wincoop E. 1994. Welfare gains from international risksharing. Journal of Monetary
Economics. 34:175-200
Vassalou M. 2000. Exchange rate and foreign inflation risk premiums in global equity returns.
Journal of International Money and Finance. 19:433-470.
Verdelhan A. 2010. A habit-based explanation of the exchange rate risk premium. Journal of
Finance. 65:123-145.
Weil P. 1989. The equity premium puzzle and the risk-free rate puzzle. Journal of Monetary
Economics. 124:401-2.

45

Table 1: Global and Local Factors in Equity Pricing
Panel A: World and International Asset Pricing Model
Model Version

World

International

No Priced Currency Risk

Unconditional

0.161

0.049

0.740

Conditional

0.001

0.228

0.001

Panel B: Firm-Return Factor Models
World CAPM

World FF

World APT

World CAPM

–

-6.77

-3.10

World+Local

-5.50

-5.53

-8.38

Heston-Rouwenhorst

-2.84

-0.29

0.29

World + Local CAPM

World + Local FF

World + Local APT

5.00

7.28

7.31

Heston-Rouwenhorst

Panel C: Loadings for Foreign MNC Returns on US+Local Market
 =  +     +   
1. Equally-Weighted Means
Total Foreign MNCs in US

 on US

 on Local

R-Sq

Full Sample

-0.024

0.760

0.200

2. Market-Weighted Means
US Exchange Subset in 2004

 on US

 on Local

Corr(   )

Before Cross-Listing

0.486

0.647

0.198

After Cross-Listing

0.740

0.766

0.289

3. Based on Cross-Listing Event
Abnormal Returns*

Change in Beta

Prelisting and Listing

Postlisting

Local

Global

0.17

-0.14

-0.321

0.135

Notes: * Returns in weekly percent. Numbers in bold are significantly diﬀerent from zero at 5% MSL.
Sources: Panel A-Dumas and Solnik (1995), Table III and VI. The cells report the p-value for the hypothesis in
the column. Panel B-Bekaert, Hodrick, and Zhang (2009), Table IIA., reporting t-stats for MSE diﬀerence for model
in row minus model in column. Panel C 1 and 2- Chua, Lai, and Lewis (2010) Table 7 and authors calculations.
Panel C3-Foerster and Karolyi (1999) Table VI.

46

Table 2: Foreign Exchange Return Regressions and Consumption Covariations
Panel A: Fama Regressions Estimates ∆+1 =  0 +  1 ( −  ) + +1
Currency

0

1

MSL  :  1 

Japanese Yen

0.009

-2.57

0.0001

British Pound

-0.004

-1.94

0.0016

Swiss Franc

0.005

-1.30

0.0032

1
2

Panel B: Carry Trade Regression Estimates
 ( −  ) ∗ (+1 −  ) = 0 + 1  ( −  ) + +1
Coeﬃcients

Predicted Carry Trade

Currency

0

1

Mean (Std Dev)

Japanese Yen

-0.006

3.02

3.02 (7.16)

British Pound

-0.002

2.68

3.54 (5.17)

Swiss Franc

-0.006

2.83

2.20 (7.88)

Panel C: Implied Risk Premium and Consumption Variances
Japanese Yen

British Pound

Swiss Franc

US Consumption

46.87

20.07

19.46

1.76

Notes: Numbers in bold are significantly diﬀerent from zero at 5% MSL.
Source: Author’s calculations using MSCI exchange rate data and Datastream
Eurocurrency deposit rates from August 1978 to October 2010. Consumption is US
Real Consumption Expenditure from National Income and Product Accounts for 1978 Q3 to 2010 Q3

47

30
Figure
1A: Predictable Foreign Exchange Returns

% Per Annum

20
10
0
‐10
‐20
‐30

Yen

Pound

% Per Annum

Figure 1B: Predicted Carry‐Trade Returns
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
‐5
‐10

Yen
20

Pound

Figure 1C: Interest Rates

15
10
5
0
‐5

Japan Interest

US Interest

UK Interest

