                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  WHY DID U.S. BANKS INVEST IN HIGHLY-RATED SECURITIZATION TRANCHES?

                                               Isil Erel
                                          Taylor D. Nadauld
                                            René M. Stulz

                                         Working Paper 17269
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17269


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




Respectively, assistant professor, Fisher College of Business, Ohio State University, assistant professor,
Brigham Young University, and Everett D. Reese Chair of Banking and Monetary Economics, Fisher
College of Business, Ohio State University, NBER, and ECGI. We are grateful to John Sedunov for
research assistance and to Viral Acharya, Philip Strahan, George Pennachi, and Michael Weisbach
for useful comments. René Stulz has been and is involved in compensated activities, including expert
testimony, on behalf of large financial institutions related to the securities studied in this paper. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Isil Erel, Taylor D. Nadauld, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Did U.S. Banks Invest in Highly-Rated Securitization Tranches?
Isil Erel, Taylor D. Nadauld, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 17269
August 2011
JEL No. G01,G21

                                              ABSTRACT

We estimate holdings of highly-rated tranches of mortgage securitizations of American deposit-taking
banks ahead of the credit crisis and evaluate hypotheses that have been advanced to explain these holdings.
We find that holdings of highly-rated tranches were economically trivial for the typical bank, but banks
with greater holdings performed more poorly during the crisis. Though univariate comparisons show
that banks with large trading books had greater holdings, the holdings of highly-rated tranches are
not higher for banks with large trading books in regressions that control for bank size. The ratio of
highly-rated tranches holdings to assets increases with bank assets, but not for banks with more than
$50 billion of assets. This evidence is inconsistent with explanations for holdings of highly-rated tranches
that emphasize the incentives of banks deemed “too-big-to-fail”. Further, the evidence does not provide
support for “bad incentives” theories of holdings of highly-rated tranches. We find, however, that banks
active in securitization held more highly-rated tranches. Such a result can be consistent with regulatory
arbitrage as well as with securitizing banks holding highly-rated tranches to convince investors of
the quality of these securities. Our evidence supports the latter hypothesis.


Isil Erel                                            René M. Stulz
Department of Finance                                The Ohio State University
Ohio State University                                Fisher College of Business
832 Fisher Hall                                      806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue                                     2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210                                   Columbus, OH 43210-1144
erel@fisher.osu.edu                                  and NBER
                                                     stulz_1@cob.osu.edu
Taylor D. Nadauld
Department of Finance
Brigham Young University
Provo, Utah 84602
taylor.nadauld@byu.edu
       So-called toxic assets held by U.S. financial institutions were at the heart of the recent financial crisis.

A mainstream view of the role of these assets is that their loss in value led financial institutions to have

low capital, which forced them to raise more capital, to cut back on making loans, and to engage in fire

sales (see Brunnermeier (2009)). The most visible and controversial policy initiative of the U.S. Treasury

to deal with the crisis, TARP, started as an attempt to fund the purchase of toxic assets from banks.

Though a vigorous debate has been taking place on why banks held these assets, to our knowledge, there

is no systematic investigation of the various theories that have been advanced to explain these holdings.

In this paper, we estimate bank holdings of assets that became toxic and investigate which of the various

theories advanced to explain these holdings are consistent with the empirical evidence.

       At least in the early phases of the crisis, the bulk of the assets that are considered to have become

toxic were highly-rated securities issued in securitizations involving subprime and alt-A mortgages. This

definition includes AAA, AA, and A tranches of ABSs as well as CDOs. For short, we will call these

securities highly-rated securitization tranches. Banks made other losses; in particular, they made losses on

non-prime mortgages and on highly levered loans held on their books. However, early on, the largest

write-downs came from mark-to-market losses on highly-rated securitization tranches. For instance, in Q4

2007 Citibank had write-downs of $18 billion. All but $1 billion of these write-downs came directly or

indirectly from highly-rated tranches of securitizations.1

       Traditionally, banks were institutions that made loans financed by deposits. More recently, banks

have been implementing an originate-to-distribute model, where they originate loans and sell them

through securitizations. Before the crisis, it was widely believed that the originate-to-distribute model

would make banks safer and reduce systemic risk (e.g., Greenspan (2004)). However, a substantial

fraction of securities issued through securitizations did not leave the banking system and eventually

became the banks’ most notorious toxic assets. In trying to understand why the subprime losses were

followed by a long-lasting financial crisis while stock market losses from the crash of 1987 that were of

roughly similar magnitude were not, economists have argued that the key difference between the

1
    Bloomberg reports the dollar amount of write-downs by quarter and security type for large financial institutions.

                                                            1
subprime crisis and the stock market crash is that the subprime crisis led to large bank losses through the

securities that they retained from securitizations while the crash of 1987 did not lead to significant bank

losses (see Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) for this comparison). For instance, Acharya, Schnabl, and

Suarez (2010) summarize their view of the origin of the crisis by stating that “banks increasingly devised

securitization methods that allowed them to concentrate risks on their balance sheets which eventually led

to the largest banking crisis since the Great Depression.”

    Though investment banks eventually reported information on their holdings of highly-rated tranches,

they did not have reporting requirements that make it possible to consistently identify such holdings

before the crisis. It is possible to estimate subsets of holdings of highly-rated tranches for individual

investment banks that are not part of bank holding companies for 2006 or 2007 based on their disclosures.

We provide such estimates in a separate section and discuss their implications for our analysis. For bank

holding companies, we are able to construct estimates of holdings of such securities from 2002 to 2008.

These estimates involve some crucial assumptions. However, our various approaches to estimate these

holdings give similar overall results. Strikingly, there is large variation in holdings of highly-rated

tranches across banks. The median holdings of highly-rated tranches normalized by total assets are less

than 0.2%. Obviously, for the typical bank, these holdings were not material. The mean across banks was

about 1.3% in 2006. Again, average holdings of highly-rated tranches across banks were not threatening.

Banks with large trading portfolios (more than $1 billion of trading assets and trading assets representing

more than 10% of total assets) had higher holdings, as the average for these banks represented about 5%

of assets as of 2006. We would expect holdings of highly-rated tranches to be negatively related to bank

performance during the crisis. We find that this is the case.

    We identify a number of possible determinants of the holdings of highly-rated tranches from the

ongoing debate as to why banks held these tranches. These determinants are not mutually exclusive. All

determinants could affect the holdings of a particular bank. The most important determinants that have

been discussed are:



                                                      2
    A) Securitization business by-products. Banks engaged in securitization hold some of the securities

        they create through the process of creating and marketing these securities. In addition, banks had

        to have skin in the game (Shleifer and Vishny (2010), Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2011)).

    B) Regulatory arbitrage. Banks could hold the highest-rated tranches of securitizations with lower

        regulatory capital than the underlying loans, making it advantageous for them to hold loans in the

        form of securitizations (see Acharya and Richardson (2009) among others). They could also hold

        these tranches in off-balance sheet conduits and structured investment vehicles (SIVs), where the

        capital requirements were even less (Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2010)). However, as the

        value of these tranches held in SIVs fell, some banks had to take them on their balance sheet.2

    C) Bad incentives within the firm. The argument made is that banks had inappropriate incentive

        systems that made it advantageous for managers and/or traders to take excessive risks (e.g., Rajan

        (2010)), such as investing in assets that subsequently became toxic. This argument is summed up

        by Blinder as follows: “Give smart people go-for-broke incentives and they will go for broke.

        Duh.”3 In some cases, these bad incentives might have been the result of internal accounting

        mechanisms and/or economic capital attribution that did not properly account for the cost of

        holding these highly-rated tranches (see UBS (2008)). These securities had a higher yield than

        other highly-rated securities such as Treasuries or agency MBSs, which made their holdings

        advantageous, at least in the short term, for some types of bonus schemes. In addition, some argue

        that fees generated through the securitization activities created incentives for executives to

        securitize too many assets. According to this view, executives involved in these securitizations

        benefited from making deals rather than from placing them, in which case the bank would be

        stuck with tranches that could not be sold.


2
  See, for instance, “Citi finalizes SIV wind-down by agreeing to purchase all remaining assets,” Citigroup Inc.,
November 19, 2008. In that release, Citi announced that “it has committed to acquire the remaining assets of the
SIVs at their current fair value, estimated to be approximately $17.4 billion.”
3
  See Alan S. Blinder, Crazy compensation and the crisis, The Wall Street Journal, May 28, 2009. Fahlenbrach and
Stulz (2011) show, however, that banks whose CEOs had incentives better aligned with those of the other
shareholders did not perform better during the crisis.

                                                       3
    D) Good deals. The yields of highly-rated tranches of securitizations were higher than the yields of

        comparably rated securities. Consequently, it is possible that managers held these securities

        because they thought they were good deals. A related hypothesis is the hypothesis that market

        participants did not, in general, assess risks correctly because of biases (see Gennaioli, Shleifer,

        and Vishny (2011) for a model) or for other reasons, such as models that turned out to be flawed

        even though at the time they were believed to be valid.

    E) Too big to fail. The argument is that banks that are assessed to be too big to fail have a lower cost

        of funds for risky assets because the market does not expect them to be allowed to fail (Carbo-

        Valverde, Kane, and Rodriguez-Fernandez (2010)). Therefore, these banks can make profits from

        investing in risky assets as doing so does not increase their cost of funding to the same extent it

        would for a bank that is not too big to fail. From this perspective, highly-rated tranches of

        securitizations would have been risky securities that such banks would have found to be

        profitable to hold. Because of how they are engineered, these securities pay off fully in most

        states of the world, but pay the least in states of the world where public support of financial

        institutions is most likely, namely in systemic crises.



    These various explanations for holdings of highly-rated securitization tranches advanced in the

finance literature as well as by observers in general are not mutually exclusive. It could be that for each

explanation there is a subset of banks for which the explanation is the main reason these banks held

highly-rated tranches. In this paper, we investigate whether any of these explanations helps explain the

cross-sectional distribution of holdings of highly-rated tranches across banks just before the crisis.

    In the next section, we develop these possible explanations for banks’ holdings of highly-rated

tranches and develop the testable implications of each theory. In Section 2, we explain how we construct

our estimates for highly-rated tranches for depository banks and summarize these estimates. In Section 3,

we investigate whether the performance of banks during the credit crisis is related to our estimates of their

holdings of highly-rated tranches. We test the implications of the various theories in Section 4. In Section

                                                      4
5, we provide estimates of highly-rated tranches in 2006 or 2007 for the four large investment banks that

were not bank holding companies. We conclude in Section 6.



Section 1. Theories of Holdings of Highly-Rated Tranches.

    In Fama (1985), banks’ cost of funding is a market cost of funding, but banks face a cost of doing

business, the cost of the reserves they have to maintain, which means that to remain in business they have

to charge an above-market rate to their lenders. This well-known result poses a paradox when considering

banks’ holdings of highly-rated tranches. If banks pay a market rate of return on their sources of finance

and earn a market rate of return on their investments in securities, how can it be a positive NPV project

for banks to hold securities? Whereas it is intuitive that a bank might monitor lenders and that this

monitoring could create value, there is nothing intuitive about the notion that securities are more

efficiently held by banks than by investors.

    In the context of Fama (1985), if a bank believes that securities are properly priced, we would only

expect it to hold securities to address unexpected liquidity demands from depositors and borrowers or as

part of an inventory if it makes a market in these securities. However, the value of securities held as a

liquidity buffer should be positively correlated with liquidity shocks rather than negatively. As a result,

we would expect banks to hold safe securities for liquidity purposes or even, if possible, securities that

have high payoffs in states of the world with a systemic liquidity shock. From this perspective, holdings

of highly-rated tranches for liquidity purposes makes sense only if these securities were viewed as safe

assets robust to systemic liquidity shocks. We would expect there to be economies of scale in the size of

the liquidity buffer as liquidity demands on a large bank would be more predictable than on a small bank.

Banks without a trading book would not make a market in these securities and hence would be expected

to have smaller holdings of such assets.

    We now consider the five groups of determinants of holdings of highly-rated tranches discussed in the

introduction and derive testable hypotheses.



                                                    5
1.A. Securitization by-product.

    Investors in securitization tranches know that the issuer has better information about the assets

securitized than they do. This information asymmetry leads to discounting of the tranches. To reduce this

discounting, the issuer can signal the quality of the assets by holding some of the securities issued

alongside outside investors. In general, we would expect that it would be most efficient for issuers to have

skin in the game in the form of the riskiest tranches, so that they would be the first to bear losses.

However, holding the riskiest tranches is extremely expensive in terms of capital requirements. Therefore,

banks that do not have slack in regulatory capital are more likely to hold highly-rated tranches. Further,

the fraction of tranches that were highly rated in securitizations was extremely large (typically more than

70%), so that holding such tranches was a way for banks to convince investors that these tranches were

good investments. Highest-rated tranches were also purchased by different sets of institutional investors

(e.g., pension funds) than the lowest-rated tranches were (e.g., hedge funds). Though banks held

securitization tranches voluntarily, the Dodd-Frank Act, Section 939A, mandates regulations that oblige

issuers to have “skin-in-the-game.” A bank that is active in the securitization market as an issuer has a

pipeline of deals. If it produces CDOs, it will have an inventory of ABSs. As it issues ABSs and CDOs, it

will have tranches that it sells immediately and others that it does not. It may make a market for tranches.

Consequently, we would expect holdings of highly-rated tranches to increase over time as securitization

activity increases. However, banks may also be stuck with highly-rated tranches that they cannot sell. As

securitization activity slowed in 2007, holdings of highly-rated tranches should have increased to the

extent that banks found it difficult to sell these tranches but failed to stop their production quickly

enough. Therefore, we have the following predictions:



    (Securitization H1; activity) Holdings of highly-rated tranches as a fraction of a bank’s assets were

    higher for banks engaged in securitization activity.

    (Securitization H2; cumulative activity) Holdings of highly-rated tranches for banks active in

    securitization increased over time as each securitization would require skin in the game.

                                                     6
      (Securitization H3; end-of-game) Holdings of highly-rated tranches for banks active in securitization

      increased in 2007 to the extent that securitization activity did not slow down fast enough and banks

      were stuck with highly-rated tranches that they intended to sell.



1.B. Regulatory arbitrage.

      Banks that do not have regulatory capital slack will always choose to organize their activities in a way

that, everything else equal, minimizes the use of regulatory capital. U.S. capital regulations, starting in

2002, reduced the capital requirement for banks holding highly-rated tranches. Before the change in

regulation, banks holding highly-rated tranches had to set aside 8% regulatory capital if these securities

were not held in the bank’s trading book. The trading book was subject to different regulatory capital

requirements and these capital requirements were less onerous. Strikingly, with the regulations introduced

in 2002, a bank that made subprime loans was better off to hold them on its books as securities issued

against the subprime loans as collateral than holding the loans directly.4 Further, the bank was even better

off holding the securities in an off-balance sheet conduit or SIV. It is important to note, however, that

regulatory arbitrage made it advantageous for banks to hold highly-rated tranches of securitizations if they

benefitted from making the loans used as collateral in the first place since, otherwise, the more

advantageous treatment of highly-rated tranches did not make them positive NPV projects. These

regulatory capital benefits would not have been consequential for banks with a large excess amount of

regulatory capital. In addition, small banks would not have found it beneficial to use securitization to

reduce regulatory capital charges because of the fixed costs of securitization. Finally, with the start of the

financial crisis, conduits and SIVs ran into trouble and some of their assets came back on the balance

sheets of the bank sponsors.

      Banks differ in the extent to which they optimize their use of regulatory capital. While some banks

have large amounts of excess regulatory capital, others do not. Their business model makes it optimal for

some banks to have more economic capital than regulatory capital. However, it is also possible that some

4
    See Goldman Sachs, Global Markets Institute, Effective Regulation: Part 1, March 2009, for an example.

                                                          7
banks are more intent in maximizing the size of their balance sheet for a given amount of regulatory

capital. For assets with low capital charges, the highly-rated tranches were attractive because they had a

higher yield than other assets with similar capital charges as they had more systematic risk (see Iannotta

and Pennacchi (2011)). We would expect banks that were more intent on taking advantage of regulatory

arbitrage opportunities to have grown their balance sheet when capital requirements for highly-rated

tranches changed in 2002.

    It follows that:



    (Regulatory Arbitrage H1) Banks that are more constrained in regulatory capital and larger banks

    have greater holdings of highly-rated tranches as a fraction of assets.

    (Regulatory Arbitrage H2) Banks that engage in more regulatory arbitrage activities have more

    highly-rated tranches.



1.C. Bad incentives.

    Rajan (2006) raised concerns about the incentives in place in the financial industry and how they

might lead to excessive risk-taking even before the crisis. A key characteristic of highly-rated tranches

before the financial crisis is that they had a higher yield than similar highly-rated assets. Such a difference

can arise in efficient markets simply because some assets have more systematic risk than others. For

instance, these assets might have poor returns when the economy performs particularly poorly (see Coval

and Stafford (2009)). If incentives are set properly, executives or traders should not benefit from investing

in correctly priced assets that have a higher return only because they have more systematic risk. However,

if incentives are set improperly, it is possible for executives or traders to benefit from profits generated by

investing in such assets. First, traders whose performance is judged on P&L taking into account

regulatory capital used and the cost of funds of the bank have incentives to invest in highly-rated tranches

since their P&L increases by the positive carry of these assets and charges for regulatory capital are low.

Second, executives whose performance is assessed by the ROE of their bank also benefit from investing

                                                      8
in highly-rated tranches as long as the yield on these securities exceeds the cost of holding these assets.

Therefore, we have the following predictions:



    (Bad incentives H1) Banks with trading operations and poor incentives have more highly-rated

    tranches.

    (Bad incentives H2) Banks more focused on ROE hold more highly-rated tranches.



1.D. Good deals.

    A possible explanation for holdings of highly-rated tranches is that bank managers thought that they

were good deals in the sense that they were investments with high risk-adjusted expected returns. They

could have thought that the higher yield of these securities compared to securities of similar rating was

due to market mispricing, that the higher yield was compensation for the complexity of the securities, or

that compensation for systematic risk that they felt was overstated. Managers could have believed that

they were well-equipped to assess these securities, so that they did not have to be compensated to hold

them. Irrespective of why the banks felt that investing in these securities created value for shareholders,

we would expect that managers with stronger incentives to create value for shareholders would hold more

of these securities if they were generally perceived to be priced inefficiently and if investing in these

securities required more effort than investing in more standard securities. With this view, we have the

following hypothesis:



    (Good deal H1) Managers of banks that invest more in highly-rated tranches of securitizations have

    stronger incentives to maximize shareholder wealth.



1.E. Too-big-to-fail.

    To the extent that a bank is viewed as too-big-to-fail, its cost of funds does not reflect the full extent

of the risks it takes. The proponents of the too-big-to-fail view argue that, since a too-big-to-fail bank

                                                      9
does not pay for some of the risks it takes, the bank has incentives to take more of the risks it does not

fully pay for. If a bank that is viewed as too-big-to-fail is expected to be bailed out whenever it makes

large losses, the bank can increase its value by generally taking more total risk. If, instead, such a bank is

likely to be bailed out only in systemic crises, it has incentives to take on more risks that have poor

payoffs in systemic crises. Highly-rated tranches of securitizations were not risky securities that banks

would have used to increase their overall riskiness since these securities were designed to pay off fully in

most states of the world. As a result, too-big-to-fail banks would have had incentives to hold highly-rated

tranches only if too-big-to-fail is believed to imply a greater probability of being bailed out in a systemic

crisis but not otherwise:



    (Too-big-to-fail H1) Banks deemed too-big-to-fail invested more in highly-rated tranches of

    securitizations than other banks.



The too-big-to-fail hypothesis ignores the possibility that a too-big-to-fail bank could be subject to more

regulatory scrutiny, so that it might be limited in its risk taking. Further, such a bank can have high

franchise value, which also would limit its risk taking.



Section 2. Estimated holdings of highly-rated tranches.

    In this section, we explain first how we estimate holdings of highly-rated tranches and then provide

data on our estimates.



2.1. Methods to estimate holdings of highly-rated tranches.

    Our primary data source is the Consolidated Financial Statements for Bank Holding Companies

(BHCs), form FR Y-9C, published quarterly by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

We focus on the cross-section of BHCs that are publicly traded in the United States and have data as of

December 31, 2006. We drop all BHCs with missing data on total assets or with total assets less than $1

                                                     10
billion and end with a final sample of 231 banks as of December 31, 2006, the period we focus on in the

majority of our estimations.5 The total sample period over which we calculate holdings of highly-rated

tranches covers March 2002 through December 2008. It starts in 2002 because this is the first year that

capital requirements on securitization tranches were calculated based on credit ratings.

    Our variable of interest is designed to measure holdings of what we call highly-rated tranches, which

are highly-rated non-government and non-agency securities issued in securitizations and held on BHC

balance sheets. Examples include highly-rated tranches of subprime RMBSs, CMBSs, CLOs, CBOs and

CDOs. Bank holding companies did not explicitly report holdings of these securities in their consolidated

financial statements during our sample period. Our approach is to “back out” the amount of highly-rated

tranches banks held on their balance sheets using data from the regulatory-capital portion of the

consolidated financial statements (schedule HC-R of the form FR Y-9C). Under risk-based capital

guidelines, BHCs are required to hold regulatory capital against each asset, including securities, with the

amount of capital determined by the type of the asset and/or the riskiness of the asset in the case of the

securitization tranches. For example, government securities usually require zero risk-weighting while

agency-sponsored securities are generally assigned a 20% risk weight by virtue of their implicit

government guarantees. Securitization tranches with a credit rating of AA or AAA are assigned a 20%

capital charge while tranches with credit ratings of A require a 50% capital charge.

    Our approach is to identify the amount of securities in the 20% and 50% risk-weight categories that

are not government or agency-affiliated. Reporting guidelines name the specific types of securities that

are to be included in each risk weight category and instruct BHCs to account for securities at historical

cost, as opposed to fair value. For example, the total amount of held-to-maturity securities (line item 35 in

Schedule HC-R) in the 20% risk-weight category contains various securities issued or guaranteed by the




5
 We drop BHCs that are not in the top tier of the multi-tiered BHCs to avoid double counting. We also drop 3
BHCs that are insurance companies, 2 BHCs that are mortgage brokers, 2 BHCs that are credit card companies and
one asset-management BHC that is an outlier in our sample.

                                                     11
government or government-sponsored agencies and reported in Schedule HC-B.6 The key to our measure

of highly-rated tranches is that BHCs are instructed to also include, “all other residential MBS,”

“commercial mortgage pass-through securities,” “other commercial MBS,” “asset-backed securities,” and

“structured financial products” that represent the amortized cost of securities rated AAA or AA in this

20% risk category. Thus, the residual amount of securities included in the 20% risk category that are not

affiliated with the government or government-sponsored agencies represent the amount of AAA or AA-

rated private-label structured debt held by BHCs. The instructions for assets to be included in the 50%

risk category are similar but for A-rated securities. Taken together, the 20% risk-weighted residual and

the 50% risk-weighted residual represent the portion of highly-rated (AAA, AA, or A rated) non-

government, non-agency securities held on BHC balance sheets. In other words, they represent the

holdings of highly-rated tranches that we seek to measure. We provide the details of the construction of

the residual measures, including the relevant FRY9-C codes, in data Appendix 1.

    Many of the highly-rated tranches with 20% or 50% risk weights are accounted for as available-for-

sale (AFS) or held-to-maturity (HTM) securities. However, some highly-rated tranches, especially in the

case of the largest banks, are held separately in a BHC’s trading account. Identifying these securities in

the trading accounts is difficult because, for regulatory-capital purposes, banks with large trading

operations do not report individual risk-weighted trading assets.7 Rather, they compute a value-at-risk

(VaR) for their entire trading operation. For the banks that are subject to the market risk capital

guidelines, we are unable to use the residual approach to back out holdings of highly-rated tranches in

trading books. To capture holdings of securitization tranches, we use the total amount of line items that

are recorded as trading assets (in Schedule HC-D) and represent non-government, non-agency mortgage-

backed securities. This approach captures the private-label securitization tranches with mortgage


6
  These securities are securities issued by government-sponsored agencies (line item 2b), residential mortgage pass-
through securities issued by FNMA and FHLMC (line item 4a2), securities issued by states or political subdivisions
in the U.S. (Item 3), and other MBSs (collateralized by MBSs) issued or guaranteed by agencies (line items 4b1
(line item 4b2)).
7
  Bank holding companies are subject to “market risk capital” guidelines if their trading assets exceed 10% of total
assets or if their trading assets exceed $1 Billion.

                                                        12
collateral in a BHC’s trading account, but without differentiating the credit quality of these securitization

tranches.8 Adding the securitization tranches from the trading account to the 20% and 50% AFS and

HTM residual results in our primary measure of highly-rated tranches, which we refer to as the “Highly-

Rated Residual” hereafter. This measure overstates holdings of highly-rated tranches of MBSs because it

includes lower-rated tranches held in the trading book, but it understates holdings of highly-rated tranches

because the data available from the trading book does not include CDOs.

    Our primary analysis investigates the holdings of highly-rated tranches before the crisis started. We

therefore focus on holdings as of December 31, 2006. Beginning in June 2008, BHCs have been required

to explicitly report the amount of CDOs held in their trading accounts if the BHC reported a quarterly

average for trading assets of $1 billion or more in any of the four preceding quarterly reports. We

supplement our December 2006 estimates of highly-rated tranches by adding the amount of CDOs

reported in June 2008 to our first measure, “Highly-Rated Residual,” as of December 2006.9 It is likely

that the June 2008 values of CDOs under-report the value of CDOs held on BHCs’ balance sheets as of

2006 because the value of CDOs were written down in the fall of 2007 and early 2008. To account for

this possibility, we create another measure by adding the amount of CDO write-downs (downloaded from

Bloomberg) for the time period December 31, 2006 through the June 30, 2008 to the June 2008 CDO

totals for each of the relevant banks.

    In summary, our residual approach yields three separate measures of highly-rated tranches. The first

is the “Highly-Rated Residual,” which includes 20% and 50% residuals as well as MBS Trading. The

second measure, constructed to account for the CDOs held in trading assets, adds 2008 CDOs to our first

measure (“Highly-Rated Residual + CDOs” hereafter). The third one, which also adds the CDO write-

downs, is named the “Highly-Rated Residual + CDOs and Writedowns.”

8
  Nadauld and Sherlund (2010) show that over 80% of the value-weighted bonds in subprime RMBS deals received
a AAA rating, with close to 90% rated at least A. Although we cannot use the residual approach to identify the
holdings of highly-rated tranches in trading assets, it is likely that these securities were highly rated. This is
especially true in light of the fact that correlation traders in hedge funds were frequent purchasers of the lowest rated
(residual) tranches in securitization deals.
9
  Only four banks in our final sample held enough CDOs in their trading portfolio to warrant explicit reporting of the
amount in the June 2008 FR-Y9C.

                                                           13
    Our final measure of highly-rated tranches holdings, which we call the “Bottom-up Highly-Rated

Tranches” measure, is borrowed from Cheng, Hong, and Scheinkman (2010). This measure is basically

the sum of each line item from the AFS, HTM, and trading asset accounts that corresponds to non-

government, non-agency sponsored securities. It includes “other mortgage-backed securities” and “asset-

backed securities” from the AFS and HTM securities (Schedule HC-B). Non-government, non-agency

mortgage-backed securities from trading assets (Schedule HC-D) are also added. Data Appendix 1

provides the detailed data fields associated with the construction of this bottom-up measure. While the

measure explicitly assesses the amount of non-government, non-agency securities held on BHCs’ balance

sheets, it does not capture the credit quality of these assets. Like our first measure, the bottom-up measure

is constructed using data reported at the end of 2006 and therefore does not include CDO holdings in

trading accounts.



2.2. Estimates of holdings of highly-rated tranches.

    Our analysis in this paper focuses on the holdings of highly-rated tranches at the bank level. We

always normalize the holdings by bank assets. However, before turning to normalized holdings, it is

useful to briefly discuss the dollar amount of holdings within our sample. Figure 1 shows the evolution of

total holdings of highly-rated tranches using our primary “highly-rated residual” measure. At the end of

2006, the last year before the crisis, the banks in our sample held $228 billion of highly-rated tranches.

The holdings of these tranches increased dramatically since the start of our sample in 2002. In 2002, the

total holdings of highly-rated tranches were $64 billion. The total holdings keep increasing after the end

of 2006, experiencing an especially sharp increase in the last quarter of 2007.

    Table 1 shows data on our estimates of holdings of highly-rated tranches by BHCs. We first show

summary statistics for our primary “highly-rated residual” measure (see Panel A). Although this measure

is available from 2002 onwards, we specifically focus on 2006. We have data for 231 BHCs. The median

holdings of highly-rated tranches (as a ratio of total assets) are 0.15%. Such a holding is of trivial

importance for a bank. So, for the typical bank, holdings of highly-rated tranches were not a material

                                                     14
concern.10 However, the mean holdings of highly-rated tranches are 1.13%, almost ten times the median.

Such a result implies that some banks have large holdings of highly-rated tranches compared to the

typical bank. We show the 90th percentile of holdings of highly-rated tranches, which is 3.13%.

     In 2006, only 54 of the BHCs in our sample reported trading assets. Of these banks, 14 had trading

assets in excess of $1 billion and in excess of 10% of the bank’s assets. These “large trading banks” had

holdings of highly-rated tranches averaging to 4.75%. One way to understand the economic importance of

such holdings is that the Basel I accord required banks to have capital equal to 8% of risk-weighted

assets, half of it in Tier 1 capital. Banks usually hold more regulatory capital than required, but an 80%

loss on highly-rated tranches would almost wipe out a bank’s Tier 1 required capital for a large trading

bank. In contrast, the mean of the holdings of highly-rated tranches for the banks that did not report

trading assets was 0.78%. We also reproduce the holdings of the three largest banks. While these holdings

are large for Citibank at 4.78%, they are below the mean for both Bank of America (1.04%) and JP

Morgan Chase (0.63%).

     Panel A also reports information on holdings of highly-rated tranches for other years, from 2002 to

2008. Neither the mean nor the median changes noticeably during that period of time. The mean increases

from 1.29% in 2002 to 1.50% in 2005. After 2005, the mean falls, reaching 1.13% in 2008. For the large

trading banks, the mean increases more noticeably and drops more sharply after peaking in 2006.

However, there are only 14 large trading banks in 2006. The number of large trading banks falls to 12 by

the end of 2007. The large decrease in highly-rated tranches for large trading banks in 2007 is due to the

merger of the Bank of New York and Mellon. Both banks have high holdings, but the resulting entity is

not in our sample for 2007 as it is not alive at the end of 2006. If we look instead at the holdings of banks

alive both at the end of 2006 and of 2007, the mean holdings of highly-rated tranches is 2.94% at the end

of 2006 and 3.07% at the end of 2007. The three largest banks have a different pattern. Citibank’s

holdings more than double over time and reach a peak in 2007. In contrast, neither Bank of America nor


10
   Note that the typical bank does not have a trading book. Consequently, for the typical bank, our estimate of
highly-rated tranches is unbiased.

                                                      15
JP Morgan Chase exhibits much of an increase in holdings until 2007 and 2008. The holdings of JP

Morgan Chase increase from 1.06% in 2006 to 2.55% in 2008. We are unable to ascertain the extent to

which this increase results from the acquisitions of Bear Stearns and Washington Mutual.

    The next panel of Table 1 uses information on CDO holdings. CDO holdings do not affect the median

and have a trivial effect on the mean because only six banks report holdings of CDOs in excess of $1

billion, the reporting threshold. The holdings of highly-rated tranches for the banks with large trading

books increase only by 0.01%. Panel C adds information on write-downs. Taking into account write-

downs has no impact on most banks. However, the holdings of highly-rated tranches for Citibank increase

further to 5.68%. The holdings of Bank of America increase to 1.88%. Finally, the holdings of JP Morgan

Chase remain under 1%.

    The final panel of Table 1 shows our estimates using the bottom-up approach. There is no meaningful

difference between these estimates and the estimates using our preferred approach for most banks. When

we turn to the large trading banks, the bottom-up measure has a mean that is higher by 0.29% in 2006.

The two methods yield different estimates for Citibank and Bank of America. For Citibank, the bottom-up

method has an estimate that is lower by 0.89%. For Bank of America, the difference of 0.79% is in the

opposite direction.

    In summary, for most banks, holdings of highly-rated tranches as a proportion of assets were less than

1% of assets. These holdings were small for some large banks – such as JP Morgan – but the banks with

large trading assets had on average holdings that were roughly 30 times greater than the holdings relative

to assets of the typical bank. The average securities holdings of banks with large trading assets are only

24% higher than the average securities holdings of the banks without large trading assets. Consequently,

it is quite clear that banks with large trading assets allocate much more of their securities holdings to

highly-rated tranches.




                                                   16
Section 3. Stock Returns and Highly-Rated Tranches.

To examine the validity of our measures of highly-rated tranches, we test whether they explain stock

returns of bank holding companies during the financial crisis. We calculate each bank’s buy-and-hold

excess return over the equally-weighted market return for the time period from July 1, 2007 through

December 31, 2008. We then regress these buy-and-hold returns on the four different BHC-specific

measures of highly-rated tranches holdings as of December 31, 2006. To account for potential

nonlinearities in the relation between these holdings and returns, we sort firms into quintiles based on

their holdings and construct dummy variables for banks in each quintile. The quintile with the lowest

amount of highly-rated holdings serves as the omitted group. We expect banks in the highest quintiles of

highly-rated tranches holdings as of December 2006 to be associated with lower returns during the

subsequent financial crisis.

     We control for some bank attributes, such as the bank’s market capitalization, prior returns, market-

to-book, and Tier 1 leverage, which are likely to influence stock returns. The size of a bank’s other

securities holdings is also expected to affect the returns over the period of the financial crisis. Therefore,

we control for “other” securities’ holdings of held-to-maturity and available-for-sale securities and

“other” trading securities in all regressions.11 We control for banks’ real estate as well as commercial and

industrial (C&I) loan exposure in the form of mortgage and C&I loans, scaled by total assets. Banks also

had unused commitments to make residential and commercial real-estate loans. Following Loutskina and

Strahan (2011), we control explicitly for such unused loan commitments.

     We present the results in Table 2. Firms in the top quintile of highly-rated tranches holdings are

associated with about 14% lower returns, on average. For banks in the top quintile, the average of the

ratio of holdings of highly-rated tranches to equity market capitalization at the end of 2006 is 29.63% (the

median is 17.02%). The lower returns we document are therefore consistent with the size of the holdings

and the magnitude of losses on highly-rated tranches that have been documented. The negative coefficient

11
  The term “other” securities generally refers to holdings of government, agency, and non-highly-rated private-label
securities. The appendix contains a precise description of securities included in our measures of “other” H.T.M. and
A.F.S. securities and “other” Trading securities.

                                                        17
on the top quintile is statistically significant for all measures of highly-rated tranches except for the

bottom-up measure. The impact of highly-rated tranches holdings on returns is lower for banks that have

low holdings. Banks in the 2nd lowest quintile of holdings are associated with an estimate of 5% lower

returns, which is statistically insignificant. As in Loutskina and Strahan (2011), unused loan commitments

have a significantly negative impact on returns. As expected, banks with higher exposures to real estate

through mortgage and C&I loans had significantly negative returns. Other HTM and AFS securities are

associated with larger returns, as are firms with higher market-to-book ratios. Prior returns, market

capitalization, and Tier 1 do not have significant coefficients explaining returns. Taken together, these

results provide evidence that our constructed measures of highly-rated tranches holdings predict bank

stock return performance, which is what one would expect if the poor performance of these highly-rated

tranches was unexpected.



Section 4. Why Did Banks Hold Highly-Rated Tranches?

    In this section, we test the hypotheses developed in Section 2 using the estimates of highly-rated

tranches presented in Section 3. We test each hypothesis in turn. We estimate regressions where the

dependent variable is the fraction of highly-rated tranches held by a bank, normalized by its assets. In all

regressions, we control for the returns of the bank in 2005-2006, the market-to-book ratio, Tier 1

leverage, and the holdings of other securities as of 2006. For the holdings of other securities, we consider

separately other securities held to maturity and available for sale as well as other trading securities. Since

these holdings exclude the highly-rated tranches, there is no mechanical relation between these holdings

and holdings of highly-rated tranches. Panel B of Appendix 1 provides the details of the construction of

the explanatory variables used in this section.

    We also control for bank asset size. The impact of BHC asset size on highly-rated tranches is likely

to be nonlinear. Therefore, we construct a piece-wise linear specification which breaks up the impact of

asset size into two separate variables. We allow for a possible change in the relation between asset size

and holdings of highly-rated tranches at $50 billion because banks with assets in excess of $50 billion are

                                                     18
more likely to be systemically important.12 The first variable, named “$0-50 Billion,” captures the impact

of the first $50 billion worth of assets on holdings of highly-rated tranches. All BHCs with less than $50

billion in assets take the value of their asset size while BHCs with assets greater than $50 billion take the

value of $50 billion. The second variable, which is named “>$50 Billion,” takes a value of 0 for all BHCs

with less than $50 billion in assets while it takes the actual asset size minus $50 billion for BHCs with

greater than $50 billion worth of assets. In this way, the estimated coefficients on the piece-wise

specification are additive and hence the sum of the two coefficients estimates the relation between asset

size and holdings of highly-rated tranches.

       The regressions in Table 3 show estimates of the regressions using these variables only. We see that

banks’ holdings of highly-rated tranches increase as their size grows, but only up to $50 billion. For banks

that have more assets than $50 billion, the fraction of assets held in highly-rated tranches does not

increase with size. As discussed in Section 2, such an increase would be expected with the too-big-to-fail

hypothesis. Consequently, the evidence in Table 3 is inconsistent with the hypothesis that too-big-to-fail

was a factor influencing holdings of highly-rated tranches (Too-big-to-fail H1). More formally, we can

reject the hypothesis that too-big-to-fail banks invested more of their assets in highly-rated tranches at the

5% level. We therefore conclude that the too-big-to-fail hypothesis is not supported by the data. There is

also no evidence that banks that held larger portfolios of trading securities other than highly-rated

tranches held more securities in the form of highly-rated tranches. Finally, none of the remaining control

variables are significant. Importantly, the results are the same irrespective of the estimate of highly-rated

tranches we use.

       We investigate extensively the robustness of the results in Table 3 concerning the relation between

highly-rated tranches holdings and bank size. In particular, we use different piece-wise linear

specifications. With the first one, we allow for different slopes for banks with assets below $50 billion,

between $50 and $250 billion, and above $250 billion. Again, we find no evidence that the largest banks

hold more highly-rated tranches. In another specification, we consider separately banks with assets below

12
     Institutions with more than $50 billion in assets are treated differently in the Dodd-Frank Act.

                                                             19
$100 billion and assets above $100 billion. With this latter specification, the coefficient on the largest

banks is negative (the coefficient is -0.072) and significant at the 10% level. The largest banks do not hold

more highly-rated tranches with that specification either.



4.1. Securitization by-product hypothesis.

     As argued by Shleifer and Vishny (2010), in the presence of asymmetric information regarding the

quality of the loans, banks must retain some portion of the loans securitized.13 Traditional signaling

theories further conclude that, in the presence of asymmetric information regarding asset quality, agents

with an information advantage must retain assets of the lowest quality if the signal is to be viewed as

credible.

     In a credit-tranched securitization context (non-agency RMBS and CDO’s), such theories predict that

BHCs underwriting securitization deals hold the equity tranche and lower-rated junior tranches as a

credible signal of deal quality. Our data does not capture the holdings of equity tranches and other low-

rated tranches. But “skin-in-the-game” as an explanation for the retention of the AAA, AA, and A-rated

assets that we measure can be motivated through a catering argument. That is, BHC’s originate

securitizations which contain tranches with payoff structures which cater to specific investor preferences.

For example, junior tranches cater to correlation traders betting on the survival or default of a junior

tranche as a function of collateral correlation (see Nadauld, Sherlund, and Vorkink (2011)). Senior

tranches cater to institutional investors with a mandate to invest in high credit-quality assets. If BHCs are

indeed catering to the high credit-quality demands of institutional investors, signaling might still be

required. So, BHCs could retain even the highly-rated portions of the resultant securities in order to signal

the quality of a securitization deal to the institutional investors.




13
  The requirement that securitizing banks retain a portion of the securitization is not derived explicitly in Shleifer
and Vishny (2010). Rather, they rely on a prior literature in making this assumption. Prior literature proves
theoretically the “skin-in-the-game result” in the presence of asymmetric information and provides empirical
evidence in support of the result (see Gorton and Pennacchi (1995), Sufi (2007), and Holmstrom and Tirole (1997)).

                                                         20
    We test whether securitization-active banks held more highly-rated tranches as of December 31,

2006. We define a BHC as being securitization-active if the outstanding principal balance of assets sold

and securitized with servicing retained or with recourse or other seller-provided credit enhancements is

non-zero in any of the years 2003, 2004, 2005, or 2006. According to this definition, 49 BHCs in our

sample are active in securitization. We estimate highly-rated tranches as a function of the securitization-

active indicator, the piece-wise size variables, and the standard set of controls employed in previous

tables. Results are presented in Table 4.

    We produce results for the “highly-rated residual” and “highly-rated residual + CDOs” measures of

highly-rated tranches and report them in columns (1) and (2). We find that securitization active banks

hold more highly-rated tranches. The coefficient on the indicator variable is 0.015 in both specifications,

indicating that these banks hold 1.5% more of their assets in the form of highly-rated tranches. Such an

effect is economically significant since the standard deviation of highly-rated tranches holdings is 3.1%.

The estimated coefficients on the step-wise size variables are diminished but not wholly subsumed by the

presence of the securitization-active indicator, suggesting that securitization activity is not a manifestation

of asset size alone. Though we do not report the results for the “bottom-up highly-rated tranches” and

“highly-rated residual + CDOs and Writedowns” measures, the regression estimates are very similar to

those reported in columns (1) and (2). In regressions (3) and (4), we use the change in the securitization

activity of a bank four quarters apart. We see that holdings of highly-rated tranches increase with the

change in securitization activity. We interpret the results as being consistent with a “skin-in-the-game”

hypothesis. However, it is important to stress a limitation of our data. We cannot tell whether a bank

holds highly-rated tranches from its own securitizations or from securitizations produced by other banks.

The “skin-in-the-game” hypothesis would suggest that the bank retains its own securitizations. Yet, there

could be signaling value to a firm from holding securitization tranches even if they are not its own if the

intent is to demonstrate the value of securitization tranches.

    The measure of securitization we use is a measure based on a bank’s own securitization activities.

Alternatively, we could use a measure of participation of banks in the underwriting of securitizations. To

                                                      21
do so, we create an indicator variable for any BHC, which shows up in the League Tables of RMBS,

CLO, CBO, or CDO securitization activity (“Securitization-league-table Indicator”).14 Out of 231 banks

in our December-2006 sample, 12 banks meet the criterion. We show the regression estimates with this

measure in columns (5) and (6) of Table 4. We find that these estimates are positive but not significant.

       We saw in Figure 1 that the aggregate dollar amount of highly-rated tranches holdings increased

through time. The increase is supportive of the role of securitization as a determinant of holdings of

highly-rated tranches. To check this hypothesis further, regressions (5) and (6) of Table 4 use an estimate

of a bank’s loan pipeline. Our “loan pipeline” measure calculates the average amount of retail and

wholesale closed-end first and junior lien loans made on 1-4 family residential properties that were for

sale during the year 2006, scaled by total assets. In regressions utilizing the loan-pipeline measure, we

estimate our dependent variable, highly-rated tranches, as of 2007. This measure is not significant in

explaining banks’ holdings of highly-rated tranches.

       Figure 1 shows that the aggregate dollar of highly-rated tranches experienced an especially sharp

increase from the last quarter of 2006 to the last quarter of 2007. This increase is supportive of the

hypothesis that banks accumulated highly-rated tranches rapidly as the market turned because they had

trouble selling these tranches. However, even though the aggregate amount of highly-rated tranches

increased the most from 2006 to 2007, total assets increased as well, so that the large dollar increase is not

accompanied by a noticeable increase in percentage holdings. Consequently, the evidence on percentage

holdings does not support the view that banks accumulated holdings at a rapid pace in 2007. Their

behavior is consistent with having kept their allocation to highly-rated tranches roughly constant.

       Next we explore whether highly-rated tranches increased over time as a result of the increase in

securitization activities further. For that purpose, we run regressions of the year-over-year change in

holdings of these tranches on the year-over-year changes in the outstanding principal balance of assets

sold or securitized (with servicing retained or with recourse). We use quarterly data from the first quarter


14
     Data source is Moody’s eMaxx Data Services.


                                                     22
of 2002 to the last quarter of 2006 and normalize the change in the highly-rated holdings or outstanding

balance of securitizations from t-4 to t using assets as of t-4. Results are reported in column (7) of Table

4. The coefficient on the ratio of the change in securitization over lagged assets is a positive and

significant at the 10% level. In the last column of table 4, we focus on outstanding principal balance of

only mortgages sold or securitized and find similar results.

    Finally, the increase in holdings of highly-rated tranches should be concentrated among

securitization-active banks. In Figure 2, we plot the holdings of highly-rated tranches through time

separately for securitization-active banks and non-securitization active banks. In 2006, securitization

active banks had highly-rated tranches holdings of 3.1% in comparison to holdings of 0.8% for other

banks. For the securitization-active banks, holdings of highly-rated tranches increased from 2.1% of total

assets in Q1 2002 to 3.3% in Q1 2007, while highly-rated holdings for the non-active banks remained

virtually unchanged over the same period. A formal test of the 1.2% difference in highly-rated holdings

between Q1 2002 and Q1 2007 for securitization-active banks yields a t-statistic of 1.30.

    Our analysis is strongly supportive of the hypothesis that banks engaged in securitization held more

highly-rated tranches (Securitization H1) and the hypothesis that holdings of highly-rated tranches

increased over time (Securitization H2). We also find weak evidence that holdings of highly-rated

tranches for firms active in securitization increased more in 2007 (Securitization H3).



4.2. Regulatory arbitrage.

    Acharya and Richardson (2009) argue that BHCs find it advantageous to hold highly-rated assets as a

form of regulatory capital arbitrage. Regulatory arbitrage occurs because banks have to hold less

regulatory capital if, for example, mortgage loans on the balance sheet are transformed into AAA-rated

bonds via securitization. Transforming mortgages into highly-rated securities can also result in a cheaper

source of funding for BHCs through asset-backed commercial (ABCP) programs, where commercial

paper is issued at a lower cost since it is collateralized by highly-rated securities (see Acharya, Schnabl,

and Suarez (2010)). Finally, Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2010) show that structured investment

                                                     23
vehicles (SIVs) were a form of regulatory arbitrage that enabled banks to hold various assets, including

highly-rated tranches, with almost no regulatory capital. To implement this regulatory arbitrage, banks did

not have to hold highly-rated tranches on their balance sheet. Consequently, our approach has nothing to

say about regulatory arbitrage that involves holdings of highly-rated tranches in bank off-balance sheet

vehicles. It might be, however, that banks that engaged in regulatory arbitrage through SIVs held more

highly-rated tranches as an inventory available for their SIVs. Too few banks in our sample sponsored

SIVs for us to test that hypothesis reliably.15

     To test the regulatory-arbitrage hypothesis, we examine whether BHCs’ issuance or sponsoring of

asset-backed commercial paper can explain their holdings of highly-rated tranches. We construct an

indicator variable for all BHCs active in the ABCP market, either through direct issuance or through

sponsoring credit enhancements in the ABCP issuance. We estimate regressions that explain holdings of

highly-rated tranches as a function of this indicator variable (“ABCP Activity Indicator”), the piece-wise

asset size variables, and a set of other controls. In this test, we estimate highly-rated holdings as of

December 2007 and explain holdings using a 2006 ABCP indicator variable., which is equal to one if the

BHC engaged in any ABCP activity in years 2003-2006.

     The results presented in the first two regressions of Table 5 provide little support for the regulatory-

arbitrage hypothesis through ABCP issuance. The coefficients on the ABCP indicator variable are

negative, though they lack statistical significance, and are of little magnitude economically. The

remaining control variables are mostly consistent with results in previous tables. Estimates on the impact

of the first $50 billion of asset size remain quantitatively similar to previous tables but are not significant

in the ABCP specification. This evidence is therefore not supportive of the theory that banks held highly-

rated tranches as a form of regulatory arbitrage.




15
  Only 12 bank holding companies in our sample sponsored off-balance sheet conduits in general, and only one,
Citigroup, was affiliated with SIV’s as a specific type of conduit. The 12 banks that sponsored off-balance sheet
conduits are also the banks with ABCP programs, so that we cannot distinguish between banks with ABCP
programs and banks with conduits.

                                                       24
    We develop an alternative measure of a BHC’s propensity to engage in regulatory arbitrage that does

not rely on ABCP activity. In March 2001, the Federal Reserve allowed BHCs to incorporate credit

ratings in calculating regulatory capital for holdings of securities. Prior to the rule change, capital charges

on securities were dictated by asset type rather than credit quality. For example, mortgage-backed

securities issued or guaranteed by Fannie Mae carried a 20% risk-weighting (so that the capital set aside

was 20% of 8%, or 1.6%, in comparison with 8% for corporate loans) capital charge, but non-agency

mortgage-backed securities that were viewed as having similar risk carried a greater capital charge.

Following the rule change, the regulatory capital charge became a function of the securities’ credit rating

rather than asset class. AAA-rated and AA-rated securitizations became associated with a 20% risk-

weighting, A-rated securitizations a 50% risk-weighting, BBB-rated securitizations a 100% risk-

weighting, and BB-rated securitizations a 150% risk-weighting. Thus, following the rule change, poor

credit-quality securitized assets became more expensive from a regulatory standpoint.

    The rule change provides an opportunity to identify BHCs with a propensity to engage in regulatory

arbitrage. We consider whether a BHC’s use of regulatory-capital arbitrage opportunities arising from the

ratings-based capital change has any power in predicting its holdings of highly-rated tranches in

subsequent years. To do so, we calculate the change in leverage for each BHC in our sample from the

fourth quarter of 2000 to the fourth quarter of 2002 and hypothesize that BHCs with the largest change in

leverage surrounding the event are those with a higher propensity to engage in regulatory capital

arbitrage.

    Columns (3) and (4) of Table 5 regress the holdings of highly-rated tranches in December 2006 as a

function of the change in leverage from 2000 Q4 to 2002 Q4. If banks that took advantage of the change

to increase their leverage are those that engage in regulatory arbitrage, we should see a positive relation

between holdings of highly-rated tranches and the change in leverage around the regulatory change. The

change-in-leverage variable is positively related to holdings of highly-rated tranches, but the coefficient is

not statistically significant.



                                                      25
     There has been much discussion that the market risk amendment to the Basel accord allows banks to

hold highly-rated tranches in their trading book with very little regulatory capital compared to banks that

can only hold the tranches in their banking book. However, as discussed earlier, banks with a trading

book could hold more highly-rated tranches to have an inventory for market-making purposes. The final

two regressions of Table 5 use an indicator variable (“Market Risk Equivalent Bank Indicator”) for banks

that had the right to use their own value-at-risk model to satisfy capital requirements on their trading

book.16 We find no evidence that these banks held more highly-rated tranches. We estimate (but do not

tabulate) the same regression without the size variables. Without the size variables, the indicator variable

is significant. However, the R-squared of the regression drops by half. The significance of the size

variables is not affected by the presence of the market risk indicator and the inclusion of the market risk

indicator has only a trivial impact on the R-squared.

     With the regulatory arbitrage hypothesis, we would expect banks with higher leverage to have larger

holdings of highly-rated tranches as such banks would be expected to take more advantage of investments

that economize regulatory capital. However, as seen in Tables 4 and 5, Tier I leverage does not have a

significant coefficient, which implies that banks that are more constrained in regulatory capital do not

seem to be holding more highly-rated tranches (Regulatory Arbitrage H1). Overall, there is no evidence

for the hypothesis that banks that engage in more regulatory arbitrage activities have larger holdings of

highly-rated tranches (Regulatory Arbitrage H2). Again, it is important to mention that our study is

focused on explaining holdings of highly-rated tranches on banks’ balance sheets. Hence, our analysis

does not address off-balance sheet regulatory arbitrage.

     Finally, we consider the possibility of BHCs having engaged in regulatory arbitrage through the

securitization channel itself. From a regulatory capital standpoint, it is cheaper for banks to hold a

portfolio of mortgages in the form of highly-rated securitizations than to hold an unsecuritized portfolio

16
   A BHC is subject to the market risk capital guidelines, and thus able to use its own estimates of value-at- risk in
calculating capital requirements, if it’s consolidated trading activity, defined as the sum of trading assets and
liabilities for the previous quarter, equals: (1) 10% or more of the BHCs total assets for the previous quarter, or (2)
$1 billion or more. The Federal Reserve may include or exempt a BHC where it feels appropriate. Our Dec. 2006
sample of 231 BHCs includes 14 BHCs that meet the market risk capital guidelines.

                                                          26
of mortgages. This is because AAA-rated securitizations, for example, carry a 20% risk-weighting while

unsecuritized subprime mortgages carry a much larger risk weight. As such, it could be that securitization

activity is an efficient mechanism to transform an expensive portfolio, from a regulatory standpoint, into a

cheaper portfolio.

    We provide two pieces of evidence that indicate that banks engaged in securitization did not engage

in regulatory arbitrage on their balance sheet (as opposed to the off-balance sheet ABCP mechanism

documented by Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2010)) so that they could hold less regulatory capital than

other banks. First, we examine whether levels of regulatory capital were overly aggressive among

securitization-active banks. For each BHC, we calculate the regulatory “cushion,” which is the ratio of

tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets, minus the tier 1 requirement of 4%. We plot the results in Figure 2.

While securitization-active BHCs do, on average, exhibit a lower regulatory capital cushion, the cushion

is not close to the regulatory boundary, nor does it change through time as would be expected of a BHC

wanting to push the boundaries of regulatory capital through increased securitization activity.

    A second piece of evidence comes from examining the ratio of total assets to risk-weighted assets. In

order to control for bank size, we create a size-based matched sample of securitization-active and non-

securitization active banks and plot the ratio of total assets to risk-weighted assets in Figure 3. A

securitization-driven regulatory arbitrage hypothesis predicts that securitization-active banks would amass

more total assets for a given level of risk-weighted assets than non-securitization active banks. Figure 3

demonstrates that the data do not support this view. Rather, securitization active banks have a lower ratio

of total assets to risk-weighted assets than their counterparts of roughly equal size. Taken together, we

interpret the results as being consistent with the view that regulatory capital arbitrage was not the primary

driver of securitization activity.



4.3. Bad incentives.

    There are two distinct “bad incentives” hypotheses. The poor-incentives hypothesis argues that banks

had compensation plans that made it advantageous for managers and traders to play the carry trade,

                                                     27
holding positions in highly-rated tranches while borrowing at the firm’s cost of funds. Consequently, the

incentives can be bad at lower levels of a bank – say at the trader level. It is also possible for incentives

to be poor at the top. We examine both possibilities.

     We would expect that poor incentives are more likely to exist in banks with poor governance.

Consequently, banks with poor governance would be more likely to be banks with greater holdings of

highly-rated tranches. To test this hypothesis, the first regression of Table 6 uses a “Governance Index”

that contains 41 firm-level attributes from RiskMetrics and that increases with the protection of minority

shareholders (see Aggarwal, Erel, Ferreira, and Matos (2011) for a detailed explanation of the index). We

find no relation between holdings of highly-rated tranches and a bank’s governance index.

     The data on compensation contracts below the top five officers of banks is not available. However, it

is often argued that there is an incentive problem with traders’ compensation, since generally they receive

a share of the profits they generate but do not have to pay for losses they generate. Consequently, if the

hypothesis is correct, we would expect the problems to arise in banks that have trading operations. Table

5 shows, however, that there is no evidence that banks with larger trading portfolios have more highly-

rated tranches.17 In unreported results, we also re-estimated the regressions of Table 5 with an indicator

variable for any bank with non-zero trading assets and still find that the trading asset indicator variable is

not significant.

     We construct several measures of CEO compensation and test whether these measures can explain

differences in holdings of highly-rated tranches (see Panel B of Appendix 1 for a detailed description of

the managerial-compensation measures). Our first measure calculates the elasticity of total managerial

compensation to a BHC’s return on equity (ROE), where the ROE is calculated as net income divided by

total common equity as of fiscal year end.18 ROE is a performance measure that is not risk adjusted and

does not account for the cost of equity. Therefore, a bank’s ROE can be increased through carry-trade

17
   Columns (3) and (4) in Table 5 estimate the relationship between holdings of highly-rated tranches and BHCs
with large trading portfolios.
18
   The numerator of the compensation-ROE elasticity is calculated as the change in compensation from 2001-2005
divided by 2001 levels of compensation. The denominator is calculated as the change in ROE from 2001-2005
divided by 2001. ROE Details are provided in the data appendix.

                                                     28
positions and through increases in leverage. This elasticity measure is designed to capture the relationship

between total managerial compensation and firm performance. To the extent that highly-rated tranches

bolster non-risk-adjusted firm performance because they have a higher yield than other similarly rated

securities, managers with a higher elasticity of compensation to non-risk-adjusted performance would

find it advantageous to hold more highly-rated tranches relative to managers whose compensation is less

sensitive to non-risk-adjusted performance.

     The second regression of Table 6 reports estimates of a regression of holdings of highly-rated

tranches on measures of the elasticity of managerial compensation to performance. The elasticity variable

named “High-Compensation Elasticity” is equal to one for firms with above-median elasticity of the

CEOs total compensation to changes in bank ROE. The sample is limited to 51 BHCs on account of

limited availability of the compensation data. The relationship between holdings of highly-rated tranches

and compensation elasticity is positive, as expected, but the estimates lack statistical significance. Lack of

significance may be due to the limited sample size, given that the coefficient on the $50-billion size

variable, which was significant in previous estimates, also lacks significance in this small sample.

     We also consider alternative measures of managerial compensation. Column (3) in Table 6 regresses

holdings of highly-rated tranches on managers’ “Compensation Residual” (see Cheng, Hong, and

Sheinkmann (2010)) and control variables. Compensation residual, a measure of excess compensation, is

constructed by computing the natural logarithm (log) of average total compensation from 2003 to 2005.

This log average compensation is then regressed on the log of the firm’s 2005 market cap. The residual

from this regression, estimated in 2005, serves as the compensation residual variable in our cross-

sectional regressions of highly-rated holdings in 2006. The coefficient on the residual is positive but

insignificant. With residual compensation data on only 67 CEOs, the limited sample size may continue to

limit the power of the tests.19




19
  Although we have compensation data on as many as 89 CEOs as of 2006, the compensation residual regressions
require data on compensation from 2003-2005, which limits our sample to 67.

                                                     29
    Finally, regression (4) in Table 6 uses another measure of managerial compensation, the bonus-to-

salary ratio. This “Bonus-per-Salary” variable is calculated as the ratio of the CEO’s total bonus to his

base salary. It affords the largest sample size of any of the compensation regressions, though the sample is

still limited to 89 observations. The results presented in Table 6 indicate virtually no statistical

relationship exists between “bonus-per-salary” and holdings of highly-rated tranches. The standard set of

control variables exhibits their usual signs, magnitudes, and significance in all specifications.

    There has been much criticism of the impact of options on risk-taking incentives (see, for instance,

Bebchuck and Spamman (2010)). We test whether banks where the CEO’s compensation exhibited more

option-like features (more sensitivity to volatility) held more highly-rated tranches. The coefficient on

“Equity Risk” is negative with a t-statistic of -1.34. There is therefore no evidence supporting the view

that option-like compensation led to more risk taking through holdings of highly-rated tranches.

    In summary, we find no support for the hypothesis advanced by various observers that “bad

incentives” explain holdings of more highly-rated tranches.



4.4. Good deals.

    The last two regressions of Table 6 investigate the relation between holdings of highly-rated tranches

and equity incentives of CEOs. The coefficients on our estimates of equity incentives of CEOs are

insignificant. In other words, the banks of CEOs with more incentives to maximize shareholder wealth

did not hold more or fewer highly-rated tranches than other banks. Such a result would be consistent with

the model of Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny (2011) where investors in general ignore some possible

adverse outcomes in making their investment decisions. Such failure to account for some possible adverse

outcomes in their model is pervasive and hence does not directly offer a prediction on which banks held

more highly-rated tranches for investment purposes. Their model does predict greater holdings of

securitized securities to show skin-in-the-game. We found support for that prediction earlier.




                                                      30
Section 5. Investment banks.

    As discussed in the introduction, stand-alone investment banks did not have to report the information

that we use in this paper to estimate holdings of highly-rated tranches by banks. Investment banks did

report information about exposures to securitizations and to subprime mortgages. However, the reporting

format was specific to each bank. We collected information for 2006. Some of that information was only

made available in filings for the 2007 reporting year. A brief summary of available information on

holdings of highly-rated tranches is as follows:

    1) Bear Stearns. Bear Stearns reports data on retained interests in its own securitizations. It states

        that “Retained interests in securitizations are generally not held to maturity and typically are sold

        shortly after the settlement of a securitization.” (2007 10-K). On November 30, 2006, Bear

        Stearns had AAA-rated retained interests in non-agency securitizations of $1.5 billion. In

        addition, it had $2.6 billion on non-AAA rated non-agency retained interests. The 10-K also

        reported AAA-rated CDO exposure as $755 million. Separately, it reported subprime mortgage

        exposure for November 30, 2007. It had $1 billion of subprime investment-grade securitizations.

        But, Bear Stearns' overall subprime exposure was negative $582 million because it had a short

        position in ABS CDSs. Finally, it reported securitizations that did not qualify for sale treatment

        and hence were on its balance sheet. The total for mortgage securitizations and CDOs as of

        November 30, 2006 was $30 billion, but its exposure to loss was $800 million.

    2) Goldman Sachs. In the 2007 10-K, the bank said that the fair value of retained interests from

        mortgage-backed securities, as of 2006, was $4 billion. It had another $2 billion of retained

        interests in CDOs and CLOs. In addition, the firm had purchased interests in residential mortgage

        securitizations of $8 billion “purchased in connection with secondary market-making activities.”

        It also had holdings that were not consolidated in the balance sheet for mortgage CDOs of $26

        billion and of corporate CDOs and CLOs of $11 billion. However, the purchased and retained

        interests associated with these securitizations were only $2 billion. Further, it had exposure

        through derivatives on these securitizations of $10 billion. The bank also reported its subprime

                                                     31
    exposure for November 2007, which was $2 billion. Its Alt-A exposure was around $6 billion.

    Furthermore, the bank reported amounts held in securities that may be more difficult to fund on a

    secured basis in times of stress in its 2007 10-K. For example, it held $41 billion of mortgage and

    other asset-backed loans and securities as of November 2006. As of November 2007, it reported

    level 3 “loans and securities backed by residential estate” for $2 billion.

3) Lehman Brothers. In its 2007 10-K, Lehman provided an estimate of its holdings of mortgage and

    asset-backed securities as of November 30, 2006. The total amount, which included whole loans

    and servicing, was $52 billion. Securities amounted to $10 billion. Investment-grade retained

    interests in securitizations were $5.3 billion for residential and asset backed while they were for

    $0.6 billion for commercial mortgage loans and CMBSs. Using data on agency securitizations, it

    follows that holdings of private-label investment-grade securitizations were $3.4 billion. A

    separate table provides exposure to subprime mortgages. The total was $6.9 billion, of which $1.8

    billion corresponds to retained interests in securitizations. In its fair value table for 2007, Lehman

    reports holdings of $89 billion of mortgage and asset-backed securities. These holdings include

    holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities.

4) Merrill Lynch. It reported total U.S. subprime exposures of $2.7 billion at the end of 2007, but it

    also made losses in 2007 of $3.1 billion on subprime exposures. In addition, it had Alt-A

    exposures of $2.7 billion. The bank had retained interests on residential mortgage loans of $2.8

    billion at the end of 2007. Its exposure to securitizations that were consolidated on its balance

    sheet for real estate was $4.3 billion in 2006 and $16.3 billion in 2007, but investors had no

    recourse to Merrill. It reports a long exposure in super-senior CDOs of $30.4 billion and a short

    exposure of $23.6 billion as of 2007. However, in addition, it made losses of $14.6 billion on

    CDOs in 2007, so that an estimate of its end of 2006 exposure is $21 billion.

5) Morgan Stanley. It showed retained interests from private label residential mortgage

    securitizations of $3.2 billion at the end of November 2007. Of these, $1.2 billion were non-

    investment grade. Securitizations that were consolidated in the balance sheet are for $5.9 billion,

                                                 32
        with an exposure of $1.75 billion. In a conference presentation, Morgan Stanley showed net

        subprime exposure of $10.4 billion at the end of the third quarter of 2007, most of which was

        written down the next quarter. Further, it had $14 billion of other mortgage net exposure and $36

        billion of net CMBS exposure. Based on one of the tables in 2007 10-K, the bank’s net subprime

        exposure was $6.1 billion as of November 30, 2007. It had a long exposure of $11.1 subprime

        exposure in loans, total return swaps, and CDS, but most of that exposure was from $7.8 billion

        in ABS CDS. It reported CDO subprime exposure of negative $5 billion. Its holdings of CDOs

        amounted to $1 billion, but it had a net short derivatives position of $6 billion. In another table,

        however, it reports that the net total U.S. subprime trading exposure was $1.8 billion.



    Three of the investment banks, Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch, and Morgan Stanley, had assets in

excess of $1 trillion at the end of 2007. The assets of Bear Stearns were $395 billion and those of Lehman

Brothers were $691 billion. Our estimates of the non-agency securitization exposures of the investment

banks are not equivalent to those of the bank holding companies. Nevertheless, three facts are worth

noting. First, the net exposures to securitizations are not higher than the holdings of bank holding

companies with large trading assets. Second, the investment banks focus much more on net exposures, so

that long holdings are likely to be substantially larger than the long holdings of bank holding companies.

Third, derivatives play a large role in the exposures of investment banks.



Section 6. Conclusion.

    In this paper, we estimate holdings of highly-rated tranches of American banks. We use four different

approaches to estimate these holdings and the different approaches lead to similar conclusions. Using a

sample of 231 publicly-traded U.S. bank holding companies, we find that holdings of highly-rated

tranches were economically trivial for the typical bank before the credit crisis. The average of the

holdings across the banking sector was only 1.3% of assets, but the average of the holdings for the banks

with large trading positions was almost 5%. Yet, even among these banks, there was wide dispersion in

                                                    33
holdings. For instance, our estimate of holdings for JP Morgan Chase is less than 1% of assets, but

Citigroup had holdings in excess of 5%. Though the data we use for bank holding companies is not

available for investment banks, we show that investment banks did not have net exposures to

securitizations that were systematically greater than the holdings we measure for bank holding companies.

    We investigate many of the hypotheses that have been advanced to explain holdings of highly-rated

tranches by banks. The large dispersion of holdings across the largest banks explains why there is no

support for the arguments that banks that are viewed as too-big-to-fail had incentives to have large

holdings of such assets. In regressions, we find that bank holdings of highly-rated tranches increase with

their asset size, but only up to $50 billion. For banks that have more than $50 billion in assets, those

deemed “too-big-to-fail,” their holdings of highly-rated tranches do not significantly increase with asset

size. The securitization by-product hypothesis argues that holding tranches of originated securitization

deals serves as a credible signal of deal quality to potential investors. As such, we would expect banks

that are active in securitization to hold a larger amount of highly-rated tranches as a fraction of their

assets. Consistent with this hypothesis, we find that banks that were active in securitization between 2003

and 2006, either through origination or in the providing of credit enhancements, held 1.5% larger amounts

of highly-rated tranches as a fraction of total assets as of December 31, 2006 than the other banks.

    We find no evidence in support of regulatory capital arbitrage hypotheses. In particular, there is no

evidence that banks with ABCP programs held more highly-rated tranches. If banks that engage the most

in regulatory arbitrage are banks that have less slack in terms of regulatory capital than other banks, we

show that banks that engaged in securitization do not meet that criterion. It is often argued that banks used

the more advantageous capital requirements of the trading book for the purpose of regulatory arbitrage.

However, controlling for size, we do not find that these banks held more highly-rated tranches of

securitizations. An important caveat is that in our assessment of regulatory arbitrage we focus on the

assets held by banks on their balance sheets. Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2010) show that off-balance

sheet vehicles enabled banks to engage in regulatory arbitrage. While these vehicles were important for



                                                     34
some banks, the fact that only one bank in our sample sponsored SIVs makes it impossible for us to

reliably determine the relation between SIV holdings and holdings of highly-rated tranches.

    Lastly, we explore “bad incentives” explanations for holdings of highly-rated tranches. We find that

holdings of highly-rated tranches are unrelated to an index of governance quality of banks. Further, there

is no evidence that banks where compensation was more focused on ROE, where bonuses were high

relative to salary, where option compensation was more important, and where unexplained compensation

was high held more highly- rated tranches. Finally, CEO equity incentives do not appear to be related to

holdings of highly-rated tranches. Consequently, it is not the case that banks where CEOs had greater

incentives to maximize shareholder wealth differed in their holdings of highly-rated tranches.

    Banks are highly levered. Because of their high leverage, banks become distressed if they make large

losses on any material asset class that they invest in. With a large adverse shock to the economy, it is

ineluctable that banks will make large losses on some asset classes. Our evidence shows that the evidence

is fully consistent with the view that banks that invested more in highly-rated tranches did so as a normal

outcome of being active in the securitization business.




                                                    35
References

Acharya, Viral V., and Matthew Richardson, 2009, Causes of the financial crisis, Critical Review 21, 195-
210.

Acharya, V., P. Schnabl, and G. Suarez, 2010, Securitization without risk transfer, forthcoming, Journal
of Financial Economics.

Aggarwal, R., I. Erel, M. Ferreira, and P. Matos, 2011, Does governance travel around the world?
Evidence from institutional investors, Journal of Financial Economics 100, 154-181.

Bebchuk, L., and H. Spamann, 2010, Regulating bankers pay, Georgetown Law Journal 98, 247-287.

Brunnermeier, M. K., 2009, Deciphering the liquidity and credit crunch 2007-2008, Journal of Economic
Perspectives 23, 77-100.

Carbo-Valverde, Santiago, Edward J. Kane, and Francisco Rodriguez-Fernandez, 2010, Safety-net
benefits conferred on difficult-to-fail-and-unwind banks in the US and Europe before and during the
Great Recession, working paper.

Cheng, I., H. Hong, and J. Scheinkman, 2010, Yesterday’s heroes: Compensation and creative risk-
taking, working Paper.

Coval, J., J. Jurek, and E. Stafford, 2009, The economics of structured finance, Journal of Economic
Perspectives 23, 3-25.

Fahlenbrach, R., and R. Stulz, 2011, Bank CEO incentives and the credit crisis, Journal of Financial
Economics 99, 11-26.

Fama, E., 1985, What’s different about banks?, Journal of Monetary Economics 15, 29-40.

Gennaioli, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 2010, Neglected risks, financial innovation, and financial
fragility, forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.

Gennaioli, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 2011, A model of shadow banking, working paper.

Gorton, G., and G. Pennacchi, 1995, Banks and loan sales: Marketing non-marketable Assets, Journal of
Monetary Economics 35, 389-411.

Greenspan, A., 2004, Risk and uncertainty in monetary policy, American Economic Review 94, 33-40.

Holmstrom, B., and J. Tirole, 1997, Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and the real sector,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 35-52.

Iannotta, G. and G. Pennacchi, 2011, Bank regulation, credit ratings, and systematic risk, unpublished
working paper, University of Illinois.

Loutskina, E., and Philip E. Strahan, 2011, Informed and uninformed investment in housing: The
downside of diversification, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

                                                   36
Nadauld, T., and S. Sherlund, 2010, The impact of securitization on the extension of subprime credit,
working Paper.

Nadauld, T., S. Sherlund, and K. Vorkink, 2011, The impact of collateral correlation in structured finance,
working Paper.

Rajan, R., 2006, Has finance made the world riskier?, European Financial Management 12, 499-533.

Rajan, R., 2010, Fault Lines, Princeton University Press.

Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny, 2010, Unstable banking, Journal of Financial Economics 97, 306-318.

Sufi, A. 2007, Information asymmetry and financing arrangements: Evidence from syndicated loans,
Journal of Finance 62, 629-668.

UBS, 2008, Shareholder Report on UBS's Write-Downs, UBS.




                                                    37
Appendix 1 – Panel A: Dependent Variables
Our main data source is the Consolidated Financial Statements for Bank Holding Companies, the form FR Y-9C. We focus on Schedules HC-B
(Securities), HC-D (Trading Assets), and HC-R (Regulatory Capital) to construct our main variables of interest. Below we list their definitions
with references to schedules and data mnemonics in the form FR Y-9C.

Variable Name                                                           Schedule                                 Data Mnemonic

Highly-Rated Residual: Summation of non-government or non-              Schedules from Form FR Y-9C as of        bhc21754+bhc51754
agency mortgage-backed securities (MBSs) as well as asset-backed        December 2006: HC-R Item 35 (Column      bhc21773+bhc51773
securities (ABSs) that are rated in the highest three investment-       D) + Item 35 (Column E) + Item 36        -bhck1294-bhck1297
grade (e.g., AAA, AA, or A) categories and non-government, non-         (Column D) + Item 36 (Column E) - HC-    -bhck1703-bhck1706
agency MBSs in trading securities. The measure includes held-to-        B Item 2b (Columns A+C) – Item 4a2       -bhck1714-bhck1716
maturity (HTM) and available-for-sale (AFS) securities with 20%         (Columns A+C) – Item 4b1 (Columns        -bhck1718-bhck1731
or 50% risk weight minus securities in 20% or 50% risk-weight           A+C) – Item 4b2 (Columns A+C) - Item 3   -bhck8496-bhck8498
category that are issued or guaranteed by the government or             (Columns A+C) + HC-D Item 4c             +bhck3536
government-sponsored agencies. All values are at amortized costs,
except for MBSs from trading assets that are recorded at fair values.

Highly-Rated Residual + CDOs: Summation of the “Highly-Rated            Highly-Rated Residual                    Highly-Rated Residual
Residual” and the CDO amounts reported under trading assets in          + Schedule HC-D (from Form FR Y-9C       + bhckf649 + bhckf650
June 2008.                                                              as of June 2008) Item 5a+ Item 5b

Highly-Rated Residual + CDOs and Writedowns: Summation of               Highly-Rated Residual + CDOs             Highly-Rated Residual +
“Highly-Rated Residual + CDOs” and the writedowns on CDOs               +CDO Writedowns from Bloomberg           CDOs + CDO Writedowns
between December 2006 and June 2008.                                                                             from Bloomberg

Bottom-up Highly-Rated Tranches: Total value of MBSs that are           Schedules from Form FR Y-9C as of        bhck1709+bhck1713
not issued or guaranteed by the government or government-               December 2006: HC-B Items 4a3            +bhck1733+bhck1736
sponsored agencies plus ABSs, using HTM securities at amortized         (Columns A+D) + 4b3 (Columns A+D) +      +bhckC026+bhckC027
costs and AFS and trading securities at fair values. Note that there    Item 5 (Column A+D) + HC-D Item 4c       +bhck3536
is no ABS data for trading securities so ABS part includes only
HTM and AFS securities.


                                                                         38
Appendix 1 – Panel B: Independent Variables

Variable Name                                                                                                Data Source and Algebraic Expression
                                                                                                             or Data Mnemonic

$0-50 Billion and > $50 Billion: We construct a piece-wise linear specification which breaks up the          Schedule HC:
impact of asset size into two separate variables. The “$0-50 Billion” variable captures the impact of        bhck2170
the first $50 Billion worth of assets on holdings of highly-rated tranches. In constructing this variable,
each BHC in our sample takes the value Min{BHC asset size, $50 Billion}. The “>$50 Billion”
variable captures the impact on highly-rated holdings of assets in excess of $50 Billion. In
constructing this variable, each BHC in our sample takes the value Min{0, BHC asset size - $50
Billion}.

ABCP Activity Indicator: It is an indicator variable that is equal to one if a bank has any Asset            Schedule HC-S:
Backed Commercial Paper (ABCP) activity during the years 2003-2006. A bank is ABCP active if the             Variable equal to 1 if bhck806 +
maximum amount of its credit exposure arising from credit enhancements provided to asset-backed              bhck808 > 0 in any year 2003-2006
commercial paper conduit structures in the form of standby letters of credit, subordinated securities
and other credit enhancements is not zero. Note that we also include the amount of unused
commitments to provide liquidity to conduit structures.

Bonus-per-Salary: This variable is calculated as the ratio of total managerial bonuses divided by total      Execucomp
managerial salary.

C&I Loans: Commercial and industrial loans, scaled by total assets.                                          Schedule HC-C:
                                                                                                             (bhck1763+bhck1764)/bhck2170

CEO Ownership %: This variable is calculated as total CEO ownership divided by total shares                  Execucomp and Compustat
outstanding as of year-end 2006. Total ownership is calculated as the sum of delta weighted options
and shares owned (both unrestricted and unvested restricted stock).

Change in Leverage, 2000 Q4 – 2002 Q4: This variable is calculated as the change in Tier 1 leverage
from 2000 Q4 to 2002 Q4. In March 2001 banks began incorporating a loan’s credit rating into                 As of 2002 Q4:
calculations of risk-based capital. Prior to the rule change, risk-based capital was calculated based on     (bhck2170/bhck8274)/(bhck2170(t-
asset type rather than explicit asset risk, as measured by credit ratings. Firms experiencing the largest    8)/bhck8274(t-8))
increase in leverage surrounding the ratings-based rule change are identified as firms likely to have
been engaging in regulatory capital arbitrage.

                                                                           39
Compensation Residual: This variable is constructed by computing the log of average total executive       Execucomp and Compustat
compensation from 2003-2005, which is regressed on the log of firms’ 2005 market cap. The residual
from this regression, estimated in 2005, serves as the compensation residual variable in the cross-
sectional regressions estimated in 2006.

Dollar Gain from +1%: This variable calculates the change in CEO wealth per 1% increase in                Execucomp and Compustat
shareholder wealth. It is calculated as market cap * .01 * delta-weighted ownership.

Equity Risk (%): This variable represents the percent change in CEO wealth that results given a           Execucomp and Compustat
change in volatility of 1%. The variable is created by calculating the change in option value given a
1% change in volatility. The change in option value for a given change in volatility is then divided by
the sum of the value of the delta-weighted option portfolio, stock holdings, and preferred share
holdings of the CEO.

Governance Index: Index of 41 firm-level attributes from RiskMetrics. The index increases with the        RiskMetrics:
protection of minority shareholders and incorporates measures of board structure, anti-takeover           Governance index from Aggarwal, Erel,
provisions, auditor selection as well as compensation and ownership structure.                            Ferreira, and Matos (2011)

High-Compensation Elasticity: This variable measures the elasticity of the CEO’s total                    Execucomp and Compustat
compensation to changes in bank ROE Total compensation comprised of the following: Salary, Bonus,
Other Annual, Total Value of Restricted Stock Granted, Total Value of Stock Options Granted (using
Black-Scholes), Long-Term Incentive Payouts, and All Other Total. Return on Equity is calculated as:
Net Income / Common Equity Total as of Fiscal Year End. Bonus elasticity is computed using only
the total dollar amount of bonuses paid to the CEO. In our regression framework, we create an
indicator variable equal to one for BHCs with above-median levels of comp/ROE elasticity.

Loan Pipeline: This variable calculates the total amount of retail and wholesale closed-end first and     Schedule HC-P:
junior lien loans made on 1-4 family residential properties that were for sale during 2006. The total     (bhckf066 + bhckf067 + bhckf068 +
dollar amount of loans for sale is scaled by total assets.                                                bhckf069)/bhck2170

Log Market Cap: Log of December 2006 market capitalization.                                               CRSP:
                                                                                                          Market price * shares outstanding
Log Market-to-Book: Log of the ratio of December 2006 market capitalization to 2006 fiscal year-          CRSP and Compustat:
end book value of equity.                                                                                 (Market price*shares outstanding)/book
                                                                                                          value of equity, fiscal year end.


                                                                         40
Market Risk Equivalent Bank Indicator: This variable is equal to one for any BHC that is subject to         Schedule HC-R:
the market risk capital guidelines. A BHC is subject to the market risk capital guidelines, and thus able   Variable equal to 1 if bhck1651 > 0 as
to use estimates of V.A.R. in calculating capital requirements, if it’s consolidated trading activity,      of December 31, 2006.
defined as the sum of trading assets and liabilities for the previous quarter, equals: (1) 10% or more of
the BHCs total assets for the previous quarter, or (2) $1 Billion or more.

(Mortgage Sec. $t - Mortgage Sec. $t-4)/Assetst-4: Year-over-year change (sampled quarterly) in the         Schedule HC-S: The $ amount of
total amount of the outstanding principle balance of 1-4 family residential loans and home equity loans     mortgage securitization activity is
sold and securitized with servicing retained or with recourse or other seller-provided credit               calculated as (bhckb705 + bhckb706).
enhancements.


Mortgage Loans: Sum of all loans secured by real estate, scaled by total assets.                            Schedule HC-C: bhck1410/bhck2170.

“Other” H.T.M. and A.F.S. Securities (Gov., Agency, & Lower-rated Private-Label H.T.M. and                  HC-B item 8 (column A and D) –
A.F.S. Securities): This variable captures the portion of Held-to-Maturity and Available-for-Sale           Highly-Rated Residual (see
securities held on BHC balance sheets that are government or agency securities. This variable also          construction in Appendix A) + HC-D
captures the portion of non-highly rated non-agency, non-government (private-label) securities. It is       item 4c:
calculated as the difference between the total HTM and AFS securities on BHCs balance sheet and the         (bhck1754+bhck1773) – Highly-Rated
total “highly-rated residual” HTM and AFS securities on BHCs balance sheet.                                 Residual (see Appendix A) – bhck3536.

“Other” Trading Securities (Gov., Agency, & Lower-Rated Private Label Trading Securities):                  HC-D item 12 (Column A) – item 4c
This variable captures the portion of trading assets on BHCs balance sheet that are not included in the     (Column A):
highly-rated residual. This includes all government and agency securities as well as non-highly rated       bhck3545 – bhck3536.
private-label securities held on the trading book. It is calculated as the difference between total BHC
trading assets and the “all other MBS” portion of trading assets.

Prior Returns: BHC buy-and-hold returns calculated from January 2005- January 2006.                         CRSP

(Sec. $t – Sec. $t-4)/Assetst-4: Year-over-year (sampled quarterly) change in the total amount of the       Schedule HC-S: The $ amount of
outstanding principle balance of assets sold and securitized with servicing retained or with recourse or    securitization activity is calculated as
other seller-provided credit enhancements.                                                                  (bhckb705 + bhckb706 + bhckb707 +
                                                                                                            bhckb708 + bhckb709 + bhckb710 +
                                                                                                            bhckb711).



                                                                         41
Securitization-active Indicator: This variable measures the total outstanding principal balance of     Schedule HC-S:
assets sold and securitized with servicing retained or with recourse or other seller-provided credit   Variable equal to 1 if (bhckb705 +
enhancements. The securitization active dummy variable is equal to one for banks that have any         bhckb706 + bhckb707 + bhckb708 +
positive amount of securitization activity in the years 2003-2006.                                     bhckb709 + bhckb710 + bhckb711) > 0
                                                                                                       in any year 2003-2006.

Securitization-league-table Indicator: This variable is equal to one for any BHC that was involved     Moody’s eMaxx Data Services
in the underwriting of any type of securitization, including subprime RMBS, CLOs, CBOs, and CDOs.

Tier 1 Leverage: BHC Tier 1 capital divided by average total assets for leverage capital purposes.     HC-R item 31: bhck7204

Unused Loan Commitments: Unused portion of residential and commercial real estate loan                 Schedule HC-L:
commitments.                                                                                           (bhck3814+bhck3816)/bhck2170.




                                                                         42
Figure 1. Dollar Amounts of Holdings of Highly-Rated Tranches.

This figure plots the aggregate, nominal U.S. dollar amount of holdings of highly-rated tranches through time. Our sample runs from 2002-2008
and includes all U.S. publicly-traded bank holding companies (BHCs). The plot is created using the “Highly-Rated Residual” measure of highly-
rated holdings. See Appendix 1-Panel A for a description of this variable.




                                                           Holdings of Highly-Rated Tranches
                                        350

                                        300

                                        250
                     Billions $, U.S.




                                        200

                                        150

                                        100

                                        50

                                         0
                                              2002 Q4   2003 Q4   2004 Q4    2005 Q4   2006 Q4     2007 Q4      2008 Q4




                                                                            43
Figure 2. Time Series Plot of Holdings of Highly-Rated Tranches as a Percent of Total Assets.

This figure plots the holdings of highly-rated tranches as a percent of total assets through time. The sample includes all U.S. publicly-traded bank
holding companies (BHCs). Banks are deemed “securitization-active” if the outstanding principle balance of assets sold and securitized with
servicing retained or with recourse or other seller-provided credit enhancements is greater than zero in any quarter between the years 2003-2006.
Forty-six banks meet this criterion as of January 2002. The remaining banks are characterized as “Non-securitization active.”


                                                    Holdings of Highly-Rated Tranches
                                                    Securitization-Active        Non-Securitization Active

                                           0.035
                                            0.03
                       % of Total Assets




                                           0.025
                                            0.02
                                           0.015
                                            0.01
                                           0.005
                                              0
                                                    2002m3
                                                    2002m6
                                                    2002m9

                                                    2003m3
                                                    2003m6
                                                    2003m9

                                                    2004m3
                                                    2004m6
                                                    2004m9

                                                    2005m3
                                                    2005m6
                                                    2005m9

                                                    2006m3
                                                    2006m6
                                                    2006m9

                                                    2007m3
                                                    2007m6
                                                    2007m9

                                                    2008m3
                                                    2008m6
                                                    2008m9
                                                   2002m12




                                                   2003m12




                                                   2004m12




                                                   2005m12




                                                   2006m12




                                                   2007m12




                                                   2008m12
                                                                            44
Figure 3. Time Series Plot of Regulatory “Cushion.”

This figure plots the regulatory “cushion” of all U.S. publicly-traded bank holding companies (BHCs). The regulatory cushion is calculated as the
ratio of Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets, minus 4%. Banks are deemed “securitization-active” if the outstanding principle balance of assets
sold and securitized with servicing retained or with recourse or other seller-provided credit enhancements is greater than zero in any quarter
between the years 2003-2006. Forty-six banks meet this criterion as of January 2002. The remaining banks are characterized as “Non-
securitization active.”


                                           (Tier 1 Capital/Risk-Weighted Assets) - 4%
                                                  Securitization-Active         Non-Securitization Active
                                9
                                8
                                7
                                6
                      Percent




                                5
                                4
                                3
                                2
                                1
                                0
                                     2002m3
                                     2002m6
                                     2002m9

                                     2003m3
                                     2003m6
                                     2003m9

                                     2004m3
                                     2004m6
                                     2004m9

                                     2005m3
                                     2005m6
                                     2005m9

                                     2006m3
                                     2006m6
                                     2006m9

                                     2007m3
                                     2007m6
                                     2007m9

                                     2008m3
                                     2008m6
                                     2008m9
                                    2002m12




                                    2003m12




                                    2004m12




                                    2005m12




                                    2006m12




                                    2007m12




                                    2008m12
                                                                          45
Figure 4. Time Series Plot of Total Assets to Risk-Weighted Assets.

This figure plots the ratio of total assets to risk-weighted assets using a sample of U.S. publicly-traded bank holding companies (BHCs). The
sample includes all securitization-active BHCs and a size-based matched sample of non-securitization active BHCs. Banks are deemed
“securitization-active” if the outstanding principle balance of assets sold and securitized with servicing retained or with recourse or other seller-
provided credit enhancements is greater than zero in any quarter between the years 2003-2006.




                                                                                       Total Assets/Risk-Weighted Assets
                                                                  Securitization-Active                                                              Non-Securitization Active Matched Sample
                       1.5
                      1.45
                       1.4
                      1.35
                       1.3
                      1.25
                       1.2
                      1.15
                       1.1
                             2002m3
                                      2002m6
                                               2002m9


                                                                  2003m3
                                                                           2003m6
                                                                                    2003m9


                                                                                                       2004m3
                                                                                                                2004m6
                                                                                                                         2004m9


                                                                                                                                            2005m3
                                                                                                                                                     2005m6
                                                                                                                                                              2005m9


                                                                                                                                                                                 2006m3
                                                                                                                                                                                          2006m6
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2006m9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2007m3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2007m6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2007m9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2008m3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2008m6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2008m9
                                                        2002m12




                                                                                             2003m12




                                                                                                                                  2004m12




                                                                                                                                                                       2005m12




                                                                                                                                                                                                            2006m12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2007m12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2008m12
                                                                                                                                                 46
Table 1. Documenting the Holdings of Highly-Rated Tranches Among U.S. Bank Holding Companies.
This table reports summary statistics of some measures of holdings of highly-rated tranches: Highly-Rated Residual, Highly-Rated Residual + CDOs, Highly-
Rated Residual + CDOs and Writedowns, and Bottom-up Highly-Rated Tranches. See Appendix 1 for the definition of the variables. Full sample includes all
U.S. publicly-traded bank holding companies (BHCs). Large trading-asset banks are defined as BHCs with trading assets in excess of $1 Billion or BHCs whose
trading assets represent greater than 10% of total assets. Non-zero trading asset banks are defined as banks with trading assets greater than $0 and less than $1
Billion (or with trading assets representing less than 10% of total assets). Non-trading asset banks are defined as banks with no trading assets. Beginning in the
second quarter of 2008, BHCs with trading assets in excess of $1 Billion have been required to report the amount of CDOs and ABSs held in their trading
portfolio. Panel C reports statistics for the residual measure plus these CDOs and ABSs as in 2008. In Panel D, we also include write-downs on CDOs from
Bloomberg covering 2006 onwards.

                     Full Sample                        Large Trading-Asset Banks Non-Zero Trading Asset Banks Non Trading-Asset Banks   Citigroup   B of A   JPMorgan Chase
   Year       Obs     Mean       Med       90th %tile      Obs      Mean            Obs      Mean                Obs       Mean
Panel A: "Highly-Rated Residual"

   2002       169      1.29%       0.10%     3.59%         13      3.05%              35     1.68%                121     0.99%           1.96%      1.29%     0.00%
   2003       184      1.27%       0.06%     3.40%         13      3.77%              37     1.71%                134     0.91%           2.26%      0.79%     0.20%
   2004       205      1.37%       0.02%     3.85%         14      3.76%              36     2.38%                155     0.92%           2.74%      0.94%     0.88%
   2005       218      1.50%       0.10%     4.48%         14      4.70%              37     3.11%                167     0.88%           3.54%      1.43%     0.80%
   2006       231      1.31%       0.15%     3.13%         14      4.75%              40     2.49%                177     0.78%           4.78%      1.04%     0.63%
   2007       224      1.27%       0.20%     3.04%         12      3.18%              47     2.26%                165     0.85%           5.06%      1.73%     1.57%
   2008       220      1.13%       0.11%     3.12%         11      2.42%              47     1.52%                162     0.93%           4.39%      2.55%     2.03%

Panel B: "Highly-Rated Residual + CDOs"

   2006       231      1.31%       0.15%     3.13%         14      4.76%              40     2.49%                177     0.78%           4.79%      1.05%     0.67%

Panel C: "Highly-Rated Residual + CDOs and Writedowns"

   2006       231      1.33%       0.15%     3.14%         14      4.90%              40     2.52%                177     0.78%           5.68%      1.88%     0.69%

Panel D: "Bottom-Up Highly-Rated Tranches"

   2002       169      1.11%       0.04%     3.49%         13      2.01%              35     1.56%                121     0.89%           1.18%      1.37%     0.18%
   2003       184      1.01%       0.01%     3.15%         13      2.95%              37     1.53%                134     0.67%           1.04%      0.84%     0.26%
   2004       205      1.14%       0.01%     2.64%         14      3.09%              36     2.31%                155     0.69%           1.25%      0.52%     0.35%
   2005       218      1.26%       0.01%     3.26%         14      4.14%              37     2.80%                167     0.68%           1.85%      1.18%     0.78%
   2006       231      1.28%       0.09%     3.17%         14      5.04%              40     2.47%                177     0.72%           3.89%      1.83%     0.64%
   2007       224      1.23%       0.14%     3.15%         12      3.56%              47     2.13%                165     0.80%           4.69%      2.56%     1.51%
   2008       220      1.03%       0.17%     3.24%         11      2.37%              47     1.32%                162     0.85%           3.89%      3.19%     2.40%




                                                                                      47
Table 2. Holdings of Highly-Rated Tranches and Bank Holding Company Stock Returns.

This table documents the relationship between BHC stock returns and holdings of highly-rated tranches as of Dec 2006. The dependent variable is buy-and-hold
excess return over the equally-weighted market return from July 1, 2007 through December 31, 2008. Each regression uses a different measure of highly-rated
holdings. Appendix 1 outlines the construction of the measures of highly-rated holdings as well as the definitions of the main explanatory variables and control
variables. Heteroskedasticity-robust t-statistics are in parentheses. The symbols ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                                                          Measures of Holdings of Highly-Rated Tranches

                                                                    "Highly-Rated     "Highly-Rated Residual +   "Highly-Rated Residual +   "Bottom-Up Highly-
                                                                      Residual"               CDOs"               CDOs and Writedowns"       Rated Tranches"
                                                                          (1)                    (2)                        (3)                     (4)

80th %tile - 100th%tile Highly-Rated Tranche Holdings Indicator        -0.137**               -0.137**                   -0.141**                  -0.083
                                                                        (-2.284)               (-2.284)                   (-2.341)                (-1.280)
60th %tile - 80th%tile Highly-Rated Tranche Holdings Indicator           -0.108                 -0.108                     -0.116                  -0.068
                                                                        (-1.466)               (-1.466)                   (-1.575)                (-0.967)
40th %tile - 60th%tile Highly-Rated Tranche Holdings Indicator           -0.099                 -0.099                     -0.089                  -0.013
                                                                        (-1.506)               (-1.506)                   (-1.378)                (-0.206)
20th %tile - 40th%tile Highly-Rated Tranche Holdings Indicator           -0.091                 -0.091                     -0.091                  0.077
                                                                        (-0.949)               (-0.949)                   (-0.941)                (0.776)
0%tile - 20th%tile Highly-Rated Tranche Holdings (Omitted Group)


Unused Loan Commitments                                                -1.358**               -1.358**                   -1.357**                -1.266**
                                                                        (-2.402)               (-2.402)                   (-2.389)                (-2.201)
Mortgage Loans as % of Total Assets                                    -0.767**               -0.767**                   -0.765**                -0.785**
                                                                        (-2.204)               (-2.204)                   (-2.221)                (-2.182)
C&I Loans as % of Total Assets                                          -0.761*                -0.761*                    -0.773*                 -0.802*
                                                                        (-1.824)               (-1.824)                   (-1.877)                (-1.952)

"Other" H.T.M. and A.F.S. Securities                                     0.615                  0.615                      0.620                   0.627
                                                                       (1.470)                 (1.470)                    (1.488)                 (1.443)
"Other" Trading Securities                                             -2.705*                 -2.705*                    -2.674*                 -2.626*
                                                                       (-1.801)                (-1.801)                   (-1.803)                (-1.748)
Log Market Cap                                                           -0.005                 -0.005                     -0.005                  -0.009
                                                                        (-0.270)               (-0.270)                   (-0.228)                (-0.446)
Prior Returns                                                             0.167                 0.167                      0.169                   0.176
                                                                        (1.087)                (1.087)                    (1.096)                 (1.143)
Market-to-Book                                                         0.113***               0.113***                   0.112***                0.107***
                                                                        (3.107)                (3.107)                    (3.093)                 (2.923)
Tier 1 Leverage                                                          -0.012                 -0.012                     -0.012                  -0.011
                                                                        (-0.594)               (-0.594)                   (-0.610)                (-0.553)
Constant                                                                  0.551                 0.551                      0.538                   0.585
                                                                        (0.922)                (0.922)                    (0.901)                 (0.924)

Observations                                                             218                     218                        218                     218
Adjusted R-squared                                                      0.237                   0.237                      0.237                   0.226


                                                                                48
Table 3. Are Holdings of Highly-Rated Tranches Explained by Bank Asset Size?

This table tabulates the results of an OLS regression of our measures of highly-rated holdings on measures of bank size, “other” securities holdings, and other
control variables. The sample contains the cross-section of publicly traded U.S. BHCs with relevant data as of December 2006. Each regression uses a different
measure of highly-rated holdings. Appendix 1 outlines the construction of these measures of highly-rated holdings as well as the definitions of the main
explanatory variables and control variables. Heteroskedasticity-robust t-statistics are in parentheses. The symbols ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1, 5,
and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                                               Measures of Holdings of Highly-Rated Tranches


                                                    "Highly-Rated        "Highly-Rated Residual +      "Highly-Rated Residual +       "Bottom-Up Highly-
                                                      Residual"                  CDOs"                  CDOs and Writedowns"           Rated Tranches"
                                                          (1)                         (2)                         (3)                          (4)

$0-50 Billion                                           0.797**                   0.797**                       0.808**                     0.881***
                                                         (2.458)                   (2.459)                       (2.494)                     (2.771)
>$50 Billion                                             -0.063                    -0.063                         -0.056                      -0.062
                                                        (-1.518)                  (-1.519)                      (-1.336)                     (-1.550)

"Other" H.T.M. and A.F.S. Securities                     0.029                      0.029                        0.030                        0.030
                                                        (1.170)                    (1.170)                      (1.174)                      (1.238)
"Other" Trading Securities                               0.384                      0.385                        0.357                        0.354
                                                        (1.063)                    (1.067)                      (0.970)                      (1.031)

Prior Returns                                            -0.005                    -0.005                        -0.005                       -0.011
                                                        (-0.514)                  (-0.513)                      (-0.510)                     (-1.144)
Market-to-Book                                           0.003                     0.003                          0.003                       0.003
                                                        (1.418)                   (1.416)                       (1.395)                      (1.332)
Tier 1 Leverage                                          -0.001                    -0.001                        -0.001                       -0.001
                                                        (-1.107)                  (-1.108)                      (-1.113)                     (-0.875)

Constant                                                 0.013                      0.013                        0.013                        0.015
                                                        (0.742)                    (0.742)                      (0.745)                      (0.911)

Observations                                              225                         225                         225                          225
Adjusted R-squared                                       0.149                       0.149                       0.152                        0.172




                                                                                49
Table 4. “Skin in the Game”: Does Securitization Activity Explain Holdings of Highly-Rated Tranches?

This table tabulates the results of an OLS regression of our measures of highly-rated holdings on variables measuring a bank’s securitization activity.
“Securitization-active Indicator” variable in Columns (1) and (2) is equal to one if the outstanding principle balance of assets sold and securitized with servicing
retained or with recourse or other seller-provided credit enhancements is greater than zero. “Securitization-league-table Indicator” in Columns (3) and (4) is equal
to one for any BHC that was involved in the underwriting of any type of securitization. “Loan Pipeline” in Columns (5) and (6) calculates the total amount of
retail and wholesale closed-end first and junior lien loans made on 1-4 family residential properties that were for sale, scaled by total assets, as of December
2006. In the regressions including the Loan Pipeline, we measure highly-rated holdings as of December 2007 rather than December 2006. The dependent variable
in Columns (7) and (8), “(Highly-Rated Residual $t – Highly-Rated Residual $t-4)/Assetst-4,” measures year-over-year changes in the amount of holdings of highly
rated tranches, sampled quarterly from 2002 Q1 through 2006 Q4 (see Appendix 1 – Panel A for a detailed description of the construction of the “Highly-Rated
Residual” variable). The variable “(Sec. $t – Sec. $t-4)/Assetst-4” in Column (7) is sampled quarterly and is calculated as the year-over-year change in the total
amount of the outstanding principle balance of assets sold and securitized with servicing retained or with recourse or other seller-provided credit enhancements.
The variable “(Mortgage Sec. $t - Mortgage Sec. $t-4)/Assetst-4” in Column (8) is sampled quarterly and is calculated as the year-over-year change in the amount
of the outstanding principle balance of mortgage assets (1-4 family residential loans and home-equity lines of credit) sold and securitized with servicing retained
or with recourse or other seller-provided credit enhancements. Control variables are defined in Appendix 1. The sample contains the cross-section of publicly
traded U.S. BHCs with relevant data as of Dec 2006. Heteroskedasticity-robust t-statistics are in parentheses. Standard errors used to compute the T-statistics
reported in columns 7 and 8 are clustered by year-quarter and by Bank. The symbols ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                                50
(…Table 4 continued)



                                                                                Measures of Holdings of Highly-Rated Tranches
                                                                  "Highly-Rated                         "Highly-Rated                         "Highly-Rated
                                                      "Highly-      Residual +            "Highly-        Residual +             "Highly-       Residual +    (Highly-Rated Residual $t - Highly-
                                                        Rated       CDOs and                Rated         CDOs and                 Rated        CDOs and        Rated Residual $t-4)/Assetst-4
                                                      Residual"    Writedowns"            Residual"      Writedowns"             Residual"     Writedowns"

                                                            (1)           (2)                    (3)            (4)                     (5)           (6)        (7)                 (8)

Securitization-active Indicator                     0.015**       0.015**
                                                    (2.178)       (2.188)
Securitization-league-table Indicator                                                    0.015          0.015
                                                                                         (0.485)        (0.490)
Loan Pipeline                                                                                                                   -0.010        -0.011
                                                                                                                                (-0.280)      (-0.304)

(Sec. $t - Sec $t-4)/Assetst-4                                                                                                                                 0.003*
                                                                                                                                                                (1.69)
(Mortgage Sec. $t - Mortgage Sec. $t-4)/Assetst-4                                                                                                                                 0.003**
                                                                                                                                                                                   (1.98)

$0-50 Billion                                       0.564*        0.574**                0.736**        0.746**                 0.722*        0.731*            0.122              0.122
                                                    (1.967)       (2.001)                (2.138)        (2.173)                 (1.911)       (1.930)           (1.48)             (1.48)
>$50 Billion                                        -0.065        -0.059                 -0.062         -0.055                  -0.009        -0.005            -0.010             -0.010
                                                    (-1.565)      (-1.383)               (-1.577)       (-1.386)                (-0.544)      (-0.328)          (1.15)             (1.15)

"Other" H.T.M. and A.F.S. Securities                0.032         0.032                  0.032          0.032                   0.011         0.010             -0.004             -0.003
                                                    (1.261)       (1.265)                (1.346)        (1.351)                 (0.629)       (0.594)           (0.37)             (0.37)
"Other" Trading Securities                          0.386         0.359                  0.311          0.282                   -0.027        -0.039            0.048              0.048
                                                    (1.071)       (0.978)                (0.946)        (0.841)                 (-0.259)      (-0.361)          (1.05)             (1.05)

Prior Returns                                       -0.006        -0.006                 -0.007         -0.007                  -0.007        -0.007            -0.005              -0.005
                                                    (-0.527)      (-0.523)               (-0.649)       (-0.647)                (-0.686)      (-0.688)          (1.55)              (1.55)
Market-to-Book                                      0.004*        0.004*                 0.004          0.004                   0.001         0.001            0.002**            0.002**
                                                    (1.755)       (1.733)                (1.539)        (1.517)                 (0.450)       (0.433)           (2.24)              (2.25)
Tier 1 Leverage                                     -0.002        -0.002                 -0.001         -0.001                  -0.002*       -0.002*         -0.001**            -0.001**
                                                    (-1.238)      (-1.244)               (-0.996)       (-1.001)                (-1.676)      (-1.683)          (2.48)              (2.49)

Constant                                            0.012         0.012                  0.012          0.013                   0.031*        0.032*           0.014**            0.014**
                                                    (0.675)       (0.678)                (0.724)        (0.727)                 (1.889)       (1.903)           (2.07)             (2.07)

Observations                                        225           225                    225            225                     200           200               3,723              3,724
Adjusted R-squared                                  0.170         0.173                  0.150          0.153                   0.105         0.110             0.028              0.028



                                                                                                   51
Table 5. Does Regulatory Capital Arbitrage Explain Holdings of Highly-Rated Tranches?

This table tabulates the results of an OLS regression of our measures of highly-rated holdings on proxies identifying
banks that are likely to engage in regulatory-capital arbitrage activities. These proxies are an Asset-backed
Commercial Paper (ABCP) Activity indicator, change in leverage around the regulation change in 2001, and an
indicator variable for banks that are subject to market-risk-equivalent capital rules. The construction of each of these
variables, dependent variables, and controls is detailed in Appendix 1. The regressions in columns (1) and (2) are
estimated using holdings of highly-rated tranches as of December 2007 and ABCP activity as of December 2006.
The sample contains the cross-section of publicly traded U.S. BHCs with relevant data as of December 2006.
Heteroskedasticity-robust t-statistics are in parentheses. The symbols ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1, 5,
and 10% levels, respectively.


                                                                  Measures of Holdings of Highly-Rated Tranches

                                                    "Highly-Rated                         "Highly-Rated                       "Highly-Rated
                                        "Highly-      Residual +             "Highly-       Residual +            "Highly-      Residual +
                                          Rated       CDOs and                 Rated        CDOs and                Rated       CDOs and
                                        Residual"    Writedowns"             Residual"     Writedowns"            Residual"    Writedowns"
                                           (1)           (2)                    (3)             (4)                  (5)           (6)

ABCP Activity Indicator                   -0.009        -0.008
                                         (-0.363)      (-0.302)

Change in Leverage, 2000 Q4 - 2002 Q4                                          0.002           0.002
                                                                              (1.355)         (1.316)

Market Risk Equivalent Bank Indicator                                                                               0.016         0.015
                                                                                                                   (0.575)       (0.553)

$0-50 Billion                             0.803          0.800                0.791*          0.804**                0.665         0.681
                                         (1.572)       (1.567)                (1.975)          (2.007)              (1.586)       (1.631)
>$50 Billion                              -0.006        -0.003                 -0.061           -0.054              -0.063        -0.056
                                         (-0.375)      (-0.177)               (-1.513)        (-1.325)             (-1.567)      (-1.376)

"Other" H.T.M. and A.F.S. Securities      0.011          0.011                  0.001           0.001               0.030         0.030
                                         (0.834)       (0.811)                (0.0179)        (0.0247)             (1.177)       (1.181)
"Other" Trading Securities                -0.013        -0.027                  0.362           0.334               0.322         0.297
                                         (-0.176)      (-0.343)                (1.018)         (0.924)             (1.023)       (0.918)

Prior Returns                             -0.010        -0.010                 -0.014          -0.014               -0.006        -0.006
                                         (-1.037)      (-1.055)               (-1.065)        (-1.055)             (-0.585)      (-0.578)
Market-to-Book                            0.001          0.001                  0.008          0.008                 0.003         0.003
                                         (0.914)       (0.905)                (1.563)         (1.534)               (1.431)       (1.406)
Tier 1 Leverage                          -0.002*       -0.002*                 -0.001          -0.001               -0.001        -0.002
                                         (-1.731)      (-1.739)               (-0.442)        (-0.450)             (-1.154)      (-1.159)

Constant                                 0.029**       0.029**                 0.015           0.015                0.014         0.014
                                          (2.180)       (2.206)               (0.481)         (0.485)              (0.921)       (0.919)

Observations                               221           221                    140             140                  225           225
Adjusted R-squared                        0.113         0.117                  0.135           0.137                0.151         0.154




                                                               52
Table 6: Do Bad Incentives Explain Holdings of Highly-Rated Tranches?

This table tabulates the results of an OLS regression of our measures of highly-rated holdings on various proxies of managerial incentives. The construction of
each dependent and independent variable is detailed in Appendix 1. The sample contains the cross-section of publicly traded U.S. BHCs with relevant data as of
Dec 2006. Heteroskedasticity-robust t-statistics are in parentheses. The symbols ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                              Dependent Variable: "Highly-Rated Residual" Measure of Holdings of Highly-Rated Tranches
                                                     (1)             (2)                (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)              (7)

Governance Index                                    -0.014
                                                   (-0.740)
High-Compensation Elasticity                                          0.014
                                                                     (1.056)
Compensation Residual                                                                 0.016
                                                                                     (1.400)
Bonus-per-Salary                                                                                       -0.002
                                                                                                      (-0.428)
Dollar Gain from +1%                                                                                                    0.000
                                                                                                                       (1.099)
Equity Risk (%)                                                                                                                         -2.696
                                                                                                                                       (-1.337)
CEO Ownership %                                                                                                                                           7.338
                                                                                                                                                         (0.962)
$0-50 Billion                                      0.833**           0.685            0.918*           0.898*           0.455           0.827*            0.862*
                                                    (2.380)         (0.978)          (1.820)          (1.928)         (1.189)          (1.910)           (1.899)
>$50 Billion                                        -0.064           -0.070           -0.067           -0.064          -0.065           -0.066            -0.067
                                                   (-1.533)         (-1.514)         (-1.568)         (-1.521)        (-1.254)         (-1.560)          (-1.546)
"Other" H.T.M. and A.F.S. Securities                 0.028            0.119           0.083            0.021            0.014           0.028             0.013
                                                    (1.074)          (0.463)         (0.726)          (0.367)          (0.241)         (0.428)           (0.224)
"Other" Trading Securities                           0.395            0.444           0.382            0.460            0.224           0.363             0.394
                                                    (1.093)          (1.201)         (1.085)          (1.182)          (0.471)         (0.994)           (1.056)
Prior Returns                                       -0.007            0.011           -0.004            -0.002          -0.003           -0.004            -0.004
                                                   (-0.633)          (0.167)         (-0.155)         (-0.493)        (-0.632)         (-0.780)          (-0.707)
Market-to-Book                                      0.004             0.006            0.005            -0.016          -0.011           -0.010            -0.003
                                                   (1.536)          (0.416)          (0.764)          (-0.781)        (-0.535)         (-0.464)          (-0.154)
Tier 1 Leverage                                     -0.001           -0.003           -0.002            0.010            0.013            0.011             0.012
                                                   (-1.077)         (-0.370)         (-0.300)          (1.535)         (1.561)          (1.548)           (1.542)
Constant                                             0.021           -0.014           0.001            0.016            0.012           0.027             0.007
                                                    (0.968)         (-0.126)         (0.0111)         (0.328)          (0.217)         (0.494)           (0.147)
Observations                                         222               51              67               89              79               79                79
Adjusted R-squared                                  0.146            -0.033           0.063            0.083           0.140            0.088             0.093




                                                                               53
