                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE INCREDIBLE SHRINKING PORTUGUESE FIRM

                                         Serguey Braguinsky
                                          Lee G. Branstetter
                                           Andre Regateiro

                                        Working Paper 17265
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17265


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2011




This research was supported by the Carnegie Mellon-Portugal Information and Communications Technologies
Institute, the Institute's Ph.D. program in Technological Change and Entrepreneurship, and the Portuguese
National Science Foundation (FCT). We thank Rui Baptista, Steven Klepper, Pedro Martins, and
Lowell Taylor for helpful comments. We also thank Michael Dahl for access to information on changes
in the firm size distribution in Denmark and Javier Miranda for similar information on changes in
the firm size distribution in the U.S. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, nor do they reflect the
views of any branch, agency, or ministry of the Government of Portugal.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Serguey Braguinsky, Lee G. Branstetter, and Andre Regateiro. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Incredible Shrinking Portuguese Firm
Serguey Braguinsky, Lee G. Branstetter, and Andre Regateiro
NBER Working Paper No. 17265
July 2011
JEL No. J21,J58,J80,K3,L51,O12,O41,O52

                                              ABSTRACT

Using Portugal's extensive matched employer-employee data set, this paper documents an unusual
feature of the Portuguese economy. For decades, the entire Portuguese firm size distribution has been
shifting to the left. We argue in this paper that Portugal's shrinking firms are linked to the country's
anemic growth and low productivity. We show that the shift in the Portuguese firm size distribution
is not reflected in other advanced industrial economies for which we have been able to obtain comparable
data. Careful attempts to account for expanding data coverage, a structural shift from manufacturing
to services, and aggressive efforts to "demonopolize" the Portuguese economy leave about half of
this shift unexplained by these factors. So, what does explain the shift? We argue that Portugal's uniquely
strong protections for regular workers have played an important role. Drawing upon an emerging
literature that that attributes much of the productivity gap between advanced nations and developing
nations to the misallocation of resources across firms in developing countries, we develop a theoretical
model that shows how Portugal's labor market institutions could prevent more productive firms from
reaching their optimal size, thereby constraining GDP per capita. Calibration exercises based on this
model quantify the degree of labor market distortion consistent with recent shifts in the Portuguese
firm size distribution. These calibration exercises suggest quite substantial growth effects could arise
if the distortions were lessened or abolished altogether.


Serguey Braguinsky                                   Andre Regateiro
Department of Social and Decision Sciences           Heinz College
and Heinz College,                                   School of Public Policy and Management
School of Public Policy and Management               Carnegie Mellon University
Carnegie Mellon University                           Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                                 AndreRegateiro@cmu.edu
sbrag@andrew.cmu.edu

Lee G. Branstetter
Heinz College
School of Public Policy and Management
Department of Social and Decision Sciences
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
branstet@andrew.cmu.edu
1       Introduction

The Portuguese economy has been making headlines in recent months – and the news has been almost

uniformly bad. After months of deteriorating economic circumstances and declining confidence in the nation’s

ability to make good on its rapidly expanding debts, Portugal became the third eurozone economy to request

a bailout from the nations with which it shares the common currency and the IMF. The crisis led to the fall

of the ruling party, an acrimonious election, and widespread pessimism on the part of Portuguese workers,

managers, and investors.1

     This paper looks beyond current headlines and macroeconomic imbalances to consider a central weakness

plaguing Portugal for decades – low productivity levels. Even when compared to Western Europe’s other

weaker economies, Portugal’s productivity record is uninspiring and has been so for years.2 This paper

suggests a link between Portugal’s unusually poor productivity performance and another distinctive feature

of its economic landscape – a firm size distribution that has been shifting to the left for more than 20

years. Analysis using Portugal’s comprehensive and highly detailed matched employer-employee data base

demonstrates the surprising extent and persistence of this shift. Although many other researchers have used

these data, to our knowledge, ours is the first paper to document this surprising change.3

     As we demonstrate, this kind of shift is not found in other advanced industrial economies where we have

been able to obtain similar data, such as the U.S. or Denmark. In these countries, the tendency has been

for the firm size distribution to shift modestly to the right. It might be theoretically possible for changes

in Portugal’s firm size distribution to be an artifact of expanding data coverage, a reflection of the shift

from manufacturing to services, or a response to the efforts of Portuguese governments in the 1980s and

1990s to demonopolize sectors that had become excessively concentrated in the turbulent years of the 1970s

and 1980s. However, we show that even generous allowances for all of these factors leaves most of the shift

unexplained. To explain the residual, we turn to Portugal’s uniquely restrictive labor market practices and

their implications for the allocation of labor across firms.

     We develop a theoretical model that shows how strong protections for employees could, in principle,

shift the entire firm size distribution. Our model builds on the intellectual foundations of Lucas (1978), in

which the firm size distribution reflects an underlying distribution of managerial ability. Better managers,

by definition, run bigger firms. We argue that the impact of employment protections can be represented as

an effective tax on wages. By driving a wedge between the costs firms must pay for employees and their
    1 See“Portugal and the Eurozone,” Financial Times, July 6, 2011.
    2 SeeBlanchard (2007), among many other studies, documenting Portugal’s poor productivity record.
    3 Important studies using these data include Blanchard and Portugal (2001) and Cabral and Mata (2003).




                                                             1
value to the firm, these protections lead firms to reduce their employment, lower demand for workers in

the aggregate, and force some employees into the creation of low-productivity enterprises when these same

employees would be better off working for more skilled managers. In effect, these protections distort and

degrade the distribution of employees across managers of different quality. Not only is the entire firm size

shifted to the left, but productivity in terms of national per capita output falls.

   It turns out that even a system of labor protections that is uniformly applied across the firm size distri-

bution has a disproportionate impact on larger, more productive enterprises. These enterprises are especially

sensitive to labor protections and respond to them by reducing employment even more, in proportion to their

size, than smaller, less productive enterprises. This pattern of response strengthens the (negative) impact

of the labor protections on aggregate output per capita. A review of Portuguese economic history suggests

that, in fact, the protections were not rigidly enforced for the smallest firms, but that the effective degree

of protection was substantially higher for larger firms. We develop an extension of the model to the case

of nonlinear tax on labor and show, both analytically and by means of a calibration exercise, that a policy

regime that discriminates against large firms exacerbates the leftward shift in the firm size distribution.

   An emerging literature in development economics finds that the largest part of the productivity gap

between developed and developing countries can be attributed to the inefficient allocation of resources across

firms in the latter countries.4 Whereas well developed factor and product markets and a high level of

competitive intensity ensure that the most productive factors are allocated to the most productive enterprises

in developed countries, this often fails to happen to the same degree in developing countries. Our paper

builds on this literature, and shows that this problem not only exists in developing Asia, Africa, or Latin

America, but also in the countries of the Western European periphery.

   Based on our model, we use calibration exercises to estimate the magnitude of policy distortions that are

consistent with recent shifts in the Portuguese firm size distribution. We find that these distortions have

serious deleterious effects on productivity in Portugal. Our calibrations suggest that the relaxation of labor

market protections could yield large productivity gains. Given the difficult choices facing Portugal’s new

government, the message of this paper may prove to be a timely one.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief overview of Portuguese economic

history that lays out the essential facts and policy shifts with which our paper contends. Section 3 documents

the shift in Portugal’s firm size distribution, compares it to trends in other countries, and demonstrates

that this shift is not an artifact of expanding data coverage or “natural causes,” such as the shift from
  4 This literature is surveyed in Jones (2011). Important recent contributions include Hsieh and Klenow (2009), Restuccia

and Rogerson (2008), and Chari (2011).



                                                            2
manufacturing to services. Sections 4 presents the theoretical model where labor protections are modeled

as a uniform (linear) tax on labor and shows that it can generate the shrinkage of the firm size observed

in the data and that the burden of such a tax falls disproportionately on larger firms. Section 5 presents

the model with nonlinear tax to reflect the fact that labor protections have been relaxed for smaller firms

but tightened for larger firms in Portugal over the past 20-25 years. The model and the calibration exercise

based on it show that a large reduction in the labor protections for smaller firms can be more than undone

in terms of its effects on firm size and efficiency by simultaneously introducing a relatively small bias against

larger firms. Section 6 concludes.



2     Portugal’s Economic Mess: Shrinking Firms and Declining Prospects

      “The road to hell is paved with good intentions” - attributed to Saint Bernard of Clairvaux


    Portugal’s current economic challenges are daunting, but the underlying causes of the nation’s economic

woes have been evident for some time. At least five years ago, Olivier Blanchard circulated a paper that

presciently warned Portugal would face real difficulty if it did not contend seriously with these underlying

problems. Blanchard (2007) diagnosis of Portugal’s challenges emphasized the macroeconomic imbalances

that had emerged by the mid-2000s. As Portugal’s former currency became more tightly linked to that of its

more developed European trading partners over the course of the 1990s, and as the prospects for Portugal’s

early entry into a European currency union advanced, inflation and currency risk diminished. Portuguese

interest rates rapidly fell from fairly high levels to much lower levels approaching those of the slower growing

core European economies. Portuguese businesses and consumers responded to these rapid and substantial

declines in interest rates in a predictable fashion, and booming investment and debt-fueled consumption

increases drove Portuguese unemployment rates down to historically low levels while raising real wages to

unsustainably high levels. Domestic savings was insufficient to finance a simultaneous consumer credit boom

and an investment boom, and Portugal began running large current account deficits.

    In the 2000s, Portugal’s twin investment and consumption booms abruptly stopped. Dramatically slower

growth and rising unemployment produced persistent fiscal deficits, as government spending sought to fill

the gap left by the collapse of the boom. The financing of these growing deficits increasingly relied on

foreign investors. The common currency prevented Portugal from responding to excessively high real wages

by allowing the currency to depreciate. In principle, Portugal could regained competitiveness by allowing

wages to fall, but wages appear to be characterized by downward rigidity in even the most flexible economies,


                                                       3
and rigidities in the Portuguese labor market were extreme, even by European standards, slowing downward

adjustment in wages even in the presence of massive unemployment. The pain of the adjustment process

could be ameliorated if Portugal could partly eliminate its large productivity gap vis-a-vis the European core

economies. But this gap has proven to be large and persistent. Portuguese productivity levels remain low,

and the rate of convergence with the higher productivity levels of Northern Europe has been agonizingly

slow.

   While Blanchard’s analysis noted Portugal’s poor productivity performance, his paper did not dwell at

length on its causes or remedies. Our paper is more focused on this deep foundational source of Portugal’s

problems, and to better understand its genesis and evolution, we need to go back considerably further in

time. In fact, we need to go back all the way to Portugal’s institutional divergence from the rest of Western

Europe in the 1930s.5 Founded in the first decade of the 20th century, Portugal’s republic was politically

unstable and economically poorly managed. Inflation and sovereign debt problems prompted a military coup

that brought Minister of Finance Antonio de Oliviera Salazar to power. At the nadir of the Great Depression,

Portugal reconstituted itself as an authoritarian state where Salazar ruled with an iron hand. Like its Iberian

neighbor, Spain, Portugal remained under this dictatorship well into the 1970s. Initially quite restrictive

in its trading relationships with Western Europe, Portugal gradually opened to more extensive trade and

investment ties vis-a-vis the rest of the continent, and Portuguese per capita income began to converge with

that of continental Western Europe, but a large gap persisted into the 1970s.

   The dictatorship collapsed with the so-called Carnation Revolution of 1974. During the long decades

of authoritarian rule, the only segment of the political spectrum that had not become heavily tainted by

associated with the dictator was the far left. It was therefore not surprising that the post-dictatorship political

regime was dominated by politicians with this ideological bent. Seeking to defend workers’ rights that had

been regularly trampled on during the dictatorship, the new government enshrined high levels of worker

protections in the nation’s new constitution. Under the new regime, it was nearly impossible for private

employers of any size to fire workers or to reduce nominal wages. In addition to aggressive intervention in the

labor market, the new regime also sought to increase social spending (which led to inflation and government

financing problems), and increase government ownership of the means of production. A number of sectors

were effectively nationalized, and existing privately owned enterprises were combined into government-owned

conglomerates.
   5 The next several paragraphs draw upon a series of wide-ranging conversations with Portuguese economists and other social

scientists, including Rui Baptista (IST), Francisco Lima (IST), Nuno Limao (University of Maryland), and Pedro Martins
(QMUL, now Government of Portugal). For a comprehensive history through the 1990s, see Corkill (1999).




                                                             4
    The new regime also inherited problems that were not of its own making. At the same time that the

dictatorship was collapsing at home, longstanding insurgencies and independence movements in Portugal’s

overseas territories intensified, the Portuguese military withdrew from Africa, and large numbers of former

colonists moved back to Portugal with limited assets, income, and prospects. Students of the global macroe-

conomic history of the 1970s will observe that these were not terribly good times for a country to attempt

to fundamentally remake itself and cope with the collapse of an overseas empire. And Portugal’s prospects

worsened with the severe global recession of the early 1980s.

    The economic performance of the new regime was not good. Macroeconomic instability and the need for

a bail-out from the IMF in the early 1980s helped prompt a shift to more centrist economic policies in the

1980s, and this shift was reinforced by efforts to accede to what was then known as the European Economic

Community. Over the course of the 1980s, Portugal opened up to greater trade and investment links with

the EEC and harmonized a number of its laws and economic institutions with Western European norms (as

a condition for EEC accession).6 The march toward nationalization and monopolization was reversed, with

the government breaking up and privatizing in the late 1980s a number of the sectors it had nationalized

and monopolized in the late 1970s and early 1980s. The growth in government spending sharply decelerated,

government finances were placed on a sounder footing, and monetary policy became much less inflationary.

Finally, the extremely strong protections for Portuguese workers were slightly relaxed for all enterprises,

and successive Portuguese governments began granting exemptions for smaller firms from various tax and

administrative rules and social policies that larger enterprises were constrained to follow.7

    Combined with a global economic recovery, these policy shifts helped lead to much better economic

outcomes. Portuguese economic growth accelerated, employment prospects improved, and growth came in

tandem with a much higher level of macroeconomic stability. Portugal benefitted from its position as a

relatively low cost manufacturer with privileged access to the core European markets, and manufactured ex-

ports to Western Europe grew rapidly. Portugal also benefitted from inward investment from more advanced

economies, which provided better technology as well as capital. Despite inflation that was persistently higher

in Portugal than in the core European economies, exchange rate movements maintained the competitiveness

of Portuguese labor vis-a-vis that in the more productive and advanced core European economies.

    But as the 1990s wore on, some of these favorable circumstances began to shift in less favorable directions.

In the early 1990s, Portugal, like other Western European countries, effectively pegged its currency to the
   6 SeeHandley  and Limão (2010).
   7 SeeMartins (2009) for an excellent description and detailed analysis of the impact of this relaxation of labor regulations
for small firms.




                                                              5
German Deutschemark, as part of preparation for an eventual common currency. The de facto loss of currency

flexibility undermined Portuguese competitiveness (and this is reflected in the trade statistics).8 The collapse

of Leninism in Eastern Europe and the rise of China brought a new set of competitors into the relatively

low-tech industries in which Portugal had been a successful exporter and this, too, is reflected in the trade

statistics. The expansion of the EU in an eastward direction opened up a whole new range of attractive

options for Western European multinationals seeking to engage in FDI at the European periphery, and we see

this, too, reflected in the data. In the mid-to-late 1990s, as all of these adverse phenomena intensified, their

macroeconomic effects were masked for a while by the twin investment and consumption booms that were

the focus of Blanchard’s prescient diagnosis. When the booms ended, the impact of Portugal’s worsening

relative competitiveness became far too obvious.

   This overview provides a useful context in which to consider the chief empirical contribution of this

paper, which is the documentation of the pronounced leftward shift in the Portuguese firm size distribution.

Our data window opens in the mid-1980s, as the policy regime was shifting in a more market friendly

direction. Greater trade openness might have led to greater competition for larger manufacturing firms.

Demonopolization of the industries that had been nationalized could plausibly lead to shrinkage of the largest

firms in these industries. Like nearly all industrialized nations, Portugal has witnessed a shift in labor from

manufacturing, where firms have traditionally been larger, to services, where they have traditionally been

smaller. Successive Portuguese governments made concerted efforts to bring small firms in the “informal

economy” into the formal sector, and coverage of small firms in the official databases expanded over time.

All of these factors could affect the firm size distribution, and we need to first confirm that the leftward shift

in the firms size distribution does not simply arise from these “natural causes.”

   At the same time, there are ample reasons to believe that government interventions in the labor market

continue to distort the allocation of labor across firms. Even after the partial labor market reforms of the

late 1980s, it remains very difficult for enterprises – especially those with over 20 employees – to fire workers

for cause or to lay-off workers even in difficult economic circumstances. It remains all but impossible for

firms to reduce employees’ nominal wages, even when the firms face very adverse circumstances. Legally

mandated severance payments are quite high, even by European standards, and Portuguese courts have been

consistently characterized by a pro-worker orientation. Portuguese firms are required to provide a range of

services to employees. OECD rankings of member states on the basis of labor market protections consistently

placed Portugal at the very top through the mid 1990s. At that point, it was ranked second after Turkey,
  8 The   issues in this paragraph are noted in Blanchard (2007).




                                                               6
and Turkey’s macroeconomic performance in the 1990s and 2000s has also been quite uneven.

   Another dimension of distortion revolves around the increasing extent to which the Portuguese legal,

tax, and administrative regime discriminates against larger enterprises. Appendix B lists a large number of

policies which only apply to firms above a certain size. These policies span virtually the entire spectrum of

public regulation of enterprise from compliance with accounting rules, to minimum wage requirements, to tax

policy. It is common for social democratic European countries with elaborate labor laws and protections to

exempt the smallest firms from many policy requirements and mandates. In other countries, these exemptions

are often granted to all enterprises below a certain threshold, and this tends to be associated with a “bulge”

in the firm size distribution just below the common threshold at which many of these requirements hold.9

In Portugal, we find no “bulge” in the firm size distribution, probably because there is no common threshold

but rather a very large number of different thresholds that are connected to different policies. However, it is

clear that, as Portuguese enterprises grow in size, they confront a steadily growing set of rules, regulations,

and mandates that increasingly drive a wedge between the value of employees to the firm and the cost

of employing workers while maintaining compliance with all relevant laws. The absence of a single clear

threshold does not eliminate the possibility that firm growth is deterred by a gradual accretion of increasing

mandates and costs.

   In Section 4, we introduce a theoretical model that reflects both these dimensions of distortion. We first

illustrate how strong labor market protections can function as a tax on wages and, in turn, how that can

lead to a leftward shift to a firm size distribution. Even when there is a uniform tax that does not apply with

greater incidence against large firms, we find that the reductions in employment relative to the no-distortion

benchmark are greatest for the larger firms. It is straightforward to show that workers are shifted into less

productive enterprises and aggregate per capita output falls as the firm size distribution shifts to the left.

   To reflect the more recent pattern of exemptions for small firms, but requirements for larger firms, in

Section 5 we replace our uniform tax with a nonlinear tax, and show that a large decrease in the uniform

component of the tax, if accompanied by introducing an relatively modest rate of increase of such a tax with

firm size, can actually lead to an even bigger leftward shift of the firm size distribution and efficiency loss than

a large increase in the uniform tax. It thus appears that more recent attempts by the Portuguese government

to relax labor protections for smaller firms while also “tilting” the playing field against larger firms have

only exacerbated the negative effects in terms of the shift in the firm size distribution and efficiency.

   Before we develop this model and apply it to the Portuguese economy, though, we must first document
  9 See   Garicano et al. (2011), who find evidence of such a bulge in the French firm size distribution.




                                                                 7
the shift in Portugal’s firm size distribution and demonstrate that it is not fully attributable to “natural

causes.” And that is the focus of our next section.



3     Firm Size Matters: Shifts in the Portuguese Firm Size Distri-

      bution, 1986-2009

Table 1 shows the evolution of firm size, measured by the total number of workers, of the Portuguese entire

economy, by quartile, from the opening of our data window in 1986 through the most recent year for which

we have complete data, 2009. The shift in the entire firm size distribution is immediately apparent. It also

appears if we measure firm size by revenues rather than workers. If we plot data by decile, we see that firm

size is declining at every decile, save the lowest.

    What is also interesting is that we do not see a shift like this in other advanced industrial countries for

which comparable data are easily available. The Business Dynamics Statistics database maintained by the

U.S. Census Bureau allows users to examine changes in the distribution of U.S. firms by employment size

category10 of the U.S. Census Bureau. While the on-line database does not allow us to produce a table that

looks exactly like Table 1, it is clear from the histogram one can produce with these data that the U.S. firm

size distribution has modestly shifted to the right. Between the late 1970s and 2009, the number of firms in

the smallest categories declined slightly, and the number of firms in most of the largest categories increased

slightly. This looks nothing like the shift we see in Portugal.

    Figure 1 illustrates the shift in the U.S. firm size distribution. Of course, the United States is not

necessarily an ideal comparator for Portugal. Instead, one might want to look at another comparable

European economy. Fortunately, similar data are also available for Denmark. In fact, the data for Denmark

are more detailed and more comparable to that the Portuguese data than is the case for the U.S., allowing

us to construct a table that is easily comparable to the one we created for Portugal.

    Table 2 shows that the average firm size in Denmark has actually grown in the last 30 years. Not only

that but all other percentiles of the data have either grown or remained constant. As in the U.S., it seems

the firm size distribution in Denmark has shifted somewhat to the right. But even if there is a shift in the

measured Portuguese firm size distribution that is not evident in the data for other industrial countries,

it is still possible that the shift could be an artifact of the data or it could arise for reasons other than

distortionary government policies.
 10 http://www.ces.census.gov/index.php/bds




                                                       8
3.1    Is the Shift an Artifact of Increasing Data Coverage?

An increase in database coverage could have caused an apparent shift in the Portuguese firm size distribution.

Small firms could have been previously operating “under the radar” and not reporting their existence in order

to escape paying taxes and social security contributions. As these, mostly small, firms move into the formal

economy a decrease in the firm size distribution could appear in the data, even though the underling real

FSD remained unchanged. Dell’Anno (2007) claims the informal economy has indeed decreased in Portugal,

as depicted in Table 3 transcribed from that study.

   To see how much of the leftward shift in the firm size distribution may be attributable to the decrease in

the informal economy, we make use of the regulation that requires firms to disclose how long they have been

operating, and the tenure of their employees at the time of their first formal registration. Table 4 reports the

percentage of new firms (firms that are in the database for the first time) that report tenures of at least 3

years for at least one worker. It seems from these data that the database is indeed becoming more inclusive.

Once we have identified using this procedure firms that had been operating in the informal economy before

they became formally registered, we use a simple regression approach to correct our firm size distribution

for the effects of increasing data coverage.

   Specifically, we estimate recursively the following regression for firms identified as having entered from

the informal economy:



                               Et−1 = Et + β1 F irmAge + β2 IndustryControl.


   The regression is estimated recursively for the previous 5 years or the maximum workers’ tenure reported,

whichever is smaller. The resulting coefficients are then employed to infer the size in the previous year, given

the size in the current year, firm age, and industry.

   Table 5 compares the original and corrected average firm size. Table 6 shows the decile decomposition

of the corrected firm size. Figure 2 compares the 1987 original and corrected firm size density. Figure 3

compares the 2007 original and corrected firm size density.

   In line with the story that the size of the informal economy in Portugal has been getting smaller over

the years (Dell’Anno (2007)), the correction procedure above seems to have a much greater impact in the

early that in later years. It turns out that of our original 8.6 drop in average firm size 1.95 or 22% can be

explained by increased database coverage. If we consider the entire firm size distribution rather than a single

moment, such as the mean, the impact on our measured shift appears limited, as the figures indicate.



                                                        9
3.2     Demonopolization in the 1980s

As mentioned in the introductory section, the opening of our data window broadly corresponds to the

period in which Portuguese economic policy was shifting to the center, and earlier efforts to nationalize

and monopolize certain critical sectors were reversed. This “denationalization” and “demonopolization”

policy was concentrated in sectors such as electricity generation/distribution, railway management/operation,

cable and DSL based telecom companies, gas and water distribution (with the establishment of regional

monopolies), and regional transport, where earlier nationalization and monopolization efforts had been

concentrated. Forcing the breakup of large companies into several smaller ones could, in principle, drive the

measured firm size distribution to the left.

   Unfortunately, our data, which have replaced firm names with identifier codes to maintain anonymity, do

not allow us to easily identify exactly which enterprises were subject to this policy. However, we can show

that even if we control for all significant firm breakups in our data over our sample period, this is insufficient

to explain the shifts we see in the data. The procedure we follow below is to identify firm breakups through

worker movements, which we can track quite easily. We identify any firm whose initial workforce is composed

of over 50% of workers that worked together in another firm in the previous year as being created as a result

of a breakup or divestiture. Obviously, this procedure captures not only government forced breakups but

also voluntary ones. The procedure is applied to all firms with more than 50 workers, even though the

conventional wisdom regarding the demonopolization and denationalization policies of the 1980s suggests

that they were concentrated on much larger enterprises. Our procedure will thus capture many other kinds

of breakups, including spinoffs that contained a high degree of worker movement from the parent to the new

firm.

   As a result of the procedure described above, we have identified 982 firms with more than 50 workers as

having been created out of some kind of divestiture or breakup procedure. To measure the impact of firm

breakups in the change in average firm size we can compare the current situation with a hypothetical world

where these firms never went through a breakup. To do so we consider that only the parent firm survives

and that its size is the sum of the sizes of all of its offspring.

   Table 7 shows the results. Out of the remaining 5.6 average firm size reduction (after the correction for

increased database coverage), breakups only explain 0.001 difference in average firm size or close to 0.002%.

Other moments of the firm size distribution remain broadly unaffected as well. This particular aspect of

recent Portuguese policy history does not explain the leftward shift in the firm size distribution.




                                                         10
3.3       The Switch to Services

Another factor contributing to decreases in firm size is the change in the structure of the Portuguese econ-

omy. Like all other advanced industrial economies, Portugal has seen a decline in the employment share

of manufacturing, and a corresponding rise in the employment share of the service sector over our sample

period.

   Table 8 shows this change. Firms in the service sector have historically been considerably smaller than

firms in manufacturing as can be seen in Table 9. So the switch in economic fabric is yet another factor

contributing to the decrease in firm size. To measure the impact of the change in the economic fabric of

Portugal on the firm size distribution we compare the observed decrease in size with the counterfactual of

what would have happened if the change in employment shares had not occurred. To do so we compute the

expected firm average size in 2007 if the aggregate sector weights were the same ones as in 1987.

   This calculation yields an expected firm size in 2007 of 11.36 workers. The unexplained remaining gap of

15.67 to 9.11, or about 6.57, can then be decomposed into the change of size within sectors from 15.67 to 11.

13 and the change in sector composition from 11.36 to 9.11. The change in industry composition explains

2.25 out of the initial 8.6 difference, or about 26%. Although we do not report these results here, one can

undertake a similar exercise for other moments of the distribution. The clear conclusion is that, while the

shift to services explains part of the shift in the firm size distribution, it explains only part of the shift. Even

within the service sector, we see a decline in average firm size and a decline at every size decile. We also

remind the reader that, while other countries like the United States and Denmark have also undergone a

shift toward greater employment in services, they have not experienced the same leftward shift in the entire

firm size distribution that we have seen in Portugal.

   Several interesting conclusions emerge from this section. First, the entire firm size distribution in Portugal

has shifted significantly to the left. Second, we do not see similar shifts in other Western countries for which

we have comparable data. Third, the Portuguese shift cannot be plausibly ascribed to expanding data

coverage or other “natural causes.” While expanding data coverage and other factors can explain part of

the shift that we observe, a great deal remains unexplained. To account for this large residual, we turn now

to the consideration of a category of economic policies that Portugal has pursued to an extreme degree in

the post-Salazar era: employment protections for workers.




                                                        11
4     Labor Protection

Labor Protection is notoriously high in Portugal. The OECD index of Strictness of Overall Employment

Protection11 has listed Portugal as the country having the most protective labor laws in the entire sample

from 1985 to 1996. Since 1996, it has ranked second overall (after Turkey), but it is the highest ranked

Western European country by a considerable margin. In 2007 Denmark placed 20th and the US 29th out of

the 29 OECD countries.

    Various aspects of Portugal’s employment protection regime have been discussed in detail elsewhere (e.g.,

Blanchard and Portugal (2001) and Martins (2009)). For now, we note that Portugal’s regime makes it very

difficult for all but the smallest firms to fire workers for cause, to lay off workers in a downturn, and to reduce

nominal wages. In addition to the law itself, many sectors in Portugal remain highly unionized, and union

contracts introduce additional protections that go above and beyond the (very high) minimum required

by law. With strong employment protection, we would expect firms to be especially cautious when hiring

workers, due to the difficulties involved in firing them later. Firms facing a tumultuous market might put

off hiring workers that would be useful in the present but that would become costly to let go if conditions

deteriorated. These fears might lead to biases and mis-allocations of workers across firms.

    Most of the theoretical literature on the economics of such labor laws states they they have a dampening

effect on worker mobility: firms do not hire as much when conditions are good and do not fire as much

when conditions deteriorate. However as noted by Lazear (1990), if labor protection costs can be undone by

efficient markets, then the only outcome of stricter labor protection is the reduction in wages and there are

no further repercussions in terms of protective labor laws in terms of employment effects or efficiency. For

example, if the total costs of firing a worker are given to that worker in the form of severance pay then both

the firm and the worker will consider that severance costs plus wages are the workers total cost or revenue.

Thus in a frictionless world, the same workers will work for the same companies, the only difference being

that their wages will be reduced to take into account a final balloon payment.

    As Lazear (1990) also notes, this analysis holds only if wages are completely flexible. Particularly in

the presence of minimum wages or other sources of downward wage rigidity, firms’ ability to lower wages in

response to employment protections is limited. There is a strong correlation across countries between high

levels of employment protections and the presence of high (and binding) minimum wages. In addition, in

countries with elaborate employment protections, wages are often decided by collective agreements negotiated

with labor unions. This setting further compromises the ability of firms to offset the effects of labor protection
 11 www.oecd.org/employment/protection




                                                        12
through lower wages. And a realistic degree of risk aversion on the part of workers coupled with a realistic

degree of bankruptcy risk on the part of a firm can limit even further the trade-off between severance

payments and regular wages. We believe that, in the Portuguese context, the various frictions Lazear keeps

in the background of his model are a sufficiently important part of the economic landscape that employment

protections almost surely have significant effects on the working of the labor market. But is it reasonable to

think that these protections could also impact the firm size distribution and aggregate productivity?

   In order to guide our thinking on these issues, we present a variation of the celebrated Lucas “span-

of-control” model (Lucas (1978)), which describes the firm size distribution of an economy taking into

consideration also the occupational choice. Labor protection costs are modeled as a tax on labor. We view

this as a simplification of a far more complex interaction between workers and firms in which greater labor

protections transfer bargaining power to workers. The work of Grout (1984) and Grossman and Hart (1986),

among others, suggests that standard Nash bargaining outcomes will lead to an effect that operates much
                                                       12
like the simple tax we use in the model below.


4.1     Modeling the Firm Size Distribution in the Presence of Labor Protection

Following Murphy et al. (1991) variation of the Lucas model, we assume that there is a distribution of ability

x in the workforce, with the support of [1, xmax ] and the strictly positive density function g(x). There is

only one good in the economy which is produced by many firms. If a firm is organized by an entrepreneur

with ability x, its profits are given by



                                               π(x; w, T ) = xhα − wT h,


   where h is the aggregate human capital (ability) of all the workers employed by this entrepreneur,

0 < α < 1 is the parameter of the production function, w is the workers’ wage, the price of good is

normalized to be 1, and T ≥ 1 is the gross tax on labor.

   The first order condition determines the optimal size of the firm given the ability of the entrepreneur,

the wage and the gross tax rates per efficiency units of labor employed:

                                                                        1
                                                                 xα  1−α
                                                h(x; w, T ) =                .                                           (1)
                                                                  wT

   Abler entrepreneurs obviously run larger firms and since there are increasing returns to ability in en-
  12 As we were developing this model, we came across Garicano et al. (2011) who take a similar approach with their own study

of employment protections in France.


                                                             13
trepreneurship, optimal firm size is actually a convex function of x and so are entrepreneurial profits:


                                                                    1            α
                                             π(x; w, T ) = x 1−α (wT )− 1−α c,

                 α       1
   where c = α 1−α − α 1−α > 0.

   Note also that given w, an increase in T lowers the optimal sizes of all firms. Of course, an increase in

tax will not leave wages unchanged, so we now turn to market equilibrium.

   An individual becomes an entrepreneur when



                                                         π(x) > wx,


   and a worker otherwise. The abler people become entrepreneurs in equilibrium, and the less able ones

become workers. The ability (human capital) level that defines the cutoff between entrepreneurs and workers

is denoted by z and is given by the indifference condition:


                                                            1                α
                                                   wz = z 1−α (wT )− 1−α c,


or equivalently by:
                                                            w  α1
                                                      z=            T.                                     (2)
                                                            c1−α

   The demand for workers by entrepreneurs must equal the supply of workers:

                                     Z       z                  Z   xmax
                                                 x g(x) dx =               h(x) g(x) dx.                   (3)
                                         1                      z

   The existence and uniqueness of the equilibrium pair (z, w) is a standard result in the Lucas “span-of-

control” model and it is not affected by the presence of the labor tax, so we do not present it here. Figure

4 illustrates the occupational choice.

   A rise in labor protections (an increase in labor tax) will have repercussions for both the equilibrium

wage rate w and for the cutoff ability z. It might seem at first sight that since a higher tax reduces profits,

this will induce marginal firms to exit, raising the cutoff ability required to be an entrepreneur. Such a

conclusion, however, does not take into account the effect of the equilibrium adjustment of the wage rate. As

it turns out, in equilibrium a higher T not only leads to smaller sizes of all existing firms, but also induces

entry by entrepreneurs with ability below the z that prevailed in the previous equilibrium. More formally,

we have


                                                                14
                                                                                                                 x




                  1                                                                         z                 x max
                                                Workers                                           Owners




                                              Figure 4: Occupational Choice



   Proposition 1: An increase in labor protections reduces equilibrium wage and optimal sizes of all incum-

bent firms. It also induces new entry of firms run by entrepreneurs in the lower tail of the entrepreneurial

ability distribution.

   Proof: From the indifference condition (2) we have


                                                          1            α
                                               (wT )− 1−α = z − 1−α T −1 c−1 .


   Substituting for the optimal size of the firm (1) in the equilibrium equation (3) and using the expression

immediately above we obtain

                                 Z   z                                     Z   xmax
                                                              1        α                1
                            cT           x g(x) dx = α 1−α z − 1−α                    x 1−α g(x) dx,                           (4)
                                 1                                         z

   which implicitly determines equilibrium z as a function of T (and the parameters of the model). Straight-
                                         dz
forward differentiation shows that       dT   < 0.

   Next, rearranging and differentiating the indifference condition (2) we obtain that


                                               (1−α)                                        dz
                            w0 (T ) = c−         α     [−αT −α−1 z α + αz α−1 T −α             ] < 0,
                                                                                            dT
             dz
   because   dT   < 0.

   Finally, using equation (1) we can see that optimal firm size is inversely proportional to the gross of tax

wage rate wT for any x, hence all optimal sizes of incumbent firms will change in the same direction in

response to an increase in taxes. Suppose, by way of contradiction, that optimal sizes of incumbent firms

increase or at least do not decrease in response to a higher tax on labor (in principle, this could happen
                                                                                                   d(wT )
if the incidence of tax falls more than 100 percent on the workers, so that                          dT     < 0). If that were the



                                                                  15
case, however, labor demand from incumbent firms will increase or at least stay constant as compared to the

previous equilibrium situation (before the increase in tax), while new entry will definitely increase overall

labor demand. Labor supply, on the other hand, has to go down because z shifts to the left as shown above.

Thus the new situation where all incumbent firms expand or at least do not decrease their optimal sizes
                                                               ∂h(x;T )
cannot be an equilibrium, meaning that we must have              ∂T       < 0 for any x. 

   The preceding argument also shows that the equilibrium gross of tax wage wT will be increasing in T .

The incidence of tax is always shared between firms and workers in the model.

   Why does an increase in labor tax lead to entry by more marginal firms? Intuitively, this happens because

wage earnings for the marginal worker/entrepreneur go down by more than his/her profits as an entrepreneur.

Thus, the worker with ability z who was indifferent between working for wage or running his/her own firm

before the tax increase now strictly prefers to run his/her own firm. To see this even more clearly, suppose

that after an increase in taxes the wage was such that the worker with ability z in the previous equilibrium

was still indifferent between working for pay and being an entrepreneur. This would imply that the supply

of labor has not changed from the previous equilibrium (with a lower tax). But with a higher tax all existing

firms now have lower profits and smaller optimal sizes, so the demand for labor is definitely lower than it was

before the tax increase. Thus, the wage has to come down further and that induces the marginal worker to

switch to entrepreneurship. An increase in labor protection, somewhat unexpectedly, pushes more workers

into starting their own firms, and these newly created firms are less efficient than incumbent firms.

   The effect of an increase in employment protection on firm size distribution follows in a straightforward

fashion from Proposition 1:

   Corollary: An increase in labor protections produces a leftward shift of the firm size distribution.

   Proof: Proposition 1 implies that all incumbent firms decrease in size, while there is entry by even smaller

firms due to a decrease in the ability of the marginal entrepreneur z. The claim follows immediately. 


4.1.1   Welfare, Output, and Productivity

Welfare in the model is given by economy-wide output:

                                              Z   xmax
                                        Y =              xh(x; T )α g(x) dx.
                                              z(T )

   Totally differentiating with respect to T , we obtain




                                                          16
                                     Z    xmax
                            dY                           ∂h                          dz
                               =α                xhα−1      g(x) dx − zh(z; T )α g(z) .                      (5)
                            dT        z                  ∂T                          dT

   Equation (5) shows that the effect of the tax on labor can be decomposed in two parts. The first part is

the decrease in output of incumbent firms, which are now producing at less than their optimal levels without

tax. The second part is the additional output produced by former employees who now find it relatively more

attractive to start their own firms. Total output and welfare decline because workers that leave employment

to become entrepreneurs do not have the same level of ability as their previous employers and so are unable

to compensate for the production loss taking place in the firms they left.

   In our model, higher taxes will lower aggregate output. Since we assume that population is fixed, this

means that output per capita falls. We therefore use per capita output as our measure of the economy’s

aggregate productivity. This particular measure of productivity is helpful in linking our analysis to con-

siderations of national welfare. References elsewhere in the text to the implications of our analysis for the

“productivity” of the Portuguese economy are, therefore, meant to indicate per capita output. Our mod-

eling assumptions – especially the assumption of diminishing returns to labor within firms – imply that

the marginal product of labor within firms actually increases as taxes force firms to decrease employment.

But, at the aggregate level, the ability of the economy to produce output with its labor endowment clearly

declines, because labor is shifted out of productive enterprises and into less productive ones.


4.1.2   Non-linear Effect of a Linear Tax

Even though we have so far assumed that the marginal tax rate on labor is constant and independent of

firm size, it is important to note that the effect of increasing such a tax results in a disproportional decrease

in the sizes of the largest, that is, most efficient firms. Formally, from the expression for the optimal size of

the firm (1) we have


                                                   ∂h wT     1
                                            −             =     > 1,
                                                 ∂(wT ) h   1−α

   so that the elasticity of the optimal firm size with respect to gross of tax wage is greater than 1. This, of

course, is a consequence of increasing returns to entrepreneurial ability and it shows that labor protection

has a disproportionately large impact on the size and output produced by the most efficient firms in the

economy.




                                                            17
4.2     The Self Employment Option

A salient feature of the Portuguese economy in the last several decades has been not just the leftward shift

in the overall firm size distribution, but an especially sharp increase in the number of firms that have no

employed workers (self employment). Table 10 shows that the fraction of self employed businesses in the

total increased from a little over 1 percent in the late 1980s to 3.5 percent in the late 1990s and eventually

exceeded 10 percent by the late 2000s. The self employment choice can be incorporated into the model

presented in the previous subsection. Self employment, in contrast to being a worker, entails an extra non-

pecuniary benefit of “being your own boss”. Past research has shown that such non-pecuniary benefits are

pervasive and quite large (see, e.g., Hamilton (2000), Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002)). Thus, total

return for the self employed individual is given by x + B, where B is the utility component.13 The individual

is self employed if x + B > wX and a worker otherwise. Let the equilibrium wage and cutoff ability that

solve the system of equations (2) and (3) in the previous subsection be given by (w∗ , z ∗ ). We have

    Lemma 1: In the presence of the self employment option, either w∗ ≥ 1 + B and there are no self

employed in the economy, or w∗ < 1 + B and there is a second cutoff ability zmin such that all individuals

with x < zmin are self employed while all individuals with x ≥ zmin are either paid workers or owners of

entrepreneurial firms. In this latter case, there is a pair (ŵ, ẑ) with ŵ > 1 + B > w∗ and ẑ > z ∗ such that

(ŵ, ẑ) are the equilibrium wage and the cutoff ability, respectively, of the “truncated” labor market, where the

pool of potential workers and entrepreneurs has the support [zmin , xmax ].

    Proof: The first part of the claim is trivial. Assume therefore that the equilibrium wage without self

employment w∗ < 1 + B and let u > 1 be defined as the solution of the equation w∗ x = x + B if such

a solution belongs to the interval (1, xmax ), otherwise, let u = xmax . By construction, all individuals

with x ≤ u prefer to be self employed rather than work in firms, so the supply of labor will be given by
Rz            Rz
 u
   x g(x) dx < 1 x g(x) dx, while the demand for labor remains unchanged. The resulting excess demand

for labor will tend to increase the wage rate above w∗ leading, in its turn, to a decrease in the demand

for labor by incumbent entrepreneurial firms and also a rightward shift of the cutoff ability z (because the

increase in the wage rate makes working for pay more attractive than running an entrepreneurial firm for

the individual with the cutoff ability z ∗ in the previous equilibrium). The process will continue until the

new equilibrium is attained; in this new equilibrium we must have ŵ > 1 + B > w∗ and ẑ > z ∗ . 

    Thus, the equilibrium with self employment is characterized by the triple (ŵ, zmin , ẑ) which jointly solves
   13 Equivalently, we may assume that there is a legal minimum wage W̄ which has to be paid to a worker regardless of his/her

efficiency units of labor endowment. The analysis below goes through with this alternative assumption.




                                                             18
the following three conditions:



                                                   zmin + B = ŵzmin ,                                                           (6)


                                                                         α1
                                                                ŵ
                                                    ẑ =                        T,                                               (7)
                                                               c1−α

   and

                                     Z   ẑ                     Z       xmax
                                                x g(x) dx =                     h(x) g(x) dx.                                    (8)
                                       zmin                        ẑ

   Figure 5 illustrates the resulting occupational choice.




                                                                                                                  x




                0                                          z min                                z             x max
                              Self-Employed                                 Workers                  Owners




                                              Figure 5: Occupational Choice



   An increase in labor protections (the tax on labor) in the equilibrium with self employment has similar

effects on the equilibrium wage ŵ and the equilibrium cutoff ability between workers and entrepreneurs ẑ as

before, although the decline in equilibrium wage and the decrease in ẑ are less in magnitude. In addition,

an increase in labor protections increases the fraction of the labor force that chooses to be self employed.

Formally, we have

   Proposition 2: In the presence of self employment, an increase in labor protections reduces equilibrium

wage and optimal sizes of all incumbent firms. It also induces new entry of firms run by entrepreneurs in

the lower tail of the entrepreneurial ability distribution as well as transition of former workers in the lower

tail of workers ability distribution into self employment.

   Proof: Since the proof of the first three claims is almost identical to the proof of Proposition 1 we do
                                                                                          ∂zmin           1
not repeat it here. To prove the last claim just observe that from (6)                     ∂ ŵ     = − ŵ−1 < 0, so that the cutoff

ability between the self employed and the paid workers will increase as the wage decreases in response to a



                                                                19
higher tax on hired labor. 

    Both the corollary to Proposition 1 and the welfare implications from the previous subsection remain

valid and are actually reinforced by self employment. In particular, the firm size distribution will shift to

the left not just because of the decrease in the sizes of incumbent firms and additional entry by marginal

entrepreneurial firms, but also because of an increase in entry by the smallest firms, those with no employees.

Total output will also go down because of decreased production of existing firms that is not compensated

by the production of the new marginal entrants and because the new self employed do not benefit from the

production boost of their previous managers.14


4.3     Calibrating the Model

We saw in the previous two subsections that the model, especially the model with the self employment

option captures the qualitative features of the evolution of the firm size distribution in Portugal over the

past quarter century. The question remains, however, whether it can capture the quantitative features of

this evolution for some reasonable parameter values.

    To answer this latter question we conduct our first simple calibration exercise (see also the next section).

We choose the standard value of the parameter of the production function α = 0.67, and we assume that

ability (human capital) is distributed uniformly on the interval [1,10]. With these model parameters, the

equilibrium average firm size with no labor protections would be 22.59 employees, while the size of the firm

at the 90th percentile would be 27 employees (see the first column in Table 11).

    The second column of Table 11 shows that in order to match the average firm size in the Portuguese data

in 1986 without introducing the self employment option, the net tax rate on wages should be 50 percent

(T = 1.5). With this tax rate, the size of the firm at the 90th percentile of the firm size distribution is

20 employees, somewhat lower than the actual number (23 employees in Table 1). The 50 percent tax rate

on wages also results in the reduction of the equilibrium wage by 27 percent as compared to the no tax

equilibrium. The impact on gross total output is small (it declines by just over 1 percent) but net of tax

output declines by 14 percent.

    The third column in Table 11 shows that in order to match the decline of the average firm size similar to

the one observed in the Portuguese data from 1986 to the late 2000s, the tax on labor must be increased to

200 percent (T = 3). The corresponding decline in equilibrium wage is more than 50 percent compared to
  14 The new self employed do receive non-pecuniary benefits from exercising their self-employment option, so that their actual

utility loss is lower than the loss in output. Still, those individuals chose to work for wage before the tax increase, so they are
worse off overall in the new situation, although not by as much as they would be without the self employment option.



                                                                20
the no-tax case and net of tax output is also reduced by almost one half. A simple linear tax model without

self employment requires somewhat unrealistically high tax rates and wage declines in order to produce firm

size patterns observed in the data.

    Including the self employment option makes the situation look much more reasonable. Table 12 shows the

results of the calibration with the same parameters as before, while also assuming that the utility component

of being self employed B = 1, so that being self employed doubles the total return to human capital of the

least able worker. Under this parametrization, the equilibrium wage without tax on labor is 2.21, so the

self employment option is not exercised in the no-tax equilibrium, which thus looks exactly the same as the

no-tax equilibrium in the previous case (Table 11).

    Introducing the tax on hired labor now has the additional effect of pushing some workers into self

employment. This effect is actually quite significant quantitatively, as the average firm size (inclusive of

self-employed firms) declines much faster with an increase in tax than before. As can be seen from column

2 of Table 12, a 30 percent net tax on labor (T = 1.3) is now sufficient to generate the average firm size

matching the actual average firm size observed in Portugal in 1986. The fraction of the self employed is

2 percent, which is also fairly close to the actual data (see Table 10). Moreover, in order to match the

subsequent decline of the average firm size we now need to assume that T has to be increased to just 1.8

(rather than 3). The fraction of the self employed under this tax rate is 15 percent, which is somewhat

higher than in the data, but as a result of this, the decline in the wage is limited to 36 percent (rather than

57 percent without the self employment option) and net of tax output also goes down by 24 percent rather

than by 49 percent as without self employment.

    Figure 6 shows the distribution of firm sizes under the no-tax, T = 1.3 and T = 1.8 scenarios above. In the

next section we will see that the actual dynamics of labor protections in Portugal were heavily biased against

larger firms. This can be incorporated into the model by assuming a nonlinear tax on labor. Calibration

exercises based on the nonlinear tax produce an even more realistic picture of the effects of increasing labor

protections, especially in the presence of self employment (see subsection 5.3).



5     Biases against Large Firms in Portugal

Portugal is known for having strong government support systems for small firms. Small firms are typically

viewed as important economic drivers and worthy of stronger support then larger firms. These incentives to

be a small firm might hamper firm growth and exacerbate biases and mis-allocations of workers across firms.



                                                      21
A particular aspect of government systems to promote small businesses is that they commonly contain several

provisions favoring firms under various specific size thresholds. Hence, such laws might create incentives for

firms to remain below a certain size threshold and so decrease the average firm size. The impact of these

types of thresholds has already been the subject of several past studies.

   For example, in Portugal the impact of the threshold created by the DL 64-A/1989 law was studied by

Martins (2009). The study found that the threshold did not create a significant distortion in the worker flows

of firms above and bellow the threshold. The study did find, however, that firms under the threshold gained

sizable increases in relative performance. A similar law with a 15 worker threshold in Italy was analyzed by

Schivardi and Torrini (2008). The authors found that the law created a concentration of firms under the

threshold and that firms just bellow the same had a 2% lower probability of growth. Garibaldi et al. (2003)

and Boeri and Jimeno (2005) found a similar effect when analyzing the same law.

   Our analysis indicates that at least In Portugal, government support system for small firms has not

created a concentration of firms under any particular threshold. This may reflect the fact that there many

different laws have been introduced over the past few decades, with many different thresholds (see Appendix

B for the list of relevant laws and their brief description). Figure 7 shows the number of firms for each size

category from 5 to 60 workers. The 10, 20 and 50 thresholds are highlighted by a vertical line, as each of

these thresholds occurs in more than one Portuguese law. As the reader can see, there is litte indication

that firms prefer to stay below any of them.

   To test this more formally, we follow the methodology proposed by Schivardi and Torrini (2008) to see if

firms change their growth behavior close to the thresholds. Specifically, we estimate a probit model of the

form:

                                                                                               60
                                                                                               X
                               2          3          4
           Yit = α + Et−1 +   Et−1   +   Et−1   +   Et−1   + Aget−1 +   Age2t−1   + Indt−1 +         D(Et−1 = k)
                                                                                               k=5

   Where Y is an indicator stating if the firm grew from the last period to the current one, E is employment,

Age is firm age, Ind is a set of industry dummies and D is a set of dummy variables that equals one if the

firm was of that specific size in the previous period. The idea is test whether, after controlling for firm size,

the specific size thresholds still retain some effect. The resulting threshold coefficients are plotted in figure 8.

All of them were statistically significant but they do not point to a strong clustering at any of the thresholds.

Even when considering year to year changes (by interacting the threshold controls with year controls) there

is no discernible pattern around the patterns identified by the laws. The same pattern emerges when running

the probit on a variable indicating that the firm shrank.


                                                              22
5.1    Threshold Crossing Probability

Another way to check if the thresholds introduced by the laws are influencing firm size is to see if the

probability that some thresholds will be crossed varies around those specified thresholds. Figure 9 plots the

probability of crossing size thresholds between 5 and 60. Firms can either grow above the threshold of shrink

below it. The picture looks quite smooth, with no kinks at any particular thresholds.

   One way in which firms could be responding to the laws is by changing the composition of their work

force. Firms could for example hire more temporary workers above the thresholds to be able to maintain a

flexible work force. To see if this pattern can indeed be found in the data we have examined the percentage

of temporary workers in total number of workers below and above various firm size thresholds and did not

detect any major changes in contract types. The same holds for part-time contracts. Wages and firm survival

probabilities also do not seem to change significantly at the thresholds. Overall there is no strong evidence

that the thresholds identified by the laws impact firm size in any significant manner.

   Our interpretation of these results is straightforward. The absence of “threshold effects” does not mean

that the bias against larger firms has no effect. It instead stems from the wide range of different thresholds

at which the various policies begin to bind. As productive firms in Portugal grow, they do not run into a

solid wall of greater employment protection costs at some particular size. Instead, the growth momentum

may be undermined by a gradual accumulation of costs that are individually small but collectively amount

to a significant disincentive to growth. We model such a situation theoretically in the next subsection by

introducing a degree of nonlinearity into the model with labor tax from the previous section.

   While measures to support small firms have been added over the past 20 years, the situation with

accumulating barriers to firm growth appears to have worsened over time as laws that effectively discriminate

against larger enterprises proliferated. Some telling evidence of the effects of such increased bias against larger

firms can be seen in Figures 10 and 11. These two Figures show the change in the probabilities of growing

above a certain threshold or shrinking bellow it, respectively, for firms of different sizes that occurred over

these 20 years. We can see that the probability of growing to the next level has diminished fairly substantially

at all firm sizes. Portugal’s firm size distribution has shifted to the left, in part, because enterprises do not

have the same propensity to grow larger in the latter part of our time period that they had at the outset.

We also see that the probability of a firm shrinking in the next period compared to the previous period has

increased over time, and this increase is concentrated in the smaller size ranges. This could reflect the fact

that the labor market costs of reducing workforce size tend to be much higher for larger firms.




                                                        23
5.2     Equilibrium With a Nonlinear Tax

Given the reality of a labor protection regime that hits larger firms more intensely, we redefine the equilibrium

in this section with a nonlinear labor tax. Let the profit of the firm run by entrepreneur of ability x be given

by



                                         π(x; w, T (h)) = xhα − whT (h),


     where T (h) is assumed to be an increasing function of the firm size h. For simplicity, we will assume that

T (h) has constant elasticity δ > 0 with respect to h, T (h) = µhδ . Let β ≡ δ + 1, then the profit function

can be written as



                                          π(x; w, µ, β)) = xhα − wµhβ


.

     The parameter µ > 1 is the linear component of the gross tax on labor corresponding to T in the previous

section, while β > 1 reflects the convexity of the overall cost of hiring extra workers under the non-linear

tax on labor. Taking the first-order condition, we can solve for the optimal firm size as before:

                                                                               1
                                                                              β−α
                                                                        αx
                                           h(x; w, µ, β) =                                                    (9)
                                                                       βwµ

     Clearly, ceteris paribus the optimal firm size is decreasing in both the linear and non-linear parameters

of the tax.

     The optimized profit is given by:

                                                                              α
                                                                           β−α
                                                     β              α
                                                                 − β−α    α          α
                                π(x; w, µ, β) = x   β−α   (wµ)                   (1 − )
                                                                          β          β

     As in the previous section, the cutoff ability of the marginal entrepreneur is determined by the indifference

condition similar to equation (2), from which we obtain, after some manipulations,


                                                          β   µ        − β−α
                                           z = (wβ) α           (β − α) α                                    (10)
                                                              α

     Finally, in equilibrium the demand and supply of labor should once again be equal to each other implying

that



                                                              24
                                           Z    z                   Z     xmax
                                                    x g(x) dx =                  h(x) g(x) dx.                     (11)
                                            1                         z

   We first establish

   Lemma 2: For any positive and finite µ and β there exists a unique market equilibrium with the nonlinear

tax, that is, there is a unique pair (w∗ , z ∗ ) such that all individuals with ability below or equal to z ∗ choose to

work in firms and receive wage w∗ , all individuals with ability above z ∗ choose to run entrepreneurial firms

and the equilibrium condition of the demand and supply of labor (11) is satisfied.

   Proof: The indifference condition (10) together with increasing returns to ability in entrepreneurship

establish the first part of the claim. Solving equation (10) for w in terms of z and substituting the resulting

expression as well as the expression for the optimal size of the firm (9) into the market equilibrium condition

(11), we obtain

                          Z    z                                   β1                Z   xmax
                                                           α                     α                  1
                                   x g(x) dx =                            z − β(β−α)              x β−α g(x) dx.   (12)
                           1                            µ(β − α)                       z

   The left-hand side of the equation (12) is equal to zero when z tends to 1 and is monotonically increasing

in z. The right-hand side is positive and finite when z tends to 1 and is monotonically decreasing in z,

converging to zero as z tends to xmax . Thus, there must exist one and only one z that satisfies equation

(12). This is the z ∗ the existence of which is claimed in the Lemma. The existence of the corresponding

unique w∗ follows from equation (10). 

   The equilibrium with the nonlinear tax has the same qualitative properties as the equilibrium with the

linear tax studied in the previous section. More formally, we have

   Proposition 3: Assume that
                                                                    α(1 + µ)
                                                            β<               .                                     (13)
                                                                       µ

Then an increase in either the linear component of the tax µ, or the nonlinear component β (provided the

above constraint is still met) reduces equilibrium wage and optimal sizes of all incumbent firms. It also

induces new entry of firms run by entrepreneurs in the lower tail of the entrepreneurial ability distribution.

   Proof: See Appendix.

   Note that the parametric restriction (13) is only a sufficient but not a necessary condition and it is likely

to be easily satisfied for reasonable parameter values.

   Provided that (13) holds, all other results we obtained in the previous section also continue to hold. In

particular, an increase in µ and/or β shifts the firm size distribution to the left and reduces total output


                                                                      25
and efficiency. The extension to the equilibrium with self employment is also straightforward.


5.3    Calibration of the Nonlinear Tax Model

While the qualitative features of the modes with linear and nonlinear tax can be seen to be very similar, the

nonlinear tax case is important because it shows how labor protection reforms that reduce the degree of this

protection for smaller firms but are biased against larger firms can in fact lead to very big distortions and

efficiency losses, comparable to those from a much higher linear tax.

   Columns 4 in Table 11 and Table 12 show that the same decline in the average size of the firm and

very similar declines in the firm size at the 90th percentile as observed in the Portuguese data from 1986 to

2009 can result from a 100 percent decrease in the linear component of the net tax rate on labor (from 50

percent to 25 percent in Table 11 without the self employment option and from 30 percent to 15 percent in

Table 12 which does allow for self employment), accompanied by introducing a relatively modest degree of

nonlinearity (the elasticity of the tax with respect to firm size of 0.16 in Table 11 and 0.12 in Table 12). As

can be seen by comparing columns 3 and 4, “tilting” the playing field in favor of smaller firms and against

larger firms like this is comparable in terms of its effects on the decrease in the average firm size, the decrease

in the size of the 90th percentile firm and the increase in the fraction of self employed (in Table 12) to the

effects of increasing the linear net tax rate on labor from 50 percent to 200 percent in Table 11 and from

30 percent to 80 percent in Table 12. In other words, even a relatively small bias against large firms in the

labor protections policy can completely undo any positive effects on firm size and efficiency of a reduction

in labor protections for smaller firms and is actually equivalent to a sharp increase in the labor protection

if applied equally to all firms.

   Figure 12 shows the comparative effects of the nonlinear tax with a low linear component µ = 1.15

and β = 1.12 and a much higher linear tax (with T = 1.8) on the overall distribution of entrepreneurial

firms. With the nonlinear tax, the optimal sizes of the firms run by entrepreneurs at the high end of the

ability distribution are markedly lower than under a much higher linear tax. There are also many more

entrepreneurial firms run by individuals towards the lower end of the part of the ability distribution from

which entrepreneurial talent is drawn.




                                                        26
6     Conclusion

This paper documents an important, unusual, and heretofore undocumented feature of the Portuguese

economy. For at least two decades, the Portuguese firm size distribution has been shifting to the left.

This shift is quite pronounced, does not appear to exist in other advanced industrial countries, and cannot

be fully ascribed to expanding data coverage or other “natural causes.”

    We believe Portugal’s unusual and distinctive shifts in the firm size distribution reflect its unusual and

distinctive labor market regime. As many observers and official indices have attested, Portugal’s policy

commitment to employment protections for regular workers in the formal sector is extreme, even by Western

European standards. We present a model in which high levels of employment protection effectively operate as

a tax on wages, and can produce a shift in the firm size distribution, relative to the distortion-free benchmark,

that reflects, in some ways, what we have seen in Portugal.

    An immediate implication of our model is that the same policy regime that shrinks firms also lowers

aggregate productivity. Even a uniform tax tends to hit the most productive enterprises disproportionately

hard, causing a degradation of the allocation of resources across enterprises. More resources are tied up in

smaller, less protective enterprises and fewer resources are allocated to the most productive firms, relative to

what we would see in a distortion-free economy. To the extent that the tax hits larger (and more productive)

enterprises harder – a reasonable belief given the realities of Portugal’s labor regime – the negative impact of

resource allocation is exacerbated, the firm size distribution is driven even further to the left, and aggregate

productivity declines even more.

    We engage in some simple calibration exercises to quantify the level of policy distortion that is consistent

with the shifts in the firm size distribution we observe in the data, then seek to measure the level of aggregate

productivity gains that might result if these distortions were partly or completely eliminated. Our results

strongly suggest that Portugal could achieve first-order productivity gains by moving to a less distorted labor

market.




                                                       27
References

O. Blanchard. Adjustment within the euro. The difficult case of Portugal. Portuguese Economic Journal, 6

  (1), pp. 1–21, 2007.

O. Blanchard and P. Portugal. What hides behind an unemployment rate: Comparing Portuguese and US

  labor markets. American Economic Review, 91(1), pp. 187–207, 2001.

T. Boeri and J.F. Jimeno. The effects of employment protection: Learning from variable enforcement.

  European Economic Review, 49(8), pp. 2057–2077, 2005.

L.M.B. Cabral and J. Mata. On the evolution of the firm size distribution: Facts and theory. American

  Economic Review, 93(4), pp. 1075–1090, 2003.

A.V. Chari. Identifying the aggregate productivity effects of entry and output restrictions: An empirical

  analysis of license reform in india. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(2), pp. 66–96, 2011.

D. Corkill. The development of the Portuguese economy: a case of Europeanization. Psychology Press, 1999.

R. Dell’Anno. The shadow economy in Portugal: An analysis with the MIMIC approach. Journal of Applied

  Economics, 10(2), pp. 253–277, 2007.

P. Garibaldi, L. Pacelli, and A. Borgarello. Employment protection legislation and the size of firms. IZA

  Discussion Papers, 2003.

L. Garicano, C. LeLarge, and J. Van Reenen. Firm size distortions and the productivity distribution:

  Evidence from France. Working Paper, London School of Economics, 2011.

S.J. Grossman and O.D. Hart. The costs and benefits of ownership: A theory of vertical and lateral

  integration. The Journal of Political Economy, 94(4), pp. 691–719, 1986.

P.A. Grout. Investment and wages in the absence of binding contracts: A Nash bargaining approach.

  Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 52(2), pp. 449–460, 1984.

B.H. Hamilton. Does entrepreneurship pay? An empirical analysis of the returns of self-employment. Journal

  of Political Economy, 108(3), pp. 604–631, 2000.

K. Handley and N. Limão. Trade and investment under policy uncertainty: Theory and firm evidence.

  Technical report, Mimeo, University of Maryland, 2010.


                                                     28
C.T. Hsieh and P.J. Klenow. Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and India. Quarterly Journal

  of Economics, 124(4), pp. 1403–1448, 2009.

C.I. Jones. Misallocation, economic growth, and input-output economics. Technical report, National Bureau

  of Economic Research, 2011.

E.P. Lazear. Job security provisions and employment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(3), pp.

  699–726, 1990.

R.E. Lucas. On the size distribution of business firms. The Bell Journal of Economics, 9(2), pp. 508–523,

  1978.

P.S. Martins. Dismissals for cause: The difference that just eight paragraphs can make. Journal of Labor

  Economics, 27(2), pp. 257–279, 2009.

T.J. Moskowitz and A. Vissing-Jorgensen. The returns to entrepreneurial investment: A private equity

  premium puzzle? The American Economic Review, 92(4), pp. 745–778, 2002.

K.M. Murphy, A. Shleifer, and R.W. Vishny. The allocation of talent: implications for growth. The Quarterly

  Journal of Economics, 106(2), pp. 503–530, 1991.

D. Restuccia and R. Rogerson. Policy distortions and aggregate productivity with heterogeneous establish-

  ments. Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4), pp. 707–720, 2008.

F. Schivardi and R. Torrini. Identifying the effects of firing restrictions through size-contingent differences

  in regulation. Labour Economics, 15(3), pp. 482–511, 2008.




                                                      29
A      Proof of Proposition 3

Note that the equilibrium equation (12) in the main text can also be written as

                               Z      z                                  β1        Z    xmax          1
                                                               α                 1
                                                                                                  x  β−α
                                          x g(x) dx =                           zβ                           g(x) dx.
                                  1                         µ(β − α)                  z           z

    Totally differentiating (12) yields

                                                                  1
                                             dz                  µβ Ω
                                                =−           − 1                       ,                                     (14)
                                             dµ                      α
                                                   zg(z) (Γz) β + β(β−α) z −1 Ω + g(z)

                                                 1              1          1        1
                                          dz    β 2 Ω ln z + (β−α)2 Ξ + β(β−α) Ω + β 2 Ω ln Γ
                                             =−                −1
                                                                                              ,                              (15)
                                          dβ        zg(z) (Γz) β + α z −1 Ω + g(z)
                                                                                β(β−α)

                R xmax           1                          R xmax          1
                          x                                          x
                                                                                 ln( xz ) g(x) dx, and Γ ≡           α
                               β−α                                       β−α
    where Ω ≡    z        z               g(x) dx, Ξ ≡       z       z                                            µ(β−α) .
                                                                                                                             dz
    Both the numerator and the denominator in the expression (14) contain only positive terms, hence,                        dµ   is

always negative. The denominator in the expression (15) is the same; as for the numerator, all terms except
                                    α
the last one are positive. If ln µ(β−α) > 0 the the last term is also positive. Hence, the condition (13) in the
                                                                                     dz
main text is a sufficient (but not necessary) condition for                          dβ   to also be negative.

    Next, taking the natural log of the equation (10) in the main text, we obtain


                                                   α       α α β−α
                                          ln w =     ln z + ln +   ln (β − α) − ln β.
                                                   β       β µ   β

    Obviously, w will be decreasing in µ and/or β if and only if ln w is so. Since z is decreasing in µ, the

equilibrium wage is clearly a decreasing function of µ. Differentiating the expression above with respect to

β we obtain, after some manipulations


                                            d ln w    α         α 1 dz   α       α
                                                   = − 2 ln z +        − 2 ln          .
                                              dβ      β         β z dβ  β     µ(β − α)

Under the condition (13) both the second and the third terms on the right-hand side of the expression above
                         d ln w
are negative, so that      dβ      < 0.

    The arguments that under the condition (13) the optimal sizes of all incumbent firms are decreasing in

µ and β and that an increase in either µ or β shifts the firm size distribution to the left and reduces total

output are exactly the same as in the proofs of Propositions 1 and the Corollary in the main text. 




                                                                          30
B     List of Laws Supporting small firms

    • DL 132/1983 - Tax incentives for investment in firms under 50 workers.

    • DL 141/1985, DL 9/1992 - Firms over 100, (50 after 1992) workers have to present a monthly social

      balance.

    • DL 69-A/1987 - Firms under 6 workers are allowed to pay bellow minimum wage. (in effect until 2003)

    • DL 69-A/1987 - Firms under 50 workers are allowed to pay up to 50% bellow minimum wage under

      certain conditions. (in effect until 2003)

    • DL 64-A/1989 - Firms under 20 workers are allowed to go through a less bureaucratic process for

      dismissal for cause. (in effect until 2003)

    • DL 298/1992, DL 211/1998, DL 171/1999 - A line of credit for firms under 250 workers is created.

    • DL 26/1994, DL 109/2000 - Firms over 50 workers must maintain an internal Worker Health Protection

      system.

    • DL 30-B/1994, DL 160/9195 - Firms under 20 workers are entitled to a 95% collectable income tax

      deduction. (in effect until 1997)

    • DL 121/1995, DL 200/1996, DL 42/1998 - Firms under 20 workers are entitled to deduct several

      operational costs. (in effect until 2001)

    • DL 34/1996 - Firms under 50 workers have a access to subsidized young workers.

    • DL 116/1999 - Progressive fines for labor law breach established at the 5, 50, and 200 thresholds.

    • DL 12-A/2000 - Priority is given to firms under 50 workers on the use of European Structural Funds

      for worker training.

    • DL 106/2001 - Firms over 10 workers have to report monthly the wage bill.

    • DL 255/2002 - Firms under 50 workers receive support for hiring workers.

    • DL 99/2003 - Firms under 50 are not required to inform union leaders of several firm related informa-

      tion.




                                                     31
• DL 99/2003 - Firms under 10 workers are allowed to go through a less bureaucratic process to let go

  of workers.

• DL 99/2003 - Several small advantages for firms under 10 workers: changes in information presentation

  deadlines, mandatory days off and vacation time.

• DL 99/2003 - Firms under 50 are allowed to deny leave of absence under certain conditions.

• DL 99/2003 - Firms under 50 and 10 have progressively higher limits on overtime.

• DL 40/2005 - Firms under 250 workers are allowed to tax deduct patent request and maintenance

  costs.




                                                32
                                                                                                                                                                 C


                                                                           0   .01   .02   .03
                                                        a)
                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                 Figures



                                                                  to
                                                                       4
                                                        b)
                                                              5
                                                                  to
                                                   c)                  9




     Source: U.S. Census Bureau
                                                         10
                                                              to
                                                   d)              19
                                                         20
                                                              to
                                                   e)              49
                                                         50
                                              f)              to
                                                 1   00
                                                                   99
                                                             to
                                              g)                  24
                                                   25                  9




                                  1977
                                                         0




33
                                                             to
                                              h)                  49
                                                   50                  9
                                                         0
                                         i)                  to
                                              10                  99
                                                   00                  9
                                                         to
                                         j)                   24
                                              25                   99

                                  2009
                                                   00
                                         k)              to
                                              50              49
                                                   00              99
                                                         to
                                                              99
                                                                   99
                                                                                                 Figure 1: Changes in the US Firm Size Distribution, 1977-2009




                                                    l)
                                                         10
                                                              00
                                                                   0+
                              Figure 2: 1987 original and corrected FSD
                                 The firm size distribution in Portugal:
              Original data and the data corrected for the increase in data coverage, 1987.
         .4
         .3
         .2
         .1
         0




              0              10             100            1.000            10.000            5
                                           1987 Firm Size Density

                                           Original             Corrected



Source: Authors’ calculations based on Quadros de Pessoal (Portuguese matched employer-employee
dataset).




                                                      34
                              Figure 3: 2007 original and corrected FSD
                                 The firm size distribution in Portugal:
              Original data and the data corrected for the increase in data coverage, 2007.
         .4
         .3
         .2
         .1
         0




              0                10                100                 1.000           10.000
                                         2007 Firm Size Distribution

                                           Original              Corrected



Source: Authors’ calculations based on Quadros de Pessoal (Portuguese matched employer-employee
dataset).




                                                      35
                                 Figure 6: Calibration with Linear Tax

          
   



   



   



   



   



    



    
                                                                              
                                                                                                    
                                                         


Firm sizes with no tax, T = 1.3, and T = 1.8. Including the self employment option.
The parameter of the production function α = 0.67, utility component of self employment B = 1,
x distributed uniformly on the interval [1, 10].




                                                      36
                           Figure 7: Number of firms by firm size 1986-2007
     Number of firms in different size categories. Some thresholds affected by labor protection laws
                      and government support for small firms highlighted in red.
                 250000
                 200000
         100000 150000
          Number of Firms
                 50000
                 0




                            0            20                        40                       60
                                                  Firm Size


Source: Authors’ calculations based on Quadros de Pessoal (Portuguese matched employer-employee
dataset).




                                                   37
                              Figure 8: Threshold Coefficients
                  Probit regression coefficients for threshold size dummies.
      .25
      .2
Coefficient
   .15.1
      .05




              0                    20                        40                60
                                             Firm Size




                                             38
                                  Figure 9: Threshold Crossing Probabilities
               The probabilities of crossing size thresholds (either grow above or shrink below)
                                     for firm sizes between sizes 5 and 60.
         .12
         .1
         .08
         .06
         .04




                0                         20                         40                        60
                                                        Size

                                                 Grow               Shrink



Source: Authors’ calculations based on Quadros de Pessoal (Portuguese matched employer-employee
dataset).




                                                      39
         Figure 10: The probability of a firm growing above a given threshold, 1987 and 2007.
           .2
           .15
         Grow
          .1
           .05
           0




                 0                      20                       40                       60
                                                   Size

                                               1987              2007



Source: Authors’ calculations based on Quadros de Pessoal (Portuguese matched employer-employee
dataset).




                                                 40
         Figure 11: The probability of a firm shrinking below a given threshold, 1987 and 2007.
            .09
            .08
         Shrink
          .07
            .06
            .05




                  0                      20                       40                       60
                                                    Size

                                                1987              2007



Source: Authors’ calculations based on Quadros de Pessoal (Portuguese matched employer-employee
dataset).




                                                  41
                                 Figure 12: Calibration with Nonlinear Tax

     
   



   



   



   



   



    



    
                                                                              
                                                                                                    
                                                   


Firm sizes with no tax, T = 1.3, and µ = 1.8, β = 1.12. Including the self employment option.
The parameter of the production function α = 0.67, utility component of self employment B = 1,
x distributed uniformly on the interval [1, 10]




                                                        42
D    Tables

                                      Table 1: Portuguese Firm Size

      Average firm size and firm sizes at various percentiles of the firm size distribution, 1986-2009.

              Year       Mean          P10          P25         P50          P75          P90
              1986        17.72           1           2            4          10           26
              1987        17.44           1           2            4          10           26
              1988        16.27           1           2            4          10           25
              1989        15.87           1           2            4           9           24
              1990        15.75           1           2            4           9           24
              1991        15.07           1           2            4           9           24
              1992        14.27           1           2            4           9           23
              1993        13.36           1           2            4           8           21
              1994        12.02           1           2            4           8           19
              1995        11.63           1           2            4           7           18
              1996        11.31           1           2            3           7           17
              1997        11.00           1           2            3           7           17
              1998        10.78           1           2            3           7           16
              1999        10.56           1           2            3           7           16
              2000        10.05           1           2            3           7           15
              2001        10.04           1           2            3           7           15
              2002         9.41           1           2            3           7           15
              2003         9.29           1           2            3           6           14
              2004         9.26           1           2            3           6           14
              2005         9.01           1           1            3           6           14
              2006         9.01           1           1            3           6           14
              2007         9.03           1           1            3           6           14
              2008         9.11           1           1            3           6           14
              2009         8.89           1           1            3           6           13


Source: Authors’ calculations based on Quadros de Pessoal (Portuguese matched employer-employee
dataset).




                                                     43
                               Table 2: The Danish Firm Size Distribution

      Average firm size and firm sizes at various percentiles of the firm size distribution, 1980-2007.
                              Year Mean P10 P25 P50 P75 P90
                              1980 11.03         1     1       3       7    16
                              1981 10.90         1     1       3       7    16
                              1982 11.35         1     1       3       7    16
                              1983 11.39         1     1       3       7    16
                              1984 11.60         1     1       3       7    17
                              1985 12.43         1     1       3       7    18
                              1986 13.08         1     1       3       8    19
                              1987 13.11         1     1       3       8    19
                              1988 13.07         1     1       3       8    19
                              1989 13.20         1     1       3       8    19
                              1990 13.21         1     1       3       8    19
                              1991 13.44         1     1       3       8    19
                              1992 13.32         1     1       3       8    19
                              1993 12.91         1     1       3       8    19
                              1994 13.49         1     1       3       8    20
                              1995 14.12         1     1       3       8    20
                              1996 13.83         1     2       3       9    20
                              1997 14.26         1     2       4       9    21
                              1998 14.66         1     2       4       9    21
                              1999 14.69         1     2       4       9    21
                              2000 14.78         1     2       4       9    21
                              2001 14.76         1     2       4       9    21
                              2002 14.66         1     2       4       9    21
                              2003 14.26         1     2       3       9    21
                              2004 14.01         1     2       3       9    20
                              2005 13.84         1     2       3       9    20
                              2006 13.90         1     2       3       9    21
                              2007 13.70         1     2       3       9    21

Source: Summary statistics from the Danish matched employer-employee database were kindly provided by
Michael Dahl.




                         Table 3: Shadow Economy estimated by MIMIC model.

      Years   77/79    80/82     83/85    86/88    89/91    92/94    95/97    98/00    01/03      04

              28.8%    26.4%    27.7%    24/6%     20.2%    21.9%    21.4%    18.5%    17.9%    17.6%


Source: Dell’Anno (2007)




                                                     44
                 Table 4: The fraction of new firms reporting at least 3 year tenures

                                            Year    Mean
                                            1987     0.35
                                            1988     0.27
                                            1989     0.23
                                            1991     0.24
                                            1992     0.24
                                            1993     0.22
                                            1994     0.24
                                            1995     0.19
                                            1996     0.17
                                            1997     0.16
                                            1998     0.15
                                            1999     0.14
                                            2000     0.18
                                            2002     0.16
                                            2003     0.15
                                            2004     0.15
                                            2005     0.24
                                            2006     0.14
                                            2007     0.11
                                            2008     0.09

Source: Authors’ calculations based on Quadros de Pessoal (Portuguese matched employer-employee
dataset).




                                                   45
                    Table 5: Average firm size after correcting for data coverage

                                            Original   Corrected
                                   Year         Size        Size
                                   1986       17.72        15.67
                                   1987       17.44        15.23
                                   1988       16.27        14.92
                                   1989       15.87        15.15
                                   1990       15.75        13.94
                                   1991       15.07        13.38
                                   1992       14.27        12.65
                                   1993       13.36        11.95
                                   1994       12.02        11.05
                                   1995       11.63        10.72
                                   1996       11.31        10.45
                                   1997       11.00        10.27
                                   1998       10.78        10.06
                                   1999       10.56         9.84
                                   2000       10.05         9.60
                                   2001       10.04         9.27
                                   2002         9.41        9.03
                                   2003         9.29        8.81
                                   2004         9.26        8.73
                                   2005         9.01        8.61
                                   2006         9.01        8.67
                                   2007         9.03        8.81
                                   2008         9.11        9.11
                                   Total      11.06        10.43

Source: Authors’ calculations based on Quadros de Pessoal (Portuguese matched employer-employee
dataset).




                                                 46
                                       Table 6: Corrected Firm Size

 Firm sizes at various percentiles of the firm size distribution corrected for the increase in data coverage.

                                   Year    P10    P25     P50   P75   P90
                                   1986      1      2       4     9    23
                                   1987      1      2       4     9    22
                                   1988      1      2       4     9    22
                                   1989      1      2       4     9    22
                                   1990      1      2       4     9    22
                                   1991      1      2       4     8    20
                                   1992      1      2       3     8    19
                                   1993      1      2       3     7    18
                                   1994      1      2       3     7    17
                                   1995      1      2       3     7    16
                                   1996      1      2       3     7    16
                                   1997      1      2       3     7    15
                                   1998      1      2       3     6    15
                                   1999      1      2       3     6    15
                                   2000      1      2       3     6    14
                                   2001      1      1       3     7    15
                                   2002      1      1       3     6    14
                                   2003      1      1       3     6    14
                                   2004      1      1       3     6    13
                                   2005      1      1       3     6    13
                                   2006      1      1       3     6    13
                                   2007      1      1       3     6    13
                                   Total     1      2       3     7    16

Source: Authors’ calculations based on Quadros de Pessoal (Portuguese matched employer-employee
dataset).




                                                     47
       Table 7: Average firm size after correcting for “denationalization” and “demonopolization”

                                            Firm Size   Corrected
                                     1986      15.671      15.671
                                     1987      15.226      15.226
                                     1988      14.915      14.915
                                     1989      15.148      15.148
                                     1990      13.942      13.942
                                     1991      13.379      13.379
                                     1992      12.654      12.654
                                     1993      11.949      11.949
                                     1994      11.050      11.051
                                     1995      10.715      10.715
                                     1996      10.445      10.445
                                     1997      10.275      10.275
                                     1998      10.063      10.063
                                     1999       9.841       9.841
                                     2000       9.595       9.595
                                     2001       9.267       9.267
                                     2002       9.031       9.031
                                     2003       8.813       8.813
                                     2004       8.726       8.726
                                     2005       8.606       8.606
                                     2006       8.675       8.675
                                     2007       8.807       8.807
                                     2008       9.114       9.117

Source: Authors’ calculations based on Quadros de Pessoal (Portuguese matched employer-employee
dataset).




                                                  48
                   Table 8: Employment shares by industry in Portugal, 1986-2008

      Year   Agriculture,   Manufacturing     Retail    Construction     Transport,      Services
                Forestry                    Wholesale                  Electric, Gas
                 Fishing
      1986            2.8            40.3         7.3           17.9               8.0      23.7
      1987            2.6            39.9         7.1           17.9               7.8      24.6
      1988            2.7            38.8         7.2           18.1               7.4      25.7
      1989            2.8            39.2         7.7           18.7               7.3      24.3
      1990            2.7            37.3         7.5           18.1               6.8      27.6
      1991            2.5            36.6         7.9           18.6               6.9      27.5
      1992            2.5            35.8         8.1           19.6               6.8      27.3
      1993            2.4            34.5         8.2           20.2               6.6      28.1
      1994            2.4            34.1         8.6           22.4               6.4      26.2
      1995            2.3            33.3         8.5           17.8               6.2      32.0
      1996            2.3            31.8         8.6           17.7               6.0      33.6
      1997            2.3            31.0         9.0           17.9               5.8      33.9
      1998            2.3            30.2         9.2           17.8               5.8      34.6
      1999            2.2            29.6         9.3           18.3               5.8      34.7
      2000            2.2            28.5        10.2           18.6               5.8      34.7
      2001            2.1            26.3        11.5           17.9               5.6      36.5
      2002            2.2            24.7        11.8           18.1               5.5      37.7
      2003            2.1            24.5        11.4           18.4               5.5      38.2
      2004            2.1            24.3        11.6           18.6               5.4      37.9
      2005            2.5            24.1        12.1           19.2               5.6      36.5
      2006            2.5            23.3        12.2           19.3               5.6      37.1
      2007            2.4            22.4        12.6           19.5               5.5      37.7
      2008            2.4            22.2        12.6           19.9               5.7      37.3

Source: Authors’ calculations based on Quadros de Pessoal (Portuguese matched employer-employee
dataset).




                                                49
                          Table 9: Average Firm Size by industry, 1986-2008

      Year     Agriculture,   Manufacturing     Retail       Construction     Transport,    Services
                  Forestry                    Wholesale                     Electric, Gas
                   Fishing
      1986             11.4            33.6           17.0            8.7           60.2       10.2
      1987             11.1            33.0           16.9            8.5           58.3       10.0
      1988             10.1            30.8           15.6            8.1           51.7       11.0
      1989              9.8            30.1           15.0            8.0           48.3       12.1
      1990              9.6            29.8           14.6            8.1           47.3       10.0
      1991              8.9            28.5           13.7            7.9           44.4        9.8
      1992              8.3            26.9           12.6            7.7           40.4        9.3
      1993              7.8            25.3           11.9            7.4           36.1        9.1
      1994              7.1            22.7           10.9            6.9           30.0        8.8
      1995              6.7            22.1           10.5            6.7           27.8        8.4
      1996              6.6            21.7           10.4            6.6           25.7        8.3
      1997              6.4            20.6           10.0            6.7           24.4        8.4
      1998              6.4            20.1            9.2            6.6           22.8        8.4
      1999              6.2            19.6            8.6            6.7           21.4        8.2
      2000              5.9            18.7            8.1            6.6           18.1        8.4
      2001              6.0            18.3            8.6            6.6           16.5        7.9
      2002              5.7            17.2            8.2            6.4           13.9        8.1
      2003              5.6            16.9            7.9            6.3           12.9        8.0
      2004              5.4            16.9            8.1            6.3           12.4        7.8
      2005              4.1            16.5            8.1            6.2           12.1        8.0
      2006              4.2            16.2            8.2            6.2           11.8        8.2
      2007              4.3            16.4            8.3            6.3           11.6        8.5
      2008              4.4            16.5            8.2            6.4           11.8        9.2
     Average            6.3            21.6            9.5            6.9           20.9        8.7

Source: Authors’ calculations based on Quadros de Pessoal (Portuguese matched employer-employee
dataset).




                                                 50
                   Table 10: Fraction of self employed in the workforce, 1986-2008

                                            Year      %
                                            1986    0.011
                                            1987    0.010
                                            1988    0.013
                                            1989    0.015
                                            1991    0.015
                                            1992    0.019
                                            1993    0.023
                                            1994    0.030
                                            1995    0.034
                                            1996    0.034
                                            1997    0.035
                                            1998    0.035
                                            1999    0.035
                                            2000    0.065
                                            2002    0.088
                                            2003    0.085
                                            2004    0.086
                                            2005    0.088
                                            2006    0.096
                                            2007    0.107
                                            2008    0.110

Source: Authors’ calculations based on Quadros de Pessoal (Portuguese matched employer-employee
dataset).




                                                   51
           Table 11: Calibrating the model (no self employment option)

                       Parameters: α = 0.67, supp(x) = [1, 10]

                                         No tax   T=1.5     T=3     µ =1.25, β=1.16
                    Average firm size     22.59    15.69    8.66               8.64
          Firm size at 90th percentile       27       20      12                 11
                    Equilibrium wage       2.21     1.63    0.95               1.38
              Wage index (no tax=1)        1.00     0.73    0.43               0.62
       Total output index (no tax=1)       1.00     0.99    0.91               0.91
                         Tax revenue          0       15      47                 26
Net of taxes output index (no tax=1)       1.00     0.86    0.51               0.68




          Table 12: Calibrating the model (with self employment option)

                   Parameters: α = 0.67, B = 1, supp(x) = [1, 10]

                                         No tax   T=1.3    T=1.8    µ =1.15, β=1.12
                     Average firm size    22.59    15.97    8.73               8.59
             Fraction of self employed     0.00     0.02    0.15               0.09
          Firm size at 90th percentile       27       22      17                 14
                    Equilibrium wage       2.21     1.82    1.43               1.57
                     Wage (no tax=1)       1.00     0.82    0.64               0.71
             Total output (no tax=1)       1.00     0.99    0.95               0.93
                          Tax revenue         0        9      22                 17
Net of taxes output index (no tax=1)       1.00     0.91    0.76               0.79




                                         52
