                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               WHAT'S NEXT FOR THE DOLLAR?

                                          Martin S. Feldstein

                                         Working Paper 17260
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17260


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2011




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Martin S. Feldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
What's Next for the Dollar?
Martin S. Feldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 17260
July 2011
JEL No. E3,F0,F31,F4

                                             ABSTRACT

The real trade weighted value of the dollar fell 11 percent against the Federal Reserve Bank’s index
of major currencies during the 12 months through May 2011 and 31 percent during the past ten years.
Four strong market forces are likely to cause further declines over the next several years: a portfolio
rebalancing by major international investors who regard their portfolios as overweight dollars, the
large US current account deficit, a Chinese policy to raise consumption, and interest rate differences
that make dollar investments less attractive.

A declining dollar could have a powerful positive effect on the short-run performance of the American
economy by raising exports (now more than $1.3 trillion) and inducing American consumers to shift
from imports to American made products and services. Without a boost to demand from an increase
in net exports, the U.S. recovery is likely to remain weak and could run out of steam.

There are of course also negative effects of a falling dollar: reducing the real value of any given level
of personal incomes by raising the cost to households of the imported products that they consume
and creating inflationary pressures as import prices rise.


Martin S. Feldstein
President Emeritus
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
and NBER
msfeldst@nber.org
What’s Next for the Dollar – July 2011


What’s Next for the Dollar?

Martin Feldstein*

When it comes to the value of the dollar, the official mantra of the US government is
that “a strong dollar is good for America.” Official “mantra” but not official policy.
Neither the U.S. government nor the Federal Reserve does anything to strengthen
the dollar or to prevent it from falling.

A more accurate description of American policy is to have a strong dollar at home
and a competitive dollar abroad. A strong dollar at home means a low inflation rate
that maintains the purchasing power of the dollar domestically. This is clearly the
goal of the Federal Reserve and one that has been achieved reasonably well over the
past three decades with an average inflation rate of three percent.

In contrast, the competitiveness of the dollar abroad requires a decline in the trade
weighted value of the dollar to make U.S. exports more attractive to foreign buyers
and foreign goods less attractive to American consumers by reducing the relative
price of American goods and services. The dollar has in fact fallen over the past
several decades and fallen sharply in the past year despite the mantra favoring a
strong dollar. And the fall in the international value of the dollar has not prevented
maintaining the low inflation rate at home.

Here are the facts: In the 12 months through May of this year, the real trade
weighted value of the dollar fell 10.6 percent against the Federal Reserve Bank’s
index of major currencies and 9.1 percent against the broader index of currencies
that is also calculated by the Federal Reserve.

The government’s willingness to allow this rapid decline of the dollar – and perhaps
even to encourage it by urging the Chinese to cause the dollar to depreciate relative
to the renminbi and by the Fed’s policy of quantitative easing – shows that U.S.
dollar policy is more about achieving a competitive dollar than about a strong
international value of the dollar.

The same is true if we look at the dollar’s performance over a longer period. Over
the past ten years, the real trade weighted value of the dollar fell 31 percent against
the index of major currencies and 26 percent against the Federal Reserve’s broader
index of currencies.



*Professor of Economics, Harvard University. This paper is based on the Annual
Lecture for theBank for International Settlements, delivered June 23, 2011 in
Lucerne, Switzerland.

                                           1
The Future

But what of the future? There are four major reasons why the dollar is likely to
continue falling for at least the next few years. Note that I am not advocating
policies to make that happen. I am just looking at the fundamental economic forces
that I believe will cause that continued decline to occur.

The primary reason is that major investors around the world want fewer dollars in
their portfolios. The major fund managers in Asia, in the Middle East, and elsewhere
who are responsible for sovereign wealth funds and for national pension funds
generally believe that they are overweight dollars and want to diversify their
portfolios away from that overconcentration on dollar securities.

Those governments accumulated large amounts of foreign exchange as a result of
trade surpluses. In some countries this was the caused by undervalued exchange
rates that led to increased exports and reduced imports. In the oil producing
countries, it was the result of the rapid rise in the price of oil. The relevant officials
in those countries initially regarded these foreign exchange holdings as traditional
reserves to be held as a way of bridging any future gap between the cost of imports
and the country’s export earnings.

Eventually, however, these countries recognized that they did not need such large
amounts of foreign exchange to bridge the temporary import‐export gaps that might
arise in the future. Korea, Taiwan, Singapore and others with more than $200
billion in foreign exchange each came to understand that only a small portion of that
was needed for the traditional purpose of foreign exchange reserves. That is even
more relevant for the major oil producing countries and for China with $3 trillion of
foreign exchange.

Once they recognized that these were really important national investment funds,
they asked themselves in what currencies they should be held, in what asset classes,
in what maturities. The traditional investment in short term U.S. treasury bills
ceased to make sense.

So they began shifting out of the dollar and into other currencies. The primary
currency that they bought was the euro. Although funds also went into the Swiss
franc, the Australian dollar, the Norwegian kroner and other smaller currencies,
only the market for euro bonds was large enough to absorb substantial shifts of
funds. The result of this portfolio shift was to reduce the value of the dollar relative
to the euro and to the other currencies.

This diversification into the euro was temporarily halted by the start of the crisis in
Greece and the other peripheral countries. The result was a fall of the euro relative
to the dollar and other currencies. But after a while these investors realized that the
problem of Greece and the other peripherals was not a problem of the euro as such
but of the individual countries with excessive national debts and deficits. They


                                             2
concluded correctly that these problems should be reflected in the interest rate
spreads and in the cost of credit default swaps rather than in the value of the euro.

So the euro began rising again, increasing from about $1.35 per euro to $1.50. The
more recent confusion and uncertainty about the resolution of Greece’s need for
additional credit and about the more remote possibility of defaults in Spain and Italy
temporarily reduced the euro back to about $1.40. But, in my judgment, it will start
rising again. The recent reports that China has invested some three‐fourths of its
increased foreign assets this year in euros is consistent with this pattern of renewed
portfolio reallocation.

Predicting that the euro will continue to rise may seem to ignore the very high
prices that anyone who now travels to France or Germany must pay. It is easy to
conclude that the euro is fully valued and not likely to increase further. This casual
empiricism is supported by official government calculations of purchasing power
comparisons. But both bits of evidence are misleading. What matters are the prices
that drive current account balances. The prices paid by tourists are only a small
part of the relevant price of tradeables. And the price calculations of government
officials do not accurately reflect the quality differences as judged by consumers. So
while government statisticians may believe that German cars are expensive relative
to American cars, consumers around the world are clearly willing to buy German
luxury cars at their existing high prices. That’s one of the reasons why Germany has
a current account surplus of nearly $200 billion. In short, the apparent high price of
European goods and services is not a reason why the dollar will not continue to fall
relative to the European currencies.

The second reason that the dollar will decline is the enormous size of the U.S.
current account deficit. During the last 12 months the merchandise trade deficit was
$680 billion (more than four percent of US GDP) and the current account deficit was
$470 billion. Shrinking that large current account deficit can only be done by
reducing the value of the dollar relative to the currencies of other countries.

The United States is a major exporter with exports last year of more than $1.3
trillion. A more competitive dollar would increase the volume of exports and reduce
the volume of imports.

Which currencies are able to rise relative to the dollar, leading to a decline of the US
current account deficit? The euro is again the natural candidate. The Eurozone
represents a large capital market and has a current account deficit of only one‐half a
percent of the Eurozone’s GDP. Other countries that have large current account
surpluses, implying that they have the room to absorb the effect of a currency
increase, include China with a current account surplus of more than $300 billion,
Japan with a current account surplus of nearly $200 billion (causing the yen to rise
despite the problems of the Japanese economy), Switzerland with a current account
surplus of $80 billion despite the strength of the Swiss franc, and the key Asian



                                           3
countries – Singapore, Taiwan and South Korea—that together have a current
account surplus of more than $100 billion.

In short, the large US current account deficit and the corresponding large current
account surpluses elsewhere provide a natural pressure for the dollar to decline
relative to those other currencies.

The third reason that the trade weighted value of the dollar will decline over the
next few years is China’s new goal of increasing consumer spending in China.
Although China’s rapid economic growth has led to a substantial increase in the
standard of living of Chinese households, the level of consumer spending has not
increased as rapidly as China’s overall GDP. The new twelfth five year plan calls for
a rise in consumption as a share of GDP, plus increased government spending on
consumer services like health care and education.

This in turn will imply a decline in China’s enormous national saving rate, estimated
to be over 40 percent of China’s GDP. Since any country’s current account surplus is
the difference between its national saving and its national investment (i.e.,
investment in business structures and equipment and in housing), China’s very high
saving rate allows it to have both a very high investment rate and a current account
surplus of about 3.5 percent of its GDP.

If China’s net saving rate falls by just four percent of its GDP, China’s current account
surplus will end and will change to a current account deficit. An end to its current
account surplus would mean that China would no longer be a net buyer of foreign
securities. Until now, China has been the largest lender to the United States to
finance our current account deficit. If China will no longer be buying dollars in
order to invest in dollar bonds, the dollar will fall.

Moreover, if China wants to continue to make real investments in the rest of the
world – buying oil in the ground, agricultural land in Africa, businesses in various
western countries, etc. – it will have to become a net seller of some of its $3 trillion
of foreign securities – primarily dollars ‐‐ that it currently owns. That means further
downward pressure on the dollar.

Although the fall in the dollar that would result from the reduced Chinese demand
for dollars need not mean a fall in the dollar relative to the renminbi, the Chinese
government’s policies are likely to cause that rise in the renminbi‐dollar exchange
rate. The renminbi is of course a controlled exchange rate. The government of China
has allowed the renminbi to rise relative to the dollar by about 5.5 percent over the
past 12 months. But since the dollar was falling during this time relative to the euro,
the yen and other currencies, the trade weighted value of the renminbi did not rise
over this period.

During the past year, the Chinese government prevented a faster rise of the
renminbi relative to the dollar because it wanted to protect Chinese export


                                           4
manufacturers. But in coming years the rise in spending by Chinese consumers and
by the Chinese government will substitute for the reduced value of net exports that
occurs as China’s current account surplus declines.

The Chinese government has been reassuring its domestic manufacturers that it will
not let the renminbi jump sharply as some foreigners have advocated. But it has
also made it clear that the renminbi will continue to rise and it has advocated that
its manufacturers shift production to products for the domestic market.

The implication of all this is that China can now allow the renminbi to rise more
rapidly. There is also a further reason why the Chinese government is now likely to
let the renminbi rise faster. The increased domestic spending in China will increase
demand and raise inflationary pressures. A stronger renminbi would offset these
inflationary pressures in two ways. By increasing the relative cost of Chinese
exports, a stronger renminbi will reduce the demand for those products and
therefore limit that source of inflation. A stronger renminbi also reduces import
costs, including the costs of raw materials that are used in Chinese production.

This brings me to the fourth and final reason to expect the dollar to continue
declining over the next few years: the relatively low level of real interest rates in the
United States. Because of the weakness of the US economy, the Federal Reserve has
set the short‐term federal funds rate at near zero and promised to keep it at that
level for an extended period of time. Based on this promise of continued low short
rates, multiyear rates are also very low. After allowing for current and expected
inflation, the implied real rates are negative.

In contrast, the ECB has raised the short‐term rate and indicated that it will raise it
further. The ECB needs to do this in order to prevent imported inflation from food
and energy prices triggering a price‐wage spiral in Europe’s heavily unionized
economy. In the United States, wages are not rising and unions hardly exist. Only 7
percent of private sector workers are unionized. So the real interest gap will widen,
making investment in short term eurobonds of Germany or France more attractive
than investment in the corresponding US bonds.

In summary, there are four reasons to expect that the dollar will continue to decline
relative to the Euro and other major currencies over the next several years: a
portfolio rebalancing by investors who regard their portfolios as overweight dollars,
a continuing large US current account deficit, a Chinese policy to reduce net exports,
and interest rate differences that make dollar investments less attractive.

It is of course impossible to say how fast the dollar will decline. Although it may fall
only gradually, it could continue to fall at the 10 percent rate of the past 12 months
or even faster if the holders of large dollar investments want to exit their positions
to avoid the losses that will result from the dollar’s decline.




                                            5
How likely is that? China is of course reluctant to reduce its dollar position rapidly
because of the adverse effect that would have on the dollar‐RMB exchange rate. In
contrast, smaller countries and private investors could shift from the dollar to other
currencies without causing a significant impact on the value of their dollar exchange
rates. But if each of these countries – Korea, Taiwan, etc – wants to move before
selling by others causes the dollar to decline further, the cumulative effect as they all
try to do so could be a sharp decline of the dollar. And if China sees that coming, it
might want to move more rapidly to shrink its dollar position.



The Effect of the Dollar Decline

A declining dollar would have a powerful positive effect on the short‐run
performance of the American economy. A continued decline of the dollar will raise
the current annual exports of more than $1.3 trillion and will induce American
consumers to shift from imports to American made products and services. Although
exports are less than 10 percent of U.S. GDP, more than one third of the increase in
US GDP over the past four quarters was accounted for by the increase in exports.

Without a boost to demand from a future increase in net exports, the American
recovery is likely to remain weak and could run out of steam, leading to a new
downturn of GDP. Although the U.S. recession officially ended in the summer of
2009, the expansion since then has been very weak. In the first three quarters of
2010 GDP grew at an annual rate of just 2.7 percent and more than half of that
increase was just inventory accumulation rather than final sales. Although the
fourth quarter of last year saw a temporary surge of consumer spending, this
improvement of final demand and GDP did not follow through in the current year.

The annualized rate of growth fell from 3.1 percent for the fourth quarter of last
year to just 1.9 percent for the first quarter of 2011. Private estimates of monthly
GDP by Macroeconomic Advisers indicate that the level of GDP actually fell between
December of 2010 and January of 2011, and then fell further in February. March was
the only positive month in the first quarter. The data for April, May and June showed
renewed weakness with a rising unemployment rate, a sharp fall in employment
gains, lower real weekly earnings, reduced real retail sales and industrial
production, declines in business and consumer confidence, a continued collapse of
housing prices and the first decline in the index of leading indicators since early
2009, before the upturn began. Monthly estimates of GDP fell again in April and May.

So without a dollar decline the outlook for the US economy is very negative. A
decline in the value of the dollar can change this significantly. Cutting the US trade
deficit from the current level of three percent of GDP by two percentage points of
GDP would provide an initial demand stimulus equal to two percent of GDP. This
would be more powerful than a comparable size fiscal stimulus and would provide



                                           6
that stimulus without adding to the national debt. It would also provide more
stimulus than anything that the Federal Reserve might do at the current time.

There are of course also negative effects of a falling dollar. The unambiguously
adverse effect is to reduce the real value of any given level of personal incomes by
raising the cost to households of the imported products that they consume. The
magnitude of this effect is substantial but should not be exaggerated. Since imports
are only 16 percent of GDP, a 20 percent further fall in the dollar would reduce real
incomes by no more than about three percent. Even this overstates the adverse
effect of the weaker dollar on real incomes since various imports are either priced in
dollars (like oil) or experience adjustments in the foreign currency price as foreign
exporters seek to offset the adverse effect of the weaker dollar on their exports.

The other adverse effect of a lower dollar is to create inflationary pressure. Again,
the effect is relatively small. A 10 percent annual fall of the dollar would raise the
price level and the rate of inflation by less than two percent. Given the state of the
labor market, this would only affect the price level and would not be the beginning
of a price‐wage spiral.

In conclusion, there would be both strong positive effects of a dollar decline on
aggregate demand but also adverse effects on real incomes and on the price level.
But the decline of the dollar during the next few years is not a matter of choice to be
decided by weighing the advantages and disadvantages of a lower dollar. It is
something that is likely to happen. If it does, we will see a continuing decline of the
dollar and with it a greater hope for a stronger economic recovery.

Cambridge, Mass.
July 2011




                                           7
