                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    COUNTRY HETEROGENEITY AND THE INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE ON THE
                     EFFECTS OF FISCAL POLICY

                                           Carlo Favero
                                        Francesco Giavazzi
                                          Jacopo Perego

                                       Working Paper 17272
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17272


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2011




Paper prepared for the Fiscal Policy, Stabilization and Sustainability Conference, Florence 6-7 June
2011. We thank Alberto Alesina, Morten Ravn, Luigi Spaventa, participants in the conference, and
in the conference in honour of M.Hashem Pesaran, Cambridge, June 2011, for many helpful comments
and suggestions. This paper is produced as part of the project Growth and Sustainability Policies for
Europe (GRASP), a Collaborative Project funded by the European Commission’s Seventh Research
Framework Program, contract number 244725. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Carlo Favero, Francesco Giavazzi, and Jacopo Perego. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Country Heterogeneity and the International Evidence on the Effects of Fiscal Policy
Carlo Favero, Francesco Giavazzi, and Jacopo Perego
NBER Working Paper No. 17272
August 2011
JEL No. E62,H60

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper shows how the richer frequency and variety of fiscal policy shocks available in an international
sample can be analyzed recognizing the heterogeneity that exists across different countries. The main
conclusion of our empirical analysis is that the question "what is the fiscal policy multiplier" is an
ill-posed one. There is no unconditional fiscal policy multiplier. The effect of fiscal policy on output
is different depending on the different debt dynamics, the different degree of openness and the different
fiscal reaction functions across different countries. There are many fiscal multipliers and an average
fiscal multiplier is of very little use to describe the effect of exogenous shifts in fiscal policy on output.


Carlo Favero                                          Jacopo Perego
Department of Finance                                 IGIER Universita' Bocconi
Bocconi University and IGIER                          1 via Roentgen
Via Röntgen, 1                                        20136 Milano
20136 Milano, ITALY                                   Italy
carlo.favero@uni-bocconi.it                           jacopo.perego@unibocconi.it

Francesco Giavazzi
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-383-A
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
francesco.giavazzi@unibocconi.it
        Country Heterogeneity and the International
            Evidence on the Eﬀects of Fiscal Policy
                    Carlo Favero∗ Francesco Giavazzi† Jacopo Perego‡

                                            July 26, 2011



                                               Abstract

            This paper shows how the richer frequency and variety of fiscal policy shocks avail-
        able in an international sample can be analyzed recognizing the heterogeneity that
        exists across diﬀerent countries. The main conclusion of our empirical analysis is that
        the question “what is the fiscal policy multiplier” is an ill-posed one. There is no
        unconditional fiscal policy multiplier. The eﬀect of fiscal policy on output is diﬀerent
        depending on the diﬀerent debt dynamics, the diﬀerent degree of openness and the
        diﬀerent fiscal reaction functions across diﬀerent countries. There are many fiscal mul-
        tipliers and an average fiscal multiplier is of very little use to describe the eﬀect of
        exogenous shifts in fiscal policy on output.

        Keywords: Fiscal policy, Public debt, Government budget constraint, Global VAR
        models.

        JEL Classification: H60, E62


1       Introduction
Measuring the eﬀect of fiscal policy requires collecting a sample of episodes of exogenous
shifts in fiscal stance. Such episodes, however, are rather rare at the level of an individual
country. This is why, in order to obtain more precise estimates, it is tempting to pool fiscal
shocks from diﬀerent countries and to study their eﬀects in the context of an international
panel. Diﬀerent countries, however, are diﬀerent: in order to estimate fiscal multipliers
    ∗
     Deutsche Bank Chair in Asset Pricing and Quantitative Finance, Università Bocconi, IGIER and
CEPR. Via Roentgen 1, Milan 20136, Italy, carlo.favero@unibocconi.it.
   †
     Università Bocconi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, IGIER, CEPR and NBER. Via Roentgen
1, Milan 20136, Italy, francesco.giavazzi@unibocconi.it.
   ‡
     Università Bocconi, IGIER. Via Roentgen 1, Milan 20136, Italy, jacopo.perego@unibocconi.it.
Paper prepared for the Fiscal Policy, Stabilization and Sustainability Conference, Florence 6-7 June 2011.
We thank Alberto Alesina, Morten Ravn, Luigi Spaventa, participants in the conference, and in the confer-
ence in honour of M.Hashem Pesaran, Cambridge, June 2011, for many helpful comments and suggestions.
This paper is produced as part of the project Growth and Sustainability Policies for Europe (GRASP),
a Collaborative Project funded by the European Commission’s Seventh Research Framework Program,
contract number 244725.


                                                    1
using an international panel one must recognize that countries are heterogeneous. This
paper considers three sources of heterogeneity: two in the transmission of fiscal shocks and
one in how fiscal shocks themselves are generated. The first is specific to the analysis of
fiscal policy: countries are heterogeneous in their fiscal reaction functions and therefore in
their debt dynamics. Following a fiscal shock diﬀerent countries will aim at stabilizing the
debt-to-GDP ratio at diﬀerent levels and over diﬀerent horizons. The second dimension of
heterogeneity comes from diﬀerent degrees of openness, which aﬀect the way the economy
responds to domestic and international shocks. The third is related to heterogeneity in
the style of fiscal policy, that is in the contemporaneous correlation of shifts in taxes and
spending. The aim of this paper is to show how the richer frequency and variety of fiscal
policy shocks available in an international sample can be analyzed recognizing that these
sources of heterogeneity exist across diﬀerent countries.
    The thin empirical literature which uses cross-country data to measure the eﬀects of
fiscal policy has so far overlooked heterogeneity. In Alesina and Ardagna (2010) and IMF
(2010), for instance, fiscal multipliers are estimated by pooling all countries together, leav-
ing the country fixed eﬀect as the unique source of heterogeneity in the panel estimation.
The papers by is Ilzetzki (2010) and Ilzetzki and Végh (2011) allow for the response to
fiscal shocks to be heterogeneous across diﬀerent groups of countries. However, they do
not allow for interdependence, that is for the propagation of fiscal shocks across countries,
nor for heterogeneity in debt levels.1
    Recognizing that diﬀerent countries start from diﬀerent debt levels is important be-
cause fiscal reactions functions might diﬀer depending on the level of debt and on the speed
at which it accumulates or declines. The importance of keeping track of the debt dynam-
ics in the analysis of fiscal policy has been pointed out by Favero and Giavazzi (2007),
Corsetti, Meier and Mueller (2009), Leeper (2010) and Zubairy (2011). These papers show
that studying the eﬀects of shifts in fiscal policy without tracking the debt dynamics in-
duced by such shifts might lead to fiscal multipliers computed along unsustainable fiscal
paths, that is, along a path for the debt that is at odds with the beliefs of those who hold
government bonds. In other words, correctly estimated fiscal multipliers should not over-
look the fact that the government’s fiscal actions are subject to an intertemporal budget
constraint. Consider, for example, a positive shift in government spending. Following the
shift, the government may respect its budget constraint by adjusting taxes and spending
so as to keep the ratio of public debt-to-GDP stable, or it may delay the adjustment and in
the meantime let the debt ratio grow. It may even plan to use the inflation tax. The choice
of the policy maker will depend on its preferences, its policy targets and the initial debt
level: diﬀerent choices will induce diﬀerent responses of output and other macro variables
to the same fiscal shocks. Analyses of fiscal policy that do not allow for this source of het-
erogeneity will produce an “aggregate” fiscal multiplier that could be totally irrelevant for
the policy makers. As Leeper (2010) correctly argues, “Fiscal policy will shed its alchemy
   1
    Also, in both papers fiscal shocks are identified within a VAR, an identification strategy which runs
against the problem of “non-invertibility” in the presence of fiscal foresight, i.e. whenever shifts in fiscal
policy are anticipated.


                                                      2
label when the question “What is the fiscal multiplier? ” is no longer asked, and detailed
analyses of unsustainable fiscal policies are no longer conducted”.
    This paper studies fiscal multipliers estimating a multi-country Global non-linear
model obtained by augmenting a global VAR (GVAR)2 with each country’s (non lin-
ear) debt-deficit dynamics. The model thus allows for international spillovers and for the
possibility that such spillovers, as mentioned above, work diﬀerently in diﬀerent countries.
We study the transmission mechanism of a particular set of shifts in fiscal policy, those
identified via the “narrative” method in Devries et al. (2011). These are, so far, the only
available set of narrative multi-country shocks. As it is well known, the advantage of the
narrative identification method is that it avoids the inversion of the MA representation
of a VAR, needed to identify structural shocks. The narrative identification is therefore
robust to the eﬀects of fiscal foresight, i.e. to the possibility that shifts in fiscal policy
are anticipated (see Hansen and Sargent 1991, Leeper et al 2008, Ramey 2011). Our main
point, however – namely, the importance of allowing for heterogeneity – is independent
of the particular identification strategy: it applies identically to the analysis of fiscal shocks
identified imposing enough constraints on a structural VAR.
    The analysis of narrative fiscal shocks across diﬀerent countries reveals another source
of heterogeneity: tax and spending shocks are typically not independent of one another
and the style of fiscal corrections diﬀers across countries. This simple fact is confirmed by
the set of fiscal consolidation shocks identified in Devries et al. (2011) and reproduced in
Figure 1. In this sample, which spans from 1978 to 2009, the contemporaneous correlation
of shocks to taxes and government spending is in general diﬀerent from zero and the
relative contribution of revenues and expenditures to the overall shift in fiscal stance diﬀers
significantly across countries. Ramey (2011) recognizes this point when she observes that
the correlation between revenue and spending shocks may change also within a country.
When analyzing the spending shock corresponding to the Korean war she points out that
what makes that shock diﬀerent from WWII shocks is that it was accompanied by a
contemporaneous increase in taxes, something that did not happen during WWII. This
paper explicitly recognizes that shocks to revenues and expenditures are correlated and
allows for such correlation to diﬀer across countries. As we shall see, this additional source
of heterogeneity has important implications for the analysis of the transmission of fiscal
policy shocks.
    Once we allow for all three sources of heterogeneity – in fiscal reaction functions, in
openness and in the style of fiscal corrections – and we compute multipliers along paths
that are not inconsistent with a positive value of government bonds, we find results that
sharpen our understanding of the eﬀects of fiscal policy. In particular: (i) international
spillovers are important. In the case of Canada, for instance, it makes a big diﬀerence
whether a fiscal consolidations happens contemporaneously also in the U.S., or only in
Canada; (ii) the initial level of debt and the stability of the debt ratio seem to determine
whether a shift in fiscal policy has "keynesian" or "non-keynesian" eﬀects. In our group of
  2
      See, for example, Pesaran, Schuermann, Weiner (2004) and Dees, di Mauro, Pesaran, Smith (2007).



                                                   3
countries we find evidence of non-keynesian eﬀects only in Japan. This is the only country
in our sample where fiscal policy does not respond to the level of debt and where the debt
level is non mean-reverting.
    Beyond contributing to the empirical literature on the macroeconomic eﬀects of fiscal
policy our results could be used to discriminate between alternative theoretical models.
For instance, as suggested by Perotti (2011), the finding of a fiscal multiplier smaller or
larger than one can discriminate between a neoclassical and a new-Keynesian model. In
neoclassical models with lump-sum taxation where government spending is pure waste
and produces no externality, a shift in expenditures aﬀects the economy via a pure wealth
eﬀect. As spending rises, the need to satisfy the government intertemporal budget con-
straint makes the present value of taxes rise correspondingly. Note that this channel is
overlooked in models that estimate fiscal multipliers omitting the government’s intertem-
poral constraint. Forward-looking agents see their after-tax labour income reduced and
will therefore cut down their consumption of both goods and leisure. Consumption falls
and GDP increases (depending on the elasticity of labor supply) less than the increase in
government spending. The output multiplier is less than 1. In contrast, in a Keynesian
model in response to a rise in government spending consumption increases and the output
multiplier is typically larger than 1, provided that monetary policy does not put too much
weight on output, so that the expansion in output and labor demand are suﬃcient to
generate an increase in the real wage.
    The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe a model that allows for
heterogeneity in fiscal multipliers. In Section 3 we provide some evidence on the hetero-
geneity in the style of fiscal corrections. Section 4 shows how we allow for heterogeneity
and how we keep track of debt dynamics in the analysis of fiscal multipliers. Section 5
presents our empirical results and discusses what diﬀerence all of this makes. Section 6
examines the robustness of our results to the potential endogeneity of narrative shocks.
Section 7 concludes.


2        Measuring International Fiscal Multipliers
As mentioned in the introduction, this paper does not address the issue of the identification
of fiscal policy shocks. We instead focus our attention on the transmission mechanism of
fiscal shocks using the shocks identified in Devries et al. (2011), who apply the narrative
method originally proposed by Romer and Romer (2010, hereafter R&R) to identify shifts
in fiscal policy in a group of 15 OECD countries.
    The typical approach in this literature (e.g. Alesina Ardagna 2010, IMF 2010) is to
study the fiscal transmission mechanism via a panel estimation of a cross-country output
equations. The growth rate of real GDP is regressed on a set of current and lagged values of
fiscal shocks (tax hikes and expenditure cuts) and lagged GDP growth. In particular, IMF
(2010) estimates, on the sample of fifteen OECD countries 3 the following specification:
    3
        Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Portugal,



                                                    4
            ∆yi,t = α + A1 (L, 1)∆yi,t−1 + B(L, 2)εgi,t + C(L, 2)ετi,t + λi + ν t + μi,t                   (1)

    The equation includes a full set of country dummies, λi , to account for diﬀerences in
trend growth rates across countries and time dummies, ν t , to account for global shocks,
such as shifts in oil prices or the global business cycle. The simulation of the dynamic
eﬀects of the structural shocks generates a single fiscal multiplier restricted to be the same
for all countries.
    Diﬀerently from this approach, we study the eﬀects of fiscal shocks in our panel of
countries embedding heterogeneity in the style of fiscal corrections, in openness and in the
debt-deficit dynamics in an open-economy model. The model is specified to contain the
minimal set of macroeconomic variables necessary to pin down the debt-deficit dynamics
endogenously:


 X̃i,t = Ci,1 + C2 X̃i,t−1 + ϕi Bi,t−1 + ϕi,1 Zi,t + ϕi,2 Zi,t−1 + γ gi εgi,t + γ τi ετi,t + μi,t     if i 6= U S
 Xi,t = Ci,1 + Ci,2 Xi,t−1 + ϕi Bi,t−1 + γ gi εgi,t + γ τi ετi,t + μi,t                               if i = U S
                                                                                                             (2)
with

                                    X̃i,t   ≡      [yi,t , gi,t , τ i,t , ii,t , pi,t , si,t ]
                                    Xi,t    ≡      [yi,t , gi,t , τ i,t , ii,t , pi,t ]
                                    Zi,t    ≡      [yi,t , si,t ]
                                    ϕi      ≡      [ϕi,1 , ϕi,2 , ϕi,3 ]
augmented by the following set of identities:

                            Yi,t      =     eyi,t +pi,t
                            gri,t     =     (Yi,t − Yi,t−1 )/Yi,t−1
                            B̃i,t     =     Yi,t Bi,t
                            ri,t      =     eii,t +pi,t³/B̃i,t−1´
                                                          1+r               egi,t −eτ i,t
                            Bi,t      = Bi,t−1 1+gri,t +                        eyi,t
                                                                                            + ζ i,t
                                                     i,t
                                        NP
                                         −1
                            yi,t      =     wij yj,t i 6= j
                                             j=1
                                            NP−1
                            si,t      =           wij sj,t        i 6= j
                                            j=1

    This specification requires a few comments:

   • the model allows for the correlation between revenue and spending shocks and for
     heterogeneity across countries in the conduct of fiscal policy. When a fiscal adjust-
     ment of 1% of the GDP is simulated in country i, a shock of size 1+β    1
                                                                                 to εgi,t is
                                   β
     paired with a shock of size 1+β   to ετi,t , where β is computed using the fact that

Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States.



                                                              5
           ³ ¯ ´
                  ¯
         Et ετi,t ¯εgi,t = βεgi,t ;

       • the model includes a non linear debt feedback 4 . Therefore, the impact of fiscal
         shocks on output depends on the initial conditions at which such shocks occur 5 .
         Following a fiscal shock, however, debt stabilization is not imposed: the coeﬃcients
         on the debt feedback are freely estimated. Note that the coeﬃcients ϕi,1 are allowed
         to be heterogeneous across countries, so that our specification can accommodate het-
         erogeneous debt-deficit dynamics. One restriction we impose on the ϕi,1 coeﬃcients
         is that, for every country, debt only appears in the equations for gi,t , τ i,t , ii,t and pi,t
         6;


       • the model allows to compute impulse responses to fiscal shocks keeping track of
         the debt dynamics. If εgi,t and ετi,t are validly identified shocks, the only additional
         assumption required to track the debt dynamics by appending (9) to the VAR, is that
         ζ i,t is strongly exogenous. ζ i,t , captures the statistical discrepancies in the OECD
         accounts of the debt-deficit dynamics, and is the only additional shock that needs
         to be added to the VAR in order to compute the debt dynamics;

       • εgi,t and ετi,t are identified (in Devries et al. 2011) with the narrative method, thus
         not requiring the inversion of the Moving Average representation of a VAR. Shocks
         identified from the narrative method are directly included in the VAR and impulse
         responses with respect to these shocks can be directly derived from the joint simu-
         lation of (2) and the above identities;

       • the degree of openness is allowed to diﬀer across countries by letting the coeﬃcients
         in ϕi,2 and ϕi,3 to be country-specific;

       • the U.S. is treated as a closed economy. This is not an identifying restriction. We
         have imposed that foreign variables have no impact on the U.S. economy to be able
         to compare our results with the existing empirical evidence that typically analyzes
         the eﬀect on fiscal policy in the U. S. within the context of a closed economy speci-
         fication. When the validity of the closed economy restrictions for the U.S. is tested
         statistically, the hypothesis that all the relevant coeﬃcients are zero could not be
         rejected.

    This specification allows for all three sources of heterogeneity discussed in the introduc-
tion. In the following sections we shall consider each of them in detail before illustrating
our empirical results.
   4
     Ghosh et al.(2011) also find evidence of the importance of dbet feedback and non-linearities in an
international panel of advaced economies
   5
     Impulse responses and their associated confidence intervals are computed by the simulation technique
described in Favero-Giavazzi(2007)
   6
     Zubairy(2011) allows for a debt feedback in a DSGE model, while Killian and Vigfusson(2010), in the
case of oil shocks, and Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2011) also allow for the presence of asymmetries and
non-linearities in VAR models



                                                    6
3        Heterogeneity in the style of fiscal corrections
The international shifts in fiscal policy identified in IMF (2010) are tax increases and
spending cuts implemented to reduce the budget deficit and to put the public finances on
a sustainable path7 . Such shocks are identified for a group of OECD countries using the
record available in oﬃcial documents to identify the size, timing, and principal motiva-
tion for the fiscal actions taken by each country.8 This identification strategy applies to
a panel of countries the idea originally proposed in R&R who used presidential speeches,
Congressional reports and other public records to identify all major U.S. postwar tax pol-
icy actions. However, the IMF’s shocks diﬀer from R&R’s in two important dimensions.
R&R focus only on revenue shocks and identify two main types of legislated exogenous
tax changes: those driven by long-run motives, such as to foster long-run growth, and
those aiming to deal with an inherited budget deficit. IMF (2010) considers instead both
expenditure and revenue shocks and focuses only on fiscal actions motivated by the objec-
tive of reducing the budget deficit. As a matter of fact , in the IMF sample, fiscal shocks
only refer to fiscal consolidations episodes, there are no instances of deficit-driven fiscal
expansions.
    This observation raises a question on a potential truncation problem in the in Devries
et al. (2011) shocks’ series. A truncation would arise if there were some omitted deficit-
driven fiscal expansion episodes. Although we cannot check for truncation in general, there
are two countries in our sample for which this is possible, the US and the UK. Consider the
case of the United States, for which the Devries et al. (2011) shocks can be compared with
the R&R narrative shocks. The R&R narrative shocks show both positive and negative
observations, however these shocks are constructed by aggregating tax shocks deficit-driven
and tax shocks driven by the long-run growth motive. Deficit-driven fiscal expansions
never occur in the R&R sample, where virtually all tax shocks driven by the long-run
motive are expansionary (i.e. negative tax shocks) and all the deficit-driven tax shocks are
contractionary (i.e. positive tax shocks). Therefore the R&R deficit-driven shocks, which
are directly comparable to those identified by Devries et al. 2011, show no evidence of
truncation. Moreover in the R&R identification, deficit-driven tax shocks and long-run
tax shocks are virtually orthogonal (their correlation is −0.08). The same observation -
namely the fact that the series of deficit-driven tax shocks is almost exclusively composed
of tax increases - applies also to the narrative series of deficit-driven shocks identified by
Cloyne (2011) for the UK. Note, however, that the fact that the multiplier computed using
only deficit-driven fiscal shocks is unbiased doesn’t make it directly comparable with the
one computed using R&R’s series. The former is a multiplier with respect to deficit-driven
fiscal shock only. The latter, instead, is relative to a generic fiscal shock, either long-run or
deficit driven, obtained by imposing the restriction that the output responses to long-run
motivated tax changes and to deficit-driven tax changes are identical.
    The original IMF sample includes fifteen OECD countries. The data are annual and
    7
        The dataset is available on the IMF’s website (http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.aspx?sk=24892.0)
    8
        See IMF World Economic Outlook, October 2010, p.96.


                                                      7
extend from 1978 to 2009. In this sample, there are 173 episodes of fiscal consolidation
identified. In what follows, however, we focus our attention on a representative subsample
of eight countries: Belgium, Canada, France, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, Sweden and
the United States. This choice is constrained by the availability of the data needed to
track the debt dynamics - such as general government gross debt and interest payments
- which for some of the countries in the original IMF sample are available only for a too
short time span. We label εgi,t the narrative measure of a shock to expenditures (measured
as a percent of GDP) in country i in year t, while ετi,t are the identified shocks to revenues.



                                 [Insert Figure 1 Here]

     As it is clear from Figure 1, revenue shocks and expenditure shocks are correlated,
and the fiscal mix historically used to achieve a correction in the budget is heterogeneous
across countries. In the case of the U.S., for example, the historical data tell us that a
correction of the primary surplus of one per cent of GDP is typically achieved with a
mix of 60% expenditure cuts and 40% revenue increases. In the case of Japan, instead,
the same adjustment is obtained through a mix of 80% in expenditure cuts and 20% in
revenues increases.
     The evidence in Figure 1 has two important implications. First, it tells us that, for
basically all the countries considered, the simulation of the eﬀects of a shock to govern-
ment spending, assuming no contemporaneous shift in taxes, would violate the historical
pattern. Such an experiment would describe a situation that does not exist in the data –
because ετi,t shocks have never occurred independently of εgi,t shocks, at least in this sample.
This observation casts strong doubts on the usefulness of using the narrative shocks iden-
tified in IMF (2010) to study the eﬀects of tax-based adjustments separately from those
of expenditure-based adjustments. If the identified spending and revenue shocks have a
specific pattern of correlation, that specific pattern should be preserved when simulating
the eﬀect, for instance, of a tax shock. In other words, it would be diﬃcult to interpret
the eﬀect of a tax shock which is assumed to take place independently of an expenditure
shock since such an occurrence has never been observed in the sample from which the
data are drawn. Second, the evidence described in Figure 1 implies that, when studying
the international evidence of the eﬀects of a fiscal correction, one should allow for this
source of heterogeneity in policy, that is for the diﬀerent styles of such corrections across
countries. A shift in the primary surplus equivalent to one per cent of GDP is not achieved
with the same mix in all countries. This restriction, which is implicitly imposed in IMF
(2010), violates the heterogeneity present in the data.
     To illustrate the importance of this point we have run an experiment focusing on the
United States only. Consider a regression of output growth on a distributed lag of fiscal
shocks estimated to evaluate the impact on output of i) a tax shock of one per cent of
GDP simulated setting expenditure shocks to zero (the experiment run by R&R), and
ii) an adjustment of the primary surplus of one per cent of the GDP obtained using the

                                               8
historical mix of shifts in taxes and in expenditure. In practice, we have estimated the
following two models, where i = US and A(L, q) is a lag polynomial of degree q 9 :

                             ∆yi,t = α + A(L, 1)∆yi,t−1 + B(L, 2)ετi,t + μi,t             (3)

                     ∆yi,t = α + A1 (L, 1)∆yi,t−1 + B(L, 2)εgi,t + C(L, 2)ετi,t + μi,t    (4)

    The results are reported in Figure 2. The multiplier obtained from (3), reported in
the left-hand panel, is estimated by simulating a shock to ετi,t equivalent to 1% of GDP.
On the other hand, the multiplier obtained from (4), reported in the right-hand panel, is
estimated by simulating a shock of 1 to εgi,t and a shock of β̂ to ετi,t . The coeﬃcient β̂
                                      1+β̂                       1+β̂
comes from the estimation of ετi,t = α+β εgi,t +ν i,t in the sample. In this second experiment
the overall simulated shift in fiscal policy still amounts to 1% of GDP, but it now reflects
the fiscal policy style observed in the data. As Figure 2 shows, the two multipliers are
quite diﬀerent.
The multiplier obtained using the actual fiscal correction style diﬀers from zero only in
the first year and is much smaller than that obtained by simulating an isolated tax shock
which is negative and significant for three years.



                                        [Insert Figure 2 Here]

    In the light of this diﬀerence, we favour the idea of computing multipliers based on
the historical correlation between shifts in taxes and in spending, rather than artificially
setting to zero the correlation between the two. This is nothing new: the simulation of
reduced form models such as a VAR not respecting the historical pattern of correlations
present in the data would run against the Lucas (1976) critique.


4        Heterogeneity in the transmission of fiscal shocks
Countries are also heterogeneous in their fiscal reaction functions: following a fiscal shock,
diﬀerent countries will aim at stabilizing the debt-to GDP ratio at diﬀerent levels and over
diﬀerent horizons. In other words, the eﬀects of a shift in fiscal policy will depend on the
country-specific debt-deficit dynamics: Figure 3 illustrates that this dynamics is clearly
heterogeneous across the 8 countries in our sample.



                                        [Insert Figure 3 Here]

    Another dimension of heterogeneity is related to the diﬀerent degrees of openness,
because openness determines the size of the multiplier and the extent to which an economy
is aﬀected by international fluctuations. Openness varies a lot across the eight countries
    9                                                       Sq
        Where the lag-polynomial is defined as M (L, q) =    i=0   β q Lq .



                                                      9
in our sample. The U.S. is the closest of all. In most empirical investigations on the eﬀect
of fiscal policy it is treated as closed economy: we shall not depart from this hypothesis,
assuming that the U.S. economy is unaﬀected by international fluctuations. This, however,
is not true for smaller economies where the eﬀect of a shift in fiscal policy, at home or
abroad, will depend on the international economic environment in which such a shift takes
place. For instance, diﬀerences in the response of the economy to a fiscal consolidation
might depend on the international environment in which such a consolidation takes place.
It has been argued, for example, that the sharply diﬀerent response of the Irish economy to
the two consolidations carried out during the 1980s - which resulted in a deep recession in
1981-82 and in an economic boom five years later - were associated with the very diﬀerent
economic conditions prevailing at the time in Ireland’s main trading partner, the U.K.
    The empirical model we adopt to measure the eﬀects of a shift in fiscal policy addresses
both sources of heterogeneity. It tracks, country by country, the debt-deficit dynamics, and
it allows for diﬀerent degrees of openness. In the remaining paragraphs of this section we
discuss the two issues in turn.

4.1   Tracking the path of the debt
To track the country-specific debt dynamics we must first recognize that the equation
which determines the evolution over time of the debt-income ratio is highly non-linear.
The fact that this relation is non-linear is the reason why we believe it is important to
track it by means of endogenous variables rather than simply augmenting the VAR with
the government debt series. These endogenous variables are precisely those determining
the path of government debt: the cost of debt service, the nominal growth rate and the
primary deficit. In what follows, we derive the debt dynamics in terms of gross debt and,
by doing that, we slightly depart from previous work such as Bohn (1998), which uses net
government liabilities as his definition of public debt. We use gross debt for several reasons.
First, statutory debt limits, when they exist, are usually imposed on gross debt. Second,
gross debt is the measure which is more largely available to the public and, for this reason,
it is more likely to be the one entering the information set of economic agents and hence
influencing their decisions when responding to fiscal shocks. Third, there is an inherent
diﬃculty in evaluating government assets, most of which do not have a market price to
be used as a reference. The last reason is technical: in two of the countries in our sample,
Sweden and the United Kingdom, the net debt series turns negative for some years. This is
a problem because whenever the net debt comes close to zero in our simulation it induces
an exploding path for the cost of debt service, hence making the system unstable and the
simulation unfeasible.
     In order to track the debt dynamics, we start from the two following identities:

                               g       n + Ã
                             B̃i,t ≡ B̃i,t    i,t
                                                                                           (5)
                             B̃i,t ≡ B̃i,t−1 + D̃i,t + I˜i,t + μi,t .
                               n       n

        g       n , Ã , D̃        ˜
where B̃i,t , B̃i,t   i,t  i,t and Ii,t denote, respectively, the nominal levels of gross debt,


                                               10
net debt, government assets, primary deficit and net interest payments. The error term,
μi,t , is to be interpreted as a zero-mean vector of statistical discrepancies. From (5), by
adding and subtracting Ãi,t−1 we get

                               B̃tg ≡ B̃i,t−1
                                        g
                                              + D̃i,t + I˜i,t + ∆Ãi,t + μi,t .                           (6)

Dividing both sides of (6) by nominal GDP, Ỹi,t , (and dropping the tilde to denote ratios
to GDP) we have

                                            g
                                g         B̃i,t−1 + I˜i,t
                               Bi,t   ≡                     + Di,t + ν i,t + μi,t .                       (7)
                                               Ỹi,t

ν i,t = ∆Ãt /Ỹt denotes the component in the change of gross public debt which is unrelated
to the primary deficit or to interest payments and, instead, reflects asset sales or purchases.
Since we have no economic model to determine the evolution of government assets, we shall
assume that ν i,t is an exogenous random variable. For notational convenience we define
                                                                 g
ζ i,t ≡ ν i,t + μi,t and from now on we drop the apex g from Bi,t  . Setting rt = I˜t /D̃t−1 and
grt = D(Ỹt )/Ỹt−1 , from (7) we get
                                                 µ               ¶
                                                        1 + rt
                                   Bt = Bt−1                         + Di,t + ζ i,t                       (8)
                                                       1 + grt
This last equation shows that the dynamics of Bt can be tracked using a parsimonious
number of endogenous variables. Letting yi,t , gi,t , τ i,t , ii,t and pi,t be the logs of real out-
put, real government expenditures and revenues, real net interest payments and the price
deflator, respectively, we can track the dynamics described in (8) by use of the following
set of identities:
                         Yi,t = eyi,t +pi,t
                         gri,t = (Yi,t − Yi,t−1 )/Yi,t−1
                         B̃i,t = Yi,t Bi,t                                                       (9)
                         ri,t = eii,t +pi,t³/D̃i,t−1´
                                                        1+ri,t         egi,t −eτ i,t
                            Bi,t      = Bi,t−1         1+gri,t   +         eyi,t
                                                                                       + ζ i,t

    Note that the fourth identity imposes a non-negativity constraint on the cost of financ-
ing the debt, a feature that will turn out to be very useful when simulating the model over
periods of very low interest rates. Note also that, conditional on Xi,t ≡ [yi,t , gi,t , τ i,t , ii,t , pi,t ]
and ζ i,t , system (9) is closed, which means that we have expressed the dynamics of gross
debt, Bi,t in terms of endogenous variables only.
    In order to check how closely our debt-dynamics equation tracks the actual path of
debt-GDP ratios of the eight countries in our sample, we have brought the system (9) to
the data and simulated it forward starting in 1980, by feeding it with the actual values of
Xi,t and ζ i,t . Figure 3 reports the debt dynamics produced by this simulation, along with
the actual ones. The two series are virtually not distinguishable.




                                                          11
4.2   Modelling heterogeneity in openness
As mentioned above, we assume that our sample of countries consists of one closed econ-
omy, the U.S., and n − 1 open economies. We parsimoniously model comovements in
open economies by adopting the GVAR approach proposed by Schuerman et al (2004):
                                                      ∗ , is constructed for each country
a country-specific exogenous international variable, yi,t
through a weighted average of the foreign (log of) output, yi,t

                                            n−1
                                            X
                                   yi,t =         wtij yj,t   i 6= j                     (10)
                                            j=1

where the weights wtij are based on trade shares – the share of country j in the total
trade of country i measured in U.S. dollars with wtii = 0. The current value and the first
lag of yi,t are included in the specification of each country’s VAR to capture international
comovements in the cycle. We adopt the same procedure to model exchange rates. We
include, among the country-specific variables, the real exchange relative to the U.S. dollar,
si,t , and the following global variable

                                            n−1
                                            X
                                   si,t =         wij sj,t    i 6= j                     (11)
                                            j=1


5     Results
The presentation of our results is organized in four subsections. We start by discussing
the robustness of fiscal multipliers estimated on panels of countries. We then explain why
it is important to keep track of debt dynamics and we show this with a case study of the
U.S. We close the section by showing our empirical results.

5.1   On the robustness of international fiscal multipliers
We start our empirical analysis by replicating the available international evidence on
the fiscal transmission mechanism (e.g. Alesina Ardagna 2010, IMF 2010), which, as we
said, is typically based on the panel estimation of a cross-country output equation. The
specification, which is very similar to the one presented in equation (4), is a regression of
the growth rate of real GDP on a set of current and lagged values of fiscal shocks and
lagged GDP growth. In particular, IMF (2010) estimates, on their sample of fifteen OECD
countries the following equation:

          ∆yi,t = α + A1 (L, 1)∆yi,t−1 + B(L, 2)εgi,t + C(L, 2)ετi,t + λi + ν t + μi,t   (12)

    The equation includes a full set of country dummies, λi , to account for diﬀerences in
trend growth rates across countries and time dummies, ν t , to account for global shocks,
such as shifts in oil prices or the global business cycle.



                                                   12
   We replicate the results of the IMF study by reporting in Figure 4a-4b the multiplier
with respect to an aggregate fiscal shock, εgi,t +ετi,t , obtained by imposing B(L, 2) = C(L, 2).
When aggregate shocks are considered, the estimated multiplier is statistically significant
but smaller than 1.



                                  [Insert Figure 4a-4b Here]

   The simple empirical model described by (12) imposes very strong restrictions. The
eﬀects of fiscal consolidations are assumed to be identical across countries: the only het-
erogeneity allowed for is that captured by the fixed eﬀects in the panel estimation. We
doubt that this global fiscal multiplier is a useful concept for the selection of the structural
model to be used for policy advice. The following assumptions, in particular, appear to be
very restrictive:

    • fiscal shocks are assumed to be homogeneous across all countries. No heterogeneity
      in the fiscal policy mix is allowed for;

    • the responses of output to fiscal shocks are computed overlooking their eﬀects on
      the dynamics of the debt. The specification thus rules out the possibility that fiscal
      dynamics diﬀer across countries characterized by diﬀerent debt levels. It also shuts
      down another possibly important eﬀect, namely the eﬀect that fiscal shocks can exert
      on interest rates;

    • fiscal multipliers are assumed to be the same in small and open, and large and less
      open economies. Moreover, the eﬀect of a global fiscal shock is assumed to be the
      same as that of a local fiscal shock for each of the countries included in the sample.

5.2    On the importance of tracking debt dynamics
To illustrate the importance of keeping track of the debt dynamics we start by considering
a restricted version of our general empirical model. Equation (13) encompasses the single
equation specification used in the IMF study. But it also allows to keep track of the
debt dynamics when computing impulse responses, thus checking whether multipliers are
computed along divergent fiscal paths. Otherwise it replicates the IMF study in that no
debt feedback is imposed. (Note that because we now keep track of debt dynamics the
sample is restricted to only eight countries, those for which the debt dynamics could be
reconstructed from the set of identities in (9))

                         Xi,t = Ci,1 + Ci,2 Xi,t−1 + γ gi εgi,t + γ τi ετi,t + μi,t                 (13)

with Xi,t = [yi,t , gi,t , τ i,t , τ i,t , pi,t ]. The usual set of identities in (9) is appended to (13)
in order to track debt dynamics endogenously. The model for Xi,t can be interpreted
as a set of stacked closed economy VARs: no exchange rate is included and no common


                                                    13
fluctuations among diﬀerent components of Xi,t across countries is allowed for. Moreover,
if panel restrictions are imposed, such that, for every country i, Ci,1 = C1 , Ci,2 = C2 ,
γ gi = γ g and γ τi = γ τ , (13) can be re-interpreted as an approximation of the truncated
MA representation of (12).
     We have estimated the system (13) on data from our sample of eight countries. Figure
4b shows that the estimated multipliers replicate very closely those obtained with the IMF
specification, equation (12) and reported in Figure 4a.
     Figure 5 reports the simulated debt dynamics for each of the countries in the sample
and it clearly shows that for some of the countries the common multiplier is computed
along an unstable debt path.



                                     [Insert Figure 5 Here]

   We now come to the core of the paper. We shall estimate fiscal multipliers in a model
that allows for debt stabilization, international comovements and cross country hetero-
geneity. Before attacking this problem, however, we show a case study of the U.S. to
document the error one can make by omitting the debt-deficit dynamics.

5.3    The eﬀects of overlooking the debt feedback: a case study of the
       U.S.
This section illustrates the importance of keeping track of the eﬀects of fiscal policy on the
debt when estimating fiscal multipliers. We study what we have assumed to be a closed
economy, the U.S. We choose to do so because, as already mentioned, the analysis of fiscal
policy shocks on the U.S., modelled as a closed economy, has so far been the benchmark
in the literature. We start by estimating two models for the U.S. economy on the sample
1980-2009: a standard VAR model without debt feedback (13) and one with debt feedback.
(In this case the set of regressors in each of the VAR equations is augmented by the lagged
debt-to-gdp ratio and the debt dynamics is modeled by the identities in (9).
    In practice, we consider the following system of equations for the US economy

      Xus,t = Cus,0 + Cus,1 t + Ci,2 Xus,t−1 + ϕus Dus,t−1 + γ gus εgus,t + γ τus ετus,t + μus,t     (14)

where, as above, Xus,t ≡ [yus,t , gus,t , τ us,t , ius,t , pus,t ]. The vector of coeﬃcients ϕus describes
the feedback from the lagged debt-GDP ratio to the variables included in the system. As
in the previous Sections, the debt dynamics is endogenized by appending to the system in
(14) the identities described in (9).
    To understand the importance of allowing for a debt feedback in estimating the fiscal
multiplier, we shall consider two alternative specifications of this model. First, we analyze
the fiscal VAR in (14) without feedback, that is, we impose the restriction ϕus = 0. Next,
we relax this assumption and re-estimate the same model allowing for ϕus 6= 0. When we



                                                    14
do this we let ϕus = {0, ϕgus , ϕτus , ϕius , ϕpus }, that is we let the feedback aﬀect all variables
Xus,t except yus,t . We shall refer to this model as the fiscal VAR with debt feedback.
    The two alternative specifications, with and without debt feedback, have strikingly
diﬀerent eﬀects on the dynamics of the endogenous variables following a fiscal shock–and
this plays an important role when computing fiscal multipliers. To illustrate this point,
we report in Figure 6 the simulated out-of sample dynamics of output growth, of the
debt—to-GDP ratio, the primary deficit-to-GDP ratio, and the cost of financing the debt,
as generated by the VAR without feedback (left column) and with a debt feedback (right
column). The simulated series are generated by taking, as initial conditions for all vari-
ables, their value in 2009 and then projecting each future path up to 2020 by solving the
model forward.



                                   [Insert Figure 6 Here]

    Figure 6 shows that the dynamics implied by the VAR model with no debt feedback is
unstable for all fiscal variables, although real GDP growth converges to a long-run value of
about four per cent. The same long-run steady state for growth is obtained by the model
with debt-feedback, but with a very diﬀerent path for the fiscal variables.
    The out-of-sample simulation of the model without feedback produces a path for all
the endogenous variables that does not guarantee debt stabilization. Along this path: (i)
the debt-to-GDP ratio reaches 1.75 in 2020, (ii) an unsustainable fiscal policy cumulates
yearly primary deficits in the range of 10-20 percent of GDP, (iii) the rapid increase in
the debt ratio has no eﬀect on interest rates–in eﬀect, following the historical trend,
the cost of debt service falls to zero, (iv) despite the divergence of the debt ratio, real
growth converges rapidly toward its steady state value estimated at 2 percent. The results
from the model with a debt feedback are very diﬀerent. In the fiscal VAR with feedback
debt stabilization is achieved because the initial fiscal expansion, occurred in 2008-2009, is
eventually reversed, and the dynamics of the cost of financing switches form an increasing
path to a converging one. The projected dynamics of the model with feedback reveals all
the features of a sustainable debt dynamics: (i) the debt-to-GDP ratio converges quickly
towards its steady state value, (ii) the primary deficit after its peak at 10 per cent of
GDP in 2009 is progressively reduced and turns into a surplus by 2014-2020, (iii) interest
rates respond positively to the fiscal expansion, but also to the inversion in the path of
the deficit, and eventually converge progressively toward a level between 2 and 3 per cent,
(iv) output growth converges to its steady state level of 2 per cent .
    This evidence shows that impulses responses computed on the two models should be
interpreted very diﬀerently. In the case of the model without feedback the initial shock
lands the economy on an unsustainable fiscal path, while in the case of the model with
feedback this does not happen.

    To further elaborate on this point, for each of the two diﬀerent specifications of model

                                                 15
(14), we simulated the eﬀect of a fiscal shock corresponding to 1% of GDP, respecting the
historical policy style, i.e. the correlation between tax and spending shocks that charac-
terizes the US experience. In Figure 7 we show the responses of output and of the primary
deficit.



                                 [Insert Figure 7 Here]

    The results are interesting. Consider first the response of output to the fiscal adjustment
under the two models, with and without the debt feedback: there is no diﬀerence between
the two specifications. A clear diﬀerence, instead, emerges when we compare the eﬀect
of the fiscal adjustment on the primary deficit. In the model without feedback, the fiscal
contraction has a permanent eﬀect on the primary deficit. The deficit falls and then remains
permanently negative. This explains what we observe in Figure 6 where the debt-to-GDP
ratio lands on a diverging path. Instead, in the model with feedback, the eﬀect of the
initial shock on the primary deficit is eventually reversed, and the debt ratio converges
towards its long run mean.
    The lesson from Figure 7 is that fiscal multipliers cannot be inferred by simply ana-
lyzing the impulse response of output to a fiscal shock because the same impulse response
can correspond to very diﬀerent fiscal multipliers. In our case, in the model without feed-
back, an initial fiscal retrenchment of 1% of GDP determines, after 5 years, a total fiscal
retrenchment of 11% of GDP. In the model with feedback the total fiscal retrenchment
generated by the same initial shock is instead 8% of GDP. The same total eﬀect an output-
namely a marginally significant expansion of about 2% over a 5-year period- is therefore
obtained with a change in the deficit/GDP ratio which diﬀers by 3 per cent between the
two simulated fiscal manoeuvres.

5.4   Computing the eﬀects of fiscal policy allowing for heterogeneity
We now come to the central point of our paper. We estimate fiscal multipliers in a model
that allows for debt stabilization, international comovements and cross country hetero-
geneity. We do this using the full model presented in (2) to compute the eﬀects of a fiscal
contraction of 1% of GDP obtained with a mix of tax increase and expenditure reduction
that reflects, country by country, the historical pattern of fiscal policy. The model allows
for diﬀerent policy styles across countries, diﬀerent debt-deficit dynamics and diﬀerent
degrees of exposure to the international cycle. Table 1 illustrates the significance of the
debt feedback by reporting the estimated coeﬃcients on the debt in the fiscal reaction
function of the diﬀerent countries. Note that debt stabilization plays a role in all coun-
tries: as the diﬀerence between the feedback coeﬃcients implies a positive feedback of the
primary surplus to the debt to GDP ratio, with the only exception of Japan. The style of
stabilization is however heterogenous across countries: lagged debt impacts more signifi-
cantly (with a negative sign) on expenditures in Canada and the US while it has instead


                                              16
a more significant (positive) coeﬃcients on taxes in the cases of Italy, France and the UK.



                         [Insert Figure 8 and Table 1 Here]

    The output multipliers for the eight countries, reported in Figure 8, document a very
high level of heterogeneity, suggesting that an aggregate homogeneous fiscal multiplier,
such as the one reported in Figure 4, would be diﬃcult to interpret. The output response
to a fiscal retrenchment ranges from significantly contractionary in Belgium and France,
to not significantly diﬀerent from zero in the U.K., Sweden,and Italy, to initially zero and
then slightly espansionary in Canada, and the U.S., to significantly expansionary in Japan.
    Interestingly, the country that shows a significant non-Keynesian eﬀect of a fiscal policy
retrenchment on output is Japan, which in our sample is the country that has shown the
most unstable debt dynamics with no mean reversion in the debt to GDP ratio.


6     Robustness
In this section we check the robustness of our findings of heterogeneity in fiscal multipliers
to two modifications of the fiscal shocks included in our model. We first analyze the impact
of local rather than international fiscal shocks, then we address explicitly the potential
endogeneity of narrative fiscal shocks.

6.1   Country-specific versus global shocks
So far the type of fiscal policy experiment considered is a simultaneous fiscal consolidation
across all countries in our sample. In fact, this is the type of shocks that is eﬀectively ana-
lyzed in the IMF studies when computing the fiscal multiplier based on the pooled output
growth equation and reported in Figure 4a. In the non-linear GVAR specification there is
no need for imposing the restriction that fiscal policy is synchronized across all countries
as the extended specification of the model allows for heterogeneity across countries and
for experimenting with local policy shocks. We have implemented such an experiment by
running eight diﬀerent simulations, one for each country in the sample, in which only one
country at time is subject to a fiscal shock while the others are inactive. We collected the
impulse responses in Figure 9



                                 [Insert Figure 9 Here]

    The results strengthen our general point on the importance of allowing for hetero-
geneity. Consider for example the case of the similarity of the output response to fiscal
policy in Canada and the USA that we reported in Figure 8 while analyzing the eﬀect
of a global fiscal shocks. Such similarity totally disappears in Figure 9 where we consider
the response to a local shock. In fact, the US response is virtually unaltered while the


                                              17
response in Canada is practically flat at zero. This evidence shows that the exercise based
on a synchronized shock was basically measuring the response of the Canadian economy
to a US policy shocks rather than the fiscal multiplier in Canada. In other words, while in
the US a fiscal consolidation is expansionary (in the medium run), the same shift in fiscal
policy has no eﬀect on output in Canada. However when the US cuts spending and raise
taxes, output raises not only in the US but also in Canada. The same does not happen
symmetrically for the US when Canada consolidates, most likely because of the diﬀerent
size of the two economies. The identification of the two separate eﬀects requires the higher
degree of heterogeneity of the non-linear GVAR model. In general, although all responses
to local shocks are smaller than those based on global shocks, Canada is the only case in
which there is a dramatic diﬀerence between these two experiments.

6.2   Are the Devries et al. (2011) narrative shocks exogenous?
Our second robustness check is based on a closer analysis of the exogeneity of the nar-
rative shocks. Our specification strategy, based on the direct inclusion of the narrative
shocks in the non-linear VAR model, takes for granted the exogeneity of the tax hikes
and the expenditure cuts considered by Devries et al.(2011). Narrative shocks are based
on the exam of intentions and actions as described in policy documents to identify mea-
sures motivated primarily by deficit reductions. Such fiscal actions represent a response to
past decisions and past economic conditions rather than to prospective conditions. As it
is clearly stated by Devries et al.(2011) "they are unlikely to be systematically correlated
with other developments aﬀecting output in the short-term and are thus valid for estimat-
ing the macroeconomic eﬀects of fiscal consolidations", however it is possible that these
narrative shocks capture the systematic response of fiscal policy to the debt dynamics
rather than its surprise components. The analysis of the impact of shocks to the policy
reaction functions implicitly estimated in a VAR is not based on changing any estimated
parameters and it is not therefore subject to the Lucas’ critique (see Lucas(1976) despite
the nature of a reduced form model of any VAR. This argument cannot be applied to the
narrative identified shocks inserted in a VAR if they are not orthogonal to the relevant
information set. In fact, if the orthogonality property is not satisfied a modification in the
narrative shocks might eﬀectively involve a change in the parameters of the reduced form
model. To fix ideas consider this simplified version of a fiscal reaction functions which
decomposes the dynamics of a generic fiscal policy variable into an automatic output sta-
bilization component, (β 1 yt ), a discretionary output stabilization component, (β 2 yt−1 ) a
discretionary debt stabilization component, (β 3 dt−1 ) , and a fiscal shock, uft p :

                         f pt = β 0 + β 1 yt + β 2 yt−1 + β 3 dt−1 + uft p

   The narrative approach is constructed to filter out of the fiscal variable the auto-
matic and discretionary output component but change in fiscal policy motivated by deficit
reductions may reflect the true fiscal shock uft p as well as the discretionary fiscal debt


                                                18
stabilization component. In other words the narrative approach might lead to identify
as fiscal shocks (f pt − β 0 − β 1 yt − β 2 yt−1 ) rather than uft p , generating a potential endo-
geneity bias in the GVAR specification augmented with debt dynamics. To address this
potential problem, we have evaluated fiscal shocks against the information set of our GVAR
by first regressing the narrative shocks on lags of output only and then by regressing them
on the full information set used in our non-linear GVAR. The results reported in Table
2 show that indeed the shocks are orthogonal to lags of output but that they are not
always orthogonal to the full information set included in the non-linear GVAR model. To
evaluate the consequences of this fact we have re-run our model by keeping the original
narrative shocks for the countries where they are orthogonal to the full information set,
and by substituting to the original narrative shocks the residuals of the regression of the
narrative shocks on the relevant information set for the countries where the orthogonality
hypothesis has been clearly rejected. The results, reported in Figure 10 that is directly
comparable with Figure 9 as we consider the output responses to local shocks , show that
the heterogeneity evidence is robust to the orthogonalization of the shocks, although for
some of the countries, the shape of the impulse responses is somewhat aﬀected (even if
the impact eﬀect is not).


                          [Insert Figure 10 and Table 2 Here]


7    Conclusions
The main conclusion of our empirical analysis is that the question “what is the fiscal
policy multiplier” asked unconditionally is impossible to answer empirically and makes
little sense theoretically. There is no unconditional fiscal policy multiplier. The eﬀect of
fiscal policy on output is diﬀerent according to the diﬀerent debt dynamics, the diﬀerent
degree of openness and the diﬀerent fiscal reaction functions in diﬀerent countries. Pooling
together the evidence for diﬀerent countries to derive a single measure of the eﬀect of fiscal
retrenchments on output is therefore is of very little use to describe the eﬀect of exogenous
shifts in fiscal policy on output. In this paper we have derived empirical evidence on fiscal
multipliers by specifying a global non-linear VAR that allows for the three sources of
heterogeneity mentioned above. Moreover, our model generates fiscal multipliers computed
along paths that are not inconsistent with a positive value of government bonds. We find
results that sharpen our understanding of the eﬀects of fiscal policy. In particular: (i)
international spillovers are important. In the case of Canada, for instance, it makes a big
diﬀerence whether a fiscal consolidations happens contemporaneously also in the U.S., or
only in Canada; (ii) the initial level of debt and the stability of the debt ratio seem to
determine whether a shift in fiscal policy has "keynesian" or "non-keynesian" eﬀects. In
our group of countries we find evidence of non-keynesian eﬀects only in Japan. This is the
only country in our sample where fiscal policy does not respond to the level of debt and
where the debt level is non mean-reverting.

                                                19
    The empirical results on the heterogeneity in the eﬀect of fiscal policy in our paper
should not be used to answer policy questions such as “How should a government respond
to a particular macro shock?”. These questions need to be addressed within the framework
of quantitative general equilibrium models of the business cycle - i.e. within the context of
a theoretical macro model rather than on an empirical reduced form econometric model.
Empirical results like those presented in this paper should be however considered in the
specification of a DSGE model relevant for policy simulation analysis.




                                             20
References
 [1] Alesina A. and Ardagna S. [2010]: “Large changes in Fiscal Policy: Taxes versus
     Spending”, Tax Policy and the Economy, vol.24, edited by J.R.Brown.

 [2] Auerbach A., Y. Gorodnichenko [2011]: "Measuring the Output Response to Fiscal
     Policy", American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.

 [3] Bachmann R., E.R. Sims [2011]: "Confidence and the Transmission of Government
     Spending Shocks", NBER Working Paper 17063.

 [4] Bohn, Henning [1998]: ”The Behaviour of U.S. public debt and deficits”, Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 113, 949-963.

 [5] Cloyne, J. [2011]: "What are the Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Tax Changes in the United
     Kingdom", mimeo, University College London.

 [6] Corsetti G., Meier A. and G. Mueller [2009]: "Fiscal Stimulus with Spending Rever-
     sals", CEPR DP 7302.

 [7] Dees, S., di Mauro, F., Pesaran, M. H. & Smith, L. V. [2007]: “Exploring the in-
     ternational linkages of the euro area: a global VAR analysis”, Journal of Applied
     Econometrics, 22(1), 1-38.

 [8] Devries, Pete, Jaime Guajardo, Daniel Leigh, and Andrea Pescatori [2011]:
     "A New Action-based Dataset of Fiscal Consolidation," IMF Work-
     ing Paper No. 11/128. The dataset is available on the IMF’s website
     (http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.aspx?sk=24892.0).

 [9] Favero, C. and F. Giavazzi [2007]: “Debt and the eﬀects of fiscal policy”, NBER
     Working paper no. 12822, April.

[10] Ghosh A., J.I. Kim, E.G. Mendoza, J.Ostry, M.Qureshi [2011]: "Fiscal fatigue, fiscal
     space and debt sustainability in advanced economies", NBER working paper 16782.

[11] Ilzetzki E. [2011]: “Fiscal Policy and Debt Dynamics in Developing Countries”,
     mimeo, London School of Economics.

[12] Ilzetzki E. and C.Vegh [2011] "How Big (Small) are Fiscal Multipliers?", paper pre-
     sented at the IMF-EUI Conference on Fiscal Policy, Stabilization and Sustainability,
     Florence June 6-7 2011.

[13] IMF [2010]: “Will it hurt? Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Fiscal Consolidation”, World
     Economic Outlook, Chapter 3, October.



                                           21
[14] Hansen, L. P., and Sargent T. J. [1991]: “Two Diﬃculties in Interpreting Vector
     Autoregressions”, in Rational Expectations Econometrics, ed. by L. P. Hansen, and
     T. J. Sargent, pp. 77—119. Westview Press, Boulder, CO.

[15] Kilian, Lutz & Vigfusson, Robert J., [2011]: "Nonlinearities in the Oil Price-Output
     Relationship," CEPR Discussion Papers 8174, C.E.P.R.

[16] Leeper E. M., Walker T., and Yang S.C. [2008]: “Fiscal Foresight: analytics and
     Econometrics”, mimeo.

[17] Leeper E. M. [2010]: “Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy”, Federal Reserve Bank
     of Kansas City’s Jackson Hole Symposium, Macroeconomic Policy: Post-Crisis and
     Risks Ahead, August 26-28, 2010.

[18] Lucas R.J.[1976]: "Econometric Policy Evaluation. A Critique", in Brunner K. and A.
     Meltzer, the Phillips Curve and the Labour Markets, Carnegie-Rochester Conference
     Conference Series on Public Policy.

[19] Killian L. and R.Vigfusson [2010]: "Are the Responses of the US Economy Asym-
     metric in energy Prices Increases and Decreases ?" paper available at http://www-
     personal.umich.edu/~lkilian/kv032310.pdf.

[20] Mertens K. and Ravn M. O. [2011]: “Measuring Fiscal Shocks in Structural VARs
     using Narrative Data”, mimeo.

[21] Perotti, R. [2011]: “Expectations and Fiscal Policy. An Empirical                In-
     vestigation”, mimeo, IGIER, Bocconi University, paper available                   at
     www.igier.unibocconi.it/perotti.

[22] Pesaran, M. H., Schuermann, T. and Weiner, S. M. [2004a]: “Modelling Regional In-
     terdependencies using a Global Error-Correcting macro-econometric model”, Journal
     of Business and Economic Statistics 22(2), 129—162.

[23] Romer, Christina and Romer, David H. [2010]: “The Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Tax
     Changes: Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks”, American Economic
     Review, 100, 763-801.

[24] Zubairy S.[2011] "On Fiscal Multipliers: Estimates from a medium scale DSGE
     model", Banque of Canada Working Papaer 2010-30




                                           22
                                     Belgium                                                                                            Canada

.03                                                                 ß = 0.16                       .03                                                                  ß = 0.20

.02                                                                                                .02



.01                                                                                                .01



.00                                                                                                .00



-.01                                                                                               -.01


       80   82   84   86   88   90   92   94   96   98   00   02    04   06   08                          80   82   84   86   88   90   92    94   96   98   00   02   04   06   08




                                     France                                                                                                  Italy

.03                                                                ß = -0.08                       .03                                                                 ß = 0.64

.02                                                                                                .02



.01                                                                                                .01



.00                                                                                                .00



-.01                                                                                               -.01


       80   82   84   86   88   90   92   94   96   98   00   02    04   06   08                          80   82   84   86   88   90   92    94   96   98   00   02   04   06   08




                                      Japan                                                                                             Sweden

.03                                                                 ß = 0.68                       .03                                                                 ß = 0.55

.02                                                                                                .02



.01                                                                                                .01



.00                                                                                                .00



-.01                                                                                               -.01


       80   82   84   86   88   90   92   94   96   98   00   02    04   06   08                          80   82   84   86   88   90   92    94   96   98   00   02   04   06   08




                           United Kingdom                                                                                          United States

.03                                                                 ß = 0.69                       .03                                                                 ß = 0.62

.02                                                                                                .02



.01                                                                                                .01



.00                                                                                                .00



-.01                                                                                               -.01


       80   82   84   86   88   90   92   94   96   98   00   02    04   06   08                          80   82   84   86   88   90   92    94   96   98   00   02   04   06   08




                                                                                   Spending Cuts          Tax Hikes


                                               Figure 1: The style of fiscal consolidations




                                                                                                               23
 2                                                     2


 0                                                     0


 -2                                                    -2


 -4                                                    -4


 -6                                                    -6


 -8                                                    -8


-10                                                   -10
      0        1        2           3   4                   0     1       2        3        4




              (b): Tax Hikes only                 (b): Tax Hikes and Spending Cuts, Balanced Shock
          Figure 2: Impulse Responses of Output to diﬀerent fiscal shocks. USA only.




                                                 24
                                     Belgium                                                                                       Canada
2.0                                                                                          2.0



1.6                                                                                          1.6



1.2                                                                                          1.2



0.8                                                                                          0.8



0.4                                                                                          0.4



0.0                                                                                          0.0
      80   82   84   86   88   90   92    94   96   98   00   02   04   06   08   10               80   82   84   86   88   90    92   94   96   98   00   02   04   06   08   10




                                         France                                                                                        Italy
2.0                                                                                          2.0



1.6                                                                                          1.6



1.2                                                                                          1.2



0.8                                                                                          0.8



0.4                                                                                          0.4



0.0                                                                                          0.0
      80   82   84   86   88   90   92    94   96   98   00   02   04   06   08   10               80   82   84   86   88   90    92   94   96   98   00   02   04   06   08   10




                                         Japan                                                                              United Kingdom
2.0                                                                                          2.0



1.6                                                                                          1.6



1.2                                                                                          1.2



0.8                                                                                          0.8



0.4                                                                                          0.4



0.0                                                                                          0.0
      80   82   84   86   88   90   92    94   96   98   00   02   04   06   08   10               80   82   84   86   88   90    92   94   96   98   00   02   04   06   08   10




                                     Sweden                                                                                      United States
2.0                                                                                          2.0



1.6                                                                                          1.6



1.2                                                                                          1.2



0.8                                                                                          0.8



0.4                                                                                          0.4



0.0                                                                                          0.0
      80   82   84   86   88   90   92    94   96   98   00   02   04   06   08   10               80   82   84   86   88   90    92   94   96   98   00   02   04   06   08   10




                                                         Tracked Debt                  Actual Debt                 Sample Mean


                                                         Figure 3: Tracking Debt Dynamics




                                                                                             25
                                                                              1.0
       0.5
                                                                              0.5
       0.0
                                                                              0.0

       -0.5
                                                                              -0.5

       -1.0
                                                                              -1.0

       -1.5                                                                   -1.5

       -2.0                                                                   -2.0


       -2.5                                                                   -2.5
              0        1               2                3          4                 0       1               2                3          4

                      Aggregate Consolidation (Tax and Spending)                            Aggregate Consolidation (Tax and Spending)




Figure 4a: IMF Replication, single equation, 15 OECD countries         Figure 4b: Restricted VAR, no debt feedback 8 OECD countries




                                                                       26
                              Belgium                                                               Canada
3.2                                                                 3.2

2.8                                                                 2.8

2.4                                                                 2.4

2.0                                                                 2.0

1.6                                                                 1.6

1.2                                                                 1.2

0.8                                                                 0.8

0.4                                                                 0.4

0.0                                                                 0.0
  1980   1985   1990   1995     2000    2005   2010   2015   2020     1980     1985   1990   1995    2000    2005   2010   2015   2020




                              France                                                                 Italy
3.2                                                                 3.2

2.8                                                                 2.8

2.4                                                                 2.4

2.0                                                                 2.0

1.6                                                                 1.6

1.2                                                                 1.2

0.8                                                                 0.8

0.4                                                                 0.4

0.0                                                                 0.0
  1980   1985   1990   1995     2000    2005   2010   2015   2020     1980     1985   1990   1995    2000    2005   2010   2015   2020




                              Japan                                                                 Sweden
3.2                                                                 3.2

2.8                                                                 2.8

2.4                                                                 2.4

2.0                                                                 2.0

1.6                                                                 1.6

1.2                                                                 1.2

0.8                                                                 0.8

0.4                                                                 0.4

0.0                                                                 0.0
  1980   1985   1990   1995     2000    2005   2010   2015   2020     1980     1985   1990   1995    2000    2005   2010   2015   2020




                       United Kingdom                                                        United States
3.2                                                                 3.2

2.8                                                                 2.8

2.4                                                                 2.4

2.0                                                                 2.0

1.6                                                                 1.6

1.2                                                                 1.2

0.8                                                                 0.8

0.4                                                                 0.4

0.0                                                                 0.0
  1980   1985   1990   1995     2000    2005   2010   2015   2020     1980     1985   1990   1995    2000    2005   2010   2015   2020




                Figure 5: Debt dynamics out-of-sample simulations (shaded area).



                                                                          27
            (a) Without Debt Feedback                                     (b) With Debt Feedback

                                 Debt                                                         Debt
  2.4                                                        2.4


  2.0                                                        2.0


  1.6                                                        1.6


  1.2                                                        1.2


  0.8                                                        0.8


  0.4                                                        0.4


  0.0                                                        0.0
    1980    1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015     1980      1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015




                      Real Output Growth                                           Real Output Growth
  .14                                                        .14

  .12                                                        .12

  .10                                                        .10

  .08                                                        .08

  .06                                                        .06

  .04                                                        .04

  .02                                                        .02

  .00                                                        .00

  -.02                                                       -.02
     1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015      1980     1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015




                          Primary Deficit                                              Primary Deficit
  .25                                                        .25

  .20                                                        .20

  .15                                                        .15

  .10                                                        .10

  .05                                                        .05

  .00                                                        .00

  -.05                                                       -.05

  -.10                                                       -.10

     1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015      1980     1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015




                   Cost of Financing the Debt                                   Cost of Financing the Debt
  .07                                                        .07


  .06
                                                             .06

  .05
                                                             .05

  .04
                                                             .04
  .03

                                                             .03
  .02

                                                             .02
  .01


  .00                                                        .01
    1980    1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015     1980      1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015




Figure 6: USA, Simulated paths of macro variables with and without a debt feedback.
                                                                    28
      (a): Without Debt Feedback               (b): With Debt Feedback
 6                                        6

 5                                        5

 4                                        4

 3                                        3

 2                                        2

 1                                        1

 0                                        0

 -1                                       -1

 -2                                       -2
       0     1      2         3   4            0        1       2         3   4




                 Output                                     Output


 1                                        1


 0                                        0


 -1                                       -1


 -2                                       -2


 -3                                       -3


 -4                                       -4


 -5                                       -5
       0     1      2         3   4            0        1       2         3   4




            Primary Deficit                             Primary Deficit


Figure 7: Impulse Responses to aggregate fiscal consolidation shocks, USA only.




                                                   29
                  Belgium                                  France
5                                           5


4                                           4


3                                           3


2                                           2


1                                           1


0                                           0


-1                                          -1


-2                                          -2
     0        1      2        3   4              0     1       2        3    4




             United Kingdom                                 Italy
5                                           5


4                                           4


3                                           3


2                                           2


1                                           1


0                                           0


-1                                          -1


-2                                          -2
     0        1      2        3   4              0     1       2        3    4




                  Canada                                United States
5                                           5


4                                           4


3                                           3


2                                           2


1                                           1


0                                           0


-1                                          -1


-2                                          -2
     0        1      2        3   4              0     1       2        3    4




                  Japan                                    Sweden
5                                           5


4                                           4


3                                           3


2                                           2


1                                           1


0                                           0


-1                                          -1


-2                                          -2
     0        1      2        3   4              0     1       2        3    4




         Figure 8: Output Responses to global fiscal consolidation shocks.



                                                 30
                 Belgium                                  France
5                                           5


4                                           4


3                                           3


2                                           2


1                                           1


0                                           0


-1                                          -1


-2                                          -2
     0       1      2        3   4               0    1       2        3   4




            United Kingdom                                 Italy
5                                           5


4                                           4


3                                           3


2                                           2


1                                           1


0                                           0


-1                                          -1


-2                                          -2
     0       1      2        3   4               0    1       2        3   4




                 Canada                                United States
5                                           5


4                                           4


3                                           3


2                                           2


1                                           1


0                                           0


-1                                          -1


-2                                          -2
     0       1      2        3   4               0    1       2        3   4




                 Japan                                    Sweden
5                                           5


4                                           4


3                                           3


2                                           2


1                                           1


0                                           0


-1                                          -1


-2                                          -2
     0       1      2        3   4               0    1       2        3   4




         Figure 9: Output responses to local fiscal consolidation.shocks



                                       31
                 Belgium                                     France
  5                                           5

  4                                           4

  3                                           3

  2                                           2

  1                                           1

  0                                           0

 -1                                           -1

 -2                                           -2

      0      1      2        3   4                 0     1       2        3   4




            United Kingdom                                    Italy
  5                                           5

  4                                           4

  3                                           3

  2                                           2

  1                                           1

  0                                           0

 -1                                           -1

 -2                                           -2

      0      1      2        3   4                 0     1       2        3   4




                 Canada                                   United States
  5                                           5

  4                                           4

  3                                           3

  2                                           2

  1                                           1

  0                                           0

 -1                                           -1

 -2                                           -2

      0      1      2        3   4                 0     1       2        3   4




                 Japan                                       Sweden
  5                                           5

  4                                           4

  3                                           3

  2                                           2

  1                                           1

  0                                           0

 -1                                           -1

 -2                                           -2

      0      1      2        3   4                 0     1       2        3   4




Figure 10: Output responses to local fiscal consolidation shocks orthogonalized to It−1



                                      32
  Countries      Expenditures        Revenues
                     gt                 τt

                     −0.038             0.030
   Belgium           (−0.27)            (0.35)


                     −0.149             −0.072
    Canada           (−2.25)            (0.27)


                      0.036             0.144
    France            (0.57)            (1.56)


                     −0.110             0.218
     Italy           (−2.12)            (3.18)


                      0.015             0.180
    Japan             (0.10)            (1.52)


                    −0.072581          0.045513
    Sweden           (−0.64)            (0.38)


                      0.183             0.086
United Kingdom        (2.02)            (0.47)


                     −0.292              0.47
 United States       (−2.23)            (1.62)


Table 1: Coeﬃcients of bt−1 (t-Stats in parenthesis)




                                      33
               Belgium       Canada       France       Italy       Japan    Sweden   UK      USA


                                 Exogeneity of spending shocks εgi,t

Ii,t = {yi,t−1 , yi,t−2 }

   F -Stat         4.41         0.15         0.14      1.71          0.24    0.12    4.17    0.04
   F -Prob        0.021         0.85         0.86      0.19          0.78    0.88    0.025   0.95
      n                                                          o
                                            ∗ , y∗
Ii,t = Xi,t−1 , Xi,t−2 , bi,t−1 , bi,t−2 , yi,t       , s∗ , s∗
                                                 i,t−1 i,t i,t−1


   F -Stat         0.98         4.03         1.22       5.48         1.00    3.14    4.93    2.29
   F -Prob         0.51        0.015         0.35      0.001         0.49    0.029   0.006   0.06




                                    Exogeneity of tax shocks ετi,t

Ii,t = {yi,t−1 , yi,t−2 }

   F -Stat         1.78         3.54         0.11      0.70          0.01    0.23    4.10    1.68
   F -Prob         0.18         0.04         0.89      0.50          0.98    0.79    0.026   0.20


      n                                                          o
                                            ∗ , y∗
Ii,t = Xi,t−1 , Xi,t−2 , bi,t−1 , bi,t−2 , yi,t       , s∗ , s∗
                                                 i,t−1 i,t i,t−1


   F -Stat         2.77        10.4          1.94      1.30          0.67    3.40    4.34    1.17
   F -Prob         0.03       0.0003         0.11      0.31          0.77    0.022   0.004   0.38


                             Table 1: Exogeneity test for IMF shocks




                                                              34
