NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

"HEALTHY, WEALTHY AND WISE?" REVISITED:
AN ANALYSIS OF THE CAUSAL PATHWAYS FROM SOCIO-ECONOMIC STATUS TO HEALTH
Till Stowasser
Florian Heiss
Daniel McFadden
Joachim Winter
Working Paper 17273
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17273

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2011

Financial support was provided by the National Institute on Aging (NIA) grant No. P01 AG005842.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Till Stowasser, Florian Heiss, Daniel McFadden, and Joachim Winter. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

"Healthy, Wealthy and Wise?" Revisited: An Analysis of the Causal Pathways from Socio-economic
Status to Health
Till Stowasser, Florian Heiss, Daniel McFadden, and Joachim Winter
NBER Working Paper No. 17273
August 2011
JEL No. C33,C52,I0,I12,I30,J0,J20
ABSTRACT
Much has been said about the stylized fact that the economically successful are not only wealthier
but also healthier than the less affluent. There is little doubt about the existence of this socio-economic
gradient in health, but there remains a vivid debate about its source. In this paper, we review the methodological
challenges involved in testing the causal relationships between socio-economic status and health. We
describe the approach of testing for the absence of causal channels developed by Adams et al. (2003)
that seeks identification without the need to isolate exogenous variation in economic variables, and
we repeat their analysis using the full range of data that have become available in the Health and Retirement
Study since, both in terms of observations years and age ranges covered. This analysis shows that
causal inference critically depends on which time periods are used for estimation. Using the information
of longer panels has the greatest effect on results. We find that SES causality cannot be ruled out for
a larger number of health conditions than in the original study. An approach based on a reduced-form
interpretation of causality thus is not very informative, at least as long as the confounding influence
of hidden common factors is not fully controlled.

Till Stowasser
University of Munich
Department of Economics
Ludwigstr. 28
D-80539 Munich
Germany
till.stowasser@lrz.uni-muenchen.de

Daniel McFadden
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
mcfadden@econ.berkeley.edu

Florian Heiss
Department of Statistics and Econometrics
Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz
Haus Recht und Wirtschaft II
D-55099 Mainz
Germany
heiss@uni-mainz.de

Joachim Winter
Department of Economics
University of Munich
Ludwigstr. 28 (RG)
D-80539 Munich
Germany
winter@lmu.de

1

Introduction

In health economics, there is little dispute that the socio-economic status (SES)
of individuals is positively correlated with their health status. The size of the
body of literature documenting that wealthy and well-educated people generally enjoy better health and longer life is impressive.1 The robustness of this
association is underscored by the fact that the so-called health-wealth gradient
has been detected in different times, countries, populations, age-structures, and
for both men and women. Moreover, the results are largely insensitive to the
choice of SES measures (such as wealth, income, education, occupation, or social class) and health outcomes.
While the existence of the gradient may be uncontroversial, the same cannot
be said about its explanation. Medical researchers, economists and other social
scientists have developed a large number of competing theories that can broadly
be categorized as follows: there may be causal effects from SES to health, causal
effects that work in the opposite direction, and unobserved common factors that
influence both variables in the same direction without a causal link between
the two. Distinguishing among these explanations is important since they have
different implications for public policy aimed at improving overall well-being.
For instance, if causal links between wealth and health were confirmed, society
would likely benefit from more universal access to health care and redistributive
economic policy. Yet, if such causal links were rebutted, resources would be
better spent on influencing health knowledge, preferences, and ultimately the
behavior of individuals.
Besides its importance, the discrimination between these alternative hypotheses also poses a great methodological challenge since the variation found in
observational data is typically endogenous. This is especially true for crosssectional data, which only offers a snapshot of the association between health
and wealth. Without further information on the history of both variables, the
researcher faces a fundamental simultaneity problem, which makes the identification of causal paths a hopeless venture. A possible remedy consists of finding
some sort of exogenous variation in SES or health to infer causality and the
direction of its flow. This search, however, is typically quite difficult because
convincing instrumental variables are very hard to come by. As a consequence,
researchers often face the unattractive choice between the easy path of ignoring
the endogeneity problem, which casts serious doubts on any drawn conclusions,
and the more involved use of IV strategies that critically rely on the untestable
quality of the instruments.

1
Smith (1999) and Goldsmith (2001) provide extensive surveys of the earlier literature. A brief
summary of more recent contributions to this field can be found in Michaud and van Soest (2008).

2

The nexus of health, wealth, and wisdom is also the subject of the study by
Adams, Hurd, McFadden, Merrill, and Ribeiro (2003) (HWW henceforth). The
authors propose an innovative approach that attempts to solve the above tradeoff, on the premise that causal inference may be possible without having to
isolate exogenous variation in SES. Their identification strategy consists of two
main ingredients: First, they exploit the dynamic nature of panel data, focusing
on health innovations rather than the prevalence of medical conditions. Second,
they make use of the so-called Granger causality framework, which represents
a purely statistical approach to the theory of causation. The great advantage of
working with this alternative concept is that the detection of potential Granger
causality is a rather easy task. While knowledge on the existence of Granger
causality may not be useful in its own right, it allows for tests on the absence of
“true” causality in a structural sense.
Applying this framework to the first three waves of the Asset and Health Dynamics among the Oldest Old (AHEAD) survey study, HWW find that in an elderly
US population, causal channels that operate from wealth to health are an exception rather than the rule: while causality cannot be ruled out for some chronic
and mental conditions for which health insurance coverage is not universal, SES
is unlikely to be causal for mortality and most other illnesses. Considering these
strong results, as well as the methodological novelty of HWW’s approach, it is
not surprising that their work has subsequently been the subject of vivid debate within the literature.2 So far, the focus has clearly been on the validity of
HWW’s identification strategy in general, with some calling into question the
ability to truly infer causality with a concept that arguably is a rather sparse
characterization of causal properties.
We certainly agree that HWW’s model would benefit from certain methodological refinements and plan to implement these in future research. For the
present project, however, we deliberately leave the econometrics unchanged, to
study a different aspect that also merits attention: the stability of HWW’s results
when confronted with new data that allows for hypothesis tests of greater statistical power. Special interest lies in assessing whether the somewhat surprising
absence of direct causal links from SES to most medical conditions is a robust
finding or perhaps the artifact of a particular data sample. Since the publication of HWW’s original article, the AHEAD survey has been incorporated into
the more-encompassing Health and Retirement Study (HRS). This permits deviations from HWW’s data benchmark along the following dimensions: the same
individuals can be tracked for a longer period of time, the analysis can be extended to new cohorts of respondents, and the working sample can be widened
2

As an example, consider the comments to HWW by Adda, Chandola, and Marmot (2003), Florens (2003), Geweke (2003), Granger (2003), Hausman (2003), Heckman (2003), Hoover (2003),
Poterba (2003), Robins (2003), and Rubin and Mealli (2003) published in the same issue as the
original article.

3

by including younger individuals aged 50 and older. The last point is of special interest as it offers variation in health insurance status that is not available
in a Medicare-eligible population. To understand which of these data changes
contribute to any deviating conclusions, we do not apply the whole bundle of
modifications at once. Instead, we estimate the model multiple times, by applying it to several different data samples, which are gradually augmented along
the dimensions just outlined.
We lay out the theoretical background of our analysis in section 2, where we
review the potential explanations for the association between SES and health
and specify the econometric challenges that arise when trying to discriminate
among them. This is followed by a discussion of how to address these challenges.
Section 3 describes the approach proposed by HWW. A reanalysis of HWW with
new data is presented in section 4. Section 5 concludes and outlines topics for
future research.

2

The difficulty of causal inference

2.1

The issue: Potential channels between SES and health

Correlation does not necessarily imply causation. This insight is one of the main
lessons every empiricist needs to internalize. At times, however, it can be tempting to neglect this admonition, especially when a causal interpretation of a joint
motion of two variables is very intuitive. The relationship between SES and
health is a prime example for such a situation. As an illustration, consider table 1, which lists household median wealth of HRS respondents arrayed against
self-reported health status. Here, the wealth-health gradient is prominently on
display as median wealth monotonically decreases with impairing health selfreports – an observation that is remarkably stable over time.
What could be more natural than to interpret this strong correlation as a
causal influence of wealth on health? After all, it is the explanation best in
line with conventional wisdom: money can buy (almost) anything – even better
health. Yet, the most intuitive conclusion may not necessarily be the only valid
Table 1. Median wealth by self-rated health status
Self-rated health

1992

1996

2000

2004

2008

Excellent
Very good
Good
Poor
Fair

155.6
122.1
82.5
46.7
19.5

192.0
159.0
106.2
62.2
35.0

256.0
202.6
130.6
69.0
36.5

331.4
240.0
160.0
75.1
39.7

363.0
304.0
194.0
86.1
48.1

Notes: Calculations by authors based on HRS data. Numbers reported in thousands of USD.

4

one. In fact, there are two additional hypotheses for the association of SES and
medical conditions: the causation could flow from the latter to the former, and
the correlation may actually be spurious, with third factors affecting health and
wealth in a similar way. This section describes these rivalling theories and gives
an overview of the most commonly-cited potential pathways between SES and
health (see Adler and Ostrove (1999), Smith (1999), Goldsmith (2001), and
Cutler, Lleras-Muney, and Vogl (2011) for more extensive reviews).
Hypothesis A: SES has a causal influence on health ouctomes
This is the hypothesis most energetically advocated within the epidemiological
literature. While it is true that the main contribution from economists consists
of formulating alternative interpretations of the socio-economic health gradient
(see hypothesis B, below), it should be emphasized that they are not on record of
categorically challenging hypothesis A, either. Below, we list the most prominent
theories of channels through which SES may have a causal effect on health.
Channel A1: Affordability of health care. This potential channel is arguably one
of the most intuitive explanations and may be active both before and after
an individual is diagnosed with an illness. For one, varying SES may be responsible for differentials in the onset of health conditions as poorer people
may be overly sensitive to the costs of preventive health care. In addition,
wealth could play a crucial role in determining the quality or even the plain
affordability of medical treatments, once they become necessary.
Channel A2: The psychological burden of being poor. Medical scientists increasingly emphasize the importance of psychological consequences of low SES.
They argue that low-wage employment is typically associated with a high
degree of work monotonicity and low job control, leading to psychosocial
stress. Similarly, economically disadvantaged individuals are believed to be
repeatedly exposed to episodes of high emotional discomfort, either due to
long phases of unemployment or a general feeling of social injustice. When
accumulated, these stressful experiences may well have strong adverse effects on physical health as well. Furthermore, adverse wealth shocks – such
as the loss of life savings in a stock market crash – are likely to cause anxiety and depression, representing a more immediate avenue through which
SES may impact health.
Channel A3: Environmental hazards. Another line of argument is that the exposure to perilous environments is considerably higher for the poor. This
may concern job-related risks since it can be argued that workplace safety
is lower and physical strain higher for poorly-paid occupations. The reasoning also extends to people’s living environments as neighborhood safety,
dwelling condition, air and water quality, etc. are usually much better in
exclusive residential areas.
5

Channel A4: Health knowledge. Considering that education is an integral component of SES, it is conceivable that part of the correlation between SES
and health is attributable to differences in health knowledge. According
to this argument, information on medical risk factors or the importance of
preventative care may be more widespread among the highly educated and
wealthy, leading to healthier lifestyles and lower morbidity rates among
this group.
Channel A5: Risk behaviors. An often-cited pathway through which SES may
influence health is the asymmetric distribution of unhealthy lifestyles such
as smoking, drinking and poor diet. To the extent that all of these vices
are less common among the rich, health differentials may in fact be driven
by SES variables. Note that the question of why smoking, excess alcohol
consumption, and obesity are especially prevalent in lower social classes,
is interesting in its own right, with channels A2 and A4 potentially accounting for part of this relationship.
Hypothesis B: Health has a causal influence on SES outcomes
Economists and other social scientists were among the first to challenge the conception that causal mechanisms would work their way exclusively from SES to
health. Much of this research is inspired by Grossman’s (1972) health production framework, which models the impact of health capital on savings, labor
market participation, and retirement decisions. We believe the following three
channels to be the most important in describing causal effects from health to
SES outcomes.
Channel B1: Productivity and labor supply. Arguably, the most relevant reason
why health may be causal for SES outcomes can be found on the labor
market. The productivity of an individual in poor health is generally lower
than that of someone whose physical robustness allows for longer working
hours, less absenteeism, and better career options. As a consequence, frail
people will tend to earn lower wages and accumulate less assets throughout their life course. Adverse health shocks may even be so severe that people are forced to leave the labor market altogether, depriving them from
any realistic chance to improve their SES.
Channel B2: Life expectancy and time preferences. To the extent that severe illnesses increase mortality risks, there may be an impact of poor health on
time preferences. Life-cycle models predict that the optimal response to a
perceived reduction in life expectancy is to move consumption from an uncertain future towards the presence. Thus, a history of dire medical events
may induce individuals to dissave faster, establishing a causal link from
health to SES.
6

Channel B3: Medical care expenditures. The most immediate form of impact
health events can have on financial endowments are out-of-pocket costs
of medical care. While it can be argued that the influence of this pathway should only be modest in size, this is certainly untrue for people without health insurance. In many cases, not even the insured are completely
shielded from medical bills: the existence of deductibles and lifetime coverage limits poses great financial threats especially for the chronically ill.
Hypothesis C: SES and health are jointly caused by an unobserved third factor
This hypothesis makes the case that the association between health and wealth
could have other reasons than causal mechanisms between the two: There may
be hidden third factors with a common influence on both SES and health, rendering the correlation among the latter spurious. This distinction is vital since
policies that aim at improving health outcomes by, say, redistributing wealth are
bound to be ineffective, as long as the true common cause remains unaffected.
Channel C1: Unobserved genetic heterogeneity. A good candidate for an unobserved common cause is genetic disposition. For instance, genetic frailty
may reduce the physical resistance as well as the intellectual and professional skills of an individual. In such cases, health will be poorer and SES
will be lower despite the absence of causal links among the two.
Channel C2: Unobserved family background. Genetic endowment is not the only
determinant of people’s physical and personal traits. Similarly influential
are matters of parentage and upbringing. Especially pre-natal and earlychildhood nutrition as well as stress are believed to have lasting negative
effects on well-being and functional abilities, establishing an association
between health and SES that is similar to that of Channel C1.
Channel C3: Unobserved preferences. Irrespective of whether they are inherited or learned, preferences that influence certain behavior and lifestyles
are another often-cited source of common effects. The prime example are
descendants of dysfunctional families, who adopt both the unhealthy lifestyles
(such as poor diet or smoking) and the unambitious attitudes towards education and work by which they are surrounded. Another example are time
preferences: overly myopic people will underinvest in preventative medical care and in education since in both cases pay-offs will materialize in a
distant future, to which only little importance is attached.

2.2

The challenges: Simultaneity and omitted variables

The fact that all of the aforementioned hypotheses are generally plausible, makes
the inference on causation a methodologically challenging task. Suppose – as is
the case for the remainder of this paper – we were interested in testing the
7

validity of hypothesis A, that is whether SES has a causal effect on health outcomes. Ideally, we would want our analysis to rely on truly exogenous variation
in SES variables, similar to that attained in controlled experiments. The reality
for economists, however, is far from being ideal since the sources of variation we
find in observational data is unknown to us. As a consequence, causal variables
are potentially endogenous themselves.
The possible sources of endogeneity in the wealth-health case have been described in section 2.1. Ultimately, they generate two fundamental econometric
challenges: we have to distinguish hypothesis A from hypothesis B, and hypothesis A from hypothesis C. As we discuss below, the first consists of dealing with
a simultaneity problem, and the second of finding a solution to the problem of
omitted variables.
Challenge 1: The simultaneity problem (hypothesis A vs. hypothesis B)
Imagine for a moment that hypothesis C could be dismissed, so that any association between SES and health had to be due to either hypothesis A or B. Even
with this kind of simplification in place, the identification of SES causality for
health is still difficult. Of course, we could regress our health variable of interest
(H i ) on SES (Si ) and a vector of exogenous control variables (Xi ), estimating the
following equation with OLS:
H i = θ0 + θs Si + X0i θ x + ηi ,

(1)

where i denotes the unit of observation and ηi is the residual. Yet, the crucial
question is if we could interpret the parameter estimate θbs as the causal effect
of SES on health. The answer would be affirmative if the structural model were
to look like
E(H i |Si , Xi ) = α + βSi + X0i γ ,
E(Si |H i , Xi ) = E(Si |Xi ).

This model describes a world in which causality only flows from SES to health,
with β capturing the true causal effect. In this world, θbs would indeed have a
causal interpretation, with plim θbs = β . However, the existence of hypothesis B
indicates that the above model may not be a realistic description of reality. In
fact, the true structural model is likelier to look like
E(H i |Si , Xi ) = α + βSi + X0i γ ,

(2)

E(Si |H i , Xi ) = a + bH i + X0i c,

(3)

with β again measuring the true causal effect of SES on health, and b capturing
any causation working its way in the opposite direction. Equations 2 and 3 describe a standard simultaneous-equation model (SEM) as both dependent vari8

ables are jointly determined with each being a function of the other. When trying to estimate this SEM by simply running regression equation 1, θbs will be
subject to simultaneous-equation bias, picking up the information conveyed in
b as well. As a result, the parameter of interest, β , is not identified, making a
test for causation of SES to health all but impossible.
Challenge 2: The omitted-variable problem (hypothesis A vs. hypothesis C)
Even in the absence of challenge 1, we would still face the problem of having
to discriminate between hypotheses A and C. Presume we were able to plausibly exclude causal paths from health to SES. In this case, the identification
problem no longer consists of confounding the causal effect of wealth on health
with reverse causality. Instead, the question arises if an association between
both variables is attributable to causality at all since it could also stem from a
joint reaction to a third factor. As the review of hypothesis C has shown, all of
these potential common causes (such as genetics or preferences) are inherently
unobservable, rendering challenge 2 an omitted-variable problem.
Suppose the true structural model is best described by
E(H i |Si , Xi , Ci ) = α + βSi + X0i γ + δCi ,

(4)

with Ci standing for an individual-specific variable that influences both SES and
health. If this common cause were observable, we could simply include it in
our regression function and the causal effect, β , would be readily identified.
However, given its omitted-variable nature, Ci will be swamped into the error
term, as the comparison of the structural model in error form (equation 5) with
the estimable model (equation 6) demonstrates:
H i = α + βSi + X0i γ + δCi + εi ,

(5)

H i = α + βSi + X0i γ + ui .

(6)

Here, the well-behaved structural error is denoted by εi , whereas the composite residual is ui = δCi + εi . Given that Ci has an impact on our explanatory
variable of interest, Si , the latter will be endogenous since cov(Si , ui ) 6= 0. As a
consequence, the estimation of this model by means of regression equation 1
will yield a parameter estimate θbs that suffers from omitted-variable bias, with
plim θbs 6= β . Importantly, θbs will absorb any causal impact that Ci may have on
H i . As a result, the presence of common effects could easily lead to erroneous
conclusions of active causal links between wealth and health in cases where β
actually equals zero.
Causal inference in the face of both challenges
Naturally, there is no reason to believe that both econometric problems are mutually exclusive. As a rule, they will be present at the same time, aggravating
9

causal inference even more. Ultimately, we have to estimate a structural model
that takes the following form:
H i = α + βSi + X0i γ + δCi + εi ,
| {z }

(7)

bH i + X0i c + dCi + ei ,
| {z }

(8)

=ui

Si = a +

=vi

with ei denoting a structural error and vi representing the composite unobservable. Given this multitude of potential confounders, we truly cannot expect the
simple regression function 1 to uncover β , the structural parameter of interest.
While this assessment is certainly sobering, it also sets a clearly defined bar for
any alternative identification strategy: in order to be convincing, it has to live
up to the challenges of simultaneity and omitted variables.
A common way of dealing with the potential endogeneity of SES is the use
of instrumental variable (IV) estimators. The virtue of this approach is that – at
least in theory – it solves both of these challenges at once. A good instrument
is, however, hard to find in practice. In the context of the SES-health causality,
exogenous wealth shocks have been used as instrumental variables. For instance,
Meer, Miller, and Rosen (2003) as well as Michaud and van Soest (2008) use
inheritances. In a similar vein, Smith (2005) interprets the strong stock-market
surge in the 1990s as a positive wealth shock, and it is probably just a matter of
time until we will see the first papers that make use of the exogenous variation
in wealth caused by the recent global financial crisis.
We do not discuss IV approaches in detail, but we would like to point out one
problem that arises in the analysis of the SES-health gradient. While the above
instruments may well be exogenous and certainly have an impact on wealth, it
is not entirely clear if the SES variation they induce is really that relevant for
health. According to Grossman’s (1972) standard economic model of health, an
individual’s general health status can be viewed as a latent capital stock that reflects the entire history of medically relevant events and behaviors. As a result,
the human body will certainly react to current influences but it will not forget
how it was treated in the past either. This “memory effect” likely extends to any
influence SES may have had during one’s lifetime. In light of this, it is questionable whether sudden changes in wealth are really that informative when testing
for causal links between SES and health. In fact, since an IV estimator makes
use of exogenous variation in wealth at one point in time to identify β , there is a
great chance that causal links from SES to health are statistically rejected even
though they have been operating in the past.3 Admittedly, an IV estimator will
still capture any instantaneous impact a wealth shock would have on health out3
In this light, it is not too surprising that none of the aforementioned studies using wealth shocks
as an instrument for SES was able to find evidence supportive of hypothesis A.

10

comes. As a renewed look at the potential causal pathways for hypothesis A suggests, immediate effects are most likely to arise through channel A.2 if wealth
shocks are severe enough to have direct psychological consequences.

3

The approach of the HWW study

The previous section demonstrates that the identification of causal paths between health and wealth with IV approaches is not always feasible. Especially
the isolation of truly exogenous and yet meaningful variation in SES poses considerable problems. On this account, HWW propose an alternative identification
strategy that avoids this critical step altogether. In fact, they make use of the entire observed variation in SES variables, tacitly accepting that some of it may
well be of endogenous nature. The authors argue that, in spite of this methodological simplification, their approach still allows for at least indirect inference
of causal links from SES to health.4
Naturally, HWW need to find convincing answers to the two econometric
challenges described in section 2.2. When testing hypothesis A, they face challenge 1 of excluding the possibility that any observed co-movement of wealth
and health is in reality due to reverse causality. In addition, they have to tackle
challenge 2 of ruling out that the association is driven by unobserved common
effects.
Challenge 1: Ruling out hypothesis B
Distinguishing hypotheses A and B without the aid of instrumental variables is
a difficult task. We may observe that the poor are less healthy but we have no
information on which happened first: were people already poor before they got
sick, or were they already sick before they became poor? With cross-sectional
data that only offers a snapshot of this association, there is no way of finding
out. Panel data, on the other hand, provides valuable information on transitions
in health and wealth, making it possible to analyze the dynamics of their relationship and to identify the direction of the causality flow. Imagine we were to
analyze the dependence of health innovations on past levels of SES. As long as
one agrees that a cause must precede its effect, we can be sure that the (unanticipated) onset of an illness at time t cannot have caused the amount of wealth or
education at time t − 1. Given there is any causation at work, it must flow from
the past to the present, or – as in this case – from SES to health innovations.

4

In their article, HWW also formulate tests on causality working in the opposite direction. However, the authors themselves are quite skeptical about this part of their analysis, admitting that it is
likely subject to model misspecification. As they stop short of endorsing their own results, we follow
their lead and concentrate on the more promising test of hypothesis A.

11

HWW take this insight to heart by applying their framework to the first three
panel waves of the aforementioned AHEAD survey study, which spans the years
between 1993 and 1998 and is representative of the US population aged 70
and older. They propose a dynamic model of health incidence that takes the
following form:
j
k< j
f (H I i t |HIi t , Hi t−1 , Si t−1 , Xi t−1 ),
(9)
where i once again stands for the unit of observation (in this case: household)
and the newly introduced t denotes time. The index j stands for the respective health condition as the authors apply their model to 20 different medical
j
outcomes.5 The dependent variable, H I i t measures a new incidence of a given
health condition.6 According to this model, a health innovation is potentially
influenced by the following explanatory variables:
Past level of SES: The vector Si t−1 includes five SES variables, namely wealth,
income, years of education, dwelling condition, and neighborhood safety.
These are the variables of main interest. Conceptually, if SES had any direct
causal impact on health, we would expect to observe that rich individuals
are less likely to develop a new medical condition compared with poor
individuals. While this finding alone would not yet prove the existence of
a causal link from SES to health, confounding with reverse causality could
j
be ruled out since Si t−1 precedes H I i t .
Past health status. New medical events are likely influenced by a respondent’s
health history as well. This may take the form of state dependence (e.g.,
past cancer influences the onset of new cancer) and co-morbidities (e.g.,
past cancer influences the onset of depression). For this reason, HWW control for vector Hi t−1 , containing the past levels of all 20 health conditions.
Current health incidences with immediate impact. In theory, health innovations
could also be influenced by contemporaneous shocks in SES or other health
conditions. This constitutes a problem for HWW’s concept of dealing with
simultaneity as it critically relies on the ability to observe the timing of innovations in both variables. HWW solve this problem by imposing further
structure: On the one hand they make the assumption of no instantaneous
causation of SES to health shocks, arguing that any causal action as de-

5

These include acute illnesses (cancer, heart disease, stroke), mortality, chronic conditions (lung
disease, diabetes, high blood pressure, arthritis), accident-related events (incontinence, severe fall,
hip fracture), mental problems (cognitive impairment, psychiatric disease, depression), as well as
information on interview status (self vs. by proxy), BMI, smoking behavior, ADL/IADL impairments,
and self-rated health.
6
Note that this measure of health innovation cannot be interpreted as a simple change in health
j
j
j
j
status (∆H i t = H i t − H i t−1 ) since H I i t generally captures deteriorations in health only. For chronic
illnesses, such as diabetes, it measures when the condition was first diagnosed. For acute health
j
events, such as stroke, H I i t indicates every new occurrence.

12

scribed by channels A.1 to A.5 takes time.7 On the other hand, they impose a chain structure on contemporaneous health innovations, grouping
them in the order in which instantaneous causality is most likely to flow.8
k< j
Thus, they include the vector HIi t containing the incidence variables for
all health conditions (1, ..., k) that are causally arranged upstream of condition j .
Demographic control variables. Finally, the authors control for a number of
demographic factors that could have an impact on health events, too. The
corresponding vector, Xi t−1 , includes the respondent’s age, marital status,
as well as information on the parent’s mortality and age at death.
Building on model 9, HWW design a test for non-causality of SES in the
spirit of Granger (1969) and Sims (1972). This so-called Granger causality (or
G-causality) approach is a purely statistical take on the concept of causation,
having its origin in the time-series literature. Formally, SES is not Granger causal
for health condition j if
j

k< j

j

k< j

f (H I i t |HIi t , Hi t−1 , Si t−1 , Xi t−1 ) = f (H I i t |HIi t , Hi t−1 , Xi t−1 ),
j

(10)

k< j

i.e., H I i t is conditionally independent of Si t−1 , given HIi t ,Hi t−1 , and Xi t−1 . Intuitively, given health history, knowledge of SES history must not contribute to
the predictability of health innovations. The test is implemented by estimating
the model by maximum likelihood (ML) both unconstrained (with Si t−1 as regressors) and constrained (without Si t−1 ) and by subsequently comparing the
log likelihoods of both versions. The motivation for this likelihood ratio test is
that the two values should be the same if the null hypothesis of non-causality is
true.
The detection of Granger causality, however, does not guarantee the presence of “true” causality in a structural sense, which is the concept we are ultimately interested in.9 Admittedly, information on the presence of G-causality is
helpful when predicting health innovations for an individual with given health
7

The authors themselves make the point that this assumption loses its innocuousness if the
time intervals between panel waves become too large since even the more inertial causal links
will then have enough time to unfold. Given that the AHEAD study is conducted biennially, the time
aggregation to observation intervals may indeed reintroduce some degree of simultaneity.
8
HWW list cancer, heart disease, and stroke first because they can have an immediate impact
on mortality. The other medical conditions are grouped such that degenerative illnesses can cause
chronic diseases, which in turn may influence accidents and finally mental health. Importantly, instantaneous causality is not designed to flow in the opposite direction.
9
There are three major “schools” of causal analysis: The structural approach (S-causality) described by Hoover (2001) and Hausman (2003) that is grounded in econometric simultaneous
equations models, the potential-outcomes approach (P-causality) characterized by Rubin (1974)
and Heckman (2000) that is based on the analysis of experimental treatments and the time-series
prediction approach (G-causality) employed here. The conventional interpretation of “true” causality is arguably best described by S- and P-causality treatments. In fact, Pearl (2000) demonstrates
a formal equivalence between the two concepts. Both of these schools are critical of G-causality,
arguing that its purely positivistic approach does not realistically characterize causal properties.

13

and SES history. However, the reduced-form nature of G-causality renders it
unsuitable to predict the effects of (economic) policy interventions. If SES is
Granger causal for health innovations, we only know that, for instance, the onset of an illness is likelier for a person with low SES. Yet, we do not know if
this statistical dependence is due to a real causal link from wealth to health
(hypothesis A) or due to unobserved common effects (hypothesis C). Given the
diverging policy conclusions both interpretations would trigger, HWW also need
to address the second methodological challenge of dealing with the omittedvariable problem.
Challenge 2: Ruling out hypothesis C
Most of the omitted variables identified in section 2.1 to potentially have a common influence on health and SES are unobservable by definition. As a result,
challenge 2 cannot simply be resolved by improvements in data quality and the
addition of missing variables to the vector of covariates. HWW also refrain from
making use of fixed-effects estimation, which represents another common strategy to heal omitted-variable bias in cases where panel data is available. In fact,
the efforts made by the authors to distinguish between structural causality and
common effects are limited to using a rich set of covariates in the hope that this
will mitigate the importance of unobservables. They argue that,
[f]or example, genetic frailty that is causal to both health problems and low
wages, leading to low wealth, may be expressed through a health condition such
as diabetes. Then, onset of new health conditions that are also linked to genetic
frailty may be only weakly associated with low wealth, once diabetic condition
has been entered as a covariate.

Despite this conciliating argument, HWW acknowledge that the failure to cleanly
identify causal structures questions their approach’s ability to gauge the effects
of “out-of-sample” policy changes. To address this issue, they scrutinize the generality of their results by adding invariance tests to the analysis. Intuitively, a
model is only suitable for the sort of predictions HWW have in mind if it remains valid under different scenarios than those covered by the data, or – as
the authors put it – if it has the invariance property of being valid for each
possible history. For instance, if the application of the model to different populations, time periods, and policy regimes had a negligible impact on estimation
results, there would be reasonable hope that the Granger non-causality tests
are indeed informative. The invariance tests as implemented by HWW mainly
inspect the stability of findings across time. Model 9 is estimated by stacking the
data for the two available panel wave transitions (i.e., W1→W2 and W2→W3)
above another. The same model is also estimated for both wave transitions individually, and a test statistic is constructed that compares the log-likelihoods of
these three estimations. The motivation for this likelihood ratio test is similar
14

to that of a Chow test. If the null hypothesis of model invariance is true, estimated parameters of the stacked model should not differ from those of the two
single-transition models.
All told, HWW apply the following system of non-causality and invariance
tests to the estimations of all 20 health conditions: First, they test for Granger
non-causality of SES for health innovations in the stacked version of the model
under the maintained assumption of invariance (S|I). Then, they employ an
unconditional invariance test, as described above (I), followed by an invariance
test with non-causality imposed (I|noS). Finally they implement a joint test of
invariance and non-causality (S&I). Conceptually, HWW condition the validity
of their non-causality tests on the outcome of the corresponding invariance test:
only if invariance is confirmed, they will put faith in the model’s results. The
authors are optimistic that with these refinements in place, their model is wellplaced to make meaningful predictions even if it fails to identify true causal
links, stating that
[i]t is unnecessary for this policy purpose to answer the question of whether the
analysis has uncovered a causal structure in any deeper sense. Econometric analysis is better matched to the modest task of testing invariance and non-causality
in limited domains than to the grander enterprise of discovering universal causal
laws. However, our emphasis on invariance properties of the model, and on tests
for Granger causality within invariant families, is consistent with the view of
philosophers of science that causality is embedded in “laws” whose validity as a
description of the true data generation process is characterized by their invariance properties.

They even go a step further and suggest that their approach – while not powerful enough to distinguish between causation and common effects – permits
at least the one-sided test for the absence of true causal links. Essentially, they
view Granger causality as a necessary but insufficient condition for a structural
causal pathway from SES to health. Their decision criteria when interpreting results are as follows: If the invariance test fails, one should question the validity
of the model for this particular health variable and refrain from drawing any
conclusions. If invariance holds and Granger causality is present, one cannot
distinguish between a direct causal link and a common factor. Yet, if invariance
holds and Granger causality is ruled out, it should be safe to deduce that SES
does not have a causal impact on the health condition under consideration.
Summary of HWW’s findings
Contrary to conventional wisdom, the evidence from applying HWW’s approach
to the elderly US population is not universally supportive of hypothesis A. In
fact, they find that SES is unlikely to be causal for mortality, most acute health
conditions, accidents, and a large number of degenerative diseases. Medical
15

conditions, for which direct causal links cannot be ruled out, include self-rated
health status, most mental illnesses and some chronic conditions such as diabetes, lung disease and arthritis. This pattern loses some of its mysteriousness
when viewed in the context of US health-policy characteristics. The population
under examination is of advanced age and eligible for Medicare, which will
likely weaken any causal impact wealth could have on well-being via the affordability of health care. Yet, even Medicare coverage is not fully comprehensive
and tends to focus on acute care procedures, while generally failing to limit
out-of-pocket costs for treatments of chronic and psychological conditions.10
This lends indirect evidence for the importance of channel A.1 since the socioeconomic gradient emerges exactly for those health conditions, for which the
ability to pay is most likely to be an issue.
Reflecting the substantial degree of ambiguity in these results, the policy
conclusions formulated by HWW are rather contained in both phrasing and
substance. On the one hand, they cannot overcome the methodological challenge of inferring true causality when G-causality is detected. This leaves open
whether SES-linked preventive care induces onset of chronic and mental illnesses or whether persistent unobserved factors are to blame for the observed
health-wealth association. On the other hand, even convincing evidence for the
absence of direct causal links might not necessarily warrant the bluntest form of
policy recommendation. Sure enough, SES-linked therapies for acute diseases
do not appear to induce health and mortality differentials, which – to quote
HWW – should theoretically permit the strong conclusion that
policy interventions in the Medicare system to increase access or reduce out-ofpocket medical expenses will not alter the conditional probabilities of new health
events[.]

However, the authors stop short of actually drawing this conclusion, which reflects their reluctance to base overly aggressive policy proposals on a concept
whose ability to simulate the effect of system shocks is not indisputible.
Discussion of HWW’s approach
All things considered, what should we make of HWW’s approach of inferring
causality and yet avoiding the cumbersome search for exogenous variation in
SES? Does their reliance on Granger causality and their decision to focus on
health innovations really do the trick of solving the endogeneity problem, or
have they entered a methodological dead-end street? Overall, the response
within the literature has been fairly critical, albeit not excoriating, pointing out
a number of issues briefly discussed below.

10
Note that the study was conducted well before the introduction of Medicare Part D in 2006 that
especially benefited the chronically ill by improving the coverage of prescription drugs.

16

Existence vs. activation of channels It is important to understand the limitations of an approach that focusses on innovations in health, rather than
health status itself. HWW detect a strong and ubiquitous association of
SES and prevalence of health conditions in the initial wave of their sample.
This suggests that the elderly population under consideration has potentially been affected by some of the causal channels between health and
wealth in the past. This history, however, remains a blind spot for HWW’s
model: by concentrating on future health events, they are unable to explain
what factors lead to the pre-existing SES gradient. By contrast, they study
the question whether SES has an impact on the onset of additional medical conditions, given an individual is already old, still alive, and has gone
through a long and unexplained health-wealth history. While the analysis
of an elderly population is not illegitimate and certainly interesting in its
own right, one should entertain some doubts about its external validity. In
theory, HWW’s findings could – if extrapolated backwards – also provide
a retrospective explanation for the early relation between SES and health.
However, as pointed out by Adda et al. (2003), Heckman (2003), Poterba
(2003), and HWW themselves, this extreme form of time invariance over
the entire life cycle is unlikely to hold as certain causal channels are probably relevant at different stages in one’s life.11 In light of this, an accepted
non-causality test should perhaps not be taken as evidence against the
plain existence of a causal link but rather against its activation within the
class of invariances under consideration.
Unobserved common effects. As argued above, the major weakness of HWW’s
approach is that it cannot separate true causality from hidden common effects. Yet, according to the authors, this will only constitute a problem if
Granger causality is detected. In the absence of G-causality, causation in
a structural sense should be ruled out as well. This interpretation implies
that the detection of conditional dependence is a prerequisite for an active
causal link – an assumption that is questioned by Heckman (2003), who
argues that persistent hidden factors may also work in the opposite direction of causal pathways and offset them. If this were the case, information
on G-causality might actually not tell us anything about true causal mechanisms, rendering HWW’s strategy ineffective. However, the likelihood of
direct causal effects being exactly offset by unobserved common factors
should be practically zero, making this argument irrelevant for identification. Then again, there are obvious limits to this defence in finite samples,
11

For retirees, pension income is not affected by (contemporary) ability to work, occupational
hazards vanished on the day of retirement, and Medicare provides basic health insurance, rendering
channels B.1, A.3, and A.1, respectively, of little importance when late in the life cycle. At younger
ages, however, all of these pathways may well have played an important role.

17

so that statistical inference of causation could indeed be seriously jeopardized by the failure to account for hidden common causes.
Invariance tests. Anticipating that their framework might fall short of inferring deep causal structures, HWW subject their model to the aforementioned invariance tests. On a conceptual level, model invariance would arguably justify predictions of policy effects but there are legitimate concerns
whether the actual tests implemented in their paper are statistically powerful enough. Granger (2003), Hausman (2003), Heckman (2003) and, once
more, HWW themselves point out that invariance under historical interventions is of little use when the panel is as short as AHEAD, offering hardly
any in-sample variation in populations, age structures, and – most importantly – policy regimes. As a consequence, an accepted invariance test as
implemented by HWW is unlikely to be a sufficient condition for the sort of
model validity necessary to make out-of-sample predictions. On top of that,
Poterba (2003) even questions whether one should view the acceptance of
HWW’s invariance tests as a necessary condition for meaningful analysis.
Instead of discarding results when invariance tests are rejected, one could
follow up on the reasons for time invariance failures as they may be informative of structural breaks in causal relationships. For instance, certain
causal pathways may switch on or off in the course of policy changes or
as the observed cohort grows older. In such cases, failed invariance tests
would actually shed light on the circumstances under which causal links
will be active or unexpressed, allowing for sharper, channel-specific causality tests.
Health dynamics. Another reason for concern is the fact that HWW model
health dynamics as a first-order Markov process, which cannot be expected
to properly capture the medium and long-run evolution of health. Intuitively, this is because the Markov model assumes that all relevant information about the whole past is captured in the observed variables one period
ago. This is unrealistic since knowledge of longer histories would better
capture the stock characteristics of health capital as envisioned by Grossman (1972). Taking functional limitations as an example, a respondent
who reported difficulties with walking one year ago and no limitations
previously has a different outlook than a respondent who consistently reported difficulties with walking for the last ten years.
Instantaneous causality. Finally, Florens (2003), Geweke (2003), and Heckman (2003) express their skepticism about HWW’s handling of instantaneous causality. The hierarchy imposed on health conditions (with the
assumption that incidence of each condition is conditioned on upstream
incidences but not on downstream ones) may be acceptable as a reducedform assumption and is etiologically fairly reasonable. Yet, it likely falls
18

short of the structural stability explored by invariance tests and is a potential source of serious model misspecification, making it a prime target for
methodological improvements in the course of future research.

4

Reanalysis of HWW with new data

The preceding discussion indicates that HWW’s approach of disentangling the
association between health and wealth while avoiding the often futile struggle
of finding exogenous variation in SES comes at the price of limited methodological persuasiveness. However, since the generic alternative – instrumental variables – is not exempt from substantial criticism either, we certainly feel that this
identification concept merits methodological refinement rather than being dismissed altogether. Some weaknesses, such as the treatment of common effects,
health dynamics, or instantaneous causality, require significant modifications to
the original model and we plan to implement these in future research.
Yet, one of the major downsides of HWW’s study – the lack of invariance test
power – can be addressed without the need for complex changes but instead by
applying the largely unaltered model to a more apposite set of data. Recall that
the root of this problem is that the invariance tests are based on rather limited
variation in “histories” of states relative to the universe of potential histories.
Increasing the N as well as the T dimension of the panel data will arguably raise
the number of histories and enhance the power of these tests. Of course, we can
also expect larger sample sizes to boost the statistical power of non-causality
tests, effectively reducing the risk of committing type-II errors. But sample size
is not everything. We believe that the analysis will also greatly benefit from
larger sample “diversity”, with data covering different kinds of populations that
are subject to varying institutional setups. For instance, the inclusion of younger
respondents could shed light on the question if the activation of causal links is
stable throughout the life cycle or if reaching the retirement age induces some
sort of structural break.
Given that the HRS survey study provides panel data that meets all of the
above requirements, the present analysis keeps methodological changes to an
absolute minimum and assesses the stability of HWW’s results when applying
their model to new and more encompassing data.12 Of particular interest is
the question whether HWW’s somewhat surprising result of SES not having
any direct causal impact on most health conditions is confirmed as test power
increases.
12
In fact, this study exactly replicates HWW’s model of health incidence with one notable exception. For simplicity, we skip their treatment of interview delay, which accounts for the fact that
interview timing appears to depend on health status. While this potentially calls into question the
comparability of responses from healthy and severely ill individuals, we find that results are virtually
unaffected by this non-random distribution of time at risk.

19

Figure 1. Sample sizes, decomposed by entry cohorts

Number of Respondents

25000

Total

20000

EBB
WB

CODA
15000

AHEAD

10000

HRS

5000

0
Wave 2

Wave 3

Wave 4

Wave 5

Wave 6

Wave 7

Wave 8

Wave 9

Waves

4.1

The HRS panel data

Sample characteristics
Our data – which is representative of the non-institutionalized US population
over the age of 50 – comes from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), a
large-scale longitudinal survey project that studies the labor force participation
and health transitions of individuals toward the end of their work lives and in
the years that follow. While the data is collected by the University of Michigan
Survey Research Center for the National Institute of Aging, we use the publicrelease file from the RAND Corporation that merged records from the nine panel
waves available to date. The wave 1 interviews were conducted in 1992 and
then repeated every two years, so that HRS incorporates data from 1992–2008.
Due to significant changes to the survey design between waves 1 and 2, the
first cross-section cannot be directly compared to subsequent observations and
is therefore not used in our analysis. To ensure that HRS stays representative
of the population as time goes by, the panel is periodically refreshed with new
cohorts of respondents. Up to now, the sample consists of five different entry
cohorts: the original 1992 “HRS” cohort (born 1931–1941), the 1993 “AHEAD”
cohort (born 1923 or earlier), the “CODA” (born 1924–1930) and “WB” (born
1942–1947) cohorts entering in 1998, and the EBB cohort (born 1948-1953)
added in 2004.
At baseline in wave 2 (covering interviews conducted between 1993 to 1994),
the data set contains 18,694 individuals with usable records. The panel is sub20

ject to considerable attrition, which reduces sample sizes from wave to wave – a
trend that is only temporarily disrupted when a refreshment cohort is added to
the sample (see figure 1). The two sources for attrition are mortality (especially
for the elderly AHEAD cohort) and “sample fatigue”. Death-related attritors are
kept in the working sample since mortality is one of the key outcomes of interest.
With respect to all others attritors, we apply two alternative sampling schemes.
The first exactly mirrors HWW’s benchmark in that it categorically excludes
non-respondents from the working sample, irrespective of when their drop-off
occurs or whether they rejoin the survey in later waves. As detailed below, the
second sampling procedure assures that the information of these households is
used for as long as they are part of the sample.
Much like in HWW’s original study, we exclude all individuals with missing
information on critical variables. This includes item nonresponse for key demographic variables as well as cases where information on health conditions
is generally unavailable. If respondents merely fail to answer isolated health
queries, these gaps are filled by means of simulation-based imputation. Certain
health questions on cognitive ability, severe falls, and hip fractures are not asked
to participants below the age of 65, which is why these variables are excluded
from all estimations that include younger sub-populations. While HWW went to
great lengths to impute a large number of wealth and income observations with
first-order Markov cross-wave hot deck imputation methods, we are in the more
convenient position to rely on the imputations that are now readily available
within the RAND/HRS data. We should note that, in spite of this data cleaning,
the self-reported wealth and income measures are still suspect of considerable
measurement error. The summary statistics for all variables used in our analysis
is given in table A-1.
Comparison with HWW’s data benchmark
HWW’s original data sample consists of the AHEAD cohort of US Americans aged
70 and older who are tracked through panel waves 2 to 4. Using the HRS data
that is available to date, allows for deviations from this benchmark along several
dimensions. Naturally, we can follow the same individuals for more time periods
since the AHEAD cohort is now biennially observed between 1993/94 and 2008.
Given the introduction of the four additional entry cohorts, the analysis can
also be extended to different individuals with potentially diverging histories compared to those in the original study. In addition, it is now possible and certainly
interesting to also widen the working sample by incorporating younger individuals, aged 50 and older. Finally, it should be noted that there is an additional,
albeit minor, deviation from HWW’s data benchmark even for the same observations as in the original study. One reason for this is that the early AHEAD
data has subsequently been subject to data updates and revisions within the
21

HRS project. Similarly, there may be differences between the SES imputations
carried out by HWW and those conducted by RAND/HRS.

4.2

Results

Following the strategy described in section 3, we fit model 9 as binomial probits except for BMI and ADL/IADL impairments, which are estimated with OLS
and ordered probit, respectively. Appendix tables A-2 and A-3 contain the empirical significance values for the system of non-causality and invariance tests
specified above. For a more concise overview of results, refer to tables 2 and
3. In a nutshell, the reanalysis with fresher and more encompassing data suggests that direct causal links from SES to health can be ruled out for much
fewer health conditions than in the original study. This casts some doubt on the
stability of HWW’s findings. In order to understand which of the data changes
contribute to these deviating conclusions, we estimate the model multiple times,
using several different data sets by augmenting them stepwise along the dimensions outlined above. In the first step, we rerun HWW’s benchmark study for
the same cohort and time periods, yet reverting to the current version of HRS
data instead.13 This will detect any impact arising from data revisions and differences in imputations. The second step consists of extending the analysis to the
other three cohorts in the sample, hence testing whether HWW’s conclusions
are also valid for different individuals. The third step addresses the question of
how results are affected by increasing the number of time periods under consideration. Since in HWW’s model there is no self-evident way to aggregate the
information from multiple time intervals, we compare two different sampling
approaches: one that refills the sample after each wave with applicable observations and one that does not. In the fourth and final step, we evaluate the impact
on estimation results when younger individuals are included in the analysis as
well. This stepwise decomposition of all data and sampling changes appears to
be more informative than applying the whole bundle of modifications at once.
Step one: Re-estimating HWW with revised data
In order to gauge the result’s sensitivity to data revisions and imputations, the
model is re-estimated with fresh HRS data for the exact same cohort (AHEAD)
13
To ensure that none of the observed changes is confoundedly rooted in the way certain variables
are constructed and program codes are implemented, we also reran HWW’s study verbatim using
their original data. While the goal to exactly reproduce HWW was ultimately achieved, it should be
noted that results are identical to those published as log files within the appendix of the original
2003 paper, but not to those in the article itself. This difference is attributable to data revisions that
HWW accounted for shortly after the paper was published, which means that the outcome from the
appendix should be preferred as the ultimate benchmark. As is evident from comparing columns
(1) and (2) of table A-2, said differences are not always trivial in size. Most strikingly, invariance
tests tend to fail less frequently when applied to HWW’s post-publication data set. Yet, the impact
on causality tests is negligible, thus not challenging the author’s main conclusions from the article.

22

Table 2. Tests for non-causality (Steps 2 to 4)
Health
condition

HWW (70+)
W234
F
M

Cancer
Heart
Stroke

Test results for Granger non-causality
Step 2 (70+)
Step 3 (70+)
W234
W456
W789
W2-9
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
•
•
•
•
•
•

Mortality
•
•

Lung
Diabetes
High bp.
Arthritis

••
•

BMI
Smoke now
ADL
IADL
S.-r. health

•

•

•••
••
•
••

•

••
•

••

••

••

•
•••
••• •

••
••
•

•••
n.a.
n.a.

•••
n.a.
n.a.

••
•••

•••
•••
•
•••

•••
n.a.
•••
•••

•••
n.a.
•
•••

•••
•••

••
•••
•••
•••
•••

••
•••
•••
•••
•••

•••
•

••

•
•••
•

••
••• •

•••
••

••

•••
••• •••

•••
•
•

•••

•
•

•••

•••
•

••
••
••
•

•••

••

••
•

•
•

••
••

•

Incontinence
Fall
Hip fract.
Proxy
Cognition
Psychiatric
Depression

••

Step 4 (50+)
W2-9
F
M

•••

Notes: Results are for white females (F) and males (M). Abbreviations are as follows: Granger non-causality
rejected at 5% level (•), rejected at 1% level (••), or rejected at 0.1% level (•••). Gray symbols indicate that
the corresponding invariance test is rejected at the 5% level.

and time periods (waves 2 to 4) as in the original study. The differences between the new results and HWW’s benchmark are quite modest, and outcomes
of causality test are mostly unchanged. The most notable exception is diabetes
for which the non-causality test had to be previously rejected among male respondents. With revised data, however, a direct causal link from SES to diabetes
seems unlikely to exist. For further details, compare columns (2) and (3) of table A-2.
Step two: Adding new cohorts
While the relative stability of results in face of data revisions is certainly encouraging, a much stricter test is posed by extending the analysis to all available
cohorts. To achieve this, we run three separate estimations on the following
samples: First, we revisit waves 2 to 4 but allow members of cohorts other than
AHEAD to be part of the working sample. This barely changes the sample composition because the only other cohort that is part of the survey in this early
stage is HRS, which hardly contains any individuals aged 70+. For the other
two estimations, HWW’s data benchmark is additionally changed inasmuch as
later waves are used. The second estimation starts at wave 4, when the new
cohorts CODA and EB are interviewed for the first time. Note that we do not
23

restrict analysis to these two cohorts. Rather, all respondents who are at least
70 years old at wave 4 and who are not subject to subsequent sample attrition
are followed until wave 7. This closely mirrors HWW’s approach of analyzing a
three-period panel, hence still keeping the deviations from the benchmark to a
minimum. The third estimation repeats the second for waves 7 to 9, coinciding
with the entry of the most recent cohort, namely WB.
Not surprisingly, the first estimation (table A-2, column (4)) yields results
that are almost identical to those of HWW’s benchmark with revised data (table A-2, column (3)). The hypothesis tests associated with the other two estimations, however, prove to be rather different. As far as non-causality tests are
concerned, the differences seem to be unsystematic. For some medical conditions, such as depression and ADL impairments for females and incontinence
for males, causality from SES can no longer be ruled out as non-causality tests
are now consistently rejected. For other health conditions, namely diabetes and
lung disease for males as well as psychiatric disease for females, the opposite
holds true, as non-causality tests can no longer be rejected. In addition, there
are a number of diseases for which the benchmark causality test results are not
confirmed for only one of the sub-samples. For further details compare columns
(4), (5), and (6), respectively with column (3) of table A-2. Invariance tests, on
the other hand, tend to be accepted more often than those under the benchmark scenario. At first glance, this may seem contradictory since causality tests
have yielded fairly different results depending on which panel waves are under
consideration. One should, however, not forget that the invariance tests merely
check whether the model is time invariant within each of the three estimations
but not among them. This is changed in the third step when the information
from more than just three waves is incorporated.
Step three: Increasing the number of time periods
Step two has indicated that results depend on which panel waves are chosen to
form the working sample. In order to reduce this arbitrary element and to maximize the use of available information in the data, it makes sense to increase the
number of panel waves. Since there is no unequivocal way to implement this
in practice, we propose two different sampling approaches. The first approach
is a simple extrapolation of HWW’s sampling method. The working sample consists of all individuals who participated in the survey in wave 2 and who were
not subject to sample-fatigue-related attrition in later waves. This cohort is then
followed for as many waves as possible. This sampling scheme has two major
disadvantages. First, by restricting the sample to individuals who were part of
the survey from the very start, we exclude refreshment cohorts CODA, EB, and
WB, basically discarding useful information. The second drawback is of a more
practical nature: death-related attritors cause the sample to dramatically thin
24

out over time, so that sample sizes eventually become too small to conduct
any meaningful analysis. Moreover, as time moves on, the sample arguably becomes less representative of the true population because the ongoing attrition
will select against the most frail. Nevertheless, and for the sake of maximum
comparability with HWW, we estimate two versions of this first approach. One
that follows individuals from wave 2 until wave 6 (covering cohorts HRS and
AHEAD) and another that follows individuals from wave 4 until wave 9 (covering HRS, AHEAD, CODA, and EB). The number of waves is chosen so that
sample sizes in the last respective wave are still reasonably large.
The alternative sampling scheme directly addresses the downsides of the approach above. Instead of limiting the sample to respondents who are part of the
survey from the beginning, it is now refilled in each wave with all available respondents who meet the respective age criterion (i.e. 70+) and who answer all
relevant questions for two consecutive waves. That way, all cohorts are used for
analysis, sample sizes never diminish to levels too low for efficient estimation,
and, consequently, all 8 waves can be used simultaneously. As a positive side
effect, attrition bias is reduced as well, as the mortality-induced loss of observations is offset by filling up the sample with new respondents, once they become
age-eligible. One might object that this approach reduces the power of panel
analysis as it does not make much use of its potential time-series length. For the
purpose of reproducing HWW, however, we deem it suitable since the original
model does not use the theoretical length of the panel either, assuming that
health and wealth trajectories are sufficiently described by single lags. Given
that the models are estimated by simply stacking the data of all two-waves transitions above another, it is irrelevant how long an individual is part of the survey.
The information conveyed in the responses of a person who only participates in,
say, waves 4 and 5 is no less valuable than that of a respondent who participates
from the very beginning to the end, and should therefore not be excluded.14
It is noteworthy that the invariance tests of both sampling schemes have
slightly different interpretations. In both cases, they test whether parameter estimates stay constant over time, by comparing the log likelihood when all single
wave transitions are pooled together with those when estimated separately. For
a sample with refilling, an accepted invariance test indicates that the uncovered
(non-)causal relationships hold for different populations at different times, underlining the generality of results. Invariance tests for samples without refilling,
however, cannot answer the question whether causal links hold for different
populations since only one cohort is being followed. They rather check whether
these links remain constant as a steadily diminishing cohort becomes older over
14
Of course, the validity of this argument relies on HWW’s conceptualization of health trajectories
as a first-order Markov process. The future development of more realistic models of health dynamics
will require a more sophisticated sampling procedure as well.

25

time, ultimately comparing the frail (who exit the sample early) with the medically more robust.
The main change in results from using a larger number of sample waves is
that causality from SES to health can no longer be ruled out for a large array of
conditions, even for an elderly population, aged 70 and older. This observation
holds, no matter which of the two above approaches is used, even though there
are some differences. As columns (7), (8), and (9) of table A-2 reveal, there are
seven health conditions for which the samples without refilling yield a rejection
of non-causality tests, even though this was not the case for shorter samples.
This number even increases to ten conditions, if the sample with refilling is
used instead. The most unambiguous evidence exists for six conditions (mortality and falls for males, proxy and BMI for females, and cancer irrespective of
gender) for which both approaches suggest that, contrary to earlier evidence,
causality may well play a role. The reversed case of causality becoming less
likely to exist as panel length grows, is as good as non-existent. The influence
of analyzing more time periods at once on invariance tests is about the same for
both approaches and not very strong. If anything, invariance failures tend to be
somewhat likelier – a result that makes sense because it is more demanding for
a model to be valid for eight waves than a mere three.
Step four: Adding younger individuals
So far, the consequence of applying HWW’s model to data that includes more
individuals and time periods, is that the number of medical conditions for which
SES causality may play a role has considerably increased. However, for a population aged 70 and older there remains a large number of diseases for which
causal links are not detected, despite the fact that high SES is associated with a
lower prevalence of these conditions. While this cross-sectional correlation cannot be interpreted causally, it indicates that causal channels may have been at
work earlier in life, before the individual even entered the sample. In light of
that, it is interesting to also include younger individuals, to test if the data will
pick up additional causal links that are already mute in an elderly population.
First, the sample is opened up to people who are at least 65 years old, so that
it represents (with some exceptions) the whole Medicare-eligible subpopulation.
This yields a net-increase of 3 to 6 health conditions (depending on whether
samples with or without refilling are used) for which causality can no longer
be rejected, affirming the speculation above. See columns (2), (6) and (10)
of table A-3 for details. A similar effect can be observed when the sample is
opened up even further to include individuals aged 50+, exploiting the entire
age range available within HRS. This time, the net-increase amounts to another
3 to 9 conditions, rendering cases for which causal links can be ruled out the
exception rather than the rule. Among the latter are illnesses such as strokes
26

Table 3. Tests for non-causality (Pre- vs. postretirement population)
Health
condition

Test results for Granger non-causality
Step 4 (0-64)
Step 4 (65+)
W2-9
W2-9
F
M
F
M

Cancer
Heart
Stroke

•
•
••

Mortality
Lung
Diabetes
High bp.
Arthritis

•••

Incontinence
Fall
Hip fract.

•••
n.a.
n.a.

Proxy
Cognition
Psychiatric
Depression

n.a.
•••
•••

BMI
Smoke now
ADL
IADL
S.-r. health

•
•••
•••
•••
•••

n.a.
n.a.
•••
n.a.
•••

•

••
•
•

••
•
•••

•••

•••
•

•••
•

•••
•••

•••
•••
•
•••

•••
••

•••
•••
•••
•••

•••
•
•••

•••
•••
•••

Notes: The same abbreviations as in table 2 apply.

and high blood pressure for males, lung disease for females, and cancer for
both men and women. For all other health conditions the existence of causal
links cannot be refuted. For further details, consider columns (3), (7) and (11)
of table A-3.
It is also worthwhile to split up the sample into older (65+) and younger
(50–64) individuals to study how the activation of causal channels differs between a mostly retired, Medicare-eligible population and people who are typically still on the labor market and not quasi-universally health insured. As
table 3 shows, there is quite a number of medical conditions for which SES
may be a causal driving force irrespective of age. These include depression fpr
both genders, IADL impairments, incontinence, and diabetes for women as well
as ADL impairments for men. For other conditions like arthritis, heart disease,
strokes for females, or incontinence for males, SES is only a good predictor of
new medical incidences at a higher age. On the other hand, smoking behavior
as well as psychiatric problems for women are among the conditions for which
a causal link may only be active at a pre-retirement age. Intriguingly, when
young and old people are studied separately, results appear to be sensitive to
whether samples with or without refilling are chosen (see table A-3). For older
individuals, the sample with refilling suggests more cases of Granger causality
27

than its counterparts without refreshment do. The exact opposite, however, is
true for younger individuals as for these, rejected causality is a less frequent
outcome in samples without refilling. The latter observation is likely an artifactual side effect of the way the sampling methods are defined: Sampling with
refilling effectively excludes people from the 50–64 sample once they become
older than 65, whereas sampling without refilling follows all individuals until
they die, even if they grow much older. As a consequence, unrefilled “young”
samples may arguably pick up some of the causal effects that are exclusively
active for the older subjects of the cohort.
Model invariance is not systematically influenced by adding younger individuals to the data set. The fact that the seeming structural breaks in the relation
of SES and health as people grow older are not detected by HWW’s invariance
tests, should, however, not be surprising. Recall that the test design does not
pit the young against the old but the past against the future. The idea is to
check parameter invariance as time progresses. Since the age structure within
the sample varies only little from wave to wave (especially when it is regularly
refreshed), the invariance test will not permit a direct comparison of, say, preand post-retirement populations. In light of this, the results in table A-3 merely
suggest that the time stability of the model is rather insensitive to changes in
the age composition of the sample.
Changes in results of the underlying prediction models
Given the strong dependence of non-causality test results on both the size and
age coverage of the estimation sample, it seems natural to investigate how these
changes are related to the size and the precision of coefficients of the underlying prediction models.15 As table 4 exemplifies, precision of SES coefficient
estimates does generally increase with the size of the respective sample, even
though this relation is not perfect. While standard errors remain fairly constant
across estimations based on similarly sized 3-waves samples (step 2), they surprisingly spike upwards once all waves are pooled together in step 3. This obser-

Table 4. Prediction model: Average standard errors of SES coefficients
Sex

Female
Male

Standard errors of SES coefficients (average of all health cond. and SES regressors)
HWW
Step 2 (70+)
Step 3 (70+)
Step 4 (W2-9)
W234
W234
W456
W789
W2-9
65+
50+
0-64
0.081
0.083
0.087
0.091
0.126
0.107
0.085
0.172
0.108
0.105
0.111
0.110
0.167
0.135
0.098
0.185

Notes: Reported are average standard errors of SES coefficients obtained from estimating model 9. Each
entry is an average of 160 single standard errors (20 health variables and 8 SES regressors). Individual
standard errors follow the depicted pattern quite uniformly.

15
HWW did not report the coefficients of the prediction models, but these estimates are also
available in their online appendix.

28

Table 5. Prediction model: Significant SES coefficients
Health
condition

Cancer
Heart
Stroke

SES regression coefficients that are significant at 5% level
HWW (70+)
Step 2 (70+)
Step 3 (70+)
W234
W234
W456
W789
W2-9
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
E
E
H
W
I
I
I
E
NH
I
E
E
H
W
I

Mortality

E

Lung
Diabetes
High bp.
Arthritis

W

Incontinence
Fall
Hip fract.

N

Proxy
Cognition
Psychiatric
Depression
BMI
Smoke now
ADL
IADL
S.-r. health

E
E

W

W
E
E

E
W
E
I

E

W

I

W

I
WIN
I

E
I
W
N

I
E
WIN I
I
W
N

EH

H
W
W

E

W
WI
WE

EH

N
W

W

E
W
E

Step 4 (50+)
W2-9
F
M

I

N

I
E

E
E

W
WE

W

E

I

W
n.a.
n.a.

H
n.a.
n.a.

I
E

E
n.a.

n.a.

W
E
E
E

H
W
W
E
WIH IE
WE N

IH
N
E
N
EH

W
E

W

WH
E

EH

E

E

IH
W
IE

E
W

E
E

E
INH IEH

H
IEH

W
NH

WE
W
WI
N
WIENH

H
I
W
W
IEH

Notes: Results are for white females (F) and males (M). Abbreviations are as follows: Significant coefficients
at 5% level for wealth (W), income (I), education (E), neighborhood (N), or housing quality (H). Bold
(e.g. W) symbols indicate that signs are in line with theory. Italic (e.g. W) symbols denote the opposite case.

vation may well be rooted in the aforementioned switch from a sampling procedure without (steps 1 and 2) to one with refilling (steps 3 and 4). Precision follows a more predictable pattern within step 4, as standard errors are invariably
smaller, the larger the respective sample (note that N50+ > N65+ > N70+ > N0−64 ).
The same pattern emerges when comparing results by gender, as the number of
women exceeds that of men in each of the subsamples.
Despite increased precision, table 5 suggests that the number of statistically
significant SES coefficients does not seem to be systematically affected as samples become more encompassing. In HWW’s benchmark sample, there is a total
of 29 SES regression coefficients that are significant at the 5% level. This number stays rather constant across the performed steps. Yet, note that in the benchmark case there is a fair amount of cases for which coefficients have an unintuitive sign, suggesting that respondents with high SES are likelier to develop a
new health condition. The share of these cases stays rather high for all 3-waves
samples and drops significantly once all waves are used at once. This means
that, while the overall number of significant SES coefficients does not increase,
the direction of effects is now more in line with theory. This is an additional
insight since non-causality tests as implemented here do merely check whether
29

health innovations are conditionally independent of SES variables, whereas the
quality of this dependence is not under consideration.

5

Conclusion and future research

All in all, re-estimating HWW’s model of health incidence with new HRS data,
alters conclusions about SES causation quite significantly. While the impact of
data revisions within HRS is encouragingly small, the addition of new cohorts
shows that causal inference critically depends on which time periods are used
for estimation. Using the information of many – ideally all – waves at once has
the greatest effect on results, with many health conditions moving to the column of illnesses for which SES causality may well play a role. Adding younger
individuals to the sample has a very similar effect, reducing the number of medical conditions for which the existence of causal links can be statistically rejected
even further. As a consequence, the only health conditions for which SES causation can be ruled out when estimation is based on the most encompassing
dataset with refilling, are cancer (irrespective of gender), lung disease for females and high blood pressure for males. For all other health incidences, SES
is either G-causal or the failure of invariance tests does not permit reliable conclusions. This represents a stark contrast to HWW’s original findings, where the
rejection of structural causality was the most frequent outcome.
Given that the greatest changes are triggered by the addition of panel waves
(step 3), the main driving force behind this reversal in results is most likely
an increase in test power as sample sizes soar. After all, in HWW’s stacking
model, a longer panel is equivalent to a larger sample (with respect to N) since
all waves are pooled together and treated as if they formed one cross section.
This interpretation is corroborated by the fact that test results from long panels
do not always reflect the average outcome of the respective three-wave panels
they consist of. As the example of cancer in table A-2 illustrates, non-causality
tests are often rejected in the long samples, even though they are consistently
accepted in each of the short panels. Similar observations can be made when
comparing test results by age group. In some cases, a non-causality test is only
rejected for the largest, most-encompassing sample of all individuals aged 50
and older. However, in all smaller sub-samples (50–64, 65+, and 70+) the same
null hypothesis cannot be rejected. As an example for the latter case, see heart
disease for females in table A-3. All of this evidence permits the emergence
of a clear picture: the larger the sample under consideration, the likelier the
rejection of non-causality.
We also find that causal inference depends on the age structure of the underlying population, with certain conditions being Granger caused by SES at
younger or older ages only. This yields at least indirect evidence that the activa30

tion of causal links may indeed change over the life cycle. However, we recommend to take these results with a grain of salt since their lack of robustness is
far from comforting, as evidenced by the sensitivity to the choice of sampling
schemes. In addition, we should note that the data set for the 65+ population is
about three times as large as that of the pre-retirement group. As a consequence,
we face the risk of confounding the true effect of age structures with the impact
of varying sample sizes identified above. This may well provide an alternative
explanation for the failure to detect many cases of G-causality among the 50
to 64 year olds if estimation is based on a refilling sample – a result that is not
confirmed if samples without refilling are used instead.
From a methodological point of view, the results of this study pose bad news
for a model whose identification strategy relies on Granger causality. Recall that
the reduced-form nature of G-causality cannot discriminate between structural
causation and ecological association due to common unobserved effects if Gcausality is detected. Ultimately, HWW’s framework allows only the one-sided
test for the absence of direct causal links, which is confirmed if G-causality is
rejected as well. While HWW’s original dataset provided us with a large number
of such cases, the more-encompassing data samples analyzed here, do not do
us this favor. As a result, we find ourselves in the unfortunate situation that
little can be learned about the true links between SES and health, making it
impossible to draw meaningful policy conclusions.16
In light of this, the need to improve the empirical model within future research so as to account for the confounding influence of hidden common factors, becomes even more pressing. In our view, there are two alternative ways
to achieve this. The first mirrors the identification strategy of IV approaches:
instead of using endogeneity-stricken SES histories as regressors, one could concentrate on the impact of clearly exogenous changes in these variables. If these
SES innovations meet the standard IV assumptions, we would be able to formulate two-sided tests that permit the clean identification of causality in a structural sense. Among the natural experiments one could exploit, are the major
negative shock to housing and financial wealth that many people experienced
during the ongoing financial market crisis of 2008/09, the positive shock Medicare households received as a result of the introduction of the heavily subsidized
Medicare Part D program in 2006, and the shocks some employed individuals received from changes in employer-provided health insurance.17 Particular atten16
While invariance tests have arguably gained power by the inclusion of different time spans,
cohorts, and age structures, we are still doubtful that their acceptance would attest the model the
kind of stability necessary to make out-of-sample predictions of policy effects. The reason for this
is that – with the notable exception of the introduction of Medicare Part D in 2006 – the observed
variation in relevant policies remains rather low.
17
When it comes to the recent financial crisis, we acknowledge that the equity shock might
not be large enough to provide strong identification. Using HRS data, Gustman, Steinmeier, and
Tabatabai (2010) report that equity accounted only for about 15% of assets prior to the 2008/09

31

tion could be given to the differential exposure to wealth shocks in the presence
of health care delivery systems that vary in the financial impact of copayments,
premiums, and coverage, particularly for chronic conditions and preventative
and palliative therapies. Provided that the causal link in questions even exists,
wealth shocks will take some time to affect health outcomes. Therefore, we expect any effects of the 2008/2009 financial crisis or Medicare Part D to leave
their marks only in future waves of the HRS dataset.
However, the use of such natural experiments is not immune to objection,
which leads to a fundamental trade-off. On the one hand, we can try to infer
causality by relying on wealth shocks like the ones just described, which has
the advantage of not having to worry about endogeneity issues. Yet, as argued
in section 3, there is a risk that these shocks may not be all that relevant for
health, especially when occurring late in life. On the other hand, the information contained in past levels of SES – the regressor used in HWW’s G-causality
framework – is certainly of great relevance, as it reflects the entire history between SES and health status. The disadvantage is that this pool of information
may also include confounding elements, such as the impact of hidden common
causes, calling into question the exogeneity of such explanatory variables.
The other alternative we deem feasible of discriminating among hypotheses A and C, seeks to solve this trade-off by exploiting the relevant information
contained in SES histories, while eliminating the misleading influence of common effects. As extensively argued in the fixed- and random-effects literature,
this may be achieved by interpreting the problem of common effects as an issue of unobserved individual heterogeneity, whose effect is controlled by fully
exploiting the panel structure of HRS. This being said, the choice of a suitable
estimator is not trivial because it needs to combine three important features
that often tend to be mutually exclusive. First and foremost, the estimation
strategy must allow heterogeneity to be correlated with SES, which makes FE
estimators a logical candidate. However, FE estimation is generally ridden by
matters of inconsistency, once confronted with the other two features, namely
a dependent variable that is both binary (requiring a non-linear specification)
and state-dependent (reflecting the dynamic nature of the model). A feasible
way of tackling these three issues at once, promises to be a dynamic correlated
RE Probit approach as implemented by Contoyannis, Jones, and Rice (2004).
It solves the usual trade-offs between FE and RE setups, by allowing for correlated heterogeneity and the estimation of time-invariant regressors even when
confronted with non-linear data structures and lagged dependent variables.18
crisis. Whether this is sufficient exogenous variation would have to be scrutinized as part of future research. Alternatively, one could explore negative shocks to housing wealth which represent
another aspect of the financial market crunch. Exogenous variation in these shocks is provided by
regional differences in house prices and the severity of declines in real estate value during the crisis.
18
Michaud and van Soest (2008) adopt a similar strategy, by eliminating the effect of individual
heterogeneity with GMM estimators in the spirit of Arellano and Bond (1991). In analyzing the

32

We acknowledge that this alternative strategy of coping with common effects is
not devoid of criticism either, which is why we consider it reasonable to independently explore both routes in what lies ahead. This is especially true inasmuch
as both approaches are expected to uncover different causal channels: while the
latter strategy of modelling individual heterogeneity may allow the detection of
average causal effects as manifest in SES histories, the exploitation of natural experiments will predominantly shed light on the most immediate (mental) health
consequences of wealth shocks.
A second opportunity for future research lies in improving the limited microfoundation of causal pathways, which is inherent in the reduced-form nature
of Granger causality. Even if we were able to univocally confirm the presence
of causal effects from wealth to health, we still would not know the channels
through which they operate. Yet, the latter information is absolutely critical
from a policy perspective: interventions to increase the affordability of health
insurance would be warranted if channel A1 were to be active, but would prove
ineffective if the causal link were to work through, say, channel A3 instead. To
address this issue, we intend to specify and test more differentiated hypotheses that may facilitate the discrimination among these channels. For instance, if
channel A1 is truly relevant, we should observe a certain sensitivity of results
to the availability and generosity of health care systems. Possible comparisons
include the time before and after Medicare Part D, individuals with and without
health insurance, or cross-country differences in health care regimes.19 Another
way of gauging the importance of health care affordability is to compare individuals with and without health insurance. Of particular interest will be the
pre-retirement population not yet eligible for Medicare, as their insurance status will be endogenous unless they are covered by employer-provided health
care. Even if health insurance proves to be of little importance for the onset of
a health condition, it may well be decisive in determining whether and how it
is treated, given that the individual has already gotten sick. On this account we
intend to follow the health trajectories as well medical care use of respondents
that share the characteristic of having developed a certain medical condition.
Finally, the model would certainly benefit from addressing another of the
methodological shortcomings identified in section 3: the treatment of health dynamics. In our view, there are several ways to accommodate the long memory
HRS population aged 51–61, they find that causal effects of wealth on health can be ruled out if
unobserved heterogeneity and a more realistic lag structure are accounted for. However, given that
their approach is incompatible with non-linear models, it is not directly applicable to our research
question.
19
In fact, Hurd and Kapteyn (2003) find that causal effects from SES to health status are less pronounced in the Netherlands than in the USA. Given that the Dutch health care system is basically
universal, they see this result as an indication of the general importance of differential access to
health care: SES gradients in health are strongest in institutional environments in which affordability should a priori matter most.

33

effects that prove to be so critical for a realistic description of health trajectories. The simplest fix consists of adding higher-order lags of health condition
prevalences to the list of explanatory variables. A better, albeit more demanding,
alternative is a hidden Markov structure in which health is controlled by a latent random process that drives the onset of health conditions, self-rated health
and mortality. According to Heiss (2010), such models are parsimonious and
capture the observed dynamics better than commonly applied random-effects
or conditional Markov chain models.

References
Adams, Peter, Michael D. Hurd, Daniel McFadden, Angela Merrill, and Tiago
Ribeiro (2003): “Healthy, wealthy, and wise? Tests for direct causal paths between health and socioeconomic status.” Journal of Econometrics, 112, 3–56.
3
Adda, Jerome, Tarani Chandola, and Michael Marmot (2003): “Comment: Socioeconomic status and health: Causality and pathways.” Journal of Econometrics,
112, 57–63. 3, 17
Adler, Nancy E. and Joan M. Ostrove (1999): “Socioeconomic status and health:
What we know and what we don’t.” In Socioeconomic Status and Health in
Industrialized Nations, edited by Nancy E. Adler et al., Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 3–15. 5
Arellano, Manuel and Stephen R. Bond (1991): “Some tests of specification for
panel data: Monte Carlo evidence and an application to employment equations.” Review of Economic Studies, 58(2), 277–297. 32
Contoyannis, Paul, Andrew M. Jones, and Nigel Rice (2004): “The dynamics of
health in the British Household Panel Survey.” Journal of Applied Econometrics,
19(4), 473–503. 32
Cutler, David M., Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Tom Vogl (2011): “Socioeconomic
status and health: Dimensions and mechanisms.” In The Oxford Handbook of
Health Economics, edited by Sherry Glied and Peter C. Smith, Oxford University Press, forthcoming. 5
Florens, Jean-Pierre (2003): “Comment: Some technical issues in defining
causality.” Journal of Econometrics, 112, 127–128. 3, 18
Geweke, John (2003): “Comment: Econometric issues in using the AHEAD
panel.” Journal of Econometrics, 112, 115–120. 3, 18
34

Goldsmith, Noreen (2001): “Social inequalities in health: Disentangling the underlying mechanisms.” In Strengthening the dialogue between epidemiology and
demography, vol. 954, edited by M. Weinstein and A. Hermalin, Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences, 118–139. 2, 5
Granger, Clive W. J. (1969): “Investigating causal relations by econometric models and cross-spectral methods.” Econometrica, 37(3), 424–38. 13
———— (2003): “Comment: Some aspects of causal relationships.” Journal of
Econometrics, 112, 69–71. 3, 18
Grossman, Michael (1972): “On the concept of health capital and the demand
for health.” Journal of Political Economy, 80(2), 223–255. 6, 10, 18
Gustman, Alan L., Thomas L. Steinmeier, and Nahid Tabatabai (2010): “What
the stock market decline means for the financial security and retirement
choices of the near-retirement population.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
24(1), 161–182. 31
Hausman, Jerry A. (2003): “Comment: Triangular structural model specification
and estimation with application to causality.” Journal of Econometrics, 112,
107–113. 3, 13, 18
Heckman, James J. (2000): “Causal parameters and policy analysis in economics: A twentieth century perspective.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
114(1), 45–97. 13
———— (2003): “Comment: Conditioning, causality and policy analysis.” Journal of Econometrics, 112(73–78). 3, 17, 18
Heiss, Florian (2010): “Dynamics of self-rated health and selective mortality.”
Empirical Economics, forthcoming. 34
Hoover, Kevin D. (2001): Causality in macroeconomics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. 13
———— (2003): “Comment: Some causal lessons from macroeconomics.” Journal of Econometrics, 112, 121–125. 3
Hurd, Michael and Arie Kapteyn (2003): “Health, wealth, and the role of institutions.” Journal of Human Resources, 38(2), 386–415. 33
Meer, Jonathan, Douglas L. Miller, and Harvey S. Rosen (2003): “Exploring the
health–wealth nexus.” Journal of Health Economics, 22(5), 713–730. 10
Michaud, Pierre-Carl and Arthur van Soest (2008): “Health and wealth of elderly couples: Causality tests using dynamic panel data models.” Journal of
Health Economics, 27, 1312–1325. 2, 10, 32
35

Pearl, Judea (2000): Causality: Models, reasoning, and inference. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. 13
Poterba, James M. (2003): “Comment: Some observations on health status and
economic status.” Journal of Econometrics, 112(65–67). 3, 17, 18
Robins, James M. (2003): “Comment: General methodological considerations.”
Journal of Econometrics, 112(89–106). 3
Rubin, Donald B. (1974): “Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and nonrandomized studies. Journal Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and nonrandomized studies.” Journal of Educational
Psychology, 66(5), 668–701. 13
Rubin, Donald B. and Fabrizia Mealli (2003): “Comment: Assumptions allowing
the estimation of direct causal effects.” Journal of Econometrics, 112(79–87).
3
Sims, Christopher A. (1972): “Money, income, and causality.” American Economic Review, 62(4), 540–552. 13
Smith, James P. (1999): “Healthy bodies and thick wallets: The dual relationship between health and economic status.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
13(2), 145–166. 2, 5
———— (2005): “Consequences and predictors of new health events.” In Analyses in the Economics of Aging, edited by David A. Wise, National Bureau of
Economic Research, 213–240. 10

36

A-1

Health incidence
Cancer (first/new)
Heart disease (first/new)
Stroke (first/new)
Died since last wave
Lung disease (first)
Diabetes (first)
High blood pressure (first)
Arthritis (first/new)
Incontinence (first/new)
Fall (first/new)
Hip fracture (first/new)

Health prevalence
Cancer (ever)
Heart disease (ever)
Stroke (ever)
Lung disease (ever)
Diabetes (ever)
High blood pressure (ever)
Arthritis (last 2 years)
Incontinence (ever)
Fall (ever)
Hip fracture (ever)
Proxy interview (now)
Cognitive impairment (ever)
Psychiatric disease (ever)
Depression (last 2 years)
BMI (now)
Smoker (now)
# of ADL impairments (now)
# of IADL impairments (now)
Poor/fair self-rated h. (now)

Variable

0.097
0.225
0.066
0.107
0.133
0.464
0.190
0.146
0.075
0.024
0.077
0.221
0.128
0.130
26.5
0.182
0.239
0.288
0.291

0.296
0.418
0.248
0.309
0.340
0.499
0.392
0.353
0.263
0.152
0.267
0.415
0.334
0.337
5.0
0.386
0.751
0.847
0.454

Wave 2
(N=18,694)
Mean
StDev.

0.040
0.092
0.038
0.054
0.017
0.023
0.043
0.105
0.159
0.110
0.008

0.127
0.265
0.090
0.115
0.150
0.500
0.227
0.214
0.148
0.025
0.138
0.151
0.158
0.096
26.5
0.169
0.378
0.344
0.282
0.197
0.289
0.191
0.225
0.127
0.151
0.204
0.307
0.365
0.313
0.089

0.333
0.442
0.286
0.319
0.357
0.500
0.419
0.410
0.355
0.157
0.345
0.358
0.365
0.295
5.1
0.375
0.990
0.967
0.450

Wave 3
(N=18,022)
Mean
StDev.

Table A-1. Variables used for analysis: Summary statistics

0.046
0.125
0.047
0.055
0.020
0.023
0.045
0.099
0.166
0.109
0.013

0.127
0.256
0.090
0.102
0.140
0.488
0.220
0.237
0.169
0.027
0.145
0.208
0.151
0.110
26.8
0.164
0.376
0.336
0.319
0.209
0.331
0.213
0.229
0.139
0.150
0.207
0.298
0.372
0.312
0.112

0.333
0.436
0.287
0.302
0.357
0.500
0.414
0.425
0.374
0.162
0.352
0.406
0.358
0.313
5.2
0.371
0.998
0.966
0.466

Wave 4
(N=21,645)
Mean
StDev.

0.039
0.099
0.038
0.065
0.017
0.023
0.050
0.098
0.183
0.101
0.009

0.140
0.270
0.098
0.103
0.161
0.517
0.223
0.290
0.203
0.029
0.164
0.257
0.159
0.111
27.0
0.149
0.384
0.345
0.286
0.194
0.299
0.190
0.246
0.130
0.150
0.218
0.298
0.387
0.302
0.094

0.347
0.444
0.297
0.304
0.368
0.500
0.416
0.454
0.402
0.167
0.370
0.437
0.365
0.314
5.4
0.356
1.003
0.990
0.452

Wave 5
(N=19,961)
Mean
StDev.

0.044
0.110
0.042
0.076
0.020
0.032
0.059
0.110
0.201
0.104
0.013

0.155
0.287
0.105
0.106
0.183
0.556
0.237
0.331
0.225
0.031
0.182
0.254
0.170
0.112
27.2
0.137
0.393
0.370
0.294
0.206
0.313
0.201
0.264
0.141
0.176
0.235
0.313
0.401
0.306
0.111

0.362
0.452
0.306
0.308
0.387
0.497
0.425
0.471
0.418
0.173
0.386
0.435
0.375
0.315
5.4
0.343
1.020
1.027
0.456

Wave 6
(N=18,703)
Mean
StDev.

0.041
0.117
0.039
0.058
0.023
0.028
0.054
0.109
0.201
0.109
0.014

0.152
0.275
0.099
0.105
0.187
0.553
0.228
0.324
0.247
0.035
0.143
0.198
0.177
0.111
27.4
0.148
0.364
0.340
0.300
0.198
0.322
0.194
0.234
0.149
0.166
0.227
0.312
0.401
0.312
0.119

0.359
0.447
0.298
0.307
0.390
0.497
0.420
0.468
0.431
0.183
0.350
0.398
0.381
0.314
5.7
0.355
0.984
0.964
0.458

Wave 7
(N=20,365)
Mean
StDev.

0.042
0.107
0.036
0.066
0.018
0.032
0.055
0.099
0.220
0.112
0.015

0.168
0.296
0.107
0.112
0.211
0.597
0.231
0.364
0.262
0.038
0.131
0.234
0.191
0.114
27.8
0.136
0.399
0.369
0.301

0.201
0.309
0.186
0.249
0.133
0.176
0.227
0.298
0.414
0.316
0.121

0.373
0.456
0.309
0.316
0.408
0.491
0.421
0.481
0.440
0.192
0.337
0.424
0.393
0.318
5.8
0.343
1.022
1.014
0.459

Wave 8
(N=18,806)
Mean
StDev.

0.046
0.110
0.039
0.071
0.021
0.030
0.052
0.106
0.252
0.126
0.016

0.179
0.306
0.113
0.120
0.229
0.629
0.240
0.398
0.288
0.040
0.134
0.230
0.199
0.104
28.0
0.133
0.403
0.377
0.307

0.209
0.313
0.193
0.257
0.142
0.171
0.221
0.308
0.440
0.332
0.124

0.384
0.461
0.316
0.325
0.420
0.483
0.427
0.490
0.453
0.195
0.341
0.421
0.400
0.305
5.9
0.339
1.035
1.027
0.461

Wave 9
(N=17,588)
Mean
StDev.

A-2
0.209
0.087
0.029
67.2
74.4
71.2
0.587

0.200
0.087
0.031
65.9
73.7
70.8
0.588

Demographic variables
Widowed
Divorced/separated
Never married
Current age
Mother’s current/death age
Father’s current/death age
Ever smoked
0.400
0.282
0.174
11.0
15.3
14.4
0.492

273.8
0.246
0.215
45.2
0.268
0.230
0.119
0.122
11.6
0.706
0.184

225.9
0.264
0.190
44.1
0.289
0.213
0.108
0.146
11.5
0.701
0.181

SES variables
Wealth in 1997 USD (000)
1st quartile wealth indicator
4th quartile wealth indicator
Income in 1997 USD (000)
1st quartile income indicator
4th quartile income indicator
Poor/fair housing condition
Poor/fair neighborhood safety
Education (in years)
High school (educ. > 10 y.)
College (educ. > 14 y.)
469.6
0.441
0.393
79.5
0.453
0.410
0.310
0.353
3.5
0.458
0.385

0.138
0.096
0.032
0.050
26.5
0.169
0.378
0.344
0.282

Proxy interview (now)
Cognitive impairment (first)
Psychiatric disease (first)
Depression (first/new)
BMI (now)
Smoker (now)
# of ADL impairments (now)
# of IADL impairments (now)
Poor/fair self-rated h. (now)

0.407
0.281
0.168
10.7
15.3
14.6
0.492

704.3
0.431
0.411
65.9
0.443
0.421
0.324
0.327
3.5
0.456
0.387

0.345
0.295
0.175
0.218
5.1
0.375
0.990
0.967
0.450

0.203
0.095
0.033
66.5
75.0
71.4
0.590

288.2
0.253
0.236
47.2
0.251
0.247
0.113
0.101
11.8
0.737
0.204

0.145
0.074
0.027
0.072
26.8
0.164
0.376
0.336
0.319

0.402
0.293
0.177
10.9
15.0
14.4
0.492

1,057
0.435
0.425
90.2
0.434
0.432
0.317
0.301
3.4
0.440
0.403

0.352
0.261
0.162
0.258
5.2
0.371
0.998
0.966
0.466

0.216
0.095
0.031
67.7
75.4
71.7
0.586

315.7
0.239
0.261
47.7
0.253
0.249
0.105
0.087
11.9
0.746
0.211

0.164
0.058
0.024
0.061
27.0
0.149
0.384
0.345
0.286

0.412
0.294
0.174
10.6
15.1
14.5
0.493

853.1
0.427
0.439
93.1
0.435
0.432
0.307
0.282
3.4
0.435
0.408

0.370
0.233
0.152
0.240
5.4
0.356
1.003
0.990
0.452

0.230
0.097
0.030
69.0
75.8
71.9
0.583

310.0
0.229
0.275
45.0
0.250
0.236
0.095
0.078
12.0
0.758
0.218

0.182
0.062
0.027
0.062
27.2
0.137
0.393
0.370
0.294

0.421
0.296
0.170
10.3
15.2
14.5
0.493

789.0
0.421
0.447
80.8
0.433
0.425
0.294
0.268
3.4
0.429
0.413

0.386
0.240
0.162
0.242
5.4
0.343
1.020
1.027
0.456

0.201
0.109
0.037
67.0
75.6
71.9
0.579

348.6
0.246
0.283
50.1
0.240
0.263
0.124
0.097
12.3
0.787
0.242

0.143
0.047
0.025
0.059
27.4
0.148
0.364
0.340
0.300

0.401
0.311
0.188
11.5
14.7
14.2
0.494

1,226
0.430
0.451
85.3
0.427
0.441
0.330
0.296
3.3
0.410
0.428

0.350
0.212
0.157
0.236
5.7
0.355
0.984
0.964
0.458

0.213
0.109
0.034
68.4
76.1
71.1
0.579

418.8
0.239
0.311
50.6
0.242
0.249
0.114
0.101
12.3
0.795
0.244

0.131
0.047
0.028
0.060
27.8
0.136
0.399
0.369
0.301

0.410
0.312
0.182
11.1
14.8
14.3
0.494

1,877
0.426
0.463
255.4
0.428
0.432
0.318
0.301
3.3
0.404
0.429

0.337
0.212
0.165
0.238
5.8
0.343
1.022
1.014
0.459

0.221
0.114
0.034
69.6
76.5
71.4
0.577

360.6
0.240
0.304
49.0
0.251
0.253
0.109
0.096
12.4
0.801
0.251

0.134
0.482
0.022
0.053
28.0
0.133
0.403
0.377
0.307

0.415
0.318
0.180
10.8
14.8
14.4
0.494

1,034
0.427
0.450
359.1
0.434
0.435
0.311
0.295
3.3
0.400
0.434

0.341
0.214
0.147
0.223
5.9
0.339
1.035
1.027
0.461

A-3

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M
F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

Heart
disease

Stroke

Mortality
F
F
F
F

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

Cancer

Sex

Test

Health
condition

0.010
0.006
0.812
0.030

0.068
0.034
0.056
0.023
0.086
0.042
0.290
0.080

0.000
0.000
0.812
0.000
0.017
0.020
0.290
0.018

0.092
0.161
0.331
0.093

0.016
0.030
0.193
0.012
0.030
0.006
0.213
0.024

0.384
0.266
0.657
0.481
0.204
0.135
0.059
0.080
0.221
0.315
0.652
0.308

0.000
0.000
0.068
0.000
0.505
0.458
0.162
0.349

0.085
0.052
0.398
0.099
0.690
0.619
0.243
0.571

Benchmark: HWW (70+)
Article
Appendix
New data
W234
W234
W234
(AHEAD)
(AHEAD)
(AHEAD)
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.933
0.528
0.056
0.309
0.895
0.023
0.271
0.311
0.613
0.057
0.855
0.600
0.119
0.000
0.016
0.007
0.095
0.000
0.198
0.225
0.203
0.000
0.012
0.088

Table A-2. Tests for invariance and non-causality (Ages 70+)

0.085
0.162
0.309
0.083

0.015
0.028
0.147
0.009
0.017
0.003
0.195
0.013

0.000
0.000
0.059
0.000
0.603
0.566
0.224
0.478

0.169
0.220
0.453
0.195

0.814
0.817
0.044
0.461
0.403
0.276
0.750
0.535

0.849
0.903
0.701
0.891
0.248
0.197
0.468
0.279

0.517
0.403
0.108
0.312

0.690
0.578
0.197
0.540
0.446
0.334
0.664
0.543

0.392
0.440
0.010
0.080
0.635
0.856
0.533
0.662

Significance levels of tests
3-waves samples (70+)
No refilling
W234
W456
W789
(All Coh.)
(All Coh.)
(All Coh.)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.930
0.870
0.605
0.845
0.543
0.896
0.483
0.264
0.280
0.854
0.846
0.515
0.172
0.179
0.355
0.134
0.450
0.158
0.178
0.302
0.806
0.117
0.516
0.163

0.165
0.321
0.248
0.140

0.023
0.035
0.062
0.010
0.036
0.004
0.215
0.029

0.017
0.010
0.301
0.016
0.484
0.384
0.216
0.413

0.011
0.010
0.029
0.005

0.206
0.313
0.065
0.135
0.015
0.014
0.682
0.020

0.710
0.791
0.311
0.675
0.745
0.437
0.529
0.757
0.491
0.355
0.092
0.368

0.051
0.084
0.020
0.021
0.185
0.343
0.098
0.130

0.874
0.946
0.406
0.863
0.262
0.702
0.077
0.168

Longer samples (70+)
No refilling
Refilling
W2–6
W4–9
W2–9
(All Coh.)
(All Coh.)
(All Coh.)
(7)
(8)
(9)
0.777
0.591
0.683
0.788
0.489
0.628
0.048
0.350
0.020
0.441
0.546
0.653
0.349
0.585
0.156
0.187
0.419
0.263
0.047
0.294
0.030
0.194
0.545
0.081

A-4

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M
F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M
F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M
F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

Diabetes

High blood
pressure

Arthritis

M
M
M
M

Lung
disease

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

0.007
0.024
0.534
0.013
0.393
0.172
0.990
0.666
0.046
0.032
0.085
0.020
0.071
0.167
0.395
0.082

0.041
0.017
0.042
0.012
0.187
0.276
0.145
0.116

0.093
0.104
0.034
0.025
0.081
0.110
0.382
0.090

0.008
0.043
0.488
0.014
0.074
0.014
0.697
0.132

0.344
0.407
0.657
0.439
0.377
0.284
0.188
0.271

0.189
0.281
0.110
0.101
0.234
0.128
0.025
0.062

0.110
0.177
0.246
0.091
0.243
0.199
0.043
0.085
0.004
0.009
0.777
0.012
0.220
0.121
0.668
0.310

0.386
0.486
0.218
0.295
0.210
0.064
0.023
0.052

0.306
0.236
0.274
0.259

0.552
0.483
0.343
0.504
0.689
0.502
0.010
0.203

0.378
0.492
0.364
0.360

0.493
0.479
0.381
0.470
0.603
0.620
0.013
0.174

0.021
0.032
0.228
0.018

0.087
0.109
0.055
0.031
0.102
0.151
0.313
0.098

0.010
0.047
0.516
0.018
0.083
0.017
0.633
0.133

0.379
0.403
0.601
0.454
0.269
0.179
0.149
0.171

0.403
0.487
0.190
0.291
0.273
0.094
0.026
0.076

0.262
0.227
0.247
0.212

0.270
0.156
0.622
0.349
0.259
0.246
0.472
0.289

0.154
0.051
0.018
0.032
0.053
0.029
0.474
0.072

0.572
0.477
0.086
0.329
0.603
0.585
0.609
0.663

0.154
0.154
0.669
0.235
0.059
0.119
0.084
0.026

0.846
0.594
0.371
0.796

0.928
0.663
0.003
0.342
0.960
0.963
0.409
0.935

0.217
0.138
0.465
0.246
0.759
0.579
0.283
0.667

0.667
0.655
0.672
0.740
0.393
0.403
0.304
0.345

0.526
0.324
0.057
0.250
0.493
0.428
0.617
0.569

0.370
0.395
0.154
0.244

0.363
0.234
0.011
0.145
0.125
0.112
0.404
0.128

0.006
0.018
0.835
0.012
0.049
0.029
0.327
0.047

0.158
0.098
0.483
0.174
0.029
0.021
0.794
0.049

0.421
0.435
0.185
0.343
0.102
0.082
0.161
0.073

0.491
0.318
0.331
0.462

0.399
0.352
0.035
0.240
0.581
0.325
0.276
0.538

0.683
0.416
0.084
0.550
0.111
0.041
0.035
0.052

0.282
0.143
0.134
0.211
0.103
0.061
0.419
0.107

0.253
0.273
0.219
0.213
0.069
0.074
0.584
0.085

0.156
0.064
0.002
0.033

0.053
0.015
0.000
0.005
0.884
0.690
0.009
0.718

0.099
0.074
0.228
0.084
0.186
0.052
0.091
0.130

0.384
0.593
0.071
0.280
0.063
0.068
0.115
0.044

0.496
0.732
0.329
0.474
0.241
0.192
0.255
0.215

0.077
0.072
0.009
0.027

A-5

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

Fall

Hip fracture

Proxy
interview

Cognitive
impairment
F
F
F
F

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

Incontinence

0.020
0.007
0.001
0.000

0.345
0.442
0.250
0.283
0.424
0.326
0.019
0.131
0.005
0.008
0.002
0.000

0.301
0.465
0.254
0.248
0.591
0.378
0.032
0.261

0.492
0.280
0.159
0.348
0.126
0.053
0.430
0.143

0.278
0.436
0.002
0.027

0.597
0.922
0.130
0.413
0.013
0.009
0.000
0.000

0.260
0.283
0.275
0.222
0.010
0.105
0.069
0.004

0.616
0.372
0.494
0.630
0.126
0.092
0.347
0.126

0.904
0.790
0.600
0.913
0.263
0.207
0.592
0.329

0.864
0.763
0.515
0.861
0.402
0.383
0.507
0.438
0.604
0.470
0.275
0.520
0.056
0.051
0.305
0.055

0.285
0.235
0.082
0.142
0.681
0.924
0.296
0.602

0.781
0.597
0.163
0.615
0.351
0.682
0.463
0.373

0.357
0.329
0.080
0.183
0.161
0.486
0.237
0.129

0.287
0.435
0.002
0.026

0.582
0.922
0.144
0.412
0.018
0.013
0.000
0.000

0.256
0.284
0.259
0.213
0.017
0.111
0.078
0.007

0.626
0.384
0.482
0.634
0.248
0.159
0.474
0.278

0.271
0.238
0.077
0.130
0.614
0.903
0.374
0.578

0.417
0.239
0.034
0.160

0.283
0.506
0.236
0.226
0.040
0.017
0.002
0.001

0.711
0.646
0.597
0.750
0.359
0.203
0.003
0.048

0.100
0.193
0.507
0.131
0.044
0.028
0.338
0.047

0.494
0.646
0.010
0.126
0.257
0.396
0.316
0.234

0.057
0.108
0.007
0.006

0.764
0.663
0.134
0.577
0.642
0.884
0.925
0.803

0.790
0.907
0.983
0.925
0.104
0.094
0.686
0.167

0.955
0.997
0.064
0.764
0.549
0.481
0.103
0.342

0.798
0.793
0.015
0.351
0.236
0.337
0.010
0.043

0.445
0.430
0.052
0.285

0.953
0.998
0.009
0.784
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.083
0.086
0.195
0.064
0.000
0.036
0.011
0.000

0.089
0.037
0.296
0.081
0.013
0.005
0.009
0.003

0.195
0.199
0.004
0.048
0.553
0.730
0.175
0.464

0.053
0.013
0.000
0.004

0.482
0.782
0.182
0.414
0.001
0.001
0.004
0.000

0.569
0.302
0.821
0.643
0.097
0.155
0.048
0.051

0.444
0.525
0.261
0.402
0.275
0.111
0.079
0.185

0.540
0.727
0.000
0.134
0.022
0.312
0.048
0.010

0.090
0.127
0.000
0.001

0.444
0.652
0.001
0.185
0.001
0.010
0.000
0.000

0.143
0.043
0.689
0.170
0.006
0.006
0.203
0.005

0.359
0.478
0.015
0.205
0.301
0.073
0.015
0.164

0.185
0.402
0.000
0.000
0.393
0.616
0.002
0.169

A-6
F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M
F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

BMI

Smoke now

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

Depression

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

M
M
M
M

Psychiatric
disease

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

0.211
0.299
0.011
0.042
0.944
0.934
0.065
0.753
0.260
0.251
0.673
0.345
0.009
0.002
0.664
0.019
0.420
0.214
0.625
0.492
0.710
0.504
0.129
0.528

0.419
0.330
0.738
0.531
0.010
0.002
0.249
0.009
0.509
0.242
0.838
0.650
0.366
0.146
0.064
0.182

0.127
0.052
0.004
0.012
0.295
0.365
0.065
0.137

0.288
0.143
0.026
0.089

0.299
0.347
0.078
0.151
0.767
0.856
0.302
0.695

0.075
0.031
0.012
0.012
0.194
0.546
0.110
0.108

0.429
0.245
0.022
0.140

0.151
0.063
0.637
0.210
0.598
0.390
0.217
0.488

0.192
0.096
0.932
0.356
0.011
0.014
0.664
0.022

0.196
0.503
0.086
0.098
0.578
0.478
0.003
0.112

0.164
0.147
0.012
0.031
0.036
0.106
0.110
0.019

0.129
0.068
0.049
0.046

0.158
0.063
0.635
0.219
0.579
0.420
0.424
0.570

0.192
0.104
0.953
0.368
0.015
0.017
0.623
0.028

0.197
0.505
0.107
0.109
0.694
0.581
0.002
0.148

0.154
0.150
0.011
0.028
0.037
0.115
0.080
0.016

0.167
0.113
0.060
0.068

0.267
0.382
0.034
0.097
0.001
0.068
0.539
0.001

0.113
0.127
0.352
0.115
0.000
0.001
0.642
0.000

0.236
0.182
0.001
0.019
0.185
0.209
0.005
0.023

0.711
0.491
0.270
0.622
0.009
0.028
0.674
0.019

0.357
0.408
0.031
0.126

0.760
0.763
0.082
0.525
0.128
0.196
0.721
0.200

0.008
0.025
0.083
0.003
0.353
0.618
0.248
0.290

0.125
0.133
0.000
0.002
0.252
0.125
0.016
0.062

0.075
0.296
0.522
0.102
0.099
0.174
0.004
0.009

0.772
0.705
0.010
0.291

0.085
0.062
0.140
0.060
0.000
0.679
0.459
0.000

0.039
0.018
0.503
0.046
0.000
0.000
0.931
0.000

0.199
0.177
0.000
0.023
0.007
0.007
0.000
0.000

0.074
0.063
0.041
0.033
0.066
0.212
0.428
0.071

0.219
0.166
0.036
0.109

0.421
0.655
0.309
0.396
0.577
0.016
0.400
0.569

0.038
0.027
0.001
0.006
0.000
0.000
0.316
0.000

0.732
0.748
0.000
0.062
0.452
0.414
0.007
0.222

0.945
0.950
0.737
0.958
0.006
0.021
0.076
0.003

0.034
0.052
0.001
0.005

0.031
0.046
0.172
0.024
0.221
0.374
0.305
0.208

0.001
0.000
0.011
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.487
0.000

0.068
0.095
0.000
0.000
0.093
0.041
0.000
0.002

0.175
0.269
0.299
0.162
0.088
0.143
0.035
0.048

0.157
0.228
0.000
0.003

A-7

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

Self-rated
health

0.020
0.047
0.859
0.049
0.016
0.018
0.093
0.008
0.615
0.555
0.303
0.555
0.038
0.024
0.006
0.004
0.006
0.018
0.000
0.000
0.733
0.610
0.004
0.226

0.004
0.022
0.831
0.011
0.067
0.114
0.352
0.069
0.724
0.525
0.230
0.625
0.024
0.011
0.009
0.003
0.376
0.341
0.001
0.044
0.634
0.607
0.020
0.278

0.010
0.018
0.818
0.027
0.004
0.044
0.370
0.005
0.673
0.514
0.368
0.636
0.016
0.003
0.006
0.002
0.151
0.111
0.001
0.009
0.581
0.570
0.034
0.282

0.008
0.019
0.000
0.000
0.650
0.574
0.003
0.169

0.598
0.544
0.281
0.529
0.022
0.014
0.004
0.002

0.019
0.048
0.850
0.046
0.020
0.026
0.131
0.012

0.021
0.078
0.004
0.004
0.033
0.008
0.002
0.002

0.207
0.150
0.021
0.061
0.658
0.633
0.127
0.486

0.518
0.343
0.011
0.170
0.339
0.692
0.232
0.275
0.467
0.312
0.114
0.364
0.009
0.003
0.023
0.003
0.004
0.024
0.000
0.000
0.052
0.019
0.000
0.001

0.493
0.358
0.000
0.001
0.062
0.033
0.000
0.000

0.046
0.031
0.238
0.039
0.026
0.305
0.453
0.029

0.276
0.296
0.668
0.353
0.202
0.069
0.009
0.041

0.133
0.156
0.049
0.052
0.229
0.640
0.068
0.111

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.039
0.009
0.000
0.000

0.108
0.106
0.110
0.075
0.137
0.084
0.001
0.031

0.193
0.181
0.000
0.042
0.397
0.468
0.639
0.433

Notes: Results are for white females (F) and males (M). Abbreviations of tests are as follows: I = Unconditional invariance; I|noS = Invariance, conditional on
non-causality; S|I = Non-causality, conditional on invariance; I&S = Joint invariance and non-causality.

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

IADL
impairment

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

ADL
impairment

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.004
0.006
0.000
0.000

0.442
0.337
0.053
0.335
0.053
0.010
0.000
0.002

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.018
0.264
0.081
0.011

A-8

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M
F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

Heart
disease

Stroke

Mortality
F
F
F
F

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

Cancer

Sex

Test

Health
condition

0.023
0.035
0.062
0.010
0.036
0.004
0.215
0.029
0.044
0.096
0.423
0.048

0.008
0.043
0.167
0.005
0.042
0.006
0.181
0.031

0.017
0.010
0.301
0.016
0.484
0.384
0.216
0.413

0.165
0.321
0.248
0.140

0.043
0.028
0.035
0.016
0.405
0.149
0.071
0.255

0.012
0.007
0.192
0.009
0.380
0.241
0.316
0.352

70+
(1)
0.683
0.628
0.350
0.653
0.349
0.187
0.047
0.194

0.111
0.324
0.033
0.045

0.018
0.052
0.007
0.003
0.001
0.000
0.426
0.001

W2–6
65+
50+
(2)
(3)
0.666 0.889
0.454 0.720
0.367 0.659
0.642 0.909
0.269 0.160
0.096 0.245
0.082 0.179
0.166 0.120

0.491
0.355
0.092
0.368

0.710
0.791
0.311
0.675
0.745
0.437
0.529
0.757

0.073
0.046
0.038
0.029
0.063
0.046
0.775
0.099
0.079
0.105
0.029
0.029

0.874
0.946
0.406
0.863
0.262
0.702
0.077
0.168

70+
(5)
0.777
0.788
0.020
0.546
0.585
0.419
0.294
0.545

0.317
0.288
0.111
0.231

0.690
0.730
0.195
0.616
0.398
0.151
0.673
0.450

0.867
0.864
0.053
0.733
0.336
0.569
0.092
0.234

0.305
0.221
0.005
0.100

0.319
0.377
0.051
0.189
0.025
0.012
0.486
0.030

0.853
0.912
0.041
0.689
0.558
0.485
0.025
0.333

W4–9
65+
50+
(6)
(7)
0.506 0.265
0.513 0.238
0.007 0.064
0.229 0.159
0.623 0.136
0.647 0.119
0.438 0.315
0.620 0.127

0.280
0.199
0.269
0.249

0.199
0.138
0.252
0.172
0.011
0.010
0.958
0.025

0.397
0.749
0.709
0.460
0.523
0.474
0.043
0.336

50–64
(8)
0.388
0.306
0.349
0.370
0.108
0.142
0.689
0.143

Significance levels of tests

0.113
0.144
0.679
0.153
0.601
0.376
0.045
0.384

50–64
(4)
0.126
0.125
0.552
0.151
0.021
0.056
0.993
0.058

No refilling

Table A-3. Tests for invariance and non-causality (All ages)

0.011
0.010
0.029
0.005

0.206
0.313
0.065
0.135
0.015
0.014
0.682
0.020

0.051
0.084
0.020
0.021
0.185
0.343
0.098
0.130

70+
(9)
0.591
0.489
0.048
0.441
0.156
0.263
0.030
0.081

0.002
0.005
0.030
0.001

0.152
0.248
0.027
0.078
0.010
0.008
0.570
0.013

0.057
0.039
0.020
0.023
0.109
0.200
0.084
0.070

0.051
0.130
0.000
0.006

0.201
0.286
0.007
0.078
0.005
0.001
0.082
0.003

0.211
0.112
0.001
0.053
0.480
0.343
0.007
0.245

Refilling
W2–9
65+
50+
(10)
(11)
0.250 0.497
0.078 0.281
0.151 0.077
0.198 0.375
0.024 0.116
0.034 0.112
0.109 0.110
0.015 0.080

0.019
0.033
0.060
0.010

0.008
0.037
0.332
0.008
0.096
0.113
0.630
0.115

0.546
0.520
0.115
0.448
0.117
0.056
0.119
0.083

50–64
(12)
0.410
0.318
0.301
0.383
0.068
0.055
0.917
0.106

A-9

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M
F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M
F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M
F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

Diabetes

High blood
pressure

Arthritis

M
M
M
M

Lung
disease

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

0.363
0.234
0.011
0.145
0.125
0.112
0.404
0.128

0.249
0.215
0.440
0.258
0.115
0.103
0.201
0.090
0.895
0.974
0.110
0.800
0.857
0.869
0.020
0.622

0.198
0.107
0.001
0.032
0.470
0.399
0.168
0.382

0.032
0.037
0.000
0.001
0.391
0.266
0.009
0.145

0.267
0.175
0.291
0.240
0.017
0.020
0.166
0.012

0.071
0.093
0.338
0.069

0.003
0.008
0.690
0.006
0.077
0.048
0.257
0.066

0.305
0.232
0.434
0.311
0.092
0.067
0.723
0.129

0.158
0.098
0.483
0.174
0.029
0.021
0.794
0.049
0.006
0.018
0.835
0.012
0.049
0.029
0.327
0.047

0.511
0.455
0.283
0.465
0.040
0.053
0.210
0.031

0.218
0.138
0.372
0.213

0.421
0.435
0.185
0.343
0.102
0.082
0.161
0.073

0.491
0.318
0.331
0.462

0.656
0.697
0.489
0.664
0.705
0.764
0.040
0.488

0.399
0.352
0.035
0.240
0.581
0.325
0.276
0.538

0.683
0.416
0.084
0.550
0.111
0.041
0.035
0.052

0.282
0.143
0.134
0.211
0.103
0.061
0.419
0.107

0.027
0.020
0.000
0.001
0.729
0.684
0.029
0.481
0.568
0.547
0.708
0.633
0.297
0.456
0.085
0.188

0.253
0.273
0.219
0.213
0.069
0.074
0.584
0.085

0.156
0.064
0.002
0.033

0.537
0.298
0.331
0.504
0.254
0.361
0.893
0.363

0.049
0.045
0.279
0.044

0.592
0.388
0.016
0.356
0.912
0.806
0.058
0.814

0.450
0.255
0.111
0.345
0.686
0.427
0.168
0.604

0.700
0.529
0.116
0.590
0.242
0.135
0.506
0.259

0.159
0.556
0.262
0.140
0.102
0.082
0.464
0.111

0.400
0.254
0.001
0.096

0.629
0.459
0.434
0.626
0.790
0.706
0.017
0.560

0.167
0.236
0.134
0.120
0.506
0.591
0.260
0.458

0.427
0.387
0.000
0.036
0.067
0.110
0.185
0.051

0.153
0.220
0.189
0.120
0.591
0.601
0.014
0.330

0.424
0.178
0.000
0.078

0.271
0.676
0.161
0.211
0.168
0.129
0.269
0.149

0.037
0.080
0.232
0.031
0.264
0.338
0.082
0.173

0.248
0.679
0.000
0.018
0.338
0.569
0.621
0.381

0.216
0.118
0.616
0.253
0.361
0.311
0.021
0.179

0.022
0.005
0.013
0.006

0.053
0.015
0.000
0.005
0.884
0.690
0.009
0.718

0.099
0.074
0.228
0.084
0.186
0.052
0.091
0.130

0.384
0.593
0.071
0.280
0.063
0.068
0.115
0.044

0.496
0.732
0.329
0.474
0.241
0.192
0.255
0.215

0.077
0.072
0.009
0.027

0.153
0.040
0.000
0.029
0.979
0.945
0.001
0.850

0.003
0.012
0.202
0.377
0.633
0.235
0.041
0.001

0.241
0.295
0.004
0.091
0.047
0.016
0.039
0.023

0.516
0.600
0.412
0.512
0.346
0.321
0.026
0.207

0.118
0.081
0.006
0.041

0.502
0.199
0.027
0.333
0.833
0.695
0.000
0.432

0.028
0.079
0.025
0.011
0.111
0.167
0.335
0.106

0.115
0.110
0.000
0.001
0.029
0.016
0.329
0.027

0.347
0.351
0.432
0.349
0.574
0.643
0.004
0.303

0.037
0.007
0.000
0.003

0.565
0.668
0.671
0.605
0.022
0.001
0.053
0.011

0.116
0.202
0.061
0.069
0.401
0.709
0.253
0.364

0.220
0.218
0.000
0.018
0.021
0.115
0.061
0.011

0.606
0.564
0.442
0.605
0.952
0.903
0.096
0.909

0.008
0.001
0.002
0.001

A-10

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

Fall

Hip fracture

Proxy
interview

Cognitive
impairment
F
F
F
F

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

Incontinence

0.445
0.430
0.052
0.285

0.953
0.998
0.009
0.784
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.356
0.395
0.018
0.168

0.792
0.975
0.007
0.490
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.134
0.097
0.206
0.108
0.155
0.384
0.032
0.070

0.066
0.040
0.347
0.064
0.004
0.001
0.049
0.002

0.089
0.037
0.296
0.081
0.013
0.005
0.009
0.003
0.083
0.086
0.195
0.064
0.000
0.036
0.011
0.000

0.256
0.294
0.002
0.059
0.465
0.650
0.023
0.249

0.195
0.199
0.004
0.048
0.553
0.730
0.175
0.464

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
0.519
0.480
0.577
0.553
0.071
0.184
0.000
0.000

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

0.820
0.964
0.000
0.278
0.003
0.001
0.000
0.000

0.231
0.071
0.040
0.116
0.093
0.043
0.190
0.071

0.186
0.096
0.000
0.006
0.644
0.579
0.013
0.356

0.053
0.013
0.000
0.004

0.482
0.782
0.182
0.414
0.001
0.001
0.004
0.000

0.569
0.302
0.821
0.643
0.097
0.155
0.048
0.051

0.444
0.525
0.261
0.402
0.275
0.111
0.079
0.185

0.540
0.727
0.000
0.134
0.022
0.312
0.048
0.010

0.353
0.234
0.000
0.004

0.512
0.745
0.317
0.484
0.005
0.020
0.001
0.000

0.392
0.241
0.713
0.447
0.175
0.202
0.028
0.087

0.544
0.654
0.063
0.399
0.399
0.159
0.013
0.203

0.758
0.918
0.000
0.066
0.257
0.523
0.018
0.121

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

0.059
0.094
0.000
0.001
0.001
0.005
0.000
0.000

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

0.241
0.394
0.000
0.000
0.067
0.171
0.002
0.012

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

0.209
0.130
0.026
0.101
0.105
0.216
0.000
0.010

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

0.824
0.596
0.000
0.320
0.390
0.228
0.028
0.220

0.090
0.127
0.000
0.001

0.444
0.652
0.001
0.185
0.001
0.010
0.000
0.000

0.143
0.043
0.689
0.170
0.006
0.006
0.203
0.005

0.359
0.478
0.015
0.205
0.301
0.073
0.015
0.164

0.185
0.402
0.000
0.000
0.393
0.616
0.002
0.169

0.092
0.154
0.000
0.000

0.202
0.376
0.001
0.054
0.000
0.007
0.221
0.000

0.116
0.040
0.325
0.110
0.026
0.034
0.382
0.026

0.071
0.194
0.039
0.038
0.156
0.030
0.047
0.094

0.321
0.651
0.000
0.001
0.235
0.391
0.000
0.055

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

0.130
0.145
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

0.081
0.079
0.000
0.000
0.051
0.112
0.000
0.004

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

0.093
0.021
0.073
0.059
0.018
0.018
0.000
0.000

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

0.109
0.010
0.001
0.014
0.027
0.005
0.055
0.014

A-11
F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M
F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

BMI

Smoke now

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

Depression

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

M
M
M
M

Psychiatric
disease

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

0.019
0.008
0.221
0.015
0.000
0.000
0.260
0.000
0.065
0.031
0.000
0.010
0.103
0.173
0.002
0.019

0.010
0.005
0.328
0.010
0.000
0.000
0.828
0.000
0.039
0.061
0.046
0.018
0.904
0.000
0.053
0.794

0.039
0.018
0.503
0.046
0.000
0.000
0.931
0.000
0.085
0.062
0.140
0.060
0.000
0.679
0.459
0.000

0.224
0.457
0.000
0.000
0.207
0.064
0.000
0.000

0.858
0.748
0.000
0.260
0.506
0.496
0.248
0.450

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

0.224
0.196
0.000
0.018
0.069
0.039
0.000
0.001

0.034
0.029
0.004
0.006
0.204
0.174
0.280
0.183

0.218
0.344
0.010
0.076

0.199
0.177
0.000
0.023
0.007
0.007
0.000
0.000

0.074
0.063
0.041
0.033
0.066
0.212
0.428
0.071

0.219
0.166
0.036
0.109

0.171
0.161
0.000
0.006
0.351
0.564
0.016
0.162

0.002
0.004
0.437
0.002
0.000
0.000
0.388
0.000

0.438
0.547
0.000
0.001
0.158
0.078
0.000
0.000

0.756
0.741
0.000
0.397
0.790
0.851
0.870
0.856

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

0.421
0.655
0.309
0.396
0.577
0.016
0.400
0.569

0.038
0.027
0.001
0.006
0.000
0.000
0.316
0.000

0.732
0.748
0.000
0.062
0.452
0.414
0.007
0.222

0.945
0.950
0.737
0.958
0.006
0.021
0.076
0.003

0.034
0.052
0.001
0.005

0.231
0.343
0.084
0.159
0.087
0.076
0.302
0.081

0.000
0.000
0.004
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.182
0.000

0.207
0.217
0.000
0.001
0.052
0.045
0.000
0.004

0.757
0.794
0.208
0.701
0.038
0.056
0.018
0.013

0.244
0.347
0.000
0.022

0.073
0.228
0.000
0.005
0.700
0.543
0.000
0.287

0.000
0.000
0.004
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.006
0.000

0.292
0.222
0.000
0.000
0.285
0.109
0.000
0.000

0.615
0.531
0.028
0.410
0.357
0.541
0.049
0.224

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

0.004
0.113
0.000
0.000
0.170
0.315
0.003
0.046

0.000
0.000
0.116
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.102
0.000

0.708
0.802
0.000
0.004
0.233
0.143
0.000
0.003

0.236
0.167
0.027
0.118
0.043
0.159
0.009
0.011

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

0.031
0.046
0.172
0.024
0.221
0.374
0.305
0.208

0.001
0.000
0.011
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.487
0.000

0.068
0.095
0.000
0.000
0.093
0.041
0.000
0.002

0.175
0.269
0.299
0.162
0.088
0.143
0.035
0.048

0.157
0.228
0.000
0.003

0.049
0.031
0.166
0.038
0.415
0.382
0.079
0.325

0.000
0.000
0.008
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.007
0.000

0.175
0.167
0.000
0.000
0.138
0.045
0.000
0.001

0.024
0.033
0.196
0.019
0.013
0.020
0.036
0.006

0.225
0.217
0.000
0.000

0.015
0.007
0.000
0.000
0.087
0.055
0.000
0.002

0.000
0.000
0.002
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.004
0.000

0.293
0.456
0.000
0.000
0.529
0.133
0.000
0.000

0.488
0.340
0.000
0.044
0.260
0.276
0.022
0.144

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

0.038
0.261
0.000
0.000
0.003
0.001
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.042
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.147
0.000

0.827
0.746
0.000
0.000
0.065
0.029
0.000
0.000

0.823
0.885
0.000
0.362
0.747
0.798
0.354
0.730

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

A-12

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

Self-rated
health

0.101
0.072
0.295
0.093
0.011
0.264
0.197
0.009
0.602
0.395
0.056
0.443
0.166
0.092
0.027
0.078
0.001
0.003
0.000
0.000
0.017
0.009
0.000
0.000

0.046
0.031
0.238
0.039
0.026
0.305
0.453
0.029
0.467
0.312
0.114
0.364
0.009
0.003
0.023
0.003
0.004
0.024
0.000
0.000
0.052
0.019
0.000
0.001

0.084
0.056
0.000
0.000
0.216
0.468
0.000
0.000

0.546
0.600
0.007
0.261
0.201
0.251
0.000
0.006

0.577
0.507
0.001
0.199
0.097
0.071
0.000
0.000
0.003
0.014
0.000
0.000
0.020
0.016
0.000
0.000

0.058
0.020
0.000
0.004
0.059
0.019
0.000
0.003

0.066
0.079
0.000
0.002
0.003
0.038
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.039
0.009
0.000
0.000

0.108
0.106
0.110
0.075
0.137
0.084
0.001
0.031

0.193
0.181
0.000
0.042
0.397
0.468
0.639
0.433

0.004
0.003
0.000
0.000
0.016
0.010
0.000
0.000

0.008
0.021
0.030
0.003
0.105
0.082
0.000
0.007

0.210
0.244
0.000
0.012
0.414
0.688
0.034
0.273

0.004
0.005
0.000
0.000
0.021
0.004
0.000
0.000

0.006
0.004
0.000
0.000
0.005
0.021
0.000
0.000

0.024
0.036
0.000
0.000
0.675
0.850
0.000
0.003

0.011
0.005
0.000
0.000
0.063
0.037
0.000
0.000

0.344
0.154
0.003
0.081
0.004
0.015
0.000
0.000

0.068
0.030
0.000
0.000
0.254
0.443
0.000
0.001

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.004
0.006
0.000
0.000

0.442
0.337
0.053
0.335
0.053
0.010
0.000
0.002

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.018
0.264
0.081
0.011

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.003
0.000
0.000

0.243
0.103
0.011
0.129
0.007
0.008
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.180
0.386
0.000
0.036

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.001
0.000
0.000

0.131
0.080
0.000
0.003
0.014
0.005
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.324
0.381
0.000
0.000

0.034
0.009
0.000
0.000
0.011
0.018
0.000
0.000

0.052
0.074
0.003
0.014
0.010
0.014
0.000
0.000

0.051
0.028
0.000
0.000
0.423
0.208
0.000
0.004

Notes: Results are for white females (F) and males (M). Abbreviations of tests are as follows: I = Unconditional invariance; I|noS = Invariance, conditional
on non-causality; S|I = Non-causality, conditional on invariance; I&S = Joint invariance and non-causality.

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

IADL
impairment

F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M

I
I|noS
S|I
I&S
I
I|noS
S|I
I&S

ADL
impairment

