NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EMPLOYMENT, WAGES AND VOTER TURNOUT
Kerwin Kofi Charles
Melvin Stephens Jr.
Working Paper 17270
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17270

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2011

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Kerwin Kofi Charles and Melvin Stephens Jr.. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Employment, Wages and Voter Turnout
Kerwin Kofi Charles and Melvin Stephens Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 17270
August 2011
JEL No. D72,D80,J22
ABSTRACT
This paper argues that, since activities that provide political information are complementary with leisure,
increased labor market activity should lower turnout, but should do so least in prominent elections
where information is ubiquitous. Using official county-level voting data and a variety of OLS and
TSLS models, we find that increases in wages and employment: reduce voter turnout in gubernatorial
elections by a significant amount; have no effect on Presidential turnout; and raise the share of persons
voting in a Presidential election who do not vote on a House of Representative election on the same
ballot. We argue that this pattern (which contradicts some previous findings in the literature) can be
fully accounted for by an information argument, and is either inconsistent with or not fully explicable
by arguments based on citizens’ psychological motivations to vote in good or bad times; changes in
logistical voting costs; or transitory migration. Using individual-level panel data methods and multiple
years’ data from the American National Election Study (ANES) we confirm that increases in employment
lead to less use of the media and reduced political knowledge, and present associational individual
evidence that corroborates our main argument.

Kerwin Kofi Charles
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
kcharles@uchicago.edu
Melvin Stephens Jr.
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
341 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan St.
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
mstep@umich.edu

1.

Introduction
Given the importance of voting as an input into policy-making and as the source of the

legitimacy of democratic government, understanding variation in the decision to vote has been
the subject of substantial research in economics and political science.1 Recent theoretical models
of voting emphasize the effect of information limitations on turnout, arguing that poorly
informed voters may abstain for strategic reasons (Feddersen and Pesendorfer 1996) or because
of disutility associated with uncertainty (Matsusaka 1995), regret (Merlo 2006; Degan and
Merlo Forthcoming), or aversion to ambiguity (Ghirardato and Katz 2002; Ashworth 2011). The
possibility that poorly informed people are more likely to abstain has been adduced as a possible
explanation for well-known voting regularities, including the tendency of those with lower levels
of education to vote less, and for “roll-off”, which is voting on only a subset of elections on the
same ballot (Bullock and Dunn 1996; Degan and Merlo, Forthcoming).
Empirical analysis linking turnout to information has been an active area of recent
research. Various observational studies find that citizens with more political information are
more likely to vote (Palfrey and Poole 1987; Wattenberg et al. 2000; Coupe and Noury 2004).
Laboratory studies in which research subjects are assigned information, have found similar
evidence (Battaglini, Morton, and Palfey 2010). The importance of the media as citizens’
principal source of political information in the real world is demonstrated by Snyder and
Stromberg (2010), who show that voters living in areas with less media coverage know less
about their representatives, who in turn are exert less effort on their constituents’ behalf. Several
recent analyses, studying how turnout is affected by the media and information it provides, show
that voting rises with exogenous expansions and declines with exogenous contractions in the
media (Gentzkow 2005; Lassen 2005; Dellavigna and Kaplan 2007; Gentzkow, Shapiro, and
Sinkinson forthcoming; and Stromberg 2004).
This paper examines a potential connection between information and voting that has
received little previous attention. We study how labor market activity affects turnout, and assess
the extent to which this relationship is attributable to information. Our argument applies familiar
results from labor supply theory and from work on information and voting, and yields a number
of testable predictions. When voters devote more of their time to activities related to market
1

Blais (2000) provides a comprehensive review of variation in turnout across countries, within countries across
election types and population sub-groups, and over time for the same election.

1

work they necessarily spend less time on leisure. Since the mechanisms by which voters are
exposed to political information, such as discussions with friends and family or using the media,
are complementary with leisure, increased labor market activity should leave voters less
informed and thus less likely to vote, if information accounts of voting are correct. 2 This
negative relationship between work activity and voting should be smaller when reduced exposure
to information sources has only a scant effect on people’s political information, as should be true
for elections covered so extensively that knowledge about them is ubiquitous and nearly
unavoidable. An implication of this argument is that roll-off in voting between “bigger” and
“smaller” elections (as suggested by the amount of information generally available about them)
should increase as voters’ work-related activity increases.
The first part of this paper tests these three predictions about turnout. Our analysis
presumes that voters consume less leisure, and are correspondingly less exposed to political
information, when they have abundant opportunities in the labor market – that is, when wages
and employment in their local labor market are high. We treat the relatively small spatial area of
a county as a labor market, and relate county wage and employment information to county-level
turnout data that we have assembled. Much of our analysis focuses on state gubernatorial and
presidential elections, which are both chief executive elections for which voters in all counties in
a state can participate, but which likely receive vastly different amounts of media attention.
Using OLS difference estimators that account for latent county-specific effects and unobserved
state-specific factors that vary across election years, we find that increases in mean county per
capita earnings and mean per capita employment are associated with lower gubernatorial turnout,
but are not related to turnout in presidential contests in a statistically significant way.
To address potential endogeneity bias arising from compositional differences across
counties (due, for example, to better informed voters locating in faster growing counties) and
problems arising from possible mis-measurement of the county labor market variables, we also
estimate Two Stage Least Squares (TSLS) models. In these models, we instrument for changes
2

We do not argue that people receive no political information at work. Instead, we implicitly assume that
information received through media exposure or other leisure-intensive activities is superior to whatever is gleaned
from discussions with a relatively small group of co-workers. Evidence that leisure time is spent on activities likely
to provide information is found in recent work by Krueger and Mueller (2008), who show that consumption of a
particular form of media (television viewing) constitutes fully one third of the “awake” time of the unemployed in
the United States, and that compared to the employed, the unemployed spend nearly twice as much time viewing TV
during the weekday (201 minutes vs. 106 minutes per day) and about 30% more on weekends (209 minutes vs. 162
minutes).

2

in the two labor market measures using exogenous shocks to world oil supply, interacted with the
prior importance of oil, natural gas, or coal production in a county. Shocks to international oil
supplies, arising from exogenous geo-political events, induced sharp changes in domestic
production of oil, natural gas, and coal. Differences in endowment across counties ensured that
international oil shocks affected labor market activity differently across counties within the same
state. Consistent with our expectation that any bias in the OLS estimates is towards zero, the
TSLS results for the gubernatorial elections are of the same sign but are larger in absolute value
than their OLS counterparts. The effects are economically significant, with the preferred TSLS
estimates implying that a 10 percent increase (roughly a standard deviation) in county labor
market activity between elections lowers voter turnout by between 3 to 4 percent. For
presidential election results, by contrast, we find that both the OLS and TSLS estimates are
statistically insignificant and close to zero in magnitude. This pattern of results is robust to a
number of specification checks, including alternative definitions of the instruments and different
metrics for defining labor markets.
The third prediction about turnout we test is whether roll-off varies positively with labor
market activity, a prediction we have not seen previously made or empirically tested. To
conduct this analysis, we need data on two types of elections that typically occur on the same
ballot. Most state gubernatorial elections occur in the U.S. in non-presidential election years so
there are fewer than nine states in which these two types of elections are on the same ballot. For
this part of our analysis, we therefore use data on presidential and House of Representatives
elections, which in every state occur at the same time. Using the county-level data we have
assembled, and accounting for the econometric concerns mentioned above, we find that roll off
between these two types of elections is indeed larger when wages and employment are high.
This result, combined with the evidence about a negative effect of labor market activity on
gubernatorial elections but no effect for the much more intensely covered presidential elections,
strongly suggests that labor market activity affects turnout in a manner predicted by informationbased accounts of voting.
What other explanations might account for the finding that labor market activity
negatively affects turnout in some elections but not others? Transitory cross-state migration is
one possibility. People moving temporarily into a new state might abstain from the state’s
gubernatorial election because their future non-residence in that state assures that the outcome of
3

the state’s gubernatorial contest has no bearing on their future well being. At the same time,
given the national purview of the office, voters might regard the outcome of a presidential
election as important wherever they live and so might vote in those contests even when living in
a state to which they have only temporarily moved. If migrants move towards areas with
relatively better labor market opportunities, this type of voting behavior among them might
generate the different gubernatorial and presidential effects we estimate. 3 This possibility is
particularly important for our preferred TSLS analyses, where the large changes in labor market
opportunities across counties associated with energy price shocks might have been especially
likely to induce substantial migration. We use five-year migration patterns from Census countylevel summary file data to directly study cross-state migration. We show that the migration
associated with the energy shocks over the years studied cannot explain the difference between
gubernatorial and presidential results. This is true even if we assume that all out of state migrants
voted in one type of election but not the other.4
Another possible explanation for the finding that increased labor market activity lowers
turnout for gubernatorial elections comes from Downs’ (1957) classic calculus of voting
theoretical framework. In that framework, citizens vote only if their logistical costs are exceeded
by the utility payoff they receive from being the pivotal voter who changes the outcome of an
election, plus any psychic payoff they get from participating in the democratic process.5 Since
the time cost of standing in line to vote or driving to the polls are higher when the opportunity
cost of time is high, turnout might vary negatively with labor market activity because of
logistical cost reasons.6

But a logistical costs argument would suggest that there should be

negative effects of labor market activity on turnout in all elections, including those for the
President – something we consistently fail to find. Even more persuasive, perhaps, is our finding
3

Notice that migration that permanent, within-state migration, if turnout is governed by a mechanism like the one
described, cannot account for our findings. If migration is permanent, then the outcome of the gubernatorial election
in the receiving states should matter to voters, which suggests they should turnout out to vote by the logic of this
argument. For migration that occurs across counties within a state, voters presumably care as much about the
outcome of the election for state-wide office of governor.
4
Our analysis is limited to the population of U.S citizens, so international immigration likely has little effect on our
estimated results.
5
The instrumentalist concern noted by Downs has long been known to poorly explain observed voting behavior in
elections with large number of voter, as each voter’s probability of being pivotal in such cases is vanishingly small
(see Palfrey and Rosenthal 1985). Recent theoretical work on turnout attempts to explain the presence of both
substantial turnout and substantial abstention in the typical election with many voters.
6
Some logistical costs, such as variation in weather, the costs of voter registration and the time of poll hours have
been shown to affect turnout (See Woldfinger and Rosenstone 1980).

4

that the share of people who vote on only a subset of elections on the very same ballot gets larger
in times when labor market opportunities are abundant. Since people who leave a portion of
their ballot blank have already incurred the logistical costs necessary to vote, larger roll-off when
citizens are more engaged in work related activity could not be due to logistical costs, raising
confidence in an explanation based on information exposure.
The paper next studies the effect of labor supply on media exposure, political
information, and voting using individual-level data from the American National Election Study
(ANES). Analagous to the county-level analysis, it is necessary to account for the fact that
individuals who have high labor supply also have high political participation or information.
Therefore, we exploit the rarely-used panel feature of the ANES to estimate individual fixed
effects models and find that individual-level changes in employment are negatively related to
changes in voters’ political information, precisely as an argument of information exposure would
predict. Various limitations of the self-reported ANES voting data prevent us from testing some
turnout predictions with the ANES data, but such predictions as we are able to test corroborate
the rest of our findings. We also present some corroborative associational evidence. After
reproducing the familiar result that less-informed citizens are less likely to vote, we show that
this effect is largest for political moderates – persons who existing theories of partisanship
suggest rely most on new information for resolving political uncertainty (Achen 2005). We also
show that voter information about presidential elections is nearly always perfect and is much
better than for all other contests. This common sense result implies that exposure to information
probably has little effect on voters’ information for presidential compared to other types of
elections and reconciles our presidential turnout results.
Our analysis extends several branches of existing literature. Most obviously, we add to
the very active research program on voter information and turnout. The paper also adds to the
literature relating market outcomes to voting behavior. An older literature in political science
studies turnout specifically, and tries to distinguish between two hypotheses that are based on
more psychological arguments than the mechanisms emphasized in the economics literature.
The “withdrawal hypothesis” (Brody and Sniderman 1977) posits that turnout should fall when
voters experience reductions in their material circumstances because their preoccupation with

5

financial concerns leads them to ignore acts like voting. 7 The “mobilization hypothesis”
(Scholzman and Verba 1979) argues, by contrast, that voters feeling aggrieved because of
economic difficulty will use the political mechanism to relieve those grievances and thus vote
more. Previous empirical work relating labor market activity to turnout has generally yielded
mixed results, perhaps because it has not addressed the econometric issues we raise, and has
relied on state or national correlations.8 Our turnout results directly contradict the withdrawal
hypothesis.

Moreover, whereas all of our turnout results, including the gubernatorial and

presidential estimates and the results about roll-off, are explicable with the information-based
account we emphasize, only the negative gubernatorial estimates are readily explained by an
argument based on mobilization.
Our work may also be read as adding to the literature on “economic voting.” This
literature has been contributed to by both economists and political scientists and studies the
relationship between labor market outcomes and one specific dimension of voting behavior: the
incumbent’s share of total votes cast.9 10 Turnout has not been studied in this work. The focus on
the voter share is prompted by the controversial argument (see Stigler 1973, 1979) that voters
may, perhaps irrationally, reward or punish politicians for the performance of the labor market.
The information exposure argument we emphasize in our analysis of turnout is a potentially less
controversial theoretical mechanism by which voting and labor market activity might be related.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the empirical
specifications for the analyses of turnout. Section 3 discusses county-level data. Section 4
presents the county-level results, including OLS and TSLS estimates of turnout, results for
migration and the analysis of roll-off. Section 5 presents individual level tests of information and
labor supply and Section 6 concludes.

7

Why agents should be more likely to turn to political action to correct or seek redress for bad outcomes than they
are to turn to political action to reward politicians for good outcomes is not clear, although Lau (1985) suggests that
there might be “negativity bias” in political behavior.
8
Rosenstone (1982) finds that turnout varies positively with economic conditions at the national level, but other
work finds that the positive relationship between turnout and labor market performance is unstable in the US
(Southwell 1988; Arcelus and Meltzer 1975) and is non-monotone in national time series data (Radcliff 1992).
9
See Lewis-Beck and Stegmaier (2000), and Hibbs (2005) for reviews of the economic voting literature.
10
While not part of the economic voting literature, there is also a growing literature studying how economic
conditions affect support for redistributive and other policies. A notable example of recent work in this area is
Brunner, Ross and Washington (2011), who study official ballot returns in California.

6

2.

Organizing Framework and Empirical Specification for Analysis of
Turnout
This section provides a conceptual overview of our reduced form analysis of turnout and

labor market activity. Our framework assumes that a citizen votes when his various benefits
from voting exceeds his various voting costs. Existing theory suggests what these costs and
benefits are. Downs’ (1957) classic framework posits two possible benefits from voting: an
instrumentalist payoff equal to the voter’s utility from changing the election outcome times the
probability that his vote is pivotal in determining the outcome (a payoff which must be zero in
large elections like those we study in this paper); and a psychic payoff from discharging his civic
obligation.

Recent theoretical models of voting, including models with strategically

sophisticated but differentially informed voters (Feddersen and Pesendorfer 1996) and models of
expressive voting with disutility from uncertainty, regret, or ambiguity aversion (see Matsusaka
1995, Merlo 2006, Ghirardato and Katz 2002, Ashworth 2011) stress the role of limited
information. In these models, voters derive utility from participation but will abstain unless they
are sufficiently well informed. The theoretical literature therefore suggests that voters confront
logistical cost of voting, CL , such as standing in line or driving to the polls, and various costs
associated with the lack of knowledge associated with derive from limited information, which we
refer to by the catch-all term uncertainty costs, CU .
Our empirical analysis hinges on the hypothesis that the two types of voting costs
identified in the theoretical literature depend on a voter’s labor market activity, 0 < h < 1. We
assume that at date t in location k there are specific set of logistical challenges g ( t , k ) , such as
traffic or weather. The logistical cost faced by a voter at that place and time may be written as
CL = ah g ( t , k ) + ϕ,

(1)

where ϕ represents idiosyncratic individual factors. The parameter a > 0 captures the fact that
logistical hurdles impose greater burdens on persons more heavily involved in market work. A
voters’ uncertainty costs depend on the information generally available about an election e
occurring at a given time and place, I ( e, t , k ) ; and by the voter’s exposure to that political

7

information, which we assume varies negatively with his labor market activity. 11 We write
uncertainty costs as
CU = − (1 + bh ) I ( e, t , k ) + ζ ,

(2)

where ζ represents idiosyncratic determinants of uncertainty. The parameter −1 < b < 0 ,
implying that increases in available information lower uncertainty costs, with an effect that is
smaller the more time the voter spends on market work rather than on leisure-intensive activities
like consuming media.
Let ω = ζ + ϕ represent all the idiosyncratic determinants of a voter’s voting costs.
Recalling that a citizen votes if D > CL + CU , the probability that the citizen votes (or,
equivalently, the share of citizens who vote), Vkte , is given by

(

)

Vkte = Fω D − h ( ag ( t , k ) − bI ( e, t , k ) ) − I ( e, t , k ) ,

(3)

where Fω is the cdf of the distribution from which ω is drawn. For illustrative simplicity,
assume ω is distributed Uniform [ 0,1].

Then, from (3), the marginal effect of greater labor

market activity on turnout is
∂Vkte
= − ( a g ( t , k ) − bI ( e, k , t ) ) ≤ 0.
∂h

(4)

Expression (4) says that there should be a negative (or at least, non-positive) relationship
between labor market activity and turnout in a given local area, and that this effect should differ
across elections for which there is a priori reason to suppose there are differences in available
information, as summarized by I ( e, k , t ) .
In general, (4) combines the effect of work activity operating through logistical costs and
the effect operating through information exposure. Notice, however, that if there were two
elections, say e and e , occurring at precisely the same time within a given location and
appearing on the same ballot, the effect of an increase in labor market activity on the difference
in turnout across those elections could not be a function of any logistical voting hurdles since
these are precisely the same for the two elections. That is,

11

It bears repeating that we do not deny that people may get information at politics about work. Instead, we merely
argue that leisure intensive activities like watching the media, talking with friends or attending political events are
likely provide more information than that from co-workers.

8

∂ (Vkte − Vkte )
∂h

= − ( ag ( t , k ) − bI ( e, k , t ) ) + ( a g ( t , k ) − bI ( e , k , t ) ) = b ( I ( e, k , t ) −I ( e , k , t ) )

(5)

depends only on the difference in available information about the two elections. The number of
people who “roll-off” between a “bigger” and “smaller” election on the same ballot – the
difference Vkte − Vkte

- should get larger as labor market activity increases. This effect is due

exclusively to the effect of labor market activity on uncertainty costs and would have nothing to
do with logistical costs.
To study these predictions empirically, we choose the following empirical specification
for voter turnout, Vkst , among citizens in county

k

and state s for an election at date t for which

all voters in the state are eligible to participate:
*
Vkst = β0 + β1 X kst + β2 hkst
+ δ k + π st + ηkst .

(6)

In (6), X kst is a vector of observed county-level determinants of turnout, and η kst is an
independent, mean-zero statistical error. The vector δk represents unobserved, fixed
characteristics of counties that determine turnout. The state×year fixed effects π st capture the
effect of state-specific factors for a given election; the quality of challengers, or the amount of
advertising dollars spent in the state, are examples of the type of confound that apply for every
county in a state, differentially by election year. It is worth noting that the ability to account for
state×year specific factors is an important advantage of using county-level rather than state-level
data. These various fixed effects, and the vector of observable controls are meant to account for
most systematic determinants of turnout.
*
, in a county causally affects
We wish to estimate β2 : how labor market activity, hkst

turnout, net of anything occurring elsewhere the state or nationally. We expect this relationship
to be non-positive for any given election, and more negative for elections with smaller amounts
of general information, I ( e, t , k ) . We do not observe information generally available about any
election, but we study two types of elections with state-wide voting for which it is plausible to
assume large differences in information generally available about them: gubernatorial and
presidential elections. One problem with estimating β 2 using (6) is endogeneity bias, arising
from the fact that labor market activity in a county is likely systematically associated with
unobserved county-specific factors, δ k . Latent political activism or the political sophistication of
9

persons in the county are examples of this type of confound. In addition, as denoted by the star
on the variable in (6), indicators of county labor market activity are likely measured with error,
leading to possible attenuation bias in the estimates of bias β 2 .
Consider a differenced version of (6), where Δ k represents the county-level difference
across consecutive election years in a given variable:
*
ΔkVkst = β0 + β1Δk X kst + β2 Δk hkst
+ Δk π st + Δkηkst .

(7)

Equation (7) is purged of the effects of any latent county-specific factors that are fixed over time,
and also controls for state-specific considerations that change across elections. The difference
estimator (7) might not deal with all endogeneity concerns if changes in local labor market
activity are correlated with changes in unmeasured local factors that affect voting behavior

( cov ( Δ E
k

*
kst

)

, Δ kη kst ) ≠ 0 . This could arise, for example, if counties experiencing growth in

earnings see changes in the political sophistication of their residents. Another potential problem
with (7) is that it might exacerbate attenuation bias associated with the mis-measurement of
county labor market conditions relative to the level regression (see Bound et al. 2001).
To deal with both of these potential concerns, we conduct a Two Stage Least Squares
(TSLS) analysis of the difference estimate in (7), in which we instrument for county-specific
*
changes in labor market activity, Δk hkst
. There are two pieces to our instrument: exogenous

shocks to international oil supply; and the degree to which, because of exogenous endowments,
counties differ with respect to their historical production of oil, natural gas, and coal. Shocks to
world oil supply associated with international geo-political events, spur changes in U.S.
production of oil, natural gas, and coal. Differences in endowment across counties ensure that
international supply shocks generate differential changes in county labor market activity across
counties in the same state. Our instruments for between-election changes in county-level labor
market activity are variants of the product
ΔR × I ( county _ size )

(8)

where Δ R is a measure of the international energy shock between election years, and
I ( county _ size ) is a set of indicator variables denoting the importance of oil or coal production

10

in the county.12 The TSLS analysis estimates (7), with the change in measures of local labor
activity replaced by the predicted value from the regression
*
Δk hkst
= a0 + a1ΔR × I ( county _ size ) + a2 Δk X kst + a3Δk π st + Δk ekst

(9)

The TSLS estimates identify the causal effect of labor market activity on turnout, so long
as the exclusion restriction is satisfied – that is, so long as the only mechanism by which
exogenous shocks to international oil supply affect turnout in a county is through labor market
activity in the county. There is, of course, no way to formally test whether the exclusion
restriction holds, but below we discuss and provide direct evidence showing that migration
induced by cross-market differences in labor market opportunity - the most likely reason for
concern about failure of the exclusion restriction - does not matter importantly for our results.

3.

Data for County Turnout Analysis
Throughout, we use two indicators of county labor market activity: log per capita

earnings and log total employment per adult.

The Bureau of Economic Analysis's Regional

Economic Information System (REIS) provides annual county-level data on earnings and
employment beginning in 1969. Earnings include wage and salary disbursements, other labor
income, and proprietors' income. The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) compiles REIS wage and
salary disbursements and employment data using ES-202 filings collected as part of the state
unemployment insurance program. The REIS data on county wages and employment are known
to be measured with some error.13 Our analysis controls for both the level and age distribution of
county population. We obtain county population information disaggregated by age, sex, and race

12

Other authors have used energy shocks to isolate variation in local labor market outcomes. Black et al (2002) use
only coal shocks to study disability payments; Acemoglu et al (2009) study the impact of oil price shocks on areas in
the South with large oil wells to study health spending. Wolfers (2002), using aggregate state data, tests whether
voters are rational by observing whether the share of their votes going to an incumbent increase following after
energy shocks. Wolfer’s analysis differs from our analysis in that does not study turnout and uses aggregate state
data.
13
Some employers with establishments in multiple counties may only report wages and employment ES-202
information at the state-level. These reports are allocated back to counties based on their industry level distribution
by county among employers reporting at the county-level, generating some measurement error. In addition,
components of other labor income and proprietors income such as pension plan contributions, health and life
insurance contributions, and private worker's compensation contributions are only collected at the state-level and
also use an allocation rule to determine county-level totals. Documentation for REIS sources are available on-line
http://www.bea.gov/regional/docs/cd.cfm

11

from the Census Bureau, which reports this data beginning in 1970.14 Unfortunately, population
age distribution information before 1980 is limited to five-year age bands (0 to 4, 5 to 9, etc.).
Our estimates of the number of voting age individuals in a county is therefore calculated as the
number of individuals aged 20 and over.
Our analysis of state-wide elections focuses on gubernatorial and presidential elections
between 1969 and 2000. We compile county-level voting information on these elections from
various sources.

For elections between 1969-1990 we use data from the Inter-University

Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) “General Election Data for the United
States, 1950-1990” (ICPSR study no. 13). For years beyond 1990 we assembled data from the
CQ Press Voting and Elections Collection. We have systematically verified, and corrected when
necessary, outlier values for voter turnout as well as missing data from both data sources. These
corrections are detailed in the Data Appendix. We use data for all states except Alaska, Hawaii,
and Louisiana which are excluded for reasons detailed in the Data Appendix. Voter turnout at
the county-level is constructed by dividing the total number of votes cast in an election by the
Census estimate of the number of individuals ages 20 and over residing in the county.
The TSLS part of our analysis focuses on the effect of energy supply shocks in oil and
coal producing counties in “coal” and “oil” states. Following Black et al. (2002), we define the
“coal” states to be Kentucky, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and West Virginia – the states that span the
country’s large coal seam.

The eleven “oil” states are those with at least 1 percent of annual

state wages in the 1974 County Business Patterns (CBP) in the oil/natural gas industry.15 We
create estimates of the oil/natural gas and coal industry employment in these states using twodigit CBP information from 1974. 16 We define counties as “small”, “medium” or “large”
producers of oil and coal based on whether their 1974 total employment share in oil and gas
production or in coal is, respectively, less than 5%, at least 5% and less than 20%, or at least
20%. The maps in Appendix Figure 1, which depict the distribution of “large”, “medium” and

14

These data are available on-line at http://www.census.gov/popest/archives/. We impute 1969 county population
information by using the 1970 population data.
15
These states are Colorado, Kansas, Mississippi, Montana, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Texas, Utah,
and Wyoming. As noted earlier, our analysis does not include Alaska so it is not part of this list. See Appendix
Table 1 for summary of importance of oil and coal states in “oil” and “coal” states.
16
See Data Appendix for details of how we construct estimates of importance of oil or coal employment share from
CBP data.

12

“small” oil and coal producing counties, illustrate the tremendous variation in the importance of
oil and coal across counties in these states. It is this variation that the TSLS analysis exploits.17
We obtain data on energy prices from the Energy Information Administration's Annual
Energy Review.18 Our TSLS strategy focuses on the years 1969 to 1990, a period of two large
exogenous shocks to the world oil supply: the OPEC oil embargo following the Yom Kippur
War; and the period from the end of 1979 to early 1981, following the overthrowing of the Shah
of Iran and the start of the Iran-Iraq War.19 These events affected both the prices of oil, coal and
natural gas, and the employment in these industries in the U.S., as Figure 1 illustrates.
Oil prices doubled between 1973 and 1974, were stable for several years, then increased
fourfold over a two year period. Prices fell sharply over the next four years to levels in the mid1980s that were slightly lower than those of mid-1970s. Coal prices doubled between 1973 and
1976 but then fell consistently over the next two decades, returning by the late 1990s to 1970s
levels. Real natural gas prices followed a very similar pattern to that for oil prices: a fivefold
increase between 1970 and the early 1980s, then a decline of more than half over the next 6
years. The second panel of the figure shows that national employment in the oil/natural gas and
coal industries closely tracked the movement in prices, with the noteworthy difference that
national employment was not kept artificially flat during various periods, as was true for oil
prices in two periods in the 1970s because of policy decisions.20 Since changes in resource
prices over our sample period are not exclusively the result of energy supply shocks, we use
national employment as our main measure of the energy supply shock when constructing our
instrument.21
17

Importantly, although we characterize states as either “oil” or “coal”, in the empirical work we measure the
importance of both oil and coal in the counties in these states, regardless of whether the county falls is in a state we
call an oil state or coal state. For example, 40% of the mining in the “coal” state of West Virginia is devoted to oil
and gas. Similarly, 15% of the mining in the “oil” state of North Dakota is in coal.
18
Oil prices are the U.S. average first purchase price per barrel, natural gas prices are the wellhead price per
thousand cubic feet, and coal prices are the total price per short ton. National oil and gas industry and coal industry
employment is taken from CBP data.
19
In 1967, when OPEC had a very similar policy response after the Six Day War, the effect on the price of oil was
small and fleeting. In the early 1970s, however, with so much of oil used in the West imported from the Middle
East, matters were quite different.
20
Since the early 1900s, oil production in U.S. has been overseen by various state regulatory boards, such as the
Oklahoma Corporations Commission, the Louisiana Conservation Commission and, most importantly, the Texas
Railroad Commission. Although the specific language outlining each board’s functions and objectives differ from
state to state, these agencies set limits on level of extraction and exploration in their particular states so as to
stabilize price, and prevent over-exploitation of oil reserves.
21
Our results are robust to alternative specifications of the instruments, including results using the international oil
price as the measure of the shock.

13

Table 1 summarizes turnout and labor market outcomes for the counties in our sample. For
elections between 1969 and 2000, turnout across all counties in the U.S. averaged approximately
55% in presidential elections, and 43% in gubernatorial elections. As can be seen from the
number of elections/years observations, the overwhelming majority of gubernatorial elections
during this time period occur in non-presidential years. Average turnout in the oil and coal states
used for the TSLS portion of our analysis, during the years of the energy “boom” (when prices
and production rose sharply) and “bust” (when prices and production sharply fell), is very similar
to mean turnout for the country as a whole over the entire 1969-2000 period.

The table also

shows that both county earnings per capita and employment per adult were slightly lower in the
oil and coal sample than in the rest of the country over the entire period studied.

4.

County Turnout Results

4.1

OLS Presidential and Gubernatorial Estimates
Table 2 presents estimates of specifications based on equations (6) and (7). This table

presents results for all counties in our full sample over the period 1969-2000. The estimates in
column (a) are from pooled cross-sectional regressions based on equation (6) in which county
voter turnout is regressed on a county labor market measure controlling separately for state fixed
effects and year fixed effects, as opposed to state×year fixed effects, and excluding county fixed
effects. Column (b) presents difference estimates based on equation (7) in which the change in
county voter turnout is regressed on the change in the relevant labor market outcome, in order to
account for county fixed effects. These regressions include year effects. The regressions in
column (c) estimate the full specification shown in (7) by replacing the year effects from column
(b) with state×year fixed effects. The movement from (a) to (b) reflects the importance of
controlling for fixed county characteristics; the movement from columns (b) to (c) shows the
importance of factors specific to that particular state×year. We present results separately for
gubernatorial and presidential elections. Finally, this and all similar tables that follow present
separate results for our two measures of labor market conditions (log of per capita earnings and
log of employment per adult), so each entry in the table is from a different regression.
The table shows that in pooled OLS models that control separately for state and time
effects, more labor market activity in a county is associated with higher voter turnout. The
estimated effects are strongly statistically significant for both gubernatorial and presidential

14

elections and for both indicators of labor market activity. The results in (a) are contrary to the
predicted relationship discussed above, but this specification does not account for either fixed
local confounds or state-year specific effects.22 When we account for county-fixed effects in the
difference estimator in column (b), the results are quite different. In particular, the positive point
estimates from the level equation become negative for the gubernatorial elections in these
difference models and both effects are statistically significant.

For presidential elections,

estimating the difference model effectively takes the point estimates to zero for both labor
market measures.

Adding state×year effects to the difference model sharply lowers the

magnitude of the various effects, as shown in column (c). It is interesting that the point estimates
for the gubernatorial elections remain negative (although only one is significant), while those for
presidential elections are all positive but very small.23

4.2

Two Stage Least Squares Presidential and Gubernatorial Estimates
We have noted that estimates from the difference models above might be contaminated

by measurement error and endogeneity bias, which would tend to bias the negative estimates of
labor market activity towards 0 (in the case of measurement error) or even through 0 (in the case
of endogenity bias).24 Our TSLS analysis addresses both of these concerns.
The validity of the TSLS analysis depends on whether exogenous energy supply shocks
affected changes in county labor market outcomes based on the importance of oil or coal
production in the county. Table 3 presents the first stage regressions (9) for counties in the oil
and coal sample, with each column in the table representing a different regression. The results in
panels A and B show that both oil and coal shocks (measured as the change in national
employment in these industries) differentially affected changes in county log per capita earnings

22

The pooled results reproduce the finding of the work in political science which is based on more aggregate data
and so does not control for unobserved fixed effects (see Rosenstone 1982). As we discuss later, attempts to relate
labor market activity and voting using individual level data several problem, but an especially important one is the
paucity of individual panel data on voting which makes it difficult to control for latent person fixed effects – the
analog of fixed county effects in our analysis.
23
This basic pattern of results remains the same under various alternative specifications, including those in which
we use the mean of labor market conditions in the two years preceding the relevant election as the measure of
county labor market performance.
24
Since better educated and richer people are generally more likely to vote, we would expect that counties in which
income or unobserved dimensions of human capital were growing would also exhibit growth in the likelihood of
voting for other reasons.

15

and log employment per adult in counties where the production of the resource was a “small”,
“medium” or “large” share of overall employment.

For example, the point estimates of 0.108

and 0.281 in the first column of panel A imply that a 10% increase in national coal employment
increases per capita earnings in medium and large coal counties by 1 and 3 percent, respectively,
compared to small coal counties. We find similar differential effects in large and medium
relative to small counties for oil supply shocks (the bottom pair of point estimates in each
column); for both measures of labor market performance; and across the different years in which
the two types of elections are held. Notice also that F-statistics are all larger than the threshold of
10 that has been emphasized in the “weak instruments” literature (Staiger and Stock 1997).
Before moving to the TSLS estimates, we present reduced form results where the change in
voter turnout is regressed directly on the exogenous instruments.

These results, presented in

Panel C of Table 3, demonstrate both that energy shocks have a larger impact on voter turnout in
counties in which employment is more dependent on energy production and that these shocks
affect gubernatorial turnout but not presidential turnout. We find that positive shocks to both oil
and coal production significantly lowered voter turnout in “large” counties relative to “small” or
“medium” counties for gubernatorial elections. By contrast, the presidential results indicate that
oil shocks had no differential effect on voter turnout across counties; and coal shocks led to
increased turnout but did so more in medium than in large counties.
Table 4 presents OLS and TSLS estimates of the effect of changes in the two labor
market measures on the change in voter turnout for the sample of oil and coal counties over the
energy boom/bust years. The TSLS estimates of labor market performance on turnout are
negative and, in all but one case, strongly statistically significant for gubernatorial elections. The
fact that these estimates are larger (in absolute value) than the negative OLS point estimates
suggests that measurement error and endogeneity bias affect the latter results in the manner
earlier described. The difference between the gubernatorial elections and the presidential results
is very striking. For presidential elections, both of the TSLS point estimate are positive but
neither is statistically different from zero– just as was the case in the OLS results.
How large are these estimated effects? Applying the TSLS estimates to all of the
counties in the full sample, the coefficient of -0.138 for log earnings per capita in the
gubernatorial regressions implies that a county experiencing a one standard deviation change in
log earnings per capita of 0.113 log points has a reduction in voter turnout between elections of
16

1.6 percentage points. At our estimate of -0.318, a county experiencing a one standard deviation
change in log employment per adult of 0.061 log points has a decline in voter turnout of 1.9
percentage points. Alternatively, we can estimate the impact of labor market fluctuations on
voter turnout during the energy boom and bust. In large oil producing counties, log per capita
earnings changed by 0.4 log points and log employment per adult by roughly 0.2 log points over
the boom and bust cycle. In large coal counties, log per capita earnings changed by 0.25 log
points and log employment per adult by roughly 0.1 log points. Given these swings in earnings
and employment, our estimates imply that changes in labor market activity changed turnout by
between 5.5 and 6.3 percentage points, respectively, in large oil counties and between 3.2 and
3.3 percentage points in large coal counties.

Relative to the mean of 43% across all

gubernatorial elections in the U.S., our implied effects are therefore quite economically
significant.

4.3

Roll-Off and Labor Market Activity
As discussed in Section 2, results relating labor market activity and turnout necessarily

conflate any effect of labor market activity on logistical (or, shoe-leather) costs, and any effects
operating through information exposure and uncertainty. However, if variation in shoe leather
costs mattered importantly for our results, increases in this type of cost should lower turnout for
both gubernatorial and presidential elections, yet we consistently fail to find evidence of any
negative effect on presidential turnout in any of the preceding estimates. 25
To formally assess the possible importance of an effect of market activity on turnout that
operates through logistical costs, we study roll-off between presidential and House of
Representative elections, which for a given area occur on the same ballot and on the same day. 26
Since logistical costs cannot explain the decision to vote in only one of these elections, variation
25

Another reason to doubt that this type of cost appreciably lowers turnout is plausibility: it not obvious that the few
minutes citizens must stand in line to vote are high enough to prevent people from voting.
26
Recall that to study roll-off we need to focus on different types of elections occurring at the same time and in
places where we can use the instrumental variables that allow us to account for measurement error and endogeneity
bias in TSLS analyses. These requirements invalidate gubernatorial/Presidential voting for this part of our analysis.
During the years under study, gubernatorial and Presidential elections occur at the same time in only 9 states.
Moreover, for only 4 of these states do we have measures of the instrumental variables used in our analysis. See the
Data Appendix for details about the compilation and cleaning of the data we use for the county-level House of
Representatives analysis.

.
17

in exposure to information associated with changes in labor market activity is the most plausible
explanation for any finding that roll-off varies systematically with voters’ market activity. An
information based account of voting predicts that the number of people who vote in the more
widely covered election (the presidential contest) but do not vote in the election with less media
coverage (the House of Representatives) should increase as labor market activity increases.
We estimate models of the form
*
Δk ROkst = β0 + β1Δk X kst + β2 Δk hkst
+ Δk π st + Δkηkst .

(10)

*
, and Δk π st represent, as before, county-level changes in observed county
where Δk xkst , Δk hkst

characteristics, labor market conditions, and state×year fixed effects and Δkηkst is the change in a
mean-zero error. The outcome variable ROkst measures roll-off in a given presidential election
year:

the difference in share of persons voting in presidential and House elections, or

ROkst = VkstP − VkstH .

Table 5 presents three sets of estimates: OLS county-level difference results on all
counties over all the years in our sample; OLS county-level difference results for the oil and coal
counties over the “boom” and “bust” years; and TSLS estimates from the latter sample and years.
Each entry in the table presents results from a different regression. Taken as a whole, the results
indicate that the share of people who vote in a presidential election but not in a House election on
the same ballot increases when the labor market is performing better. All of the point estimates
are positive and increase when we instrument for the labor market measure, consistent with the
likely nature of measurement error and endogeneity biased. For the log per capita earnings
measure, the point estimates are statistically significant, and are economically meaningful
relative to the mean of the dependent variable. Although none of the point estimates for the
employment per adult measure are statistically significant, we find it reassuring that all are
positive and generally move in the same direction as the earnings measure. Since this finding
that roll-off rises with increases in labor market activity cannot be the result of changes in
logistical costs, we think it strongly suggests that the negative effect between turnout and labor
market activity (in some elections) mainly reflects the effect of greater labor market activity on
agents’ exposure to political information and their uncertainty.

18

4.4

Robustness Analyses

Alternative Specifications
We conduct a number of robustness analyses for the county turnout results. In one set of
tests, we use alternative specifications of the instrument. For example, we use changes in coal
and oil price instead of changes in national employment in oil and coal.

Also, the main

specification defines the importance of oil and coal production in a county using CBP data from
1974, which is the earliest years for which two-digit data are available. Because these 1974
numbers might partly reflect endogenous responses to oil shocks (the first of which occurred in
1972/73), we use one-digit 1967 CBP data to create an alternative measure of the importance of
county oil and coal employment. Reassuringly, our TSLS results are robust to these alternative
ways of defining the instrument.27
In another robustness exercise, we estimate OLS difference models similar to those
above, but use data for geographic areas larger than counties: State Economic Areas (SEA) and
Economic Sub Regions (ESR).28

There are three benefits to estimating these models. First,

OLS difference models using data from these larger geographic areas do not depend on the
energy shock instruments in any way. So, unlike the county TSLS estimates, they are impervious
to concerns about a violation of exclusion restriction of the energy shock instrument in the
turnout estimates (the possibility that energy shocks changed voting through mechanism other
than labor market activity). Second, measurement error is certain to be smaller with this more
aggregated data than with the smaller county measures. Third, since both SEAs and ESRs are
subsumed within states, models using these data can control for state×year fixed effects, which
we have shown to be important determinants of turnout.
Of course, there are disadvantages of using data for these larger geographic areas. We
are interested in how turnout is affected by voters’ own labor market activity, for which we
believe indicators of labor market opportunity in voters’ specific local labor markets provide
good proxies. The larger the geographic area used to define a “labor market”, the greater the
likelihood that our estimates capture how labor activity in areas outside of where a voter lives
and works affects voting. Economic activity in areas outside of a voter’s own labor market does
27

See Appendix Table 2 for these robustness results.
SEAs are aggregate economic units originally developed for the 1950 Census which consist of either a single
county or a set of contiguous counties which do not cross state lines (Bogue 1951), and ESRs are aggregations of
SEAs. Most states have between 6 to 11 times the number of SEAs as counties.
28

19

not affect the voter’s own time allocation or economic wellbeing, but might still be related to
voting – possibly through some “socio-tropic” concerns. 29 Any such effect would have nothing
do with changes in voting associated with time allocation, whether because of changes in
logistical costs or exposure to information. In addition, in analyses performed on data aggregated
to larger geographic areas it is not possible for formally account for the various local (countyspecific) unobserved factors, δ k , that clearly affect turnout.

Despite these concerns, it is

instructive to see how OLS regressions based on data from larger geographic areas compare to
our preferred TSLS county-level results.
Table 6 shows that the OLS difference estimates with SEA and ESR data are, for
gubernatorial elections, substantially larger than the corresponding OLS county-level estimates
in Table 3. This is precisely what we would expect if the smaller measurement error from using
these more aggregate data reduces attenuation bias. Although these point estimates are negative
and larger than the corresponding OLS estimates, not all of them are statistically significant.
Interestingly, for these regressions as well we find very different results for presidential
elections: none of the presidential effects is statistically significant; and most are positive but
very small, especially in comparison to the gubernatorial results. It bears repeating that we do
not attach the same causal interpretation to these estimates that we do to the preceding results,
for the reasons already mentioned. Nonetheless, we find it reassuring that these estimates
support the conclusions drawn from the earlier main results: for gubernatorial elections,
improvements in labor market conditions lead to reductions in voter turnout; turnout in
presidential elections, by contrast, is either unaffected by changes in local labor market
conditions or else exhibits a small positive response.

Migration
An important consideration that might affect the causal interpretation we place on the
foregoing estimates is transitory internal migration associated with local economic shocks.
Suppose that migrants sort temporarily into areas where labor market conditions are improving.
Suppose further that migrants do not vote in elections dominated by local concerns because they
are either unfamiliar with those concerns or regard them as irrelevant, given their temporary
29

Unlike the individual-based accounts of voting that dominate the literature, socio-tropic models voting posit that
voting decisions are based, in part, how politician performance in office affects people other than the voter himself
(Kinder and Kiewiet 1981).

20

residence in the area.

Finally, suppose that migrants continue to vote in elections whose

outcomes are relevant to them wherever they live in the future. Local labor market activity and
voter turnout would then be negatively related in gubernatorial or House of Representative
elections, the outcomes of which are relevant only for people who are from or plan to live in the
state in the future.

At the same time, these same variables might exhibit no systematic

relationship to turnout in presidential elections, about which voters are presumably interested
wherever in the country they live. In this scenario, the TSLS estimates could be identifying the
effect of migration associated with energy shocks rather than how labor market activity changes
turnout among a given set of voters.
We estimate negative effects of labor market activity on turnout for two gubernatorial
elections and in the House of Representative roll-off analysis. With respect to the gubernatorial
estimates, the concern about migration is important only insofar as migration is from outside the
state; migrants across different counties within a state presumably care about the outcomes of the
state-wide gubernatorial election. Similarly, for House of Representative elections, the concern
is important for migration to or from areas outside the Congressional District, which is spatial
unit (typically a collection of several counties) within a state over which these elections are
contested. Unfortunately, no data source exists with which it is possible to track migration across
Congressional districts. However, we can study within- and out-of-state migration over the
period of the energy price shocks.
The interval of what we have called the energy “boom” and “bust” over which the TSLS
results are estimated is approximately 1970 to 1990.

This is fortunate, as we can use the

question from the 1970, 1980 and 1990 Censuses about where the respondent lived five years
previously to determine how the share of the population new to a county changed across oil and
coal counties over the energy “boom” (1970-1980) and “bust” (1980-1990) periods. These
measures are available at the county-level in Census summary files.30 The first two columns in
Table 7 show how the share of residents who had lived in a different county five years
previously changed differentially in large and medium, compared to small counties. We find that
during the boom, large and medium coal and oil producing counties experienced increases in the
share of their residents who had lived in a different county five years previously, and that these
counties experienced a reduction in the share of such persons during the period of the energy
30

See Data Appendix for further details about Census data used in migration analysis.

21

bust. Again, these estimates represent comparisons to small producing counties – precisely the
comparisons on which the TSLS estimates are based.
The results in the second pair of columns, which examine the change in the share of a
county’s residents who lived in another state five years previously, reveal a different pattern. We
find that during the energy boom there was no statistically significant change in oil or coal
counties’ shares of out of state residents compared to changes in small producing counties. And,
the reduction in the share of state migration during the bust was only a fraction of the overall
relative reduction in the share of persons who from another county. Thus, whereas the energy
supply shocks did indeed occasion greater in- and out-migration into the “large” and “medium”
oil and coal producing counties compared to “small” ones, the overwhelming majority of that
relative migration difference involved people from within the state. Given this, and presuming
that all residents of a state have an interest in state-wide elections irrespective of which county
they live in, these results suggest that the negative gubernatorial county results are not driven by
migration.
We can bound the possible effect of migration on the TSLS turnout estimates over the
boom (when there was no relative out of state migration difference into small, medium and large
counties) and bust (when the statistically significant out-of-state migration differences are small).
Suppose we make the unrealistic assumption that all out of state migrants into a county do not
vote in gubernatorial elections because they did not know or care about these elections in the
state to which they move. The results imply that of the 6.3 estimated percentage point change in
turnout over the boom/bust cycle in large oil counties from the TSLS estimates, at most only 1.7
percentage points is attributable to migration. Similarly, for large and medium coal states,
observed changes in migration cannot explain more than one-third of the 3.3 percentage point
swing in gubernatorial turnout arising from changes in labor market activity over the boom/bust
cycle in large or medium coal counties.

As noted above, we cannot conduct the same sort of

analysis for migration across congressional districts for the House of Representatives results, but
this direct migration evidence suggests that this is mechanism does not appreciably affect the
qualitative conclusions of our analysis.

22

5.

Individual Level Evidence on Information, Voting and Employment
The various county-level turnout results are jointly consistent with the notion that

increased labor market activity reduces voters’ exposure to political information, increases their
uncertainty about some elections, and lowers turnout in those elections. In this section, we
present direct evidence on such aspects of this mechanism as we are able to using individual
level data.
Suppose that the individual labor supply hist of a person i living in state s at time t is
related to the various outcomes of interest yist (information or knowledge, media exposure and
voting) according to the regression model
yist = λ0 + λ1 xist + λ2 hist + α i + π st + ν ist ,

(11)

where xist is a vector of individual level observables, αi is a un-observed fixed person effect, π st
is a vector of state×year fixed effects and ν ist is an error term. The person effect α i is analogous
to the fixed county effect δ k in the county-level turnout analysis, and captures the fact that the
outcomes y are partly determined by unobserved individual traits that also affect the likelihood
of being employed at any point in time. Failure to account for this would tend to bias estimates
of the parameter λ2 . The natural way to account for these latent confounds would be to apply
fixed effects methods to (11), which requires that the data source from which we obtain
individual level data on labor supply, information, media exposure and voting must have a
longitudinal feature, in which the same individual is interviewed across successive election years
and asked about the relevant variables in both years.
We use data from the American National Election Studies (ANES) Cumulative Data File
(Sapiro et al. 2004). The ANES is primarily a repeated cross-sectional survey, conducted in
1948 and every other year since 1952. ANES respondents are interviewed twice during
presidential election years, once in the weeks prior to the election and again in the weeks
following the election. In non-presidential election years, individuals are only interviewed once
following the election. In addition to some demographic information, the ANES reports
respondents’ turnout (based on self-reports of voting), employment status, state of residence, and
provides measures of voters’ political information and their use of various forms of media.
In various years (1956-1960, 1972-1976, and 1992-1996), the ANES has a rarely-used
panel component, in which the same people were interviewed across successive presidential
23

years. During these years the survey provides information about both voters’ level of political
information and their exposure to media. In presidential election years since 1968, the ANES
includes a variable which reflects the ANES interviewer’s assessment of the respondent’s
general level of information about politics and public affairs, based on the respondent’s answers
to various questions over the course of the survey interview. This measure is collected in both
the pre-election and post-election interviews. The interviewer codes his assessment of the
respondent’s level of political information on a five point scale ranging from “very high” to
“very low”. We define a respondent as being informed if the interviewer codes their information
level as “very high” or “fairly high”.
The survey also reports a measure of a respondent’s exposure to campaign information
from multiple media sources. This measure is available in all presidential elections years during
the post-election interview from 1952 to 1996, except for 1988, and a handful of non-presidential
election years. This Media Exposure Index summarizes how many of four different types of
media (t.v., radio, magazines, newspapers) respondents report having gotten information from
about the recently completed election. We use observations for this index for which there are
valid responses for each of the four discrete elements from which this element are constructed.
We define the respondent as being informed if they accessed three or more of these media
sources.
Table 8 presents estimates of the effect of employment on information and media
exposure from individual ANES data. 31 Column (1) presents results from pooled cross-section
models across all available years. Column (2) presents pooled cross-section estimates, but only
for the ANES panel sample. Column (3) shows the results from a difference model – estimated,
of course, on the panel sample.32 We find that in the pooled cross-section, being employed is
very strong and positively correlated with being thought by the interviewer to be a politically
31

The media exposure index is only asked in a post-election survey, so there is an unavoidable slight discrepancy
between the timing of the information questions and the labor supply measures.
32
Comparisons of sample sizes between the interviewer’s assessment of respondent information (Panel A) and the
Media Exposure Index (Panel B) must account for the higher rate of missing data for the Media Exposure Index
arising from three sources. First, the media measures are based on respondent answers to four items while the
interviewers provide an information assessment. Second, the ANES used multiple survey forms in some years such
that not all respondents were asked the same questions in a given year. Roughly half of respondents were not asked
the media questions in 1972 and roughly one-tenth were not asked in 1992. Third, since 1988 the newspaper media
question is only asked for those who first respond that they have read a newspaper during the past. As an example
of the impact on the sample sizes, the number of respondents providing valid observations in adjacent panel years
for column (3) is 672 in 1972-76 and 574 in 1992-96 in Panel A and 644 in 1956-60, 316 in 1972-76, and 348 in
1992-96 in Panel B.

24

informed person, and with being rated highly on the Media Exposure index. For the indicator of
being politically informed, the pooled result is significant in both the full sample and in the panel
sample. For the media exposure measure, the pooled point estimate is significant in the full
sample and large but not statistically different from zero in the panel sample. These results seem
inconsistent with the argument about information exposure, but they are undoubtedly
contaminated by the presence of unobserved person effects, αi , which likely impart positive bias
to the estimates.
The difference-estimator results shown in column (3) differ sharply from the naïve
pooled estimates. Once person-specific fixed effects are accounted for, we find that whether a
person is informed about politics and his level of media exposure are both negatively related to
his being employed, precisely as the argument linking leisure to information exposure predicts.
The results suggest that employment and the two measures of information are positively
associated with unobserved person-specific factors.

The estimated effects for gaining

employment on being informed and for having a high level of media exposure are -.09 and -.07,
respectively. These are both relatively large compared to the means of the two variables of 0.44
and 0.42. These results provide evidence for the mechanism that we have argued best explains
the various county-level turnout results.
Although we have presented various turnout results using official vote totals, it would be
appealing to supplement those findings with individual voting results from the ANES that
correspond to the specifications in Table 8. Unfortunately, several features of the information
the ANES provides about voting makes this difficult or impossible. One problem is that ANES
information on turnout is based on respondents’ self-reports. Voting self-reports have been
shown to be quite unreliable (both in the ANES and elsewhere), with people reporting higher
rates of turnout than suggested by official vote totals (see Katz and Katz 2000). Indeed, the wellknown unreliability of individual turnout reports is one reason we use official county vote totals
to study turnout in the preceding section. The ANES has conducted a validation study, intended
in part to measure the degree of mis-reporting of voting in the survey, which partially spans the
panel years. However, the validation information only verifies whether someone went to the
polls at all; the data cannot be used to ascertain whether someone who reports voting for both,
say, the presidential and House of Representative elections actually voted in only one of these
elections when he went into the voting booth. This is an important limitation, given our interest
25

in differential behavior across election types.

Indeed, the survey does not inquire about

gubernatorial voting at all over the years of the panel.33
We conclude our ANES analysis with some simple associational patterns that have not
been presented in previous work, as far as we know. The results do not directly test the
argument relating labor supply to information, media exposure and turnout but they support the
paper’s main argument and provide some corroboration of our key hypothesis. The first bit of
evidence examines the associational relationship between reported turnout, information and
partisanship. Formal definitions of partisanship (Achen 2005) and intuition suggest that the more
strongly a person identifies with a given political party the less likely he is to modify his relative
preferences over candidates in the face of objective information about politics; candidates’ party
identification effectively becomes all he needs to know to determine which candidate he most
prefers. This implies that, while there should be a negative relationship between reported turnout
and how informed the person is judged by an objective observer, the negative gradient should be
larger for political moderates compared to more strongly partisan voters.
ANES respondents report their political partisanship in a series of questions which are
translated to a seven point scale, ranging from “Strong Democrat”=1, “Independent”=4, through
“Strong Republican”=7. The two graphs in Figure 2 show the share of respondents who reported
having voted in the election, by the respondent’s self-reported partisanship and by their levels of
interviewer-assessed political knowledge and media exposure. The top two lines in each figure
are the average reported turnout rate for informed and un-informed persons of the given
partisanship type; the bottom line in each graph shows the difference in these two means, with
95% confidence interval bands. The figure shows that better informed persons of each
partisanship type were more likely to vote, by between 1.3 and 3.2 statistically significant
percentage points.

The graphs also show that moderates are more sensitive to political

information: the gap in turnout between informed and un-informed moderates is statistically
larger than the corresponding gap for voters at the extremes of the partisanship distribution.

33

Despite these concerns, for robustness we estimated individual first difference results for self-reported ANES
presidential voting (where the expected relationship is zero or very small), and self-reported ANES House of
Representatives voting (which is likely especially affected by mis-reporting). These individual-level Presidential
results line up with the results from official vote totals. The results for reported House of Representatives voting,
unlike all of our other results, show no statistically significant relationship with labor market activity. For reasons
noted, we place little credence in these results.

26

These results are subject to the concerns we have raised about the reliability of reported turnout,
but they are consistent with an information based account of voting.
The second piece of associational evidence provides some individual-level corroboration
for the argument we have made for why voting in presidential elections (unlike other contests) is
not affected by labor market activity. We have argued that this result makes sense in the context
of an information-based model of voting if peoples’ knowledge about presidential contests is
vastly superior to that for other elections, and if it is so close to perfect that less exposure to
political information has scant effect on what people know. We can test this argument directly.
For different types of elections over several survey years, ANES respondents are asked to
rate the candidates in the previous election contest. This “thermometer” scale ranges from 0 to
100.

We categorize respondents as not being able to “recall” a given candidate if when

answering this question they either do not recognize the candidate’s name or they state that they
cannot judge the candidate.

Valid numeric responses are categorized as “recalling” the

candidate. This is the only available measure of information differences across different types of
elections and is available for multiple election types beginning in 1978. It is admittedly quite
coarse and is not elicited for gubernatorial elections. These shortcomings notwithstanding, we
find that the share of respondents who can recall both candidates is 97%, 66% and 45%,
respectively, for presidential, Senate and House elections.

Reassuringly, as we argued in the

county turnout analysis, ignorance about candidates falls the “bigger” (meaning, the likely more
intensely covered) the election.

6.

Discussion and Conclusion
This paper argues that voters’ labor market activity affects voting through two possible

mechanisms: by changing the logistical costs associated with those actions; or by changing
people’s exposure to political information by virtue of changes in their leisure time. These two
hypothesized mechanisms yield different predictions. In particular, whereas the logistical cost
mechanism suggests that turnout should decline with labor market activity in all elections, the
information exposure argument suggests that while this relationship should be negative in
general, it should be much smaller or even zero in elections like that for the President for which

27

information in so widely available that reduced information exposure probably has little effect on
knowledge.

Moreover, while the logistical cost argument makes no obvious prediction about

roll-off (voting in only a subset of elections appearing on a given ballot), the information
exposure and leisure mechanism implies that roll-off between any pair of elections should get
larger as labor market activity increases.
Analysis of turnout using county-level data and a variety of OLS and TSLS analyses
finds evidence that is strongly consistent with the information exposure argument. We find that
increases in local per capita earnings and log employment per adult lead to reductions in voter
turnout in gubernatorial elections and House of Representative voting, but has no effect on
voting in presidential elections. We also show that for elections on the same ballot, for which the
shoe-leather cost to vote on one is the same as the cost of voting on both, the gap between
presidential and House of Representative voting widens with increases in labor market activity.
Our findings are robust to a number of extensions and robustness tests, and we rule out
alternative explanations for our findings, such as migration. We also conduct individual-level
analyses with data from the ANES. We estimate individual panel models, which find that
changes in labor supply are systematically negatively related to changes in media exposure and
an objective measure of voters’ political knowledge. Simple associational evidence further
supports our main argument. We show that the gap in turnout between informed and uninformed
persons is largest for political moderates (people who might be expected to rely most on
information in forming their political judgments), and that information is, indeed, nearly always
perfect in presidential elections compared to other contexts.
Our work extends the burgeoning literature in economics and political economy on
information and voting by focusing on a relationship that has received little previous attention.
The results also suggest some directions for future work. We have focused on the decision to
vote – the most fundamental of voting actions – but our results raise interesting questions about
whether the predictable variation in exposure to information occasioned by changes in labor
market activity affects the behavior of other actors in the political market place. For example,
our analysis treats the information that agents are more or less exposed to because of variation in
their labor market activity as exogenous. However, if political actors can predict when voters
have time to devote to activities that provide political information, this may have an effect of
what information voters observe in equilibrium. For example, the type or amount of political
28

advertising done might vary with predictable changes in voters’ leisure time, or the timing of
controversial political decisions might be similarly strategically timed.
The results may also have implications for future work linking labor market outcomes to
other aspects of voting behavior.

A previous literature on “economic voting” tries to assess

whether voters credit or blame political candidates for economic conditions by relating the
incumbent’s vote share to aggregate measures of labor market activity. Notably, this literature
does not address the decision to vote in the first place, even though the vote share going a
particular candidate obviously depends on which and how many voters turn out to vote. Our
various results suggest that whether economic conditions affect voters’ assessments of candidate
quality or not, labor market conditions also affect turnout by changing voters’ exposure to
political information, with effects that may differ between incumbents and relatively unknown
challengers. An important future challenge for the economic voting literature will thus be to
formally incorporate the turnout decision into both theoretical and empirical analyses of the vote
share, and perhaps to explore the importance of the knowledge/uncertainty mechanism we
discuss in this paper for why one type of candidate might be preferred relative to another in votes
cast.

29

References
Acemoglu, Daron Amy Finkelstein and Matthew J. Notowidigdo 2009. Income and
Health Spending: Evidence from Oil Price Shocks. NBER Working Paper
Achen, Christopher H. 2005. Bayesian Voters and Their Turnout Decisions: Unifying the
Behavioral Literature. Unpublished manuscript.
Ashworth, Scott. 2011.
Unpublished manuscript.

Targeted Campaigns with Ambiguity Averse Voters.

Battaglini, Marco, Rebecca B. Morton, and Thomas R. Palfrey. Forthcoming. The Swing
Voter's Curse in the Laboratory. The Review of Economic Studies.
Black, Dan,Kermit Daniel and Seth Sanders. 2002. The Impact of Economic Conditions
on Participation in Disability Programs: Evidence from the Coal Boom and Bust.
American Economic Review 92(1), March: pp 27-50.
Blais, Andre. 2000. To Vote or Not to Vote: The Merits and Limits of Rational Choice
Theory. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Bogue, Donald J. 1951. State Economic Areas. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Bound, John, Charles C. Brown, and Nancy Mathiowetz. 2001. Measurement Error in
Survey Data. In Handbook of Econometric, edited by E.E. Learner and J.J. Heckman.
New York: North Holland Publishing Pp. 3705-3843..
Brody, Richard A. and Paul M. Sniderman. 1977. From Life Space to Polling Place: The
Relevance of Personal Concerns for Voting Behavior. British Journal of Political Science
7 (March): 337-360.
Brunner, Eric, Stephen L. Ross and Ebonya Washington. 2011. Economics and Policy
Preferences: Causal Evidence of the Impact of Economic Conditions on Support for
Redistribution and Other Ballot Proposals. Review of Economics and Statistics. 93(3):
888-906.
Bullock, Chares S. III and Richard E. Dunn. 1996. Election Roll-Off: A Test of Three
Explanations. Urban Affairs Review 32 (September): 71-86.
Coupe, Thomas and Abdul Noury. 2004. Choosing not to choose: on the link between
information and abstention. Economics Letters 84: 261-65.
Degan, Arianna and Antonio Merlo. Forthcoming. A Structural Model of Turnout and
Voting in Multiple Elections. Journal of the European Economic Association,
Dellvigna, Stefano and Ethan Kaplan. 2007. The Fox News Effect: Media Bias and
Voting. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (August): 1187-1234.

Downs, Anthony. 1957. An Economic Theory of Democracy, New York: Harper and
Row.
Feddersen, Timothy and Wolfgang Pesendorfer. 1996. The Swing Voter's Curse.
American Economic Review, 86(3): 404-24.
Gentzkow, Matthew. 2006. Television and Voter Turnout. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 121 (August): 931-72.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Jesse M. Shapiro and Michael Sinkinson. 2009. Media Market
Structure and Political Participation, forthcoming, American Economic Review.
Ghirardato, Paolo and Jonathan N. Katz. 2002. Indecision Theory: Quality of Information
and Voting Behavior. Unpublished manuscript.
Hibbs, Douglass Hibbs Jr. (2005). Voting and the Macroeconomy,” in The Oxford
Handbook of Political Economy, Barry R. Weingast and Donald Wittman, eds. Oxford
University Press.
Katz, Jonathan N. and Gabriel Katz. Forthcoming. Correcting for Survey Misreports
using Auxiliary Information with an Application to Estimating Turnout, forthcoming
American Journal of Political Science.
Kinder, Donald R. and D. Roderick Kiewiet. 1981. Sociotropic Politics: The American
Case. British Journal of Political Science 11(2): 129-161.
Krueger, Alan and Andreas Mueller. 2008. The Lot of the Unemployed: A Time Use
Perspective. IZA Discussion Paper, # 3490.
Lassen, David, 2005. The Effect of Information on Voter Turnout: Evidence from a
Natural Experiment. American Journal of Political Science, 49(1): 103-18.
Lau, Richard R. 1985. Two Explanations for Negativity Effects in Political Behavior.
American Journal of Political Science, 29: 119-38.
Lewis-Beck, Michael S. and Mary Stegmaier. 2000. Economic Determinants of Electoral
Outcomes. Annual Review of Political Science, 3:183-219.
Matsusaka, John G. 1995. Explaining Voter Turnout Patterns: An Information Theory.
Public Choice, 84(1-2) (July): 91-117.
Matsusaka, John G. and Filip Palda. 1999. Voter Turnout: How Much Can We Explain?
Public Choice, 98:431-46.
Merlo, Antonio. 2006. Whither Political Economy? Theories, Facts and Issues. In
Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Ninth World
Congress, Volume I, ed. Richard Blundell, Whitney K. Newey and Torsten Persson:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 381-421.

Palfrey, Thomas R. and Howard Rosenthal. 1983. Voter Participation and Strategic
Uncertainty,” American Political Science Review, 79, 62-78.
Palmer, Harvey D. and Guy D. Whitten. 1999. Cross-National Analyses of Economic
Voting. Electoral Studies, 18 (1) (March): 49-67.
Peffley, Mark and John T. Williams. 1985. Attributing Presidential Responsibility for
National Economic Problems. American Politics Quarterly, 13 (4) (October): 393-425.
Peffley, Mark. 1984. “The Voter as Juror: Attributing Responsibility for Economic
Conditions.” Political Behavior, 6 (3) (September): 275-294.
Powell, Jr., G. Bingham and Guy D. Whitten (1993). “A Cross-National Analysis of
Economic Voting: Taking Account of the Political Context.” American Journal of
Political Science, 21 (3) (May), pp. 391-414.
Radcliff, Benjamin. 1992. The Welfare State, Turnout and the Economy: A Comparative
Analysis. American Political Science Review, June, 82:2: 444-454..
Rosenstone, Steven J. 1982. Economic Adversity and Voter Turnout. American Journal
of Political Science, 26(1) (February): 25-46.
Sapiro, Virginia, Steven J. Rosenstone, and the National Election Studies. American
National Election Studies Cumulative Data File, 1948-2004 [Computer file]. 13th ICPSR
version. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan, Center for Political Studies [producer],
2005. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
[distributor], 2005.
Scholzman, Kay Lehman and Sidney Verba. 1979. Injury to Insult. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Schuessler, Alexander A. 2000. Expressive Voting. Rationality and Society, 12(1): 87119.
Snyder, James M. and David Stromberg. 2010. Press Coverage and Political
Accountability. Journal of Political Economy, Vol 118(2): 355-408.
Southwell, Patricia L. 1988. The Mobilization Hypothesis and Voter Turnout in
Congressional Elections. Western Political Quarterly, 41(2): 173-88.
Stigler, George J. 1973. Mirco Politics and Macro-Economics: General Economic
Conditions and National Elections. The American Economic Review, 63 (2) (May): 16067.
Stigler, George J. 1975. The Effects of Economic Policies on Votes for the Presidency:
Some Evidence from Recent Elections: Comment. Journal of Law and Economics, 18 (3)
(December):801-02.
Stromberg, David. 2004. Radio Impact on Public Spending. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, CXIX (2004): 189–221.

Wattenberg, Martin, Ian McAllister, and Anthony Salvanto. 2000. How Voting is Like an
SAT Test: An Analysis of American Voter Rolloff. American Politics Quarterly, 28(2):
234-50.
Wolfers, Justin. 2002. Are Voters Rational? Evidence from Gubernatorial Elections.”
Stanford GSB Research Paper no. 1730.
Wolfinger, Ray and Steven Rosenstone. 1980. Who Votes? New Haven: Yale University
Press.

Table 1. Average County Voter Turnout by Election Types, and Average County
Labor Market Conditions. 1969-2000 Elections, for All Counties and Counties
in Oil and Coal States.
All Counties
(All Years)

Counties in Oil
and Coal States.
(Boom/Bust Yrs. Only)

A: Voter Turnout
Gubernatorial
Mean
Std. Dev.
# elections
# of elections in Pres. Yrs

.427
.109
348
74

.417
.113
76
20

Presidential
Mean
Std. Dev.
# elections

.548
.095
376

.556
.079
70

Per capita earnings
Mean
Std. Dev.

17.5
10.1

15.1
5.7

Employment per adult
Mean
Std. Dev.

.757
.218

.728
.169

B: Economic Measures

# County/Years

47446

11996

Data drawn from multiple sources on aggregate voting data.
"Oil" are those in which 1% of 1974 from oil and gas workers.
"Coal" States are four states in the "coal seam": WV, KY, PA, OH. See text for details.

Table 2. The Effect of Local Economic Performance on Voter Participation: County-Level Regresssions for All Counties
in U.S. for 1969-2000 Elections. Pooled OLS and First-Difference (Change Since Last Election) Models.

Pooled OLS

Governor
Difference Models

Pooled OLS

President
Difference Models

(a)

(b)

(c)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(1) Log per capita Earnings

.031
(.005)

-.032
(.012)

-.013
(.005)

.043
(.007)

.001
(.007)

.0003
(.004)

(2) Log Employment per adult

.041
(.009)

-.060
(.029)

-.008
(.007)

.054
(.012)

-.016
(.013)

.009
(.007)

Year Effects

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No

State Effects

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

State*Year Fixed Effects

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

Poplulation Share Controls?

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Local Labor Market
Measure

Observations
22299
19998
19998
24073
21058
Each point estimate in table represents results from a different regression.
Standard errors account for arbitrary forms of clustering within states.
Counties are "medium" if share of employment in oil/coal at least 5% but less than 20%; "large" if share > 20%
All regressions control for Change Since Last Election in: Total Population; % Population Female; % Population:
Black, Race "Other"; % Population Aged 30s, 40s, 50s, 60s, 70+

21058

Table 3. OLS Estimates of Effect Oil and Coal Supply Shocks on Change Since Last Election in County Labor Market Outcomes
and Change in County Voter Participation for 1969-1990 Elections.
A. ∆ County per log Capita
Annual Earnings
President
Governor

B. ∆ County log Employment
per Adult
Governor
President

C. ∆ Voter Turnout
Governor

President

Oil/Coal Supply Shock:
(∆ log Nat. Coal Emp) X I(Medium_Coal_1974)

.108
(.029)

.205
(.045)

.080
(.024)

.067
(.015)

-.014
(.010)

.018
(.008)

(∆ log Nat. Coal Emp) X I(Large_Coal_1974)

.281
(.073)

.340
(.114)

.114
(.014)

.152
(.020)

-.022
(.011)

.004
(.006)

(∆ log Nat. Oil Emp) X I(Medium_Oil_1974)

.041
(.011)

.029
(.020)

.024
(.007)

.007
(.018)

-.006
(.004)

-.005
(.003)

(∆ log Nat. Oil Emp) X I(Large_Oil_1974)

.153
(.028)

.120
(.033)

.060
(.014)

.051
(.022)

-.035
(.005)

-.0002
(.006)

State*Year Fixed Effects
F-Stat on Oil/Coal Instrument

Yes
13.4

Yes
10.9

Yes
19.5

Yes
17.4

Yes

Yes

Observations

4751

4412

4753

4412

4751

4666

Standard errors account for arbitrary forms of clustering within states.
Counties are "medium" if share of employment in oil/coal at least 5% but less than 20%; "large" if share > 20%
All regressions control for Change Since Last Election in: Total Population; % Population Female; % Population: Black, Race "Other"; % Population Aged
30s, 40s, 50s, 60s, 70+

Table 4. OLS and TSLS Estimates of Effect of Change in County-Level Labor Market Outcomes on Change in
Voter Turnout. Gubernatorial and Presidential Elections from 1969-1990 in "Oil" and "Coal" States.
Governor
OLS
TSLS

OLS

TSLS

(1) Log per capita Earnings

-.029
(.008)

-.138
(.047)

-.004
(.003)

.033
(.027)

(2)

-.040
(.012)

-.318
(.105)

.008
(.012)

.068
(.066)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Log Employment per adult

State*Year Fixed Effects

President

Instruments for TSLS Models: National Oil/Coal Employment * I(County "medium"/"large")
Observations

4751

4751

4412

4412

Each point estimate in table represents results from a different regression.
Standard errors account for arbitrary forms of clustering within states.
Counties are "medium" if share of employment in oil/coal at least 5% but less than 20%; "large" if share > 20%
All regressions control for Change Since Last Election in: Total Population; % Population Female; % Population:
Black, Race "Other"; % Population Aged 30s, 40s, 50s, 60s, 70+

Table 5. Estimates of Effect of Local Labor Market Conditions on Presidential/Congressional "Roll-Off"
(Share of County Voting in Presidential Election - Share of County Voting in House Election on Same Ballot).
Outcome: Presidential - Congressional Vote Share
OLS First Difference
Estimates

TSLS First Difference
Estimates

All Counties

Oil and Coal Counties

Oil and Coal Counties

(1) Log per capita Earnings

.012
(.004)

.024
(.013)

.091
(.049)

(2) Log per capita Employment

.019
(.013)

.071
(.039)

.195
(.162)

Yes

Yes

Yes

1972-2000

1972-88

1972-88

.037

.046

.046

19056

3836

3836

Sample
Local Labor Market Measure

State*Year Fixed Effects
Years of Data
Weighted Mean of LEVEL
of Dependent Variable
Observations

Each point estimate in table represents results from a different regression.
Standard errors account for arbitrary forms
All regressions control for total Population; % Population Female; % Population: Black, Race "Other"; % Population aged
30s, 40s, 50s, 60s, 70+
See Data Appendix for details about House elections county data.

Table 6. OLS Estimates of Effect of State Economic Area (SEA)-Level and Economic Sub -Region-Level
Economic Performance on Voter Participation: Regressions for all SEAs and ESRs in U.S. for 1969-2000
Elections. First-Difference (Change Since Last Election) Models.
Governor

President

SEA

ESR

SEA

ESR

(1) Log per capita Earnings

-.027
(.011)

-.046
(.013)

.002
(.009)

-.001
(.010)

(2) Log Employment per adult

-.027
(.018)

-.047
(.032)

.010
(.014)

.021
(.022)

No
Yes

No
Yes

No
Yes

No
Yes

Year Effects
State*Year Fixed Effects

Observations
3058
1581
3191
1666
Each point estimate represents results from a different regression.
Standard errors account for arbitrary forms of clustering within states.
All regressions control for Change Since Last Election in: Total Population; % Population Female; % Population:
Black, Race "Other"; % Population Aged 30s, 40s, 50s, 60s, 70+

Table 7. OLS Estimates of Whether Change in Share of County's Residents Living Outside County and Outside State
Five Years Before, Differs across "Large", "Medium" and "Small" Production Counties in Oil and Coal States
over Energy Shock "Boom" and "Bust".
A. ∆ County Residents who Living
Outside County Five Years Prior

B. ∆ County Residents who Living
Outside State Five Years Prior

1970 to 1980

1980 to 1990

1970 to 1980

1980 to 1990

I(Medium_Coal_1974)

.010
(.005)

-.022
(.004)

.001
(.004)

-.013
(.002)

I(Large_Coal_1974)

.001
(.005)

-.025
(.005)

-.0003
(.006)

-.016
(.004)

I(Medium_Oil_1974)

.022
(.005)

-.020
(.005)

.001
(.007)

.002
(.005)

I(Large_Oil_1974)

-.0001
(.004)

-.047
(.005)

.001
(.002)

-.017
(.007)

Importance of Oil/Coal in County:

State*Year Fixed Effects
F-Stat on Oil/Coal Shock (P-Value)

Yes
7.2 (0.0028)

Yes
33.5 (0.0001)

Yes
0.1 (0.9634)

Yes
13.1 (0.0002)

Observations
1103
1103
1103
1103
Standard errors account for arbitrary forms of clustering within states.
Counties are "medium" if share of employment in oil/coal at least 5% but less than 20%; "large" if share > 20%

Table 8. OLS and Within Individual-Level Estimates of Effect of Being Employed on
Alternative Measures of Political Information and Media Exposure in the
American National Election Study.
(1)
(2)
(3)
Pooled OLS
Within Estimator
Full Sample
Panel Sample
Panel Sample
A:

Interviewer reports R's general level of information about politics/public
affairs
(Mean of Dep. Variable: 0.38 full sample; 0.44 panel sample)

R. Employed?

.069
(.008)

.050
(.026)

-.091
(.038)

Yrs and Sample from
ANES
# Observations
# Unique Respondents

Presidential Election
Years 1968-2004
19227

72-'76,
'92-'96
2492

72-'76,
'92-'96
2492
1246

B:

ANES Media Exposure Index "high": R exposed to political campaign on 3
or more of tv, radio, magazine or newspaper?
(Mean of Dep. Variable: 0.49 full sample; 0.50 panel sample)

R. Employed?

Yrs and Sample from
ANES
# Observations
# Unique Respondents

.030
(.010)

.019
(.021)

-.076
(.043)

Presidential Election
Years 1952-2004
16802

56-'60, '72-'76,
'92-'96
2616

56-'60, '72-'76,
'92-'96
2616
1308

All Regressions Include Constant Term, State*Year Fixed Effects, Age, Age-Squared.
OLS regressions also include dummy variables for whether Respondent Male.
All Regressions weighted using ANES sample weights.
Data from Multiple Years of American National Elections Study. See text for details.

10

1

2
3
4
Gas per Mcf in $2000

5

Oil per Bbl/Coal per Ton in $2000
20
30
40
50
60

A. Real Price of Oil, Natural Gas, and Coal

2000

1990

1980

1970

year
Oil

Coal

Natural Gas

20

10

Employment (in 10,000s)
30
40
50

15
20
Employment (in 10,000s)

60

25

B. National Employment in Oil/Gas and Coal

1970

1980

2000

1990
year

Oil and Gas

Coal

Figure 1: Effect of Energy Supply Shocks on Changes in Price and National Employment in Oil/Gas
and Coal.

0

Probability of Voting
.2
.4
.6
.8

1

A. By Respondent Political Information

Strong
Democrat

Independent

Strong
Republican

Political Identity
Political Info High
Difference in Voting Prob.

Political Info Low
Difference C.I.

0

Probability of Voting
.2
.4
.6
.8

1

B. By Respondent Media Exposure

Strong
Democrat

Independent

Strong
Republican

Political Identity
Media Exposure High
Difference in Voting Prob.

Media Exposure Low
Difference C.I.

Figure 2: Reported Voter Participation, by Alternative Measures of Individual Partisanship

Data Appendix
Matching Across Data Sources
Matching the data from the various sources was facilitated by the use of county FIPS codes.
Merging was based on the modified FIPS codes used by the REIS. These county FIPS codes are
generally the same as the standard FIPS codes with the exception that many independent cities in
Virginia are merged with neighboring counties to create new “counties”. Since most data sources
contain separate observations for these independent cities, these observations are first
summarized according to the definitions of these new counties and then merged by the REIS
FIPS codes. (Independent cities in Maryland, Missouri, and Nevada appear as separate
observations in the REIS data and thus require no further adjustment.)
The voting data available from ICPSR uses the ICPSR county codes as opposed to the FIPS
county codes. A bridge file between FIPS and ICPSR county codes is used to connect the ICPSR
files with the remaining data sources.
To address a small number of counties which are involved in either a merge or a split during our
sample period, we only use observations for these counties from the after the merge or split.
Counties which split during the sample period are Yuma, AZ (creating La Paz, AZ in 1983) and
Valencia, NM (forming Cibola, NM in 1981). Counties which merged during this period are
Washbaugh, SD and Jackson, SD in 1976 as well as Nansemond, VA and Suffolk City, VA. In
addition, a few cities in Virginia annexed parts of surrounding counties including Roanoke City,
VA (annexed part of Roanoke county in 1975), Petersburg City, VA (annexed parts of Dinwiddie,
VA and Prince George, VA in 1972), and Lynchburg City, VA (annexed parts of Bedford, VA
and Campbell,VA in 1975).

County-Level Voting Data
We use county-level voting totals found from three primary sources. For 1969-1990, we use data
from ICPSR study no. 13 “General Election Data for the United States, 1950-1990”. For
subsequent years, Presidential, Senatorial, and Gubernatorial returns were obtained from the CQ
Press Voting and Elections Collection while the Congressional returns were obtained from
Election Data Services, Inc.
We made a number of adjustments to these voting returns to account for incomplete and apparent
incorrect data. First, since the ICPSR data are available for even-numbered years only prior 1980,
gubernatorial elections which occur in odd-numbered year are, for the most part, not found in the
ICPSR data. Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, New Jersey, and Virginia have odd year governor
elections. These data were obtained from the CQ Press Voting and Elections Collection.
However, for some odd-year elections prior to 1972, the election results are incorrectly entered
into an adjacent even year. These observations were moved to the appropriate years.
Second, in some instances all of the data for a single state for a given election during the period in
which the ICPSR data is the primary source was replaced with data from CQ either due to

missing data or numerous suspicious values. A list of these elections is available from the
authors.
A small fraction of individual counties in each year have data that apparent most likely because of
incorrect coding. In some instances, these errors appear to be due to a switch in values for
observations which appear consecutively in the alphabetized county list. In other instances, the
data were incorrectly entered. A list of these counties and elections which have individual
election problems that were corrected is available from the authors. In addition, for
Congressional election data, we investigated the individual county returns whenever the overall
total number of votes recorded for a state in a given year did not match the total number found on
the Election Information webpage for the Clerk of the House of Representatives
(http://clerk.house.gov/member_info/electionInfo/index.html).
We also drop observations due to a lack reported votes on election data. We do not use Louisiana
in our analysis since elections in the state during this period except Presidential elections are
subject to a non-partisan primary in which all candidates from both parties are on the same
primary ballot. A run-off election is held between the top two vote getters, regardless of party,
unless one of the candidates receives at least 50% of the vote in the primary in which case they
are declared the winner. Since the final election varies may not be held on the standard
nationwide general election day, we exclude Louisiana from all of our analysis. We also drop
states in the roll-off analysis that do not report vote totals in uncontested elections which include
Arkansas, Florida, Louisiana, and Oklahoma. In addition, due to a lack of available county-level
Congressional returns in many years, we do not use Pennsylvania in the roll-off elections either.
Finally, there are two elections that meet all of criteria discussed above or earlier in the text that
we still drop. The Arkansas 1990 Senate election is dropped because counties do not report vote
totals due to the fact under state law election results for unopposed elections need not be reported.
The Georgia 1992 Senate final election was a runoff election held on November 24th since no
candidate received at least 50 percent of the vote on November 3rd.

Defining Coal and Oil States and County Employment Share in Oil and Coal
We construct a measure of the importance of the oil and gas industry and the coal industry in the
various counties within these states using County Business Patterns (CBP). Since 1974, CBP data
have been based on the Census Bureau's Standard Statistical Establishment List. Because of the
risk of disclosing firm specific information, exact employment numbers for two-digit industries
such as coal and oil and gas are not available at the county-level. However, the CBP provides
county-level information on both the number of firms in each two-digit industry and the number
of firms that fall into a specific firm-size category (e.g., 20 to 49 employees) for these industries.
By weighting the number of firms in a firm-size category by the mid-point of the number of
employees in that category, we create an estimate of the number of employees in each two-digit
industry at the county-level. We then create county-level estimated employment shares by
industry as the ratio of the estimated industry employment to the estimated total county

employment where the total county employment is also estimated by using the firm-size
methodology.
CBP data for 1970-1976 were obtained from UCLA's Institute for Social Science Research Data
Archive through the kind help of Libbie Stephenson. CBP Data for 1977-1996 and 1998-1999
was obtained from ICPSR with the remaining years being obtained from the U.S. Census Bureau.
CBP data for 1967 were obtained from the University of Wisconsin's Data and Information
Services Center through the kind help of Cynthia Severt.

Microdata from the American National Election Survey (ANES)
We use microdata from the 1948-2004 American National Election Studies (ANES) Cumulative
Data File (Sapiro et al. 2004) which is ICPSR Study no. 8475. For our cross-sectional analysis,
we restrict the sample to observations with non-missing data for gender, age, and employment
status. For our panel analysis, it is important to note that the ANES includes one observation per
household in each survey although that the same individual from the household may not be
interviewed in all both periods. We use the following approach to link individuals the two
observations for an individual which are spaced four years apart. We first use the unique
household identifier variable VCF0006A to link observations from the same household across the
two survey waves. We then only use linked observations for the same household if a) the
respondent’s gender is the same across both waves and b) the difference in the respondent’s age
between the two survey waves is within two years of the expected four year age difference (i.e.,
the age change is between two and six years). The respondent’s gender is the same in over 99
percent of the linked household observations while the age difference is between two and six
years in over 96 percent of the linked household observations (over 93% of the age differences
are between three and five years while 81% of observations have exactly a four year age
difference).

Census County-Level Migration Data
We obtain county-level migration rates using the Summary Tape File 4 data of the 1970, 1980,
and 1990 Censuses, made available through the National Historical Geographic Information
System. In each of these Census years, a sample of households is asked whether each household
member lived in the same house five years before the Census date and, for each one that did not,
the county, state, and/or country of residence five years earlier is ascertained. The fraction of the
population sampled for this question is 15% in 1970, ~19% in 1980, and ~17% in 1990. The
Census Bureau then creates county-level estimates on the number of migrants based on these
responses. The full Census is used to enumerate the number of persons ages 5 and over that
reside in the county as of the Census date. The Census Bureau imputes age and place of
residence five years earlier if the necessary information is missing or incomplete on the Census
form. We only use the non-allocated (i.e., non-imputed) counts to compute county-level
migration rates.

Appendix Table 1 -Top Twenty Five Mining States By 1974 CBP Employment Shares

Percent of
1974 CBP
Employment
from Mining

Wyoming
West Virginia
New Mexico
Louisiana
Montana
Kentucky
Arizona
Alaska

Oklahoma
Utah
Texas
Colorado
Nevada

Kansas
South Dakota
Idaho
Virginia

Pennsylvania
North Dakota
Mississippi
Minnesota
Alabama
Arkansas
Tennessee

Ohio

15.8%
13.3%
7.8%
5.9%
4.3%
4.3%
4.1%
3.9%
3.9%
3.7%
3.2%
2.2%
2.1%
1.8%
1.7%
1.6%
1.4%
1.2%
1.2%
1.1%
1.1%
1.0%
0.8%
0.7%
0.7%

1974 CBP Share of
mining establishments
found in:
Oil and Gas
Coal

77%
40%
82%
88%
66%
16%
21%
70%
90%
47%
88%
58%
14%
85%
21%
10%
4%
25%
65%
81%
9%
23%
66%
9%
39%

5%
53%
1%
0%
5%
74%
2%
3%
1%
5%
0%
6%
N/A
1%
N/A
N/A
67%
50%
15%
N/A
1%
34%
3%
41%
20%

Notes: States in bold are "Oil States" in our analysis; States in italics are "Coal States"

1967 CMI Share of
mining establishments
found in:
Oil and Gas
Coal

81%
40%
82%
92%
66%
28%
22%
59%
94%
36%
94%
50%
11%
86%
22%
1%
1%
26%
63%
81%
3%
15%
67%
5%
40%

4%
57%
2%
0%
5%
60%
1%
4%
1%
10%
0%
11%
0%
1%
4%
0%
78%
56%
19%
0%
0%
44%
4%
39%
22%

Appendix Table 2. TSLS Estimates of Change in County Labor Market Outcomes on Change in Voter Turnout under Alternative
Specifications of Oil and Coal Shock Instruments.
Governor

Senate

Endogenous Regressor

President

Endogenous Regressor

Endogenous Regressor

∆ County per
Capita Annual
Earnings

∆ County
Log Employment
per Adult

∆ County per
Capita Annual
Earnings

∆ County
Log Employment
per Adult

∆ County per
Capita Annual
Earnings

∆ County
Log Employment
per Adult

1. (∆ National Coal/Oil Employment ) X
I("medium", "large" Oil/Coal 1967)
F-Stat on Excluded Instuments

-.067
(.026)
17.4

-.113
(.064)
49.1

-.042
(.022)
13.3

-.079
(.087)
44.3

.041
(.024)
6.2

.078
(.057)
29.8

2. (∆ Coal/Oil Price ) X
I("medium", "large" Oil/Coal 1974)
F-Stat on Excluded Instuments

-.171
(.029)
27.8

-.352
(.080)
38.0

-.044
(.046)
13.7

-.099
(.134)
27.7

.050
(.048)
15.6

.113
(.114)
87.2

3. (∆ Oil/Coal Price) X
I("medium", "large" Oil/Coal 1967)
F-Stat on Excluded Instuments

-.157
(.033)
19.4

-.286
(.077)
35.3

-.027
(.036)
16.3

-.078
(.078)
15.0

.068
(.032)
15.1

.127
(.073)
47.5

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Instrument Specification:

State*Year Fixed Effects

Observations
4751
4753
6014
6016
4412
Each point estimate in table represents results from a different regression. Standard errors account for arbitrary forms of clustering within states.
Counties are "medium" if share of employment in oil/coal at least 5% but less than 20%; "large" if share > 20%
All regressions control for Change Since Last Election in: Total Population; % Population Female; % Population: Black, Race "Other"; % Population Aged
30s, 40s, 50s, 60s, 70+

4414

Appendix Figure 1. Distribution of Small, Medium and Large Producing Counties in "Oil" and
"Coal" States.

