NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MUNICIPAL EMPLOYMENT, MUNICIPAL
UNIONS, AND DEMAND FOR
MUNICIPAL SERVICES

Jeffrey S. Zax

Working Paper No. 1728

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1985

The Social Science Research Council
generously supported the
research presented in this paper through grant SS-25-83--04. Roo
Canf-jeld assisted, indispensioly, with the empirical analysis.
John Bound, Richard Freeman,
Harry Holzer, Casey Ichniowski and John
Kain have been generous with
constructive comments. The research
reported here is part of the NBERts research
program -in Labor
Studies and project in Government
Budgets. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBEP. Working Paper #1728
Octcber 1985

Municipal

Erployrrent,

Municipal Unions,

and Demand for Municipal Services

ABSTR7cr

Municipal

unions may often use their own

votes and those of sympathetic

fellow citizens to promote increases in demand for municipal services.
If successful, this strategy can increase member employment levels

withoutsacri.ficingcompensation Municipal employeeunjonjzat sig—
nifcmntIy increases levels of annual manhours and employment per
capita, and reduces annual hours of work per employee. The net effect of

average unionization levels is to increase employees per capita by at
least 4.7,, and manhours per capita by at least 3.3/., over levels that

would prevail in the absence of municipal unions. These effects occur
almost entirely in functions with recognized bargaining units. In these
functions, employment levels are at least 9.9Y higher than they would be
in the absence of unionization.

Professor Jeffrey Zax

Departnent of Economics
Queen's College
Flushing, NY 11367

A Boston

firefighter and two Boston Housing Authority p01 ice
officers were among seven men indicted yesterday in connection
with an arson ring alleged to have set 163 nighttime fires
during 1982-83 in an attempt to force pub] Ic
to hire
more p01 ice and firefighters."
Boston Globe, 26 July 1984.

officials

Unions in the private sector place positive value on member employment

as well as on member compensation. However, private

sector unions in-

crease only compensation. They restrict labor and output supplies in
order to increase wages, at the same time encouraging substitution of
nonlabor factors for union members, and reductions in total output. In
consequence, private sector unions have negligible or negative effects
on employment.

Union control over labor supply and output levels contributes to
union power in the local public sector, as well. These unions also

exercise influence over output demand. Arson by firemen is, presumably,
among the most extreme techniQues b> which municipal erncloyees generate
demand for the services they provide. More often, local public sector
unions promote their services to other citi2ens through political activities, and encourage members to exercise their own

franchise

in favor

of service expansions. Municipal unions are distinctive both for these

strateges and for the results they obtain; the> increase

municipal

employment, as well as compensation levels.

The

first sectjor

o this study explores the relationships between

union activity and employment levels. It demonstrates that equilibrium
employment levels should increase

unions can stimulate demand for

output. it al so demonstrates that ord nan 1>, union ernp I oyrnent

efec ts

should increase with union strenQth.

The second section presents rearessions which etirrae that ernpJ'—
ment per capita in municipal functions with average uricn characteristics is, atrninirriurn, 4.7> greater than in functions lacHngunioniza—

tion. However1 only the strongest municipal unions achieve significant
employment gains. Employment in municipal functions represented by

recognized bargaining units is at least 9.9< greater than in unorganized

functions. This nearl' matches the 1O.7 increase in tctal compensation
per hour worked obtained in these same functions. These employment gains
are plausibly the result of increases in output demand they are nearly'
matched by increases of ?.7Y in manhours of service per capita.

I.

Unionization andEmployment

Local public sector employees often promote general increases in demand
for their services. They are frequently constituents as well as
employees of their local governments. They are thereby entitled to a

voice in the determination of demand for their own servces. In add—
flon, other members of their community may because of their expertise,
respect their opinions with regards to appropriate service levels. In
consequerrce, local public sector employees are likely to have important

influence on output demand. They should be able to use this influence to
improve their own job security through increases in local public sector
employment.

—2--

A. Employment and Output Demand

Local pubHc sector workers employ a number of techniques in the exer—
cisc o-f their influence. Arson with the intent to stimulate demand for

protective services is both the least savory and the least common.
Teacher campaigns for increased teacher—student ratios and police campaigns for larger patrol car teams are examples of more common techniques. These campaigns serve two purposes; they

are at once civic—

minded attempts to arouse interest in the quality of public service, and
strategies to improve public employee job security.

More generally, local public sector employees can wield substantial
political power. They are a powerful lobby for many reasons; they are
numerous, they take an active interest in

many government decisions,

their interests are well—defined, and they are familiar with the manner
in which government business is conducted. The extent o-f their abil ity

to

affect public policy through daily occupational interactions, labor

relations negotiations and political lobbying with elected public officials is unknown. However, as an example, estimated effects of local

public employees on public spending referenda are impressive.

As a specific example, the Boston Globe of 4 September 1981 reported
(pg. 16) 111n a press conference yesterday, Edward O'Reilly (President of the Boston Firefighter's Association) charged Boston Mayor
(Kevin H..) White and Boston Fire Cornrnisioner George H. Paul with
misleading the public on the issue of fire safety and said he wanted
all 116 (recently) laid off firefighters rehired to provide 'minimum
-fire protection for the city'." (pg. 16) O'Reilly made his remarks
at the site of a fatal multiple—alarm fire.

—

—

Grarni ich/Rubinfeld (1982b) report that local pubi Ic sector employees

In Michigan were more likely to vote in a referendum on budget 1 imita—

tions than other citizens and more likely to vote for increased levels
of government revenues and expenditures. LaddA4ilson report similar

results for Massachusetts. These authors estimate that public employee

votes accounted for 5—7 of the difference between votes for and against
limitations. The vote of public employees, themselves, in elections that
concern them probably underestimates their total influence. They may
also generate considerable support from people not on publ Ic payroll.
Barnum./Helburn examine the results of Texas referenda over the

ieal status of public sector bargaining. They report that, in cities
where police and fire functions cooperated in promoting legalized bar—

gaining, the total vote in favor was increased by 15.

Union—induced increases in demand for local public services should
increase derived demands for employment, and equilibrium employment
levels, if production functions, elasticities of factor and output

supply are unexceptional. The success of local public sector employees
in this strategy depends on their level- of organisation. Organized

employees can more effectively encourage demand for public services,
because their political activities are better coordinated. Organized
employees can more effectively take advantage of increased demands for
labor, because they can control labor supply.

simple model of surplus maximization demonstrates that local public
sector unions can increase equilibrium employment levels If they can
stimulate demand for output. Local governments choose capital and labor

—4—

levels to maximize the difference between revenues and costs subject to

production functions, known demands for output, fixed prices for capital
and union—determined wages for labor. Unions set wage demands on the
basis of their bargaining strength. They may also influence levels of
output demand, with the extent of influence again dependent of strength.

Formally, q represents output levels, K gives the level of capital
employed, and L gives the level of labor employed. Output is produced

according to a Cobb—Douqlas production function

1-p

q=L K
(1)

where o

<

p < •

2

Demand for output is a log—linear function of output price p, and
consumer income y.

Demand also depends on a multiplicative function f

union strength, 1(u), where u is a positive index of union power. The
demand function is:

q

a1u) p

2 y3

The Cobb—Douglas production function is commonly used to
represent
production in the local public sector. BorcherdinQ/Deacor, and
Grarni ich/Rubinfeld (1982a) are examples.

This form j commonly used to represent demand for local public
goods (Mieszkowskj,'Stejn, Bergstrom./Goodmar, Borcherding/Deacon and
Grarnl ich/Rubjn.feld (1982a)). Local public Qocds are effectivel>'
private goods in consumption (Bergstrom/Goodman,
Bcrcherding/Deacon
and Grarrlich'Rubjnfe1d (1982a)).

——

with a2, a3 > 0. Unions have no effect on demand in the absence of
organization ——
?

——

a1(0)

I —— the>' have either no or potive effects ——

1 ——and either fixed or ncreasinQ effects jr union strength

a1'(u)

0.

Costs depend on the price of capital

r, and wages. The waQe demanded

by unions, w(u), is an increasing function of union strength. LuJaqes are

set at competitive levels in the absence of unions w(O)=w,

Local

public sector employers maximize surpluses,

p<q)q —

w(u)L

—

rK
:3 :

subject

to equations I and 2.

These equations give optimal local public sector employment levels in
natural logarithms as:

lnLe1 lnr+$2lnw(u)

In this model, as in the private sector models of Oswald,
Blair/Crauiford, Dertouzos./Pencavel, Farber (1978> and Pencavel
<1984a), unions are restricted by labor demands. They may set wages,
but employers are free to choose surplus—maximizing employment
level s.

Niskaner, demonstrates that public manager; seek to maximize the
difference between budget allocations and the costs of providing
service under typical bureaucratic incentive structures. Inman
(1982) and Ott adopt this objective function in their appi icat ions.

-6—

a3
+

— in
2

u2

y

+ — in

a (U)

2

a2
(4)

where

01 =

— a2 'a21) (1—P) < 0 if a2 > 1

and

02 =

a2

(1-P(1-a2))

< 0

Optimal local pub] ft sector employment is a neqative function of wages,

a negative function of capital prices if output demand is elastic, and
positive function of demand characteristics. 6 In particular, pubi ft
sector employment is a positive function of union—induced increases

in

public service demand, a1(u).

Equation 4 predicts that local public sector unions may be able to
increase employment1 as well as wages, above levels which would prevail
in the absence of employee organization through their influence on

6

symmetrical condition gives optimal capital levels.

a

7

public service demand.

Beneck and Inman (1981) report prel irninary

evidence which supports this prediction. Benecki finds positive employment effects of municipal unions in a large sample of small cities.
However, these effects are absent or reversed in his three samples of
larger cities. Inman finds positive union employment effects for police
and 'fire functions in a small sample of big cities. The results reported

in the next section demonstrate that municipal unions increase employ—
rnent, as well as compensation levels, in a large sample of American
cit I es.

The derivative of equation 4 with respect to u, union power,
demonstrates that public unions with greater influence over output
demand will often enjoy greater employment gains than will those with
less

LlnL
________

I

C

Lu

U
ULw
—
— — (1—.ø(1—a)) — — ]
I

=

t

2

I

ua2

u

wLu

1

=

C

11

—

(1—P(1—

2

2

)) 1)

2

3

ua2
(5)

Here,

7

is the elasticity of public service demand and 1)

is the elas—

Courant/Gramlich./Rubinfeld also present a model in which, within a
broad range of activity, local public employees can raise their oi.n
employment levels. Theirs is a general equil ibrium model, with its
emphasis on redistribution through local government. In contrast,
the partial equil ibrium approach adopted here emphasizes the production of local public services.

-8--

tic it>' of

wages with respect to unionization, Union power tends to

increase employment levels through induced increases in output demand,
but also to reduce employment through employer reactions to compensation
increases. Equation 5 states that optimal employment levels increase

with u if output demand is sufficiently more elastic with respect to u
than are wages. This is morel ikely to be the case when labor is
prominent in the production function —— P is high —— because
production
increases require large amounts of additional labor. It is also more

likely if output demand is insensitive to price ——

is

low —— because

equilibrium output levels need not fall dramatically when employers
increase prices to cover union compensation gains. Both these conditions

are likely to hold for local public services.

Previous studies do not offer any evidence with regard to the irn—
plicatior,s of equationS. Differences in union strength and elasticities
of local public output demand with respect to union power have not been

measured. The next section uses a new categorization of union strength
(Zax) to test these implications indirectly: If municipal union strength
does not have a signif icant, posit ive relat lonship with un ion employmm t

effects, than municipal unions do not substantially alter demand for
muri i

ci pal

services.

8
Bergstrom.'0oodman and Grami ich/Rubinfeld (1982a) report price or tax
share elastic ties of demand for munictpal services between zero and
—1. Mieszkowsk i/Stein conclude that a value of —.5 is representative
of most estimates. Borcherdirig,/Deacor
estimate marx elasticities
the same ranqe, thouQh they also report elasticities less than —1
for some municipal services. In 1980. municipal expenditures for
salaries and tages represented 47.9> of total general expenditure
'Bureau of the Census:).

ir

—>'—

B. Employment and

Efficient

Contracts

Positive union effects on local public sector employment are one
manifestation of union influence or the demand for local public services.

However, positive effects do not prove conclusively that unions stimulate demand. Union employment effects could possibly be positive as the
result of union activity on the supply side of the local public service
market; if local public sector employment conditions a'e inefficient in
the absence of unions, and unions negotiate efficient contracts. The

empirical evidence presented in the next section does not address this

issue directly. However, comparisons between union employment eects in
the private and public sectors sucqest that it is probabi unimportant.

Unions affect employment levels throuh the supply of output with
monopoly control over labor supply. In the exercise of that control,
they may aspire to any bargain which does not preclude employment —— any

bargain under which total employment costs do not exceed the total value
of employee product.

Union gains may be taken as increases in wages, employment, or both.

The value of employee product may itself, depend upon union behavior. Employers, under union provocation or with union cooperation, may alter their supply behavior in output markets so as to
increase profits. Unions can encourage employers to exercise monopoly power <i.4arren—Boulton), assist employers to collude in output
markets (Maloney/HcCormick/Tollison), arid encourage government
protection for cartels <this issue is one of many discussed in
Simon). If these initiatives alter output supply functions,
employers will alter their derived demands for labor.
— 10

—

The allocation of union gains depends upon relative preferences of
unions and employers for the two, and on the bargaining process. Collective bargains will always set wage levels at or above those set by the

competitive market. In simple monopoly models of unionism, increased
wages imply reduced employment. However, employment under efficient
bargains will typically exceed competitive levels, as well.

Unions have no effect on efficient employment levels in only the
special case where union objective functions depend exclusively on wage
levels.

10

Here, the labor demand function is also the contract curve.

If union objective functions depend positively on employment levels, as
well as wages, the contract curve must lie to the right of the demand
curve in employment—wage space. Uiith this specification of union objec-

tives, the union effect on efficient employment levels is

unambiguously

positive; at any wage, efficient levels of employment exceed levels
employers would choose unilaterally.

Union objective functions depend significantly on employment levels

10

Fellner discusses this case at length.
For example, Hal l/Lilien construct a model with a vertical contract
curve the efficient employment level, at any wage, is identical
with that established under competitive labor market conditions. In
this case, efficient employment levels under employee unionization
exceed those preferred by employers, though not those set under
competition. McDonald/9olo discuss a model in which the contract
curve must be positively sloped. Here, efficient employment levels
not only exceed levels preferred by employers at any wage greater
than the competitive level, but always exceed levels established ir
competitive markets, as well.

— 11 —

12

in all empirical studies of private sector union behavior.

Studies of

unions in the local public sector would almost certainly reveal similar
objectives. If this were the case, and local public sector unions were
able to negotiate efficient contracts, they would increase local public
employment levels regardless of their effects on public service demand.

In practices efficient contracts are probably infrequent. Most

analyses of private sector union behavior assume that collective bargains are riot efficient, regardless of union preferences for employment.

There is little private sector evidence of efficient employment
levels. Actual union employment effects appear to be negligible or
negative. Freernan/Medoff assert that, during the 1970's, unions

sacrificed employment in return for increased compensation (pg. 249).

12 Farber (1978) finds evidence that the United Mine Workers union is

strongly risk averse. In the context of his model, risk aversion
implies positive valuation of employment levels. Dertouzos/Pencavel
find that erriploxrnent enters positively, with varying weights, into
the objective functions of all eight International Typographical
Union locals studied. Pencavel (1984a) finds positive elasticities
of substitution between wages and employment in most estimates of
union objective function characteristics, based on a pooled sample
of ten International Typographical Union locals. Farber (1984) cites
several other studies in support of these results.
13 Dunlop originally assumed that the range of union choice was
restricted to wage/employment combinations on the ernployers demand
curve for labor. Oswald supports this restriction with the assertion
that cooperative solutions, such as those required to obtain efficient outcomes, are difficult to enforce. Blair/Crawford agree, on
the theoretical argument that union objective functions do not yield
well—defined maxima along employer isoprofit curves, and on the
practical argument that actual contracts leave the employer free to
choose employment levels. Dertouzos./Pencavel, Farber (1978) and
Pencavel (1984a), while demonstrating positive union preferences for
employment, adopt this restriction and enforce negative employment
effects. More generally, Farber (1984) argues that unions and
employers may be limited to inefficient contracts bx internal union
p01 itics and enforcement difficulties. Pencavel (1984b) suggests
that observed grievance levels are higher than would be expected
under efficient contracts.
— 12 —

Freeman states "In the private sector it is universally accepted that

one of the substantial responses to union wage effects is a reduction of
employment.' (pg.

14

The political nature of bargaining in the

local public sector distinguishes it from private sector bargaining.

However, there is no compelling argument to expect that the local public
sector will be a favorable environment for the negotiation of efficient
labor contracts, where the private sector is not.

Explanations of positive union emplo>ment effects in the local public
sector as evidence of efficient contracts must be based on the speculative proposition that public sector labor markets are distinguished by

unusual cooperation in bargaining between employer and employee. Positive union effects on output demand are the more plausible explanation
of positive union employment effects. This explanation is consistent

with the analytical and anecdotal evidence of local public employee

Union employment effects are the subject of very few studies. Farber
<1984:) does not discuss employment effects in his survey. l4essels
asserts that empirical findings of moderate substitutability in
production between labor and capital, large positive union wage and
productivity effects imply larger negative union employrrent effects
than have been commonly estimated. Pencavel/Hartsog find small,
generally unimportant negative effects of unions on manhours ir
aggregate data covering 1920—80. However, as Jonathan Leonard has
pointed out, their regressions include relative output levels as
exogenous variables. The effects they estimate represent substitu—
t on

political activity.

It is based on a fundamental distinct on between

public and private sector employment; private sector employees are
factors of production, but public sector employees are constituents, as
well

II. Municipal Employment and Union Strength

This section investigates the

effects

of

municipal unionization or

manhours per 10,000 capita, employees per 10,000 capita and annual work
hours per employee in the police, fire, sanitation, and other non—
educational functions of 839 American cities.

16

Observations on func-

tions in 1975, 1977 and 1979, pooled across functions and years, com-

prise the sample for statistical purposes. All result; are taken from

15

16

There is little evidence, analytical or anecdotal, of positive
private sector union effects on output demand. Boycotts are probably
the most dramatic of the explicit strategies private sector unions
adopt to affect total demand for the goods they produce. The immediate purpose; of these actions are to reduce rather than increase
demand. Union label and anti—import campaigns are the most prominent
union efforts to increase demand for their own production. These
strategies only encourage substitution of union for nonunion and
foreign output. They have not been sufficiently successful to dissuade students of union activity from implicitly assuming that total
demand for output is independent of union behavior.

The municipal employment measure; analyzed here are drawn from three
identical surveys of municipal employment and compensation, conducted in 1975, 1977 and 1979 by the International City Management
Association (Friend and Pike, Friend and Bencivenga, Friend arid
Lufkin). These survey; report numbers of full—time employees, standard work schedules, vacation time, sick leave and compensation
expenditures for employees in police, fire, sanitation, and all
other noneducational departments. Eight hundred and thirty—nine
cities provide complete records for at least one function in one
year.

— 14 —

ordinary least squares (OLS) regression equations with one of the three
employment measures as dependent variables, and measures of municipal

unionization among the independent variables. 17

These equations are, effectively, reduced forms of the structural
equations for municipal labor markets. In addition to unionization

measures, they include as exogenous variables extensive measures of city
population characteristics, city government structure, employment condi—

tions,

and geographic division.

18

-

Respectively, these *our groups O*

independent variables capture variations across cities in
output demand
conditions, government behavior, private sector alternatives to
municipal employment, and region—specific effects.

Previous studies of municipal labor relations typically represent
unionization by a single measure of organization, bargaining, or contract status. Zax identifies a hierarchy of 'unionization' in municipal
functions which more effectively measures variations in union strength.

This hierarchy includes six degrees of municipal unionization ma
function, based on the interactions between organization in that function and in other functions of the same municipality. Functions are
'unorganized' if no employees belong to unions, 'organized' if some

17

All regressions reported here include dummy variables for functions
and years.
These variables are taken from Censusses of Population, Censusses
and Surveys of Government, and surveys of government structure
conducted by the International City Management Association. Further
details with regard to the sample are contained in an Appendix,
available from the author. It contains the complete equation estimates from which the results reported here are reproduced.
—

belong to a union or employee associations 'organized with a bargaining
unit' if a union is recognized for bargaining purposes, and 'organized
with a contract' if a collective bargaining agreement exists. For
brevity, municipalities are designated as 'bargaining' if employees in
any function of the municipality are represented by a bargaining unit.
These cities are probably in states which prohibit public sector collective bargaining. Municipalities are 'non—bargaining' if no employees are
represented by a bargaining unit. By definition, public sector bargaining is legal in these cities.

Two degrees of unionization occur in non—bargaining cities. Unorganized functions in non—bargaining cities are unambiguously non—union,
the weakest degree. The second degree, organized functions in ron—
bargaining cities, is the simplest form of union structure. If state law
denies unions the right to obtaining recognition, this degree repr€'sents

the strongest permissible form of unionization in these municipalities.
Employment in functions of this degree should be greater than in nonunion functions.

Unorganized functions in bargaining cities represent the third degree
of municipal unionization. The relative strength of unions in the second
and third degrees is uncertain. Unorganized functions in bargaining

cities can threaten to acquire recognition as a bargaining unit. t the
same time, they are the weakest form of unionization where bargaining is
legally permitted. Empirically, Zax demonstrates that compensation
increases obtained by unorganized functions in bargaining cities are

indistinguishable from those obtained by organized functions in non—

— 16 -

bargaining cities.

Organized functions in bargaining cities, the fourth degree of

unionization, are stronger than the lower degrees because these func—
tions can credibly threaten to obtain recognition. The fifth degree of

unionization, organized functions with bargaining units, is comprised of
municipal unions which have obtained legal recognition. Their

advantage

over lower degrees is the entitlement to negotiate with municipalities
over terms of employment. The sixth and strongest degree includes only
organized functions with contracts. Terms of employment for employees in
these functions are legally protected. Bargaining units and contracts

can exist, by definition only in bargaining cities UniOn Str

th

increases rnonotonically across the four degrees in bargaining cities.

Employment effects should increase commensurately.

The specification of unionization in the equations reported here
consists of four dummy variables. The first degree, unorganized functions in non—bargaining cities, is not represented. Degrees two through
four are each represented by one dummy variable. The fifth and sixth
degrees, functions with bargaining units and functions with contracts,
are pooled in a single dummy —— under the heading 'bargaining units' ——

because no source reports contracts for all functions on a function—
spec ific basis.

19

19Empirically, dummYvariablesfor geographic divionsprovide additional controls for legal status. Geographic and unionization
dummies adequately account for state—specific ef-fects; coefficients
reported here for union dummies are unchanged when divisional
dumrriies are replaced b dummy variables for each state.

The equations reported here will underestimate positive effects and
overestimate negative effects of municipal unionization on municipal
employment levels. Municipal cornpensaticin measures are not entered

explicitly into the equations, because they are determined

taneously

s.irnul—

with employment levels. Compensation levels in degrees two

through five are significantly greater than in degree one, non—union
functions (Zax). Compensation increases won by unions will force

municipalities up their demand curves for labor, reducing employment in
order to control total labor costs. These reductions, as well as the
direct effects of unionization on employment, will be captured by the
dummy variables for unionization.

Table I presents estimates of union effects on three measures of
employment levels for each degree of unionization. Bargaining units have
strong effects on manhours per capita, employees per capita and annual
work hours per employee. Individual coefficients for other degrees are
usually insignificant. However, the pattern of significance in the
differences between these coefficients further confirms the hypotheses
of the previous section.

Bargaining units, the strongest measured degree of municipal

unionization, are the only degree in which employment per capita is
significantly increased. F—tests demonstrate that bargaining unit effects on employment and manhours per capita are significantly different

—

lB

—

Table 1.

OLS Absolute Union Effects of Four
Degrees of Municipal Unionization
on Municipal Employment Levels

Function,

Employment
Measure
Manhours Per
10,000 Capita
Employees Per
10,000 Capita
Annual Work
Hours Per
Employee

Total Compensation
Per Hour Worked

Non—
Bargaining
Municipality

Unorganized
Function,
Bargaining
Municipality

2661.
(1.27>
1.35
(1.19)
2.10

—3293.
(1.75)

Organized
Function,
Bargaining
Municipality

***

—2444.
(1.32)

i.44

—1.18

(1.42)
—38.7

(1.18)
—19.7

**

Organized
Function,
Bargaining
Unit
4333.
(2.98)
3.00
(3.82)
—40.4

*
*
*

(.123>

3.265 **

3.323 *

(1.98)

(2.68)

3.615 *

(5.19)

1.965 *

(10.4)

Notes: Absolute t—statistics are in parentheses. Total compensation
effects are reproduced from Zax. Triple asterisks indicate coeffi—
cientssignifjcant at l0, double asterisks indicate significance at
5, single asterisks indicate significance at 1/..

from those in other degrees of unionization at the .O1Y level. 20 Unions
in this degree also reduce annual hours of work per ernployeesubstan—

tially, by forty hours, or one full work week. This effect, though
larger than that for other degrees, is not significantly different from
that obtained by in any degree of unionization within bargaining cities.

Employment effects in other degrees are usually insignificant. The
comparisons between effects in different degrees are revealing,

20

Details of these and all other F-tests are available frorri the
author.

-

—

nevertheless. F—tests show no significant differences in union effects
on manhours per capita, employment per capita, and annual work hours per
employee between organized and unorganized functions in bargaining
cities. Equal it>' in reduced—form employment effects may, in fact, be

evidence that organized functions obtain employment increases above
levels for unorganized functions in these cities. Compensation increases
in the former siqnificantly exceed those in the latter. Other things
equal, barQaining municipalities should react to these differences in
compensation effects by reducing employment further in organized than in
unorganized functions. Organized functions may use their greater influence over demand for output to compensate.

21

F—tests also demonstrate that coefficients on organized functions in
non—bargaining cities are significantly different, at 5>'., from those on

unorganized functions in bargaining cities, for all three measures of
labor quantities. These tests and the coefficient values indicate that
organized functions in non—bargaining cities have more strongly positive
effects on all three measures of employment, in addition to similar

compensation effects. pparently, the advantages of organizing, where
barQaining is prohibited, outweigh those of only threatening recognition, where it is permitted.

These results sugQest that the legal right to bargain is as much a

21

Sanitation functions are a greater share of these unionization
categories than of the sample as a whole. Though the equations
contain dummy variables for each function, these results may capture
some element of spillovers from better—organized p01 ice and fire
functions.
— 20 —

challenge as a benefit to municipal employees. The exercise of thfs

right, as represented b bargaining units, leads to employment and
compensation levels which exceed those under any other circumstances. As

shown by the comparison of employment and compensation effects
between
organized functions in non—bargaining cities and unorganized functions
in bargaining cities, this right becomes a liability if it is not exer—
c ised.

Table 2.

OLS Relative Union Effects of Four
Degrees o-f Municipal Unionization
on Municipal Employment Levels

Employment
Measure
Manhours Per
10,000 Capita
Employees Per
10,000 Capita
Annual Work
Hours Per
Employee

Total Compensation
Per Hour Worked

Function,
Non—
Bargaining
Municipality

5.OO

Unorganized
Function,
Bargaining
Municipality

Organized
Function,
Bargaining
Municipality
—7.42 ***
—9.26;

5.O2

—6.08

4.817 *

4.O6< **

Organized
Function,
Bargaining
Unit
7.66X *

9.87,< *

—B.43Y

8.22/ *

1O..7 *

Note; Asterisks indicate elasticities derived from coefficients
significantly different from zero at 5X (see table 1).

Table 2 restates the absolute union effects of Table

I

as elas—

ticitfes, percentages of degree—specific means. Elasticities eriphasize
the relative strength o-f bargaining units. Organized functions in bar—

—

.1 -

gaining cities enjoy compensation increases of 8.2Y., but may suffer

reductions in employment per capita of up to 8.4Z. Functions with bar-

gaining units obtain employment increases of at least 9.9, as well as
compensation increases of 1O.7'..

Elasticities also reveal that work—sharing is not the source of

employment gains. Bargaining units reduce annual hours of work per
employee by more than 27, but increase employment per capita by nearly
1O<. These effects, combined, represent an increase in nanhours of
service per municipal resident of nearly 87.. To the extent that employ-

ment gains estimated for organized functions in non—bargaining cities
are meaningful, they are also attributable to increases in service
level s.

These estimates of degree—specific union employment effects are
entirely consistent with the hypothesis that employmert increases are
won through stimulation of output demand. Stronger unions more successfully reduce employment losses or obtain employment gains, within both
bargaining and non—bargaining municipalities. In addition, employment
gains are always associated with increases in manhours of service per
capita. These facts, while not inconsistent with the hypothesis that

municipal unions negotiate efficient contracts, are not predicted b'
contemporary characterizations of such contracts.

Table 3 presents estimates of aggregate municipal union effects on
manhours per capita, employment per capita and annual work hours per
—

Table 3.

Aggregate Absolute and Relative Union
Effects on Municipal Employment Levels
Employment
Measure

Manhours Per

Absolute Effect
1733.

10,000 Capita
Employees Per
10,000 Capita
Annual Work
Hours Per
Employee

Relative Effect
3.34<

1.30

4.73

—24.9

Total Compensation
Per Hour Worked

—1.29X

$.581

7.50

Notes: Total compensation estimates are taken from Zax.

municipal employee. These estimates are sums of the absolute degree—
spec if ic effects, weighted by the proportion of all functions in each

degree. Aggregate relative effects are aggregate absolute effects as
proportions of aggregate means.

These estimates show that, on net, average levels of labor relations

activity in a function and in a city increase manhours per capita by
more than 3>'., and employment per capita by nearly 5>'., over levels that

would obtain in the absence of any unionization. Average levels of
unionization also reduce annual work hours by 28

—

23

—

hours,

or nearlx four

days.

22

III. Conclusion

The empirical results in

this

paper demonstrate that municipal unions

which achieve recognition as bargaining units are able to increase
municipal employment levels. Theoretically, municipal unions could
achieve these effects by negotiating efficient contracts, unconstrained
by municipal demand curves 4cr labor. However, the evidence here suggests that they are more likely to arise from the abil ity of municipal

unions to stimulate demand for municipal services. Private sector unions
do not have positive employment effects. While there is no reason to
believe that municipal unions are more adept at achieving efficient

contracts than are unions in the private sector, there is persuasive
anecdotal evidence that municipal unions exercise distinctive influence
over demand for their output. This difference between public and private
union effects on output demand could give rise to the contrast between
public and private union employment effects.

Benecki and Inman <1981) report similar, but less definitive
results. Benecki does not analyze individual compensation levels.
Inrnan finds positive union effects on p01 ice employment, no effect
on police wages, positive effects on fire employment and a positive
effect of marginal significance on fire wages. Both measure
unionization with a single variable: Benecki uses athe percentage of
employees who are organized for negotiating purposes". Inman uses
"the percent of workers who belong to a union or employee organization which negotiates a labor contract.
—

These results cast some doubt over estimates of municipal labor
demand elasticities. Estimates are misleading in the presence of positive municipal union employment effects, regardless of the mechanism
throuQh which these effects are Qenerated. 14 municipal ities and

municipal unions aqree to efficient contracts, observed compensation
and
employment levels are probably not on the municipality's demand curve
for labor, at all.

If, as seems more lkely municipal unions stimulate demand for
municipal output, estimated elasticities of labor demand probably understate true elasticities. The elasticity impl led be equation 4, holding
only the rental price of capital and consumer income constant, is:

in L
in w(u)

In

I

2

a1(u)

ln w(u)

>$,.

a2

The second term is positive, because w(u) and a1(u) are both increasing
functions of u. This expression demonstrates that estimated elasticities
are less negative than are true elasticities if union effects on output

demand are neglected. ctual employment levels are less sensitive to

union—induced wage increases than are employment levels given by labor
demand functions, because they are preserved through union—induced
increas

in output demand.

These results emphasize the dual nature of
municipal employment.

Municipal unions represent both employees of the municipal government
and

ar important municipal constituency. Positive union

employment

effects may derive largely from this second role, HoiAjever, this

relationship

cannot be definitively establ shed without direct evidence

of union effects on output demand. The anecdotes which provide what
evidence is currently available need to be augmented by econometric

studies from which more robust conclusions rniqht be drawn.

— 26 —

References

Barnum, Darold T. and I. B. Helburn, Influencing the Electorate
Experience With Referenda on Public Employee Bargaining, Industrial
Labor Relations Review, Vol. 35, No. 3, April, 1982, pp. 330-342.

arid

Benecki, Stanley, TMMunicipal Expenditure Levels and Collective
BargainingN, Industrial Relations, Vol. 17, No. 2, May, 1978, pp. 216—
230.

Bergstrom, Theodore C. and Robert P. Goodman, HPrivate Demand for
Public GoodsN, American Economic Review, Vol. 63, No. 3, June, 1973, pp.
280—296.

Blair, Douglas H. and David L. Crawford, Labor Union Objectives and
Collective Bargaining N Quarterly Journal of Economics
Vol. 99, No.
3, August, 1984, pp. 547—566.

Borcherding, Thomas E. and Robert T. Deacon, The Demand for Services
of Non—Federal Governments", American Economic Review, Vol. 62, No. 5,
December, 1972, pp. 891—901.

Courant, Paul N., Edward N. Grarnlich and Daniel L. Rubinfeld, "Pubhc
Employee Market Power and the Level of Government SpendingN, American
Economic Review, Vol. 69, No. 5, December, 1979, pp. 806—817.
Dertouzos., James N. and John H. Pencavel, "Wage and Employment Deter—
niinatic,n Under Trade Unionism: The International Typographical Union
",
Journal of Political Economy Vol. 89, No. 6, December, 1981, pp. 1162—
1181.

Dunlop, John, WaQe Determination Under Trade Unions, Macmillan, New

York,

1944.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. and Joshua L. Schwarz, Public Sector Labor
Markets, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1179,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, August, 1983.

Farber, Henry S., "Individual Preferences and Union Wage Determination: The Case of the United Mine Workers", Journal of PoT tical
-

27

—

Economy1 Vol. 86, No. 5, October, 1978, PP. 923—942.

Farber, Henry S.., The Analysis of Union Behavior1 National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 1502, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
November, 1984.

Feliner, William, NPrices and Wages Under Bilateral Monopoly1,
terly Journal of Economics, Vol. 61, August, 1947, pp. 503—532.

Freeman, Richard B., Unionism Comes to the Public Sector1 National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1452, Cambridge, Massachusetts, September, 1984.

Freeman, Richard B. and James L. Medoff, What Do Unions DO?l Basic
Books, Inc., New York, 1984.

Friend, Edward H. and David F. Bencivenga, Fourth National Survey of
Employee Benefits for Full—Time Personnel of U.S. Municipal ities, Labor—
Management Relations Service of the United States Conference of Mayors,
Washington, D.C., 1979.
Friend, Edward H. and Lorraine A. Lufkin, Fifth National Survey of
Employee Benefits for Full—Time Personnel of U.S. Municipalities, Labor—
Management Relations Service of the United States Conference of Mayors,
Washington, D.C., 1982.
Friend, Edward H. and Albert Pike III, Third National Survey of
Employee Benefits for Full—Time Personnel of U.S. Municipalities, Labor—
Management Relations Service of the United States Conference of Mayors,
Washington, D.C., 1977.

Gramlich, Edward M. and Daniel L. Rubinfeld, Micro Estimates of
Public Spending Demand Functions and Tests of the Tiebout and Median—
Voter Hypotheses H, Journal of Pol itical Economy1 Vol. 90, No. 3, June,
1982, pp. 536—560.
Gramlich, Edward M. and Daniel L. Rubinfeld , Voting on Public
Spending: Differences Between Public Employees, Transfer Recipients, and
Private Workers" Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 1, No.
4, Summer, 1982, pp. 516—533.

Hall, Robert E. and David Lil ien, "Efficient Wage Bargains Under
Uncertain Supply and Demand", American Economic Review1 Vol. 69, No. 5,
December, 1979, pp. 868—879.

—

28

-

inman, Robert P., 'The Economic Case for Limits to Government",
Arnercan Economic Review, Vol. 72, No. 2, May, 1982, PP. 176—183.

Inman, Robert P., "Wages, Pensions, and Employment in the Local
Publ ic Sector", in Public Sector Labor Markets, Mieszkowski , Peter and
George E. Peterson, eds., The Urban Institute Press, Washington, D. C.,
1981, pp. 11—58,

International City Management Association, Municipal Yearbook 1978,
Washington, D.C. 1979.

Ladd, Helen F. and Julie Boatright Wilson, 'Why Voters Support Tax
Limitations: Evidence From Massachusetts' Proposition 2—1/2", National
Tax Journal, Vol. 35, No. 2, June, 1982, Pp. 121—148.

Maloney, Michael T., Robert F. McCormick and Robert 0. Tollison,
"Achieving Cartel Profits Through Unionization", Southern Economic
Journal, Vol. 46, No. 2, October, 1979, pp. 628—634.

McDonald, Ian M. and Robert M. Solo, "Wage Bargaining and
Employment", American Economic Review
Vol. 71, No. 5, December, 1981,
pp. 896—908.

Mieszkowski Peter and Robert M. Stein, "Trends and Prospects in
State and Local Finance ", Journal of Urban Economics , Vol.
14, No. 2,
September, 1983, pp. 224—241.

Niskanen, William, "Bureaucrats and Politicians", The Journal of Law
and Economics, Vol. 18, No. 3, December, 1975, pp. 617—644.

Oswald, Andrew. J., "The Microeconornic Theory of the Trade Union ",
Vol. 92, No. 367, September, 1982, pp. 576—595.

Economic Journal ,

Ott, Mack, "Bureaucracy, Monopoly, and the Demand for Municipal
Services', Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 8, No. 3, November, 1980,
pp. 362—382.

Pencavel , John H., "The Tradeoff Between Wages and Employment in
Trade Union Objectives" 0uarterl Journal of Economics, Vol. 99, No. 2,
May, 1984, pp. 215—231.

Pencavel, John H., Wanes and Emplo::.'rnent Under Trade Unionism:

Microeconorric Models and Macroeconomic Applications, Institute for
International Economic Studies Seminar Paper No. 306, Stockholm, Sweden,
December, 1984.

—

—

Pencavel , John H. and Catherine E. Hartsog, "A Reconsideration of the
Effects of Unionism on Relative Wages and Employment in the United
States, 1920—1980", Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 2, No. 2, April,
1984, pp. 193—232.

Simon, Henry C., "Some Reflections on Syndical ism" Journal of
Pol itical Economy, Vol. 52, No. 1, March, 1944, pp. 1—25.

Smith, Sharon P., "The Port of New York and New Jersey: Lifel me to
the ReQion", Federal Reserve Bank of New York Quarterly Rev tew, Vol. 3,
No. 2, Summer, 1978, pgs. 1—12.

U. S. Bureau of the Census, U. S. Department of Commerce, Annual
Survey of Governments, 1975, 1976 and 1978, Washington, D. C.

U. S. Bureau of the Census, LI. S. Department of Commerce, Census of
Population and Housing, 1970 and 1980 WashinQton, D. C.

U. S. Bureau of the Census, U. S. Department of Commerce, City
Government Finances in 1979—80k Series 6F80, No. 4. U. S. Government
Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 1981.

Warren—Boulton, Frederick R., uVertical Control by Labor Unions",
American Economic Review, Vol. 67, No. 3, June, 1977, pp. 309—322.

Wessels, Walter J., "The Effects of Unions on Employment and Productivity: An Unresolved Contradiction", Journal of Labor Economics, Vol.
3, No. 1, January, 1985, pp. 101—108.

Zax, Jeffrey S., "Labor Relations, Wages and Nonwage Compensation in
Municipal Employment", unpublished working paper, National Bureau of
Economic Research, New York, New York, September, 1985.

- 30 -

