NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXAM HIGH SCHOOLS AND ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT:
EVIDENCE FROM NEW YORK CITY
Will Dobbie
Roland G. Fryer, Jr.
Working Paper 17286
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17286

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2011

We are grateful to Joel Klein, Ryan Fagan, Aparna Prasad, and Gavin Samms for their assistance in
collecting the data necessary for this project. We also thank Lawrence Katz and seminar participants
in the Harvard Labor Lunch for helpful comments and suggestions. Pamela Ban provided outstanding
research assistance. Financial support from the Education Innovation Lab at Harvard University [Fryer],
and the Multidisciplinary Program on Inequality and Social Policy [Dobbie] is gratefully acknowledged.
Correspondence can be addressed to the authors by e-mail. The usual caveat applies. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Will Dobbie and Roland G. Fryer, Jr.. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Exam High Schools and Academic Achievement: Evidence from New York City
Will Dobbie and Roland G. Fryer, Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 17286
August 2011
JEL No. I20,J00
ABSTRACT
Publicly funded exam schools educate many of the world's most talented students. These schools typically
contain higher achieving peers, more rigorous instruction, and additional resources compared to regular
public schools. This paper uses a sharp discontinuity in the admissions process at three prominent
exam schools in New York City to provide the first causal estimate of the impact of attending an exam
school in the United States on longer term academic outcomes. Attending an exam school increases
the rigor of high school courses taken and the probability that a student graduates with an advanced
high school degree. Surprisingly, however, attending an exam school has little impact on Scholastic
Aptitude Test scores, college enrollment, or college graduation -- casting doubt on their ultimate long
term impact.

Will Dobbie
Education Innovation Laboratory
Harvard University
44 Brattle Street, 5th Floor
Cambridge, MA 02138
dobbie@fas.harvard.edu
Roland G. Fryer, Jr.
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 208
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rfryer@fas.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

Public exam schools are prominent around the world. Exam schools make up over half of U.S. News
and World Report’s top 100 American high schools, and 20 out of the 21 high schools designated
as the “public elite” by Newsweek.1 Governments in China, Malaysia, Romania, Singapore, and
Turkey allocate students to secondary schools based almost entirely on admissions entrance exams.
Gifted students in Australia, Japan, Korea, Mexico City, and the United Kingdom compete for
limited spots in selective secondary schools.
To the extent that students benefit from high-achieving peers, more advanced coursework, or
higher expectations, exam schools are likely to increase student achievement. Indeed, many argue
that the success of exam school alumni is prima facie evidence of their success in educating students.
Robert Fogel (Stuyvesant), Claudia Goldin (Bronx Science), and George Wald (Brooklyn Tech) are
part of a long list of prominent exam school alumni that include numerous U.S. Representatives,
Olympic Medalists, Grammy and Oscar nominees, Pulitzer Prize winners, and Nobel Laureates.
Conversely, exam school alumni may be successful simply because they were highly gifted and
motivated teenagers who would have prospered in any school. Social interactions in exam schools
could be negative, especially for students who are lower in the ability distribution with a comparative advantage in non-academic activities (Cicala, Fryer, and Spenkuch 2011). Lower relative
ability may also make students less competitive in college admissions, even if their absolute level of
achievement is unchanged (Attewell 2001). In these cases, exam school students might be better
served by a less competitive environment or greater heterogeneity among their peers.2
Gaining a better understanding of the impact of attending an exam school on educational
attainment and achievement is of significant importance for education policy, and the subject of
this paper. We provide the first causal estimate of the impact of attending an exam high school
in the United States on later outcomes, using data from three of the most prominent exam high
schools in the United States - Brooklyn Technical High School, the Bronx High School of Science,
and Stuyvesant High School. Our identification strategy exploits the fact that admission into New
York City’s exam high schools is a discontinuous function of an individual’s admissions test score.
As a result, there exist cutoff points around which very similar applicants attend different high
1
U.S.
News
and
World
Report
2010
high
school
rankings
are
available
at
http://education.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com/best-high-schools. Newsweek’s list of “public elite” high schools for
2010 are available at http://www.newsweek.com/2010/06/13/america-s-best-high-schools-in-a-different-class.html.
2
Students at Stuyvesant, one of the most prominent exam schools in the United States, describe a hypercompetitive atmosphere that left many of them disillusioned (Klein 2007).

1

schools. The crux of our identification strategy is to compare the average outcomes of individuals
just above and below these cutoffs. Intuitively, we attribute any discontinuous relationship between
average outcomes and admissions test scores at these cutoffs to the causal impact of attending that
school.
We find that attending an exam school increases the likelihood that a student takes more
rigorous high school coursework and the probability that a student graduates with a more advanced
high school diploma. Surprisingly, however, there is little impact of attending an exam school on
Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) reading and writing scores, and, at best, a modest positive impact
on SAT math scores. Moreover, the impact of exam school attendance on college enrollment or
graduation is, if anything, negative. Students just eligible for Brooklyn Tech are 2.3 percentage
points less likely to graduate from a four year college. Students eligible for Bronx Science and
Stuyvesant are neither more or less likely to graduate – the 95 percent confidence interval rules
out impacts larger than 2.8 percentage points for Bronx Science and 2.5 percentage points for
Stuyvesant.
There are three important caveats to our analysis. First, we estimate the benefit of attending
an exam school for the marginal student admitted to each exam school. It is plausible that the
impact of attending an exam school is different for other parts of the distribution. To partially
address this issue, we estimate the effect of exam school eligibility separately for students with
high and low state test scores in 8th grade, finding no statistically significant differences. This
suggests that exam schools affect both high and low ability students similarly, but our results
should still be interpreted with this caveat in mind. Second, the counterfactual to attending an
exam school is in some cases attending a private high school or another exam school. For example,
nearly 40 percent of students just ineligible for Stuyvesant attend Bronx Science, with another 20
percent leaving the NYC public school system altogether. Thus, our estimates may be less about
the impact of attending an exam school per se, than about the impact of attending a school with
higher-achieving peers more generally.3 Third, our set of outcomes is limited to various measures
of academic attainment and achievement.4 To the extent that attending an exam school increases
human or social capital in ways that are important for later outcomes, independent of SAT scores,
3

Other school inputs such as teacher experience, teacher absences, and teacher salary do not differ systematically
across exam schools, though, as a large body of literature points out, measurable inputs have little causal impact on
student outcomes (Hanushek 1997).
4
Our attempts to match our data to tax or social security records were not successful. We also attempted to
match our list of 163,000 exam school applicants who have graduated high school to entries in the Marquis “Who’s
Who” volumes - a measure of professional success - but there were only 32 matches.

2

college enrollment or graduation, then there is reason to believe that our conclusions are premature
and the true impact of an elite exam school will only be understood with the passage of time (and
more data collection).5
Our work contributes to an impressive literature on the impact of school choice and school
quality on later life outcomes (Cullen, Jacob and Levitt 2006, Hastings, Kane, and Staiger 2006,
Hastings and Weinstein 2008, Deming et al. 2011, Deming forthcoming, Berkowitz and Hoekstra
2011, Gould, Lavy, and Paserman 2004, and Duflo, Dupas and Kremer, forthcoming). The subset
of this literature most related to ours exploits discontinuities created by admission rules to examine
the impact of attending selective schools in other countries. Pop-Eleches and Urquiloa (2011) use
almost 2,000 regression discontinuity quasi-experiments observed in the context of Romania’s high
school educational system, finding is that students with access to higher achieving schools and
tracks within schools score more highly on an end of high school exam. Dustan (2010) exploits the
allocation mechanism to elite high schools in Mexico City to show that attending an elite schools
is associated with higher end-of-school test scores. Clark (2007) employs a regression discontinuity
design using entrance exam assignment rules to grammar schools in the United Kingdom, finding
little effect of admission on exit exam scores four years later.
The next section provides a brief overview of exam schools around the world with a special
emphasis on the three schools in NYC for which we have data. Section 3 reviews some theoretical
explanations for why students may or may not benefit from exam schools. Section 4 describes our
data and presents summary statistics. Section 5 details our research design. Section 6 describes
results on the impact of attending exam schools on a host of academic outcomes. The final section
concludes. An online data appendix describes the details of our sample construction.

2

Exam High Schools

Exam schools play a prominent role educating many of the world’s most gifted students. Government authorities in China, Malaysia, Romania, Singapore, and Turkey allocate most students
to secondary schools based on entrance exams, while students in Australia, Japan, Korea, Mexico
City and the canton of Zurich compete for limited spots in selective secondary schools. In the
United Kingdom, government funded grammar schools have historically taught a more challenging
curriculum to the top 25 percent of students in a municipality. While the grammar school system
5

There is some evidence, for example, that advanced math coursework in high school is associated with higher
wages for individuals unlikely to attend college (Rose and Betts 2004, Goodman 2009, Joensen and Nielsen 2010).

3

was gradually reformed during the 1970s, there are still 164 grammar schools in England that select
students based, at least in part, on an admissions examination. In Austria and Germany, students
are separated into academic and vocational tracks based on previous achievement and teacher recommendations. In the United States, over half of U.S. News and World Report’s top 100 high
schools use merit based selection, and 20 of the 21 high schools designated as the “public elite” by
Newsweek use exam based admissions.

2.1

New York City

The exam high schools of New York City are specialized public high schools, established and run
by the New York City Department of Education. Originally there were three academically oriented
specialized high schools - Brooklyn Tech, Bronx Science, and Stuyvesant - and one arts oriented
specialized high school - LaGuardia High School. The High School of American Studies at Lehman
College, the High School for Math, Science, and Engineering at City College, and the Queens High
School for the Sciences at York College were founded in 2002 to educate students who did not get
into one of the three original specialized schools. Staten Island Technical High School was declared
a specialized school in 2005, and Brooklyn Latin School was founded in 2006 to further expand the
set of specialized schools.
While there are nine total specialized high schools in New York City today, we only include
the original three - Brooklyn Tech, Bronx Science, and Stuyvesant - in our analysis. Staten Island
Technical High School and Brooklyn Latin School are too new to have alumni data, and LaGuardia
High School does not admit students using the Specialized High Schools admissions test. The High
School of American Studies at Lehman College, the High School for Math, Science, and Engineering
at City College, and the Queens High School for the Sciences at York College have alumni data for
only the 2007 through 2009 high school cohorts, none of which have graduated from college.6
Admissions to the academic exam schools is determined by the Specialized High Schools admissions test (SHSAT). The test is broken into a math and verbal section, with students given
2 hours and 30 minutes to complete each section. The verbal section is made up of 45 multiplechoice questions. 30 questions test reading comprehension, 10 questions test logical reasoning, and
5 questions require students to put sentences into the most logical order in a paragraph. The math
6
Results including all available schools for the 2007 - 2013 cohorts are available in Appendix Tables 1 through 5.
In these tables we combine results for Lehman and the Queens High School for the Science, as the cutoffs overlap
for the two schools in most years. When the cutoffs do not overlap, we use the lower of the two cutoffs. Results are
nearly identical, if somewhat less precise, than our primary results using all cohorts from the three original exam
schools.

4

section is comprised of 50 multiple-choice questions, which test basic math, algebra, geometry, basic
graphing, logic, and word problems.
On the day of the exam, students rank the schools in order of where they want to go. Test
results are ranked from the highest score to the lowest, and administrators place students in high
schools starting with the students with the highest score. Each student is placed into their most
preferred school that still has seats until no seats remain at any school.
Table 1 details the cutoffs for each school during our sample period. Stuyvesant and Bronx
Science are typically higher on students preferences and fill up the quickest each year. The number
of exam school applicants has increased from 14,173 in 1989 to 27,650 in 2008. The last student
admitted to Stuyvesant is typically ranked 914th, while the last student admitted to Bronx Science
and Brooklyn Tech is typically ranked 2,367th and 4,412nd respectively. The rank cutoff of the
last student admitted to each school has also increased, as each school has expanded the number of
available seats to accommodate the greater demand for seats. The increased number of seats has
not been enough to fully offset the increase in demand, however, resulting in more stringent score
requirements over the sample period.

2.2

Brooklyn Technical High School

Founded in 1922, Brooklyn Technical High School (Brooklyn Tech) is the largest and lease selective
of the three original exam high schools. There are approximately 5,000 students enrolled in the
school today.
US News and World Report ranked Brooklyn Tech 63rd on its Best High Schools of America
list in 2010, and, along with Stuyvesant and Bronx Science, was designated a “public elite” high
school by Newsweek in 2008. Brooklyn Tech counts two Nobel Prize winners amongst its alumni:
Arno A. Penzias (Physics 1978), and George Wald (Physiology and Medicine 1967).
Students at Brooklyn Tech concentrate their studies by selecting majors that range from
aerospace engineering to chemistry to environmental science. The school offers 20 AP classes,
four foreign languages, and major specific classes that focus on research skills. Brooklyn Tech also
encourages students to utilize research opportunities outside the school through an internship program. Brooklyn Tech hosts 30 varsity teams and over 100 clubs. Community service is required, as
are a certain number of service credits that are earned through participation in school organizations
and teams.
Like all public schools, Brooklyn Tech receives funding from federal, state, and local govern5

ments. However, to provide the resources for the advanced opportunities, Brooklyn Tech has an
endowment that funds facility upgrades, curriculum enhancements, and faculty training. In 2009
the endowment - the Brooklyn Tech Alumni Foundation - reported income of $ 3.86 million dollars
on assets of $7.89 million (Guidestar.org 2011). The school is currently attempting to raise an
additional $21 million.

2.3

Bronx High School of Science

The Bronx High School of Science (Bronx Science) is located in the Bedford Park neighborhood in
the Bronx. Founded in 1938, Bronx Science focuses on science and math, but the humanities are
also included in the curriculum to provide students with a well-rounded education and worldview.
Approximately 2,700 students attend the school.
Bronx Science was ranked 58th in the US News and World Report 2010 Rankings of the Best
High Schools in America, and has been designated a “public elite” high school by Newsweek in
2008 through 2010. In the past 8 years, Bronx Science has produced 59 Intel Science Talent Search
semi-finalists and 6 finalists, the fifth and eight best in the nation respectively. Since the inception
of the Intel Science Talent Search, Bronx Science has been home to more finalists than any other
school in the nation (132).
The school has produced 7 Nobel Prize winners, more than any other secondary institution in the
world. Nobel Prize winners include Leon N. Cooper (Physics 1971), Sheldon L. Glashow (Physics
1979), Steven Weinberg (Physics 1979), Melvin Schwartz (Physics 1988), Russell A. Hulse (Physics
1993), H. David Politzer (Physics 2004), and Roy J. Glauber (Physics 2005). The school’s alumni
also include 6 Pulitzer Prize winners, 6 National Medal of Science recipients, and 29 members of the
National Academy of Sciences amongst its alumni. Particularly notable alumni include biologist
and winner of the National Medal of Science Bruce Ames, neuroscientist and first director of the
New Jersey Stem Cell Institute Ira Black, and biochemist and winner of the 2008 National Medal
of Science Robert J. Lefkowitz.
Bronx Science students are required to take four years of English, social studies, and lab science
and three years of math. Students can choose among 35 AP classes and 10 language courses.
Students are also able to enroll in research classes across all departments, which when taken over
four years, culminates in an Intel Competition submission. Bronx Science is home to a weather
station, a DNA crime lab furnished through a partnership with Syracuse University, a planetarium,
and a Holocaust Museum, which is maintained by students in the Holocaust Museum Leadership
6

Class. Students can participate in 29 varsity teams and 62 clubs and organizations.
In 2008 Bronx Science began a capital campaign to raise $20 million to fund school initiatives.
In 2009, the Bronx High School of Science Endowment Fund reported income of $209 thousand
dollars on assets of $5.49 million. The Alumni Association of the Bronx High School of Science
reported income of $1.09 million dollars on assets of $1.35 million (Guidestar.org 2011).

2.4

Stuyvesant

Stuyvesant High School (Stuyvesant, or just Stuy) is located in the Battery Park neighborhood
of Manhattan. Stuyvesant was founded in 1904. In 1934 entrance exams were implemented, and
in 1972, along with Brooklyn Tech, Bronx Science, and LaGuardia, Stuyvesant was designated a
specialized high school by the state legislature of New York. Stuyvesant currently serves over 3,000
students.
Stuyvesant was ranked 31st on the 2010 US News and World Report Best High Schools rankings,
and has produced 103 Intel Science Talent Search semi-finalists and 13 finalists in the past 8 years,
the second best in the nation. Stuyvesant has been designated a “public elite” high school by
Newsweek in 2008 through 2010. The school counts four Nobel Prize winners amongst its alumni:
Joshua Lederberg (Physiology or Medicine 1958), Robert Fogel (Economics 1993), Roald Hoffmann
(Chemistry 1981), and Richard Axel (Physiology or Medicine 2004). Other notable alumni including
Attorney General Eric Holder, Special Advisor to President Obama David Axelrod, string theorist
Brian Greene, and founder of the Broad Institute, Eric Lander.
Stuyvesant provides a college preparatory curriculum, requiring four years each of English,
history, and lab science and three years each of math and a foreign language. There are 55 Advanced
Placement (AP) courses offered each semester, and electives in 10 languages. including Hebrew,
Italian, Spanish, German, Latin, Japanese, French, Chinese, Korean, and Arabic. Stuyvesant
students can participate in 32 varsity sports, in addition to club and JV teams. There are over 90
clubs and 25 publications, as well as an orchestra, band, 3 choirs, and a chamber orchestra.
Conflicts between various Stuyvesant fund-raisers has led to multiple endowments for the school.
The Stuyvesant High School Alumni Association reports assets of $509 thousand while the Campaign for Stuyvesant SHS Alumni and Friends Endowment Fund reports assets of $823 thousand.
The Parents Association of Stuyvesant reports income of $330 thousand and assets of $375 thousand (Guidestar.org 2011). The Campaign for Stuyvesant’s current capital campaign is aiming to
raise $12 million.
7

3

Conceptual Framework

There are at least three theories for why the marginal student might benefit from exam schools.
First, a well developed literature emphasizes the importance of peer groups (Coleman 1966), social
interactions (Case and Katz 1991, Cutler and Glaeser 1997) and network externalities (Borjas 1995,
Lazear 2001) are important in the formation of skill and values and the development of human and
social capital (see Sacerdote (2011) for a recent review). In particular, there are likely to be
fewer “bad apples” in exam schools that exert negative externalities on higher achieving students
(Lazear 2001, Hoxby and Weingarth 2006, Carrell and Hoekstra 2011). Second, if teachers teach
to the median student in their classrooms, exam schools are likely to have more academic rigor
(Duflo, Dupas, Kremer, forthcoming). Third, exam schools are likely to have more resources
than traditional public schools. Stuyvesant, Bronx Science, and Brooklyn Tech are all conducting
multimillion dollar capital campaigns to augment the resources each school receives from the city.
There are also several theories that argue exam schools may be bad for the marginal student,
particularly for boys. Peer interactions may be negative for the marginal student if they are lower in
the ability distribution, leading them to have a comparative advantage in non-academic activities
(Cicala, Fryer, and Spenkuch 2011). The marginal student is also likely to have a lower class
rank than they otherwise would have, making them less competitive in college admissions even
if their absolute level of achievement is unchanged (Attewell 2001). Exam schools may also have
no impact if other endogenous variables in the production of achievement (e.g., parental inputs or
time on homework) are substitutes for school quality or better peers. For instance, parents whose
children score above the admission threshold may invest less in their child’s education, provide less
monitoring of their teachers, or simply be more trusting of the school with the education of their
child. Finally, it is also possible that exam school courses are taught too far above the level of the
marginal student.
It is impossible to identify the separate impact of each of these potential channels with the
data available here. Instead, this paper’s goal is to produce credible estimates of the net impact
of attending an exam high school on a series of important educational outcomes. The resulting
reduced form estimates will likely reflect a number of the channels specified in this section.

8

4

Data and Descriptive Statistics

To test the impact of exam school attendance on later outcomes, we merge information from
the Specialized High Schools Admissions Test (SHSAT) records, data on college enrollment and
completion from the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC), and data on student demographics
and outcomes from the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE).
SHSAT records are available from 1989 to 2008, encompassing the high school graduating
cohorts of 1994 to 2013. The admissions data include name, date of birth, gender, math and
English scale scores, school preferences, and whether each student was eligible at each of the exam
schools.
To explore the impact of exam school attendance on college outcomes, we match the admissions
records to information on college attendance from the NSC, a non-profit organization that maintains
enrollment information for 92 percent of colleges nationwide. The NSC data contain information
on enrollment spells for all covered colleges that a student attended, though not grades or course
work. The admissions data were matched to the NSC database by NSC employees using each
student’s full name, date of birth and high school graduation date, which the NSC used to match
to its database. 4 percent of records from our sample that were blocked by the student or student’s
school. Students eligible for an exam school are no more or less likely to have a record blocked than
other students, however. Other than the blocked records, the NSC data is available for all cohorts
and students in the admissions data, regardless of eventual high school enrollment.
To provide a measure of college quality, we match the NSC records to data on college characteristics from the 2010 U.S. News and World Report. The U.S. News and World Report collects data
on college characteristics and statistics for four-year colleges in the U.S., including average class
size, size of the faculty, graduation rates, tuition, room and board, average debt, loan size, percent
of students receiving aid, acceptance rate, standardized test scores, high school GPA where available, demographic information on gender and the diversity index, freshman retention, and annual
alumni donations. We use midpoint SAT score in 2010 as our primary measure of college quality.
When only ACT scores are available, we convert them to SAT scores using the ACT’s official score
concordance. We code all college outcomes through 2009, regardless of high school cohort. Results
are identical if we only use the first 4, 5, or 6 years after a student graduates high school.
To explore the impact of exam school attendance on school outcomes such as high school course
taking, SAT scores, and high school diploma type. we also match SHSAT scores to administrative

9

data from NYCDOE. The NYCDOE data contain detailed information on students enrollment
histories, test scores, course-taking and other outcomes of interest for students that stay in the
public school system. The NYCDOE is available for only the 2002 through 2013 graduating cohorts,
with some data available over fewer years.
Table 2 provides a detailed accounting of what data are available for each cohort. Background
data on race is available for cohorts after 2008 for students who attended a public middle school,
while 8th grade test scores are available for cohorts after 2002 in public schools. These data form
the basis of our specification tests in Section 5. Complete Regents test score records are available
for the 2005 through 2009 cohorts, with incomplete records available for the 1998 through 2013
cohorts. SAT scores are available for the 2007 through 2010 cohorts, while graduation data is
available for the 2002 through 2009 cohorts.
An important caveat is that the NYCDOE data only includes students who enroll in a public
high school for at least one year in NYC. Students who enroll in a private school or a public high
school in another district are not included. If the most talented or motivated students who do not
get accepted into an exam school are more likely to leave the NYC public system – and hence, not
be in our data set – then our estimates using the NYCDOE data may be biased.
Figure 1 examines whether individuals who score above an exam school cutoff are more likely
to stay in the NYC public school system. Those who score just below an exam school cutoff are
more likely to attend a private school or transfer to another district. Students below the Brooklyn
Tech cutoff are 4.1 percentage points less likely to stay in the NYC system, while students below
the Bronx Science and Stuyvesant cutoffs are 4.2 and 4.7 percentage points less likely to stay in a
NYC public school. The average match rate of the admissions test records to the NYCDOE data
is 78.5 percent.
The second panel of Figure 1 examines students enrolled in a public middle school only, a group
that may be less likely to enroll in a private high school if not eligible for an exam school. The match
rate among this group is 88.6 percent. However, while attrition among public school students is less
severe, public school students below the Brooklyn Tech cutoff are still 2.9 percentage points less
likely to stay in the NYC system, while students below the Bronx Science and Stuyvesant cutoffs
are 2.3 and 1.3 percentage points less likely to stay in a NYC public school, with the Stuyvesant
estimate no longer statistically significant.
Figure 2 provides a partial test for the type of nonrandom attrition that would bias our high
school results by examining the characteristics of public middle school students leaving the NYC
10

system. We regress observable baseline characteristics on each school’s eligibility cutoff within the
set of students who stay in NYC. If the characteristics of those who stay in the NYC public school
system change discontinuously at an eligibly cutoff, this is evidence of nonrandom attrition. We
limit the sample in Figure 2 to students who were previously enrolled in a public middle school, as
these are the only students for whom we have baseline results, and they are less likely to attrit in
the first place. All high school results will be from this same sample.
There is no clear pattern of nonrandom attrition into the NYCDOE data. In particular, public
middle school students who leave the NYC public school system do not score higher on 8th grade
math and English exams compared to students who stay.
As a second test of nonrandom attrition, we estimate our main results for college outcomes
restricting the sample to public middle school students for whom we also have high school outcome
data.7 The impact of exam school attendance on college outcomes for our restricted high school
sample is the same as in the full sample of all exam school applicants. Taken together with our
results from Figure 2, this suggests that, at least among public middle school students, our high
school results are not biased by nonrandom attrition.
Summary statistics for each exam school are displayed in Table 3. We include all of the available
cohorts for each outcome as detailed in Table 2. School characteristics are for the 2008 - 2009 school
year, the most recent available. Students at exam schools are more likely to be white or Asian than
the typical student in NYC, less likely to be black or Hispanic, and less likely to be eligible for free
or reduced price lunch. Students at Stuyvesant also score about 2.0 standard deviations higher
than the typical NYC student on the state math and English exam in 8th grade, while students at
Bronx Science and Brooklyn Tech score about 1.7 and 1.5 standard deviations higher respectively.
Students at Stuyvesant, Bronx Science and Brooklyn Tech are far more likely to take Regents
exams compared to the typical NYC student, particularly in optional and more advanced subjects
such as a second math class covering Trigonometry, Chemistry, and Physics.8
Students at exam schools are more likely to graduate high school than their peers in other NYC
schools. 93.0 percent of Stuyvesant students graduate from high school, compared to 53.7 percent
of students in NYC as a whole. 91.1 and 87.1 percent of Bronx Science and Brooklyn Tech graduate
from high school. Exam school students are also far more likely to receive a Regents or Advanced
7

These results are available in Appendix Table 6.
The structure of the New York math Regents changed over the sample period. Following the advice of the
NYCDOE, we combine Math A and Integrated Algebra into a single score, and Math B and Trigonometry into a
second score. Results are identical if we use Math A and B only, which make up the majority of the scores in our
sample.
8

11

Regents diploma, earned by taking more advanced math and science courses. While 81.4 percent
of Stuyvesant students, 68.7 percent of Bronx Science students, and 65.6 percent of Brooklyn Tech
students receive an Advanced Regents diploma, only 9.2 percent of students in NYC do.
Students at exam schools are also much more likely to enroll in a four year college than the
typical NYC student, and tend to attend more selective colleges than other students. 84 percent
of Stuyvesant students enroll in a four year college during our sample period, with 28.4 percent
of them enrolling in a school with a median SAT score of more than 1400.9 At Bronx Science,
83.4 percent of students enroll in a four year college, with 13.8 percent enrolling in a school with a
median incoming SAT score of more than 1400. At Brooklyn Tech, 77.7 percent of students enroll
in a four year college, with 4.8 percent enrolling in a school with a median incoming SAT score of
more than 1400. To put this in context, only 32.2 percent of NYC students enroll in a four year
college, and only 0.9 percent enroll in a school with a median SAT score of more than 1400. Of
that 0.9 percent, 51.3 percent attended one of the three exam schools in our sample. 64 percent of
NYC students attending Harvard, Princeton or Yale graduated from Stuyvesant, Bronx Science or
Brooklyn Tech.
Differences in educational inputs between exam schools and traditional public schools are less
dramatic. The typical teacher at Stuyvesant made $78,152 in 2008 - 2009, with teachers at Bronx
Science and Brooklyn Tech earning $72,088 and $76,213 respectively. The typical teacher in NYC
earned $72,557. Teachers in the exam schools have somewhat more experience than other teachers,
but are absent approximately the same number of school days each year. The exam schools do
have somewhat lower student to teacher and student to staff ratios than traditional public schools
in NYC.

5

Research Design

Our research design exploits the fact that entry into each exam school is a discontinuous function of
a student’s SHSAT score. Consider the following model of the relationship between future outcomes
(y) and enrollment in a school (Si ):
yi = α0 + α1 Si + εi
9

(1)

Colleges with median SAT scores above 1400 are Amherst, Bowdoin, Brown, CalTech, Claremont McKenna,
Columbia, Dartmouth, Duke, Emory, Harvard, Harvey Mudd, MIT, Northwestern, Notre Dame, Penn, Pomona,
Princeton, Rice, Stanford, Swarthmore, Tufts, University of Chicago, Vanderbilt, Washington University, Williams,
and Yale.

12

The parameter of interest is α1 , which measures the causal effect of exam school attendance on future outcomes yi . The problem for inference is that if individuals select into high schools because of
important unobserved determinants of later outcomes, such estimates may be biased. In particular,
it is plausible that people who select into specialized high schools had different academic skills and
motivation before they enrolled. Since exam school enrollment may be a function of ability, this
can lead to a bias in the direct estimation of (1) using OLS. The key intuition of our approach is
that this bias can be overcome if the distribution of unobserved characteristics of individuals who
just barely eligible for a school is the same as the distribution among those who were just barely
ineligible:
E[εi |scorei = c∗s + ∆]∆→0+ = E[εi |scorei = c∗s − ∆]∆→0+

(2)

where scorei is an individual’s SHSAT score and c∗s is the cutoff score below which applicants are
not admitted to school s. Equation (2) implies that the distribution of individuals to either side
of the cutoff is as good as random with respect to unobserved determinants of future outcomes
(εi ). Since enrolling in an exam school is a discontinuous function of SHSAT score, whereas the
distribution of unobservable determinants of future outcomes εi is by assumption continuous at
each cutoff, the coefficient α1 is identified. Intuitively, any discontinuous relation between future
outcomes and the SHSAT score at the cutoff can be attributed to the causal impact of school
enrollment under the identification assumption in equation (2).
We estimate the reduced form impact of scoring just above the eligibility cutoff for each school
separately using standard methods for regression discontinuity analysis (e.g. Lee and Lemiuex
2010). First, we restrict the data to scores within 0.25 standard deviations around each school’s
cutoffs. This is the largest bandwidth that never includes another school’s eligibility cutoff. Rule
of thumb and cross validation selection procedures suggest somewhat larger bandwidths of 0.35 to
0.75 standard deviations (see Appendix Table 7). This somewhat smaller bandwidth includes only
the observations in the immediate neighborhood of the cutoffs, but at the cost of including less
information, which can lessen precision.
Second, within our bandwidth, we estimate the following reduced form model of outcomes for
each school:
yi = π0 + π1 (scorei ≥ c∗s ) + π2 (scorei ≥ c∗s ) × (scorei − cs ) + π3 (scorei − cs ) + π4 Xi + πt + εi (3)
Where yi is a future outcome such as college enrollment or graduation, and (scorei ≥ c∗s ) is an
13

indicator that the student scored at or above the eligibility cutoff. We include separate score trend
terms above and below the eligibility cutoff. We also control for gender, whether a student attended
a private or public middle school, and the year of high school entry t. To address potential concerns
about discreteness in the SHSAT score we cluster our standard errors at the SHSAT score level
(Card and Lee 2008).
The identified parameter π1 measure the average reduced form treatment effect of scoring just
above the cutoff for each school. This is the causal impact of being eligible for an exam school. It
is important to note that the counterfactual to attending an exam school in many cases is a private
school or other exam school. Take, for example, the eligibility cutoff for Stuyvesant. Nearly 40
percent of students just ineligible for Stuyvesant graduate from Bronx Science, with another 20
percent leaving the NYC public school system, likely to attend a private school. The exception
to this is Brooklyn Tech, where students below the eligibility cutoff are not eligible for any of the
exam schools and must choose between a traditional public school in NYC or a private high school.
The key threat to a causal interpretation of our estimates is that exam school applicants are
not distributed randomly around the school cutoffs. Such nonrandom sorting could invalidate our
empirical design by creating discontinuous differences in respondent characteristics around the score
cutoff. In Figure 3 we evaluate this possibility by testing whether the observable characteristics of
applicants trends smoothly through each cutoff. Gender and middle school type is available for the
1994 through 2013 high school cohorts for all students. 8th grade test scores are available for only
the 2002 through 2013 cohorts who attended a public middle school, while ethnicity data is only
available for the 2008 through 2013 cohorts who attended a public middle school. Students eligible
for Brooklyn Tech are less likely to be black, while students eligible for Stuyvesant are more likely
to be Hispanic. Otherwise, there are no statistically significant differences between just eligible and
just ineligible students.
Next, we examine whether the frequency of respondents changes at the cutoff. We follow the
approach of McCrary (2008) and first collapse the data into equal sized bins of 0.01. We then
regress the number of observations in each bin on a local linear regression which we allow to vary
on either side of the cutoff. As suggested by Figure 4, the coefficient on the eligibility cutoffs is
statistically insignificant for all three schools. Results are identical with either larger or smaller
bin widths. Given the general lack of statistical significance on both of our robustness checks, we
interpret our results as showing no clear evidence that our identifying assumption is violated in the
full sample of exam school applicants.
14

Recall that our high school outcomes are only available for the set of students who enroll in a
public high school in NYC. Section 4 discusses the issues related to selection into this sample, and
conducts a number of robustness checks. While we find that students scoring just above an exam
school cutoff are more likely to enter the NYCDOE data, eligible and ineligible students are just
as likely to be male, black, and Hispanic, and score about the same on 8th grade math and reading
exams. Nonetheless, our high school results should be interpreted with this sample selection in
mind.

6

Results

6.1

Impact of Eligibility Cutoffs on Exam High School Graduation

First stage results for the 2002 to 2009 high school cohorts are presented graphically in Figure 5.10
We plot the fraction of individuals graduating from each exam school and predicted graduation
rates from a local linear regression relating whether or not an individual graduated from the school
to SHSAT score, an indicator for scoring above the eligibility cutoff, and SHSAT score interacted
with the eligibility indicator.11 In all results, the first cutoff is Brooklyn Tech, the second Bronx
Science, and the third Stuyvesant. Point estimates and standard errors for the eligibility variable
for each school are presented next to each cutoff. Regression estimates add controls for cohort,
gender and middle school type.
Individuals scoring just above the Brooklyn Tech cutoff are 22 percentage points more likely
to graduate from the school than individuals scoring just below the cutoff. Individuals who score
just above the Bronx Science cutoff are 31.1 percentage points more likely to graduate from that
school, while students scoring above the Stuyvesant cutoff are 56.8 percentage points more likely
to graduate from Stuyvesant. Note that some students scoring below each school’s cutoff still
graduate from that school. This is because students can retake the SHSAT in 9th grade, allowing
some students to change schools. Nonetheless, these first stage results suggest a strong relationship
10

We use graduation rather than “ever attended” due to data limitations in the early cohorts. First stage results
using the number of years attending each exam high school are presented in Appendix Table 8.
11
Lee and Lemieux (2010) propose a formal test for optimal bin width based on the idea that if the bins are narrow
enough, then there should not be a systematic relationship between the outcome variable and the running variable
within each bin. Otherwise, the bin is too wide and the mean value of the outcome variable is not representative
at the boundaries. A simple test for this consists of adding a set of interactions between the bin dummies and
the running variable to a base regression of the outcome variable on the set of bin dummies, and testing whether
the interactions are jointly significant. Results from this test for the first stage variable and college enrollment are
presented in Appendix Table 9. The interaction terms tend not to be jointly significant at our chosen bin width of
0.05. Results are nearly identical for other outcome variables.

15

between exam school attendance and the eligibility thresholds.

6.2

Impact of Exam School Eligibility on College Enrollment and Graduation

Reduced form results of the impact of attending an exam school on college enrollment and graduation are presented in Figure 6. We plot the average outcome for each bin and predicted outcomes
from a local linear regression.12 Enrollment outcomes are presented for the 1994 to 2009 high
school cohorts, while graduation outcomes are presented for the 1994 to 2004 cohorts only. Point
estimates and standard errors from separate regressions that include controls for exam score, exam
score interacted with school eligibility, cohort, gender and middle school type are presented next to
each cutoff. As with the first stage results in Section 6.1, these estimates include all students who
applied to an exam school, even if they later left the NYC school system.
Surprisingly, there appears to be little impact of exam schools on four year college enrollment
and graduation. If anything, students eligible for exam schools are less likely to have attended
or graduated from college by 2009. Students just eligible for Brooklyn Tech are 2.3 percentage
points less likely to graduate from a four year college. Students just eligible for Bronx Science
are 0.7 percentage points less likely to graduate, and students just eligible for Stuyvesant are 1.6
percentage points less likely to graduate, though neither estimate is statistically significant. With
that said, the 95 percent confidence interval rules out impacts larger than 2.8 percentage points for
Bronx Science and 2.5 percentage points for Stuyvesant.
The results are similar when examining college enrollment in more selective institutions. We
regress an indicator variable equal to one if a student was ever enrolled in a four year college with
a median SAT score above 1200, 1300, and 1400 on each school’s eligibility indicator, exam score,
and exam score interacted with eligibility. Colleges with median SAT scores above 1200 include
Binghamton University, Boston University, Fordham University. Colleges with median SAT scores
above 1300 include Boston College, Carnegie Mellon, Lehigh University, Geneso University, New
York University, and the University of Rochester. Colleges with SAT scores above 1400 include
the Ivies and schools like the University of Chicago and Washington University. Students eligible
for Brooklyn Tech are 1.6 percentage points less likely to enroll in a school with a median SAT of
above 1300. There is no impact of Stuyvesant or Bronx Science eligibility on enrollment in a school
with a median SAT score of above 1300, and none of the schools have an impact on enrollment in
12

Including a linear spline, by year, or renorming the data so that the eligibility cutoffs are constant over time all
give nearly identical results. These additional results are available from the authors by request.

16

schools with SAT scores above 1200 or 1400. Students eligible for an exam school also appear no
more likely to enroll in a post-baccalaureate program. The relatively small standard errors rules
out large positive effects for all college outcomes.
Table 4 presents results separately by middle school type and gender, the only two control
variables available across all years and students. We interact the linear trend in exam score with
both the group being tested and the cutoff variable. There are no clear patterns by ethnicity or free
lunch status among the subset of students we have that data for. Males and students who attended
private middle schools benefit somewhat more from being eligible for Stuyvesant, and women seem
to benefit somewhat more from being eligible for Brooklyn Tech. Given the general lack of clear
patterns and statistical significance, however, our estimates suggest that all groups are affected by
exam school eligibility similarly.
Table 5 presents results separately by 8th grade state test score for students who were enrolled
in a NYC middle school, the only group we have state scores for. The regression discontinuity
estimates presented in this paper capture the causal effect of admission for students near the cutoff.
At each cutoff, however, there exists a distribution of actual ability. Some high ability students
may score lower on the entrance exam by chance, putting them nearer a cutoff than their ability
would suggest, while some low ability students may, by chance, score higher on the entrance exam,
gaining admission to a school with far more able students on average. We test for the heterogenous
impact of exam school admission by ability by splitting the same by state test scores in 8th grade.
We first limit the sample to students within 0.25 standard deviations of the Brooklyn Tech cutoff
and above to eliminate students with no chance of admissions. We then split the remaining sample
at the median and 75th percentile of combined math and English 8th grade state test score. We
allow the linear trend in exam score to differ by both the group being tested and the cutoff variable.
Perhaps surprisingly, there are no clear patterns by baseline state test score. Of the eighteen
results considered, only one difference is statistically significant at the ten percent level. This
suggests that high and low ability students are affected by exam school eligibility similarly.
A null result on the impact of exam schools on college enrollment and outcomes, while surprising,
is broadly consistent with the literature on the effect of school choice on college outcomes (e.g.,
Cullen, Jacob and Levitt 2006, Deming et al. 2011), but differs substantially from the popular
view of exam schools. In Chicago, Cullen, Jacob and Levitt (2006) find no impact of winning a
school choice lottery on test scores, but some benefits on behavioral outcomes such as self-reported
criminal activity. On the other hand, Deming et al. (2011) find that high school choice winners in
17

Charlotte-Mecklenburg score no better on high school exams, but are more likely to graduate from
high school and attend college. Berkowitz and Hoekstra (2011) examine the effect of attending elite
private high school on college placement using by examining the outcomes of admitted applicants
who later chose not to attend, finding that the attending the school leads students to attend more
selective universities.

6.3

Impact of Exam Schools on High School Graduation and Achievement

Reduced form results of the impact of attending an exam school on high school outcomes are
presented in Figures 7 through 9. Recall that we only have high school data on individuals who
attend a public high school in NYC. Students who leave the system to attend a private school or
a public school in another district are excluded. This approach assumes that the students who
leave NYC do not differ in some systematic from those that stay. While our robustness checks in
Section 4 suggest little difference between students who stay in the system and those that leave,
conditional on attending a public middle school. There is also no difference in the impact of exam
schools on college outcomes in the full sample and the sample used for high school outcomes. Still,
we cannot definitely rule out unobservable differences between leavers and stayers, so our results
should be interpreted with this caveat in mind.
Reduced form impacts for high school diploma type for the 2002 through 2009 high school
cohorts are presented in Figure 7. NYC awards special education, Local, Regents, and Advanced
Regents diplomas. To receive a Local diploma, students must score at least 55 on each of five core
Regents examinations: English, Mathematics, Science, U.S. History and Government, and Global
History and Geography. In order to receive a more prestigious Regents Diploma, students must
receive a score of at least 65 in each of these five core subjects. To earn the Advanced Regents
Diploma, students must also score at least a 65 on elective exams in math, science, and foreign
language.
Students eligible for Bronx Science are more likely to graduate from high school in general,
and more likely to receive an Advanced Regents diploma. Students eligible for Brooklyn Tech
are also more likely to receive an Advanced Regents diploma. Stuyvesant eligibility does not
significantly affect high school graduation or the type of diploma obtained, perhaps because the
marginal applicant is already quite likely to receive an advanced degree.
Figure 8 examines the impact of the exam schools on high school course taking for the 2005
through 2009 high school cohorts. Students eligible for Brooklyn Tech and Bronx Science are more
18

likely to complete core courses such as Global History and English Language Arts, though no
more likely to take the first math course. Students eligible for any of the three schools are more
likely to take an optional second math course covering Trigonometry, though the estimate is only
statistically significant for Bronx Science. Students eligible for Bronx Science and Stuyvesant take
more science exams, and more likely to take more advanced subjects such as Physics. Students
eligible for Stuyvesant are also more likely to take Chemistry, while students from Brooklyn Tech
and Bronx Science are less likely to take that class. Taken together with the results from Figure 7,
we see the Regents results as suggesting that exam school students take more advanced coursework
than other students.
Figure 9 examines the impact of attending an exam school on SAT scores, a measure of human
capital, for the 2007 through 2010 cohorts. Students eligible at each exam school are somewhat
more likely to take the SAT, though none of the point estimates are statistically significant. Those
eligible for Bronx Science score 10.9 points higher on the SAT math section conditional on having
taken it, but no better in reading or writing. Students eligible for Stuyvesant and Bronx Science
do no better in all three sections.

7

Concluding Remarks

Public exam high schools have educated some of the world’s most successful scientists and professionals. We provide evidence that attending an exam school increases rigor of the marginal
student’s high school course work, and makes the marginal student more likely to graduate from
high school with an advanced diploma. Surprisingly, however, the impact of attending an exam
school on college enrollment or graduation is, if anything, negative. There is also little impact
of attending an exam school on SAT reading and writing scores, and, at best, a modest positive
impact on SAT math scores. The results are similar across gender, middle school type, and baseline
state test scores.
Our analysis of exam schools suggests that students are encouraged or pushed to take harder
course work but that their actual human capital essentially remains unchanged. With that said,
without longer-term measures such as income, health, or life satisfaction, it is difficult to fully
interpret our results. To the extent that attending an exam school increases social capital in ways
that are important for later outcomes that are independent of college enrollment, graduation, or
human capital, then there is reason to believe that our conclusions are premature and the true

19

impact of an elite exam school will only be understood with the passage of time. If, on the
other hand, SAT scores, college enrollment and graduation are “sufficient statistics” for later life
outcomes, then our results show the impact of attending an elite exam school for the marginal
student is likely to be small.

20

References
[1] Attewell, Paul. 2001. “The Winner-Take-All High School: Organizational Adaptations to Educational Stratification.” Sociology of Education, 74(4): 267-295.
[2] Berkowitz, Daniel and Mark Hoekstra. 2011. “Does High School Quality Matter? Evidence
from Admissions Data.” Economics of Education Review, 30(2): 280-288.
[3] Borjas, George. 1995. “Ethnicity, Neighborhoods, and Human Capital Externalities.” American Economic Review, 85(3): 365-390.
[4] Card, David, and David Lee. 2007. “Regression Discontinuity Inference with Specification
Error.” Journal of Econometrics 142(2): 655-674.
[5] Carrell, Scott, and Mark Hoekstra, 2010. “Externalities in the Classroom: How Children Exposed to Domestic Violence Affect Everyone’s Kids.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 2(1): 211-28.
[6] Case, Anne and Lawrence Katz. 1991. “The Company You Keep: The Effects of Family and
Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths” NBER Working Paper No. 3705.
[7] Cicala, Steve, Roland Fryer, and Jorg L. Spenkuch. 2011. “A Roy Model of Social Interactions.”
NBER Working Paper No. 16880.
[8] Clark, Damon. 2007. “Selective Schools and Academic Achievement.” IZA Discussion Paper
No. 3182.
[9] Coleman, James, Ernest Campbell, Carol Hobson, James McPartland, Alexander Mood, Frederic Weinfeld, and Robert York. 1966. Equality of Educational Opportunity. Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
[10] Cullen, Julie Berry, Brian Jacob, and Steven Levitt. 2006. “The Effect of School Choice on
Participants: Evidence from Randomized Lotteries.” Econometrica, 74(5): 1191-1230.
[11] Cutler, David, and Edward Glaeser. 1997. “Are Ghettos Good or Bad?” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 112(3): 827-72.
[12] Deming, David. Forthcoming. “Better Schools, Less Crime?” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
[13] Deming, David, Justine Hastings, Thomas Kane, and Doug Staiger. 2011. “School Choice,
School Quality and Academic Achievement.” Unpublished Working Paper.

21

[14] Duflo, Esther, Pascaline Dupas, and Michael Kremer. Forthcoming. “Peer Effects and the Impact of Tracking: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Kenya.” American Economic
Review.
[15] Dustan, Andrew. 2010. “Have Elite Schools Earned their Reputation?: High School Quality
and Student Tracking in Mexico City.” Unpublished Working Paper.
[16] Goodman, Josh. 2009. “The Labor of Division: Returns to Compulsory Math Coursework.”
Unpublished Working Paper.
[17] Gould, Eric, Victor Lavy, and Daniele Paserman. 2004. “Immigrating to Opportunity: Estimating the Effect of School Quality Using a Natural Experiment on Ethiopians in Israel.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(2): 489-526.
[18] Guidestar.org. 2011. Retrieved from http://www2.guidestar.org/.
[19] Hanushek, Eric. 1997. “Assessing the Effects of School Resources on Student Performance: An
Update.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 19 (2): 141-164.
[20] Hastings, Justine, Thomas Kane and Douglas Staiger. 2006. “Gender, Performance and Preferences: Do Girls and Boys Respond Differently to School Environment? Evidence from
School Assignment by Randomized Lottery.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 96 (2): 232-236.
[21] Hastings, Justine, and Jeffrey Weinstein. 2008. “Information, School Choice, and Academic
Achievement: Evidence from Two Experiments.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
123(4): 1373-1414.
[22] Hoxby, Caroline, and Gretchen Weingarth. 2006. “Taking Race Out of the Equation: School
Reassignment and the Structure of Peer Effects.” Unpublished Working Paper.
[23] Joensen, Juanna and Helena Nielsen. 2010. “More Successful because of Math: Combining a
Natural Experiment and a Structural Dynamic Model to Explore the Underlying Channels.” Unpublished Working Paper.
[24] Klein, Alec. 2007. A Class Apart: Prodigies, Pressure, and Passion Inside One of America’s
Best High Schools.
[25] Lazear, Edward. 2001. “Educational Production.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
116(3): 777-803.

22

[26] McCrary, Justin. 2008. “Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discontinuity
Design.” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2)698-714.
[27] Pop-Eleches, Cristian and Miguel Urquiola. 2011. “Going to a Better School: Effects and
Behavioral Responses.” NBER Working Paper No. 16886.
[28] Rees, Daniel, Laura Argys, and Dominic Brewer. 1996. “Tracking in the United States: Descriptive Statistics from NELS.” Economics of Education Review, 15(1): 83-89.
[29] Rose, Heather and Julian Betts. 2004. “The Effect of High School Courses on Earnings.”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(2): 497-513.
[30] Sacerdote, Bruce. 2011. “Peer Effects in Education: How Might They Work, How Big Are
They and How Much Do We Know Thus Far?” in Erik Hanushek, Stephen Machin and
Ludger Woessmann (ed.), Handbook of the Economics of Education.

23

Figure 1
Match To NYC Sample
1

Public Middle School Students

1

Public and Private Middle School Students

.8

Fraction

!BS=0.042
(0.010)

.6

.8

!BT=0.041
(0.007)

!ST=0.013
(0.013)

!ST=0.047
(0.015)

.6

Fraction

!BT=0.029
(0.008)

!BS=0.023
(0.009)

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

This figure presents raw outcomes in 0.05 wide bins and reduced form results. Outcomes within
0.25 standard deviations of each school’s cutoff are presented, with cutoffs spaced by the average
distance across the sample period. Point estimates and standard errors from a local linear regression
of each outcome on entrance exam score, school eligibility, eligibility interacted with exam score,
and cohort are displayed next to the relevant cutoff for each school. Standard errors are clustered
at the exam score level. Results include the 2002 through 2012 graduating cohorts.

24

Figure 2
New York City Sample Characteristics

8th Score

8th Score

!ST=0.028
(0.075)

!BS=0.006
(0.028)
1.5

!BS=-0.022
(0.040)

!BT=0.010
(0.023)

1

!BT=0.014
(0.030)

1

1.5

!ST=-0.037
(0.035)

2

2

2.5

8th Grade Math

2.5

8th Grade English

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

Brooklyn Tech

.8
.6
.4

Fraction

.6

!BT=0.016
(0.012)
.2

!BS=-0.017
(0.011)

!BS=-0.005
(0.010)

!ST=0.005
(0.012)

!ST=0.020
(0.010)

0

Fraction

.4

!BT=-0.024
(0.011)

0

.2

Stuyvesant

Hispanic

.8

Black

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

!BS=0.010
(0.023)

!ST=0.020
(0.034)

.4

!BT=0.015
(0.017)

0

.2

Fraction

.6

.8

Male

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

This figure presents raw outcomes in 0.05 wide bins and reduced form results for baseline characteristics of the sample of students staying in the NYC public school system. Outcomes within 0.25
standard deviations of each school’s cutoff are presented, with cutoffs spaced by the average distance across the sample period. Point estimates and standard errors from a local linear regression
of each outcome on entrance exam score, school eligibility, eligibility interacted with exam score,
and cohort are displayed next to the relevant cutoff for each school. Standard errors are clustered at
the exam score level. Results include the 2008 through 2013 cohorts who were enrolled in a public
middle school. All results are run within the sample of students who stay in the NYC system for
high school.

25

Figure 3
Baseline Characteristics
Male

!ST=0.006
(0.017)

!BT=-0.005
(0.009)

!BS=-0.004
(0.011)

!ST=0.007
(0.017)

0

.6

.2

.4

!BS=-0.005
(0.011)

Fraction

!BT=-0.009
(0.012)
.8

Fraction

.6

1

.8

Public 8th Grade

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

Brooklyn Tech

2.5

8th Score

2

!ST=-0.033
(0.034)
!BS=0.015
(0.026)

1.5

!BS=-0.001
(0.038)

!BT=0.017
(0.024)

1

!BT=0.016
(0.028)

1

1.5

8th Score

2

!ST=-0.010
(0.068)

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

Brooklyn Tech

Stuyvesant

.6
.4

!BT=0.014
(0.011)
.2

!BT=-0.021
(0.011)

Fraction

.4

Fraction

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score
Hispanic

.6

Black

.2

Stuyvesant

8th Grade Math

2.5

8th Grade English

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

!BS=-0.015
(0.011)

!BS=-0.007
(0.011)
!ST=0.018
(0.010)

0

0

!ST=0.004
(0.012)

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

This figure presents raw outcomes in 0.05 wide bins and reduced form results for predetermined
characteristics. Outcomes within 0.25 standard deviations of each school’s cutoff are presented, with
cutoffs spaced by the average distance across the sample period. Point estimates and standard errors
from a local linear regression of each outcome on entrance exam score, school eligibility, eligibility
interacted with exam score, and cohort are displayed next to the relevant cutoff for each school.
Standard errors are clustered at the exam score level. Results for middle school type and gender
include the 1994 through 2013 high school cohorts. Results for 8th grade test scores include the
2002 through 2013 cohorts who were enrolled in a public middle school. Results for ethnicity include
the 2008 through 2013 cohorts who were enrolled in a public middle school.

26

1500

Figure 4
Number of Observations

1000

!BS=-1.612
(39.872)

500

!ST=13.680
(25.268)

0

Observations

!BT=-30.822
(47.543)

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

This figure presents the number of outcomes in 0.01 wide bins. Outcomes within 0.25 standard
deviations of each school’s cutoff are presented, with cutoffs spaced by the average distance across
the sample period. Point estimates and standard errors from a local linear regression of the number
of outcomes on entrance exam score, school eligibility, and eligibility interacted with exam score
are displayed next to the relevant cutoff for each school. Standard errors are clustered at the exam
score level. Results include the 1994 through 2013 high school cohorts.

27

Figure 5
First Stage Results

.2

!ST=-0.121
(0.012)

!BT=0.224
(0.014)

!ST=-0.292
(0.019)
.4

Fraction

!BS=-0.113
(0.015)

.4
.2

Fraction

.6

.6

.8

Graduate Bronx Science

.8

Graduate Brooklyn Tech

!BS=0.311
(0.012)

0

0

!BT=-0.008
(0.003)
Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

.4
.2

Fraction

.6

.8

Graduate Stuyvesant

!ST=0.567
(0.021)
!BS=-0.002
(0.002)

0

!BT=-0.004
(0.005)
Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

This figure presents raw outcomes in 0.05 wide bins and reduced form results for the first stage
results. Outcomes within 0.25 standard deviations of each school’s cutoff are presented, with
cutoffs spaced by the average distance across the sample period. Point estimates and standard
errors from a local linear regression of each outcome on entrance exam score, school eligibility,
eligibility interacted with exam score, and cohort are displayed next to the relevant cutoff for each
school. Standard errors are clustered at the exam score level. Results include the 2002 through
2009 high school cohorts.

28

Figure 6
College Results
!BS=0.002
(0.010)

!BS=-0.007
(0.018)

.75

!ST=-0.013
(0.014)

.75

!BT=-0.008
(0.009)

Graduate 4 year college
1

1

Start a 4 year degree

!ST=-0.016
(0.021)

.5

Fraction

0

.25

.5
0

.25

Fraction

!BT=-0.023
(0.012)

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

Brooklyn Tech

1
.75

Fraction

!BS=-0.010
(0.013)
!BT=-0.016
(0.007)

0

0

.25

!BT=-0.007
(0.009)

!ST=0.007
(0.017)

.5

.75
.5

!BS=-0.004
(0.014)

.25

Fraction

!ST=0.014
(0.017)

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

.75
.5

.5

Fraction

.75

1

Start Post-grad Program

1

Start at college with median SAT > 1400

Fraction

Stuyvesant

Start at college with median SAT > 1300

1

Start at college with median SAT > 1200

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

!BT=-0.003
(0.011)

!ST=0.006
(0.020)

0

!BS=-0.008
(0.009)

0

!BT=-0.003
(0.005)

!BS=-0.011
(0.015)

.25

.25

!ST=0.005
(0.015)

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

This figure presents raw outcomes in 0.05 wide bins and reduced form results for college enrollment
and completion. Outcomes within 0.25 standard deviations of each school’s cutoff are presented,
with cutoffs spaced by the average distance across the sample period. Point estimates and standard
errors from a local linear regression of each outcome on entrance exam score, school eligibility,
eligibility interacted with exam score, and cohort are displayed next to the relevant cutoff for each
school. Standard errors are clustered at the exam score level. Results for college enrollment include
the 1994 through 2009 high school cohorts. Results for college graduation and post-grad enrollment
include the 1994 through 2002 high school cohorts.

29

Figure 7
High School Graduation Results

.6

Fraction

.4

.6

Fraction

.8

.8

!BT=0.007
(0.015)

Regents Diploma

!ST=0.007
(0.014)

1

1

HS Graduate
!BS=0.035
(0.010)

!BT=-0.046
(0.016)
!ST=0.026
(0.020)

.2

.2

.4

!BS=0.010
(0.014)

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

Brooklyn Tech

1

!BT=-0.002
(0.016)

!ST=0.004
(0.014)

.8

Fraction

!BS=0.028
(0.016)
!BT=0.044
(0.015)

.2

.2

.4

.6

!BS=0.039
(0.011)

.6

.8

!ST=-0.022
(0.023)

.4

Fraction

Stuyvesant

Regents or Adv Regents

1

Adv. Regents Diploma

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

This figure presents raw outcomes in 0.05 wide bins and reduced form results for high school
graduation and diploma type. Outcomes within 0.25 standard deviations of each school’s cutoff are
presented, with cutoffs spaced by the average distance across the sample period. Point estimates
and standard errors from a local linear regression of each outcome on entrance exam score, school
eligibility, eligibility interacted with exam score, and cohort are displayed next to the relevant cutoff
for each school. Standard errors are clustered at the exam score level. Results include the 2002
through 2009 high school cohorts.

30

Figure 7
Regents Completion Results

.8

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

Brooklyn Tech

1

!ST=0.013
(0.014)

!BT=-0.004
(0.012)

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score
Math 1
!BS=-0.002
(0.011)

Stuyvesant

!ST=0.012
(0.016)

.6
.4
.2

.2

.4

.6

Fraction

.8

!BT=0.040
(0.012)

!BS=0.036
(0.011)

.8

1

English Language Arts

Fraction

!ST=-0.033
(0.025)

.2

Brooklyn Tech

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

Brooklyn Tech

1

!BS=0.044
(0.019)

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

Number of Science Exams
3.5

Math 2
!ST=0.026
(0.019)

!BT=0.025
(0.020)

2.5

.6

Exams

!ST=0.483
(0.071)
!BT=-0.070
(0.044)

!BS=0.158
(0.046)

.4

2

.2

Fraction

3

.8

!BS=-0.008
(0.023)

.6

Fraction

!BT=0.051
(0.016)

.4

.6
.2

.4

Fraction

.8

!BT=0.039
(0.012)

US History
!ST=0.018
(0.014)

1

1

Global History
!BS=0.019
(0.012)

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

Brooklyn Tech

31

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

1

Living Environment

1

Earth System Science

!ST=0.025
(0.013)

.8

!BS=0.039
(0.014)

!ST=-0.003
(0.026)

.2

.2

.4

!BS=0.028
(0.021)

.4

!BT=-0.035
(0.017)

.6

Fraction

.6

Fraction

.8

!BT=0.026
(0.013)

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

Brooklyn Tech

Stuyvesant

1

Physics

1

Chemistry

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

.8

!BS=0.167
(0.026)
.6

!ST=0.386
(0.049)

!BT=0.004
(0.024)

.2

.2

.4

.6

!BS=-0.076
(0.026)

Fraction

!BT=-0.065
(0.023)

.4

Fraction

.8

!ST=0.075
(0.021)

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

This figure presents raw outcomes in 0.05 wide bins and reduced form results for Regents exam
completion. Outcomes within 0.25 standard deviations of each school’s cutoff are presented, with
cutoffs spaced by the average distance across the sample period. Point estimates and standard
errors from a local linear regression of each outcome on entrance exam score, school eligibility,
eligibility interacted with exam score, and cohort are displayed next to the relevant cutoff for each
school. Standard errors are clustered at the exam score level. Results include the 2005 through
2009 high school cohorts.

32

Figure 9
SAT Results
SAT Combined Score

!ST=0.027
(0.022)

!ST=-0.691
(12.137)

1900

!BS=0.024
(0.016)

!BS=0.617
(8.681)

SAT

!BT=0.013
(0.017)

1800

.8

Fraction

2000

1

Took SAT

.6

1700

!BT=14.390
(6.160)

Stuyvesant

Brooklyn Tech

SAT

!ST=-6.771
(6.021)

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

SAT Writing Score

750

750

SAT Reading Score

650

SAT

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

!ST=0.047
(6.089)

650

Brooklyn Tech

!BS=0.537
(4.516)

!BS=-0.277
(4.334)
!BT=2.009
(2.998)

550

550

!BT=1.373
(3.440)

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

SAT Math Score

750

Brooklyn Tech

!BS=0.612
(3.546)

650

SAT

!ST=5.844
(3.977)

550

!BT=10.906
(4.657)

Brooklyn Tech

Bronx Science
Entrance Exam Score

Stuyvesant

This figure presents raw outcomes in 0.05 wide bins and reduced form results for SAT results.
Outcomes within 0.25 standard deviations of each school’s cutoff are presented, with cutoffs spaced
by the average distance across the sample period. Point estimates and standard errors from a local
linear regression of each outcome on entrance exam score, school eligibility, eligibility interacted
with exam score, and cohort are displayed next to the relevant cutoff for each school. Standard
errors are clustered at the exam score level. Results include the 2007 through 2010 high school
cohorts.

33

HS
Cohort
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

Table 1: SHSAT Score Cutoffs
Stuyvsant
Bronx Sci
Rank
Score
Rank
Score
Applicants Cutoff Cutoff Cutoff Cutoff
14173
728
1.691
1995
1.104
13963
683
1.712
1821
1.171
14481
688
1.735
2118
1.100
16087
766
1.739
2321
1.123
16907
710
1.734
2114
1.183
17188
817
1.725
2006
1.228
17618
933
1.673
2248
1.177
18280
888
1.741
2330
1.186
18516
813
1.730
2245
1.170
19202
865
1.744
2264
1.230
19763
880
1.728
2202
1.241
19921
958
1.727
2190
1.279
20679
957
1.726
2075
1.312
25037
866
1.871
2046
1.434
26322
876
1.939
2313
1.410
26619
1088
1.863
2641
1.362
26707
1175
1.780
2966
1.265
25080
1220
1.740
3108
1.213
25871
1190
1.774
3289
1.182
27650
1179
1.814
3046
1.284

Brooktech
Rank
Score
Cutoff Cutoff
5305
0.288
4444
0.454
4658
0.443
5040
0.452
4745
0.578
5021
0.537
4738
0.604
4092
0.773
4043
0.764
4088
0.814
3905
0.862
3701
0.929
3567
0.963
3211
1.172
3974
1.057
4182
1.040
4788
0.936
4853
0.894
4921
0.897
4976
0.941

This table reports the SHSAT cutoffs for each school and cohort. Test results are ranked from
the highest score to the lowest, and administrators place students in high schools starting with the
students with the highest score. Each student is placed into their most preferred school that still
has seats until no seats remain at any exam school. We report the rank and standardized test score
of the last student admitted to a school in each cohort.

34

HS
Cohort
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

Race
Data
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Table 2
Data Availability
8th State Regents SAT
Scores
Scores Scores
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No

35

HS Grad
Data
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No

College
Enrollment
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No

Table 3
Summary Statistics
Student Characteristics
Male
White
Asian
Black
Hispanic
Free Lunch
8th Math
8th ELA

NYC
0.510
0.124
0.137
0.337
0.388
0.619
0.005
0.003

Stuyvesant
0.575
0.280
0.670
0.018
0.030
0.390
2.081
1.976

Bronx
Science
0.561
0.269
0.599
0.038
0.075
0.312
1.750
1.612

Regents Taking Outcomes
Math 1
Math 2
English Language Arts
US History
Global History
Number of Science Regents
Living Environment
Earth System Science
Chemistry
Physics

0.537
0.171
0.631
0.518
0.641
1.220
0.615
0.296
0.214
0.095

0.744
0.748
0.957
0.762
0.965
3.217
0.959
0.358
0.960
0.940

0.736
0.741
0.952
0.770
0.963
2.544
0.968
0.252
0.377
0.947

0.757
0.717
0.924
0.909
0.942
2.181
0.910
0.356
0.391
0.525

Graduation Outcomes
HS Graduate
Local Diploma
Regents Diploma
Adv. Regents Diploma

0.468
0.227
0.171
0.091

0.930
0.001
0.122
0.814

0.911
0.007
0.228
0.686

0.871
0.042
0.192
0.653

SAT Outcomes
Took SAT
SAT Score (if taken)

0.349
1340.794

0.915
2058.967

0.896
1935.119

0.850
1794.771

College Outcomes
Start 4-year College
College SAT > 1200
College SAT > 1300
College SAT > 1400

0.319
0.048
0.024
0.009

0.839
0.663
0.519
0.284

0.834
0.508
0.321
0.138

0.777
0.249
0.129
0.048

School Characteristics
Teacher Salary
Teacher Experience
Teacher Absences
Students per Teacher
Students per Staff

72557
11.018
0.404
15.412
14.440

78152
13.955
0.535
11.294
10.674

72088
11.180
0.254
12.497
10.165

76213
12.447
0.387
9.478
9.281

36

Brooklyn
Tech
0.576
0.214
0.570
0.128
0.084
0.621
1.601
1.344

This table reports summary statistics for New York City’s exam high schools. The sample is
restricted to NYC public school students in the 2002 through 2013 high school cohorts. Each
outcome includes all available cohorts listed in Table 2. Regents Math 1 includes Math A and
Integrated Algebra. Math 2 includes Math B and Trigonmetry. School characteristics are from the
2008 - 2009 school year.

37

Table 4
College Results by Gender and Middle School Type
Dependent Variable = Start a 4 year degree
Public
Private
p-value
Male
Female
Stuyvesant
−0.023
0.019
0.129
−0.014
−0.012
(0.017)
(0.022)
(0.018)
(0.022)
14156
14156
Bronx Science −0.003
0.020
0.335
0.004
−0.001
(0.012)
(0.019)
(0.014)
(0.014)
27120
27120
Brooklyn Tech −0.001
−0.030∗
0.209
−0.022
0.007
(0.012)
(0.017)
(0.015)
(0.011)
39007
39007

Dependent Variable = Graduate 4 year college
Public
Private
p-value
Male
Female
Stuyvesant
−0.043
0.056
0.046
0.026
−0.068∗∗
(0.026)
(0.039)
(0.030)
(0.027)
9558
9558
Bronx Science −0.016
0.031
0.191
0.003
−0.018
(0.022)
(0.028)
(0.021)
(0.022)
18709
18709
Brooklyn Tech −0.016
−0.039
0.504
−0.045∗∗∗ −0.001
(0.015)
(0.026)
(0.017)
(0.017)
27850
27850

Dependent Variable = Start Post-grad Program
Public
Private
p-value
Male
Female
Stuyvesant
−0.005
0.034
0.382
0.035
−0.029
(0.023)
(0.039)
(0.027)
(0.027)
9558
9558
Bronx Science −0.018
0.010
0.427
−0.014
−0.013
(0.018)
(0.028)
(0.018)
(0.024)
18709
18709
Brooklyn Tech −0.001
−0.004
0.917
−0.025∗∗
0.018
(0.012)
(0.023)
(0.012)
(0.017)
27850
27850

38

p-value
0.949

0.818

0.160

p-value
0.021

0.411

0.077

p-value
0.065

0.974

0.050

Dependent Variable = Start at college with median SAT >1200
Public
Private
p-value
Male
Female
Stuyvesant
0.019
0.003
0.629
0.013
0.015
(0.020)
(0.028)
(0.025)
(0.026)
14156
14156
Bronx Science −0.007
0.011
0.531
−0.013
0.006
(0.015)
(0.026)
(0.017)
(0.019)
27120
27120
Brooklyn Tech −0.012
0.017
0.279
−0.012
0.000
(0.010)
(0.024)
(0.012)
(0.013)
39007
39007

Dependent Variable = Start at college with median SAT >1300
Public
Private
p-value
Male
Female
Stuyvesant
0.007
0.009
0.966
0.005
0.007
(0.021)
(0.036)
(0.024)
(0.025)
14156
14156
Bronx Science −0.018
0.021
0.142
−0.030∗
0.012
(0.014)
(0.026)
(0.016)
(0.018)
27120
27120
Brooklyn Tech −0.014∗
−0.022
0.703
−0.014
−0.017
(0.008)
(0.020)
(0.009)
(0.012)
39007
39007

Dependent Variable = Start at college with median SAT >1400
Public
Private
p-value
Male
Female
Stuyvesant
0.018
−0.032
0.251
0.023
−0.018
(0.018)
(0.037)
(0.019)
(0.025)
14156
14156
Bronx Science −0.017∗∗
0.022
0.199
−0.020∗
0.004
(0.009)
(0.028)
(0.011)
(0.013)
27120
27120
Brooklyn Tech −0.004
0.001
0.716
−0.005
−0.001
(0.005)
(0.014)
(0.006)
(0.009)
39007
39007

p-value
0.954

0.385

0.468

p-value
0.953

0.040

0.816

p-value
0.179

0.127

0.783

This table reports reduced form estimates by subsample. The regressions also control for a local
linear regression of each outcome on entrance exam score, school eligibility, eligibility interacted
with exam score, and cohort. Standard errors are clustered at the SHSAT score level. *** =
significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

39

Table 5
College Results by Baseline State Test Score
Dependent Variable = Start a 4 year degree
Upper
Lower
Upper
Lower
Half
Half
p-value Quartile Quartiles
Stuyvesant
0.011
−0.046
0.218
0.034
−0.036
(0.027)
(0.044)
(0.033)
(0.032)
4250
4250
Bronx Science −0.014
−0.004
0.842
−0.022
−0.003
(0.031)
(0.027)
(0.047)
(0.023)
7767
7767
Brooklyn Tech
0.005
0.008
0.950
−0.047
0.015
(0.040)
(0.024)
(0.064)
(0.020)
10286
10286

Dependent Variable = Graduate 4 year college
Upper
Lower
Upper
Lower
Half
Half
p-value Quartile Quartiles
Stuyvesant
0.031
0.004
0.832
−0.046
0.111
(0.095)
(0.148)
(0.157)
(0.083)
696
696
Bronx Science −0.036
−0.005
0.810
0.066
−0.014
(0.108)
(0.085)
(0.160)
(0.068)
1344
1344
Brooklyn Tech
0.003
0.020
0.881
−0.040
0.031
(0.098)
(0.045)
(0.246)
(0.046)
1830
1830

Dependent Variable = Start Post-grad Program
Upper
Lower
Upper
Lower
Half
Half
p-value Quartile Quartiles
Stuyvesant
0.046
0.031
0.915
0.074
−0.003
(0.085)
(0.088)
(0.105)
(0.067)
696
696
Bronx Science −0.150
−0.056
0.426
−0.074
−0.068
(0.111)
(0.049)
(0.137)
(0.047)
1344
1344
Brooklyn Tech −0.064
−0.009
0.520
0.035
−0.019
(0.085)
(0.030)
(0.233)
(0.032)
1830
1830

40

p-value
0.074

0.737

0.343

p-value
0.318

0.623

0.797

p-value
0.528

0.962

0.822

Dependent Variable = Start at college with median SAT >1200
Upper
Lower
Upper
Lower
Half
Half
p-value Quartile Quartiles
Stuyvesant
0.062∗
−0.027
0.125
0.072
0.002
(0.036)
(0.048)
(0.048)
(0.042)
4250
4250
Bronx Science
0.000
−0.007
0.875
−0.034
0.006
(0.032)
(0.030)
(0.056)
(0.025)
7767
7767
Brooklyn Tech −0.009
0.001
0.828
−0.026
0.002
(0.042)
(0.016)
(0.064)
(0.015)
10286
10286

Dependent Variable = Start at college with median SAT >1300
Upper
Lower
Upper
Lower
Half
Half
p-value Quartile Quartiles
Stuyvesant
0.059
−0.005
0.162
0.057
0.021
(0.037)
(0.038)
(0.047)
(0.036)
4250
4250
Bronx Science
0.002
−0.014
0.729
−0.023
−0.003
(0.028)
(0.030)
(0.046)
(0.023)
7767
7767
Brooklyn Tech
0.009
−0.020
0.427
0.029
−0.018
(0.034)
(0.013)
(0.054)
(0.012)
10286
10286

Dependent Variable = Start at college with median SAT >1400
Upper
Lower
Upper
Lower
Half
Half
p-value Quartile Quartiles
Stuyvesant
0.060∗
−0.001
0.161
0.054
0.028
(0.032)
(0.027)
(0.037)
(0.027)
4250
4250
Bronx Science −0.027
−0.017
0.717
−0.063∗
−0.009
(0.023)
(0.014)
(0.038)
(0.011)
7767
7767
Brooklyn Tech
0.010
−0.016∗∗
0.311
0.045
−0.015∗∗
(0.023)
(0.008)
(0.035)
(0.007)
10286
10286

41

p-value
0.290

0.550

0.667

p-value
0.506

0.724

0.386

p-value
0.566

0.188

0.098

This table reports reduced form estimates by 8th grade state test score. The sample includes the
2003 through 2009 high school cohorts who attended a public middle school in New York City.
The upper half group consists of students with a combined math and English 8th grade score in
the upper half of students close to and above the Brooklyn Tech cutoff. The upper quartile group
is defined similarly. The regressions also control for a local linear regression of each outcome on
entrance exam score, school eligibility, eligibility interacted with exam score, and cohort. Standard
errors are clustered at the SHSAT score level. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant
at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

42

8

Appendix A: Additional Results
Appendix Table 1
First Stage Results for All Exam Schools
Bronx
Q. Sci/
Stuyvesant
Science
Lehman
MSE
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
Stuyvesant
0.695
−0.336
−0.006
−0.001
(0.025)
(0.029)
(0.009)
(0.005)
3004
3004
3004
3004
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
Bronx Science
0.001
0.346
−0.074
−0.021∗∗
(0.002)
(0.021)
(0.014)
(0.009)
5872
5872
5872
5872
∗
∗
∗∗∗
Queens Science/Lehman
−0.005
−0.006
0.082
−0.031∗∗
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.011)
(0.015)
7563
7563
7563
7563
MSE
−0.007
−0.012∗∗ −0.020∗∗
0.068∗∗∗
(0.008)
(0.005)
(0.010)
(0.018)
8046
8046
8046
8046
Brooklyn Tech
−0.009
−0.015∗∗∗ −0.026∗∗∗
0.021
(0.011)
(0.005)
(0.009)
(0.019)
8150
8150
8150
8150

Brooklyn
Tech
−0.157∗∗∗
(0.023)
3004
−0.075∗∗
(0.030)
5872
−0.060∗∗
(0.029)
7563
0.128∗∗∗
(0.041)
8046
0.242∗∗∗
(0.030)
8150

This table presents reduced form estimates for graduating from each exam school. The sample
includes the 2007 through 2009 high school cohorts. The Queens Science and Lehman results are
combined as the cutoffs overlap in most years. When not overlapping, we use the lower of the two
cutoffs. Standard errors are clustered by exam score. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** =
significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

43

Appendix Table 2
College Results for All Exam Schools
Start
1200+
1300+
4-year
SAT
SAT
Stuyvesant
−0.012
0.029
0.029
(0.029)
(0.036)
(0.039)
2720
2720
2720
Bronx Science
0.005
0.012
0.000
(0.024)
(0.023)
(0.020)
5111
5111
5111
Queens Science/Lehman −0.007
−0.015
−0.012
(0.019)
(0.023)
(0.019)
6415
6415
6415
MSE
0.019
−0.010
−0.019
(0.027)
(0.021)
(0.018)
6778
6778
6778
Brooklyn Tech
0.003
−0.021
−0.024
(0.025)
(0.019)
(0.019)
6855
6855
6855

1400+
SAT
0.039
(0.033)
2720
−0.023
(0.018)
5111
0.012
(0.012)
6415
−0.029∗∗
(0.012)
6778
−0.029∗∗
(0.011)
6855

This table presents reduced form estimates for graduating from each exam school. The sample
includes the 2007 through 2009 high school cohorts. The Queens Science and Lehman results are
combined as the cutoffs overlap in most years. When not overlapping, we use the lower of the two
cutoffs. Standard errors are clustered by exam score. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** =
significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

44

Appendix Table 3
High School Graduation Results for All Exam Schools
Grad
Regents Advanced
Either
HS
Diploma
Regents
Regents
Stuyvesant
−0.008
−0.007
−0.006
−0.013
(0.015)
(0.019)
(0.022)
(0.017)
2251
2251
2251
2251
Bronx Science
0.057∗∗∗ −0.031∗
0.079∗∗∗
0.048∗∗∗
(0.014)
(0.017)
(0.024)
(0.013)
4319
4319
4319
4319
Queens Science/Lehman
0.021
−0.015
0.036
0.021
(0.019)
(0.016)
(0.023)
(0.019)
5488
5488
5488
5488
∗
MSE
0.031
−0.009
0.025
0.016
(0.017)
(0.024)
(0.028)
(0.019)
5789
5789
5789
5789
∗
∗
Brooklyn Tech
0.029
−0.029
0.054
0.025
(0.017)
(0.026)
(0.028)
(0.017)
5866
5866
5866
5866
This table presents reduced form estimates for high school graduation outcomes. The sample
includes the 2007 through 2009 high school cohorts. The Queens Science and Lehman results are
combined as the cutoffs overlap in most years. When not overlapping, we use the lower of the two
cutoffs. Standard errors are clustered by exam score. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** =
significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

45

46

Brooklyn Tech

MSE

Living
Env
0.016
(0.013)
2251
0.031∗
(0.016)
4319
0.000
(0.019)
5488
0.027∗
(0.016)
5789
0.025∗
(0.014)
5866

This table presents reduced form estimates for high school Regents outcomes. The sample includes
the 2007 through 2009 high school cohorts. The Queens Science and Lehman results are combined
as the cutoffs overlap in most years. When not overlapping, we use the lower of the two cutoffs.
Standard errors are clustered by exam score. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant
at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

Queens Science/Lehman

Bronx Science

Stuyvesant

Global
History
0.011
(0.014)
2251
0.021
(0.016)
4319
0.020
(0.014)
5488
0.012
(0.014)
5789
0.027∗∗
(0.013)
5866

Appendix Table 4
Regents Results for All Exam Schools
U.S.
Math
Math
N
Earth
History
ELA
1
2
Science
Science
0.012
0.001
0.007
0.003
0.335∗∗∗
0.000
(0.016)
(0.013)
(0.012)
(0.017)
(0.088)
(0.038)
2251
2251
2251
2251
2251
2251
0.051∗∗
0.028∗∗
0.007
0.063∗∗
0.132∗
0.025
(0.024)
(0.012)
(0.014)
(0.027)
(0.075)
(0.032)
4319
4319
4319
4319
4319
4319
0.037∗
0.005
0.024∗∗
0.035∗
0.074
0.004
(0.021)
(0.016)
(0.012)
(0.020)
(0.058)
(0.030)
5488
5488
5488
5488
5488
5488
∗
∗
0.021
0.025
−0.021
0.039
0.072
−0.027
(0.019)
(0.017)
(0.012)
(0.020)
(0.055)
(0.032)
5789
5789
5789
5789
5789
5789
∗∗∗
∗
∗
0.026
0.040
0.008
0.037
0.080
−0.039
(0.017)
(0.014)
(0.011)
(0.019)
(0.044)
(0.024)
5866
5866
5866
5866
5866
5866
Chemistry
0.292∗∗∗
(0.066)
2251
−0.040
(0.034)
4319
0.050∗
(0.030)
5488
0.021
(0.028)
5789
0.015
(0.025)
5866

Physics
0.027
(0.020)
2251
0.116∗∗∗
(0.031)
4319
0.020
(0.027)
5488
0.050∗
(0.028)
5789
0.079∗∗∗
(0.024)
5866

Appendix Table 5
SAT Results for All Exam Schools
Took
SAT
SAT
Score
Stuyvesant
0.023
−6.271
(0.030)
(22.850)
3159
1015
Bronx Science
0.022
19.274
(0.021)
(12.618)
5996
1800
Queens Science/Lehman −0.005
2.030
(0.020)
(12.703)
7544
2195
MSE
−0.008
17.383
(0.019)
(13.259)
7998
2297
Brooklyn Tech
−0.003
−3.021
(0.016)
(12.866)
8075
2320
This table presents reduced form estimates for SAT outcomes. The sample includes the 2007
through 2010 high school cohorts. The Queens Science and Lehman results are combined as the
cutoffs overlap in most years. When not overlapping, we use the lower of the two cutoffs. Standard
errors are clustered by exam score. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent
level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

47

Stuyvesant

Bronx Science

Brooklyn Tech

Appendix Table 6
College Results for NYC Sample
Start
Grad
1200+
1300+
4-year
College
SAT
SAT
−0.003
0.043
0.071∗∗
0.042
(0.021)
(0.047)
(0.028)
(0.028)
5569
1991
5569
5569
−0.010
−0.007
0.005
−0.015
(0.015)
(0.038)
(0.018)
(0.018)
10504
4026
10504
10504
−0.001
−0.044
0.001
−0.002
(0.016)
(0.030)
(0.013)
(0.010)
13857
5389
13857
13857

1400+
SAT
0.036∗
(0.019)
5569
−0.022∗∗
(0.011)
10504
−0.006
(0.006)
13857

Post
Grad
0.013
(0.036)
1991
−0.048∗
(0.026)
4026
−0.018
(0.022)
5389

This table presents reduced form estimates for college outcomes. The sample includes the 2002
through 2009 high school cohorts who attended a public middle and high school in NYC. Standard
errors are clustered by exam score. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent
level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

48

Appendix Table 7
Rule of Thumb Bandwidth
Stuyvesant Bronx Science

Brook Tech

First Stage Outcomes
Graduate Stuyvesant
Graduate Bronx Science
Graduate Brooklyn Tech
NYC Public School

0.618
0.289
0.324
1.190

0.079
0.221
0.165
0.523

0.404
0.103
0.174
0.739

College Outcomes
Start a 4 year degree
Graduate 4 year college
College SAT over 1200
College SAT over 1300
College SAT over 1400
Start Post-grad Program

1.057
1.019
0.750
0.567
0.592
0.653

0.909
0.623
0.489
0.446
0.477
0.761

0.723
0.399
0.728
0.515
0.459
0.804

High School Graduation Outcomes
HS Graduate
Regents Diploma
Adv. Regents Diploma
Regents or Adv Regents

0.421
0.645
1.027
0.417

0.914
0.532
0.499
0.646

0.353
0.268
0.430
0.455

High School Regents Outcomes
Math 1
Math 2
English Language Arts
US History
Global History
Number of Science Exams
Living Environment
Earth System Science
Chemistry
Physics

0.766
0.531
0.567
0.619
0.524
0.726
0.536
0.698
0.599
0.278

0.413
0.536
0.560
0.401
0.364
0.761
0.377
0.573
0.442
0.684

0.599
0.664
0.728
0.252
0.373
0.408
0.480
0.418
0.260
0.320

High School SAT Outcomes
Took SAT
1.396
0.704
0.585
SAT Score (if taken)
0.781
0.567
0.703
This table reports optimal rule of thumb bandwidths from Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2009).

49

Appendix Table 8
Robustness of First Stage Results
Bronx
Brooklyn
Stuyvesant
Science
Tech
Stuyvesant
2.712∗∗∗ −1.350∗∗∗ −0.617∗∗∗
(0.087)
(0.109)
(0.093)
4218
4218
4218
Bronx Science
0.009
1.419∗∗∗ −0.353∗∗∗
(0.007)
(0.063)
(0.089)
8173
8173
8173
Brooklyn Tech
−0.030
−0.046∗∗∗
1.110∗∗∗
(0.034)
(0.017)
(0.101)
11301
11301
11301
This table presents reduced form estimates for the number of years attending each exam school.
The sample includes the 2007 through 2010 high school cohorts. Standard errors are clustered by
exam score. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant
at 10 percent level.

50

No. of Bins
25
13
10
5

Bin Size
0.02
0.04
0.05
0.010

Appendix Table 9
Bin Width Test
Stuyvesant
Bronx Science
Enrollment Grad Enrollment Grad
0.003
0.002
0.956
0.565
0.506
0.510
0.702
0.552
0.247
0.290
0.349
0.035
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Brooklyn Tech
Enrollment Grad
0.169
0.227
0.757
0.294
0.559
0.041
0.000
0.000

This table reports results of the optimal bin width. Each column reports results of a regression of
where we add a set of interactions between the bin dummies and the running variable to a base
regression of an outcome variable on the set of bin dummies. The p-value is from the test of whether
the interactions are jointly significant.

51

9
9.1

Appendix B: Data Description and Construction of Variables
New York City Administrative Data

Demographic variables
Demographic information was pulled from New York City enrollment files spanning the 200304 to 2009-10 school years, with precedence given to the most recent file. Race consisted of the
following categories: Black, Hispanic, White, Asian, and Other. These categories are considered
mutually exclusive.
A student was considered free lunch if he was coded as “A” or “1” in the raw data, which
corresponds to free lunch or “2” which corresponds to reduced-price lunch. A student was considered
non free lunch if the student was coded as a “3”, which corresponds to Full Price. All other values,
including blanks, were coded as missing.
New York State 8th Grade Test Scores
State test scores in 8th grade were pulled from the NYC test score files spanning the 1999
- 2000 to 2009 - 2010 school years. Scores were standardized by year and grade to have mean
of zero and standard deviation of one. The state mathematics and English Language Arts tests,
developed by McGraw-Hill, are exams conducted in the winters of third through eighth grade. The
math test includes questions on number sense and operations, algebra, geometry, measurement,
and statistics. Tests in later grades focus on advanced topics such as algebra and geometry. The
ELA test is designed to assess students on three learning standards nformation and understanding,
literary response and expression, critical analysis and evaluation ncludes multiple-choice and shortresponse sections based on a reading and listening section, along with a brief editing task.
New York State Regents Test Scores
Regents test scores for high school subjects were pulled from the NYC Regents test score files
for 1998 - 1999 through 2009 - 2010. For each subject we construct indicator variables for a student
having taken the exam, for having passed the exam at the basic level (55 out of 100), for having
passed the exam at the Regents level (65 out of 100), and for having obtained mastery in the
subject (85 out of 100). As the structure of the Math exams have changed over our sample period,
we combine Sequential Math 1, Math A and Integrated Algebra scores and Sequential Math 3,
Math B, and Trigonometry scores (based on the advice of NYC staff). Results are identical if we
restrict the results to Math A and B, which make up the majority of our observations.
Regents exams are administered within schools in January, June, and August of each calendar
year and are given in a wide variety of subjects, but scores range from 0 to 100 for every Regents
exam. Students typically take exams at the end of the corresponding course, so that most students
take the exams in June. Unlike most other standardized exams, teachers grade the Regents exams
for students in their own school. The State Education Department of New York provides explicit
guidelines for how the teacher-based scoring of each Regents exam should be organized.
Regents exam requirements have changed somewhat during the years we examine (1998 to 2010).
To graduate, students generally must score at least 55 on each of five core Regents examinations:
English, Mathematics, Science, U.S. History and Government, and Global History and Geography.
In order to receive a more prestigious Regents Diploma, students must receive a score of at least
65 in each of these five core subjects. To earn an Advanced Regents Diploma, students must also
score at least a 65 on elective exams in math, science, and foreign language.
Currently, the option of receiving a local diploma is being eliminated entirely. Beginning with
those who entered the 9th grade in the fall of 2008, students are required to meet the Regents
Diploma requirements (score 65 or higher in each of the five core subjects) in order to graduate
52

from high school in New York State. The shift from local diploma to Regents diploma requirements
was done gradually, with students entering 9th grade in fall 2005 having to score 65 in at least two
core subjects, and each subsequent cohort facing stricter requirements.
A score of 85 is labeled as achieving mastery of the subject matter. While scoring 85 or higher
is not relevant for high school graduation, meeting this cutoff is often used by high schools as a
prerequisite for courses and by New York State colleges as either a prerequisite or qualification for
credit towards a degree. Beginning with students who entered 9th grade in the fall of 2009, an
additional accolade of Annotation of Mastery in science and/or math became available for students
who score above 85 on three Regents exams in science and/or math.
Regents examinations contain both multiple-choice and open-response questions. The foreign
language exams also contain a speaking component. Scoring materials provided to schools include
the correct answers to multiple-choice questions and detailed, subject-specific instructions and
procedures for evaluating open-ended and essay questions.
School Characteristics
School-level student variables were constructed for each school based on the population of
students who were assigned to that high school in the NYC graduation files for the 2002 through
2009 high school cohorts.
School-level teacher variables were constructed for each school based on the 2008 - 2009 Human
Resources file. We define teacher salaries as the mean salary for all school staff designated as full
time teachers. Teacher experience is defined similarly. Student to teacher and staff ratios were
constructed using 2008 - 2009 staffing levels and the average cohort size for the 2002 through 2009
high school cohorts.
High School Graduation variables
High school graduation variables were pulled from the 2002 through 2009 city and state graduation files. City files are available for all years, while state files are only available for 2002 - 2008.
In overlapping years the state files are given precendence. A student is defined as having graduated
if she received a local, Regents, or Advanced Regents diploma. We define students who transfer,
drop out, receive a GED, or receive a special education diploma as having not graduated.
SAT variables
SAT score variables were pulled from the 2006 through 2009 city SAT files, which consists
of SAT scores for all students enrolled in a public NYC school when taking the SAT. We use a
student’s best combined score during the testing period. All scores are out of 2400.

9.2

Specialized High Schools Admissions Test Data

Admissions to the academic SHS is determined by the Specialized High Schools admissions test
(SHSAT). The test is broken into two sections, one math and one verbal, and students are given
2 hours and 30 minutes per section with no break. The verbal section is made up of 45 multiplechoice questions. 30 questions test reading comprehension, 10 questions test logical reasoning, and
5 questions require students to put sentences into the most logical order in a paragraph. The math
section is comprised of 50 multiple-choice questions, which test basic math, algebra (factoring and
substitution), geometry, basic graphing, logic, and word problems.
In scoring the SHSAT, there is no penalty for wrong answers and correct answers receive points.
The raw number of questions correct is scaled through a Department of Education formula, and
scores fall between 200 and 800. Due to the formula used by the DOE, students who score very
53

highly in one section but poorly in another are more likely to have a higher score than students
who score well on both.
On the day of the exam, students rank the schools in order of where they want to go. Test
results are ranked from the highest score to the lowest, and administrators place students in high
schools starting with the students with the highest score. Each student is placed into their most
preferred school that still has seats until no seats remain at any SHS.
SHSAT scores, gender and middle school type were pulled from the NYC test score r 1989
through 2008. Scores were standardized by year to have mean of zero and standard deviation of
one in the sample of test takers. Eligibility rank and score cutoffs were defined as the first student
who wanted to attend a specific school but was not accepted to that school. Gender was coded
as male, non-male, or missing. Middle school type was coded as public, private, or missing. We
consider only 8th grade admissions, dropping all SHSAT scores from 9th grade.

9.3

National Student Clearinghouse Data

Information on college attendance and graduation comes from the National Student Clearinghouse
(NSC), a non-profit organization that maintains enrollment information for 92 percent of colleges
nationwide. We provided each student’s full name, date of birth and high school graduation date,
which the NSC used to match to its database. The NSC data contain information on enrollment
spells for all covered colleges that a student attended. Information is available on full or part-time
status and degree receipt in some cases.
We code a student as having enrolled in a four year college if she ever attends a four year school
in the NSC data. We code a student as having graduated from a four year college if she if the
NSC data indicates having received a degree from a four year school. We code a student as having
enrolled in a post-graduate university if they enroll in any non-two-year college after receiving a
four year degree.
To provide a measure of college quality, we match the NSC data to data on college characteristics from the U.S. News and World Report. The U.S. News and World Report collects data on
college characteristics and statistics for four-year colleges in the U.S., including average class size,
size of the faculty, graduation rates, tuition, room and board, average debt, loan size, percent of
students receiving aid, acceptance rate, standardized test scores, high school GPA where available,
demographic information on gender and the diversity index, freshman retention, and annual alumni
donations. We use midpoint SAT score as our primary measure of college quality. When only ACT
scores are available, we convert them to SAT scores using the ACT’s official score concordance
chart found at http://www.act.org/aap/concordance/. We code a student as having attended a
school with an SAT over 1200/1300/1400 if any of the four year schools attended by that student
have a median SAT over that threshold.

54

