                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   SPILLOVER EFFECTS IN MUTUAL FUND COMPANIES

                                           Clemens Sialm
                                           T. Mandy Tham

                                        Working Paper 17292
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17292


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




We thank Long Chen, Susan Christoffersen, Wayne Ferson, Andre Guettler, Jennifer Huang, Jiekun
Huang, Inmoo Lee, Michael Lemmon, Lubos Pastor, Lukasz Pomorski, Veronika Pool, Laura Starks,
 Sheridan Titman, Mitch Warachka, Scott Weisbenner, Zoran Ivkovich, and seminar participants at
the 2011 China International Conference in Finance, the 2011 Financial Intermediation Research Society
Meeting, the 2011 National Taiwan University International Conference on Economics, Finance, and
Accounting, the Cheung Kong Graduate School of Business, the Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology, the Hong Kong Baptist University, and the University of Texas at Austin for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Clemens Sialm and T. Mandy Tham. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Spillover Effects in Mutual Fund Companies
Clemens Sialm and T. Mandy Tham
NBER Working Paper No. 17292
August 2011
JEL No. G11,G23,G30

                                            ABSTRACT

Our paper investigates spillover effects across different business segments of publicly traded mutual
fund management companies. We find that the prior stock price performance of the management company
has a significant impact on the money flows and the management turnover of the affiliated mutual
funds. Mutual funds managed by poorly performing firms experience unexpectedly low flows of new
money and exhibit a significantly higher attrition of fund managers even if the mutual funds themselves
performed well. Our results remain strong for companies where mutual funds account for only a small
fraction of the overall revenues and hold for both equity and bond mutual funds. These results indicate
that the financial health of a diversified firm has a significant impact on the prospects of the various
business segments.


Clemens Sialm
University of Texas at Austin
McCombs School of Business
1 University Station; B6600
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
clemens.sialm@mccombs.utexas.edu

T. Mandy Tham
Nanyang Technological University
50 Nanyang Avenue
S3-B1a-34
Singapore 639798
atmtham@ntu.edu.sg
1     Introduction

Mutual funds are often managed by financial firms that are also active in other business
segments, such as banking and insurance. Such diversified companies can exhibit spillovers

across the various business segments. Our paper investigates whether the prior stock price
performance of the management company has an impact on the money flows into affiliated
mutual funds and the turnover of mutual fund managers.
    A relation between the performance of the management company and the activities of the

affiliated mutual funds can occur for two primary reasons. First, the performance of the man-
agement company can simply be a reflection of the performance of the mutual fund segment.
Companies that manage successful mutual funds might exhibit superior stock price perfor-
mance because the stock price capitalizes the value of the mutual fund sector to the financial

conglomerate. It is therefore important to control for the performance of the mutual fund
segment. This direct spillover effect is particularly pronounced for management companies
where the mutual fund segment accounts for a large fraction of the company’s revenues.
    Second, indirect spillover effects between the various business segments can affect the

money flows and the management turnover of mutual funds. Poorly performing firms are
more constrained and might have to reduce the expenditures for all their business segments.
For example, a decrease in the generosity of the compensation to their managers could result
in increased attrition of skilled fund managers, which would justify the money outflows. In

addition, poorly performing firms might also cross-subsidize different business segments and
extract resources from their well-performing mutual fund segment. On the other hand, mutual
fund investors could extrapolate irrationally from the performance of the diversified company
to the mutual fund segment. Thus, investors and fund managers might abandon mutual

funds associated with poorly performing management companies even if the funds themselves


                                              2
exhibit superior performance.
   To investigate the relation between the stock price performance of management companies

and the money flows and manager turnover of their affiliated mutual funds, we collect a sample
of 118 publicly traded companies that manage mutual funds over the period from 1992 to 2009.
Whereas some companies focus their activities on mutual fund management, most companies
derive only a small fraction of their revenues from their mutual fund segments. Comparing

the spillover effects between firms with differential dependence on the mutual fund segment
enables us to study in more depth the economic determinants of the spillover effects.
   Whereas the impact of prior fund performance on fund flows has received significant atten-
tion in the mutual fund literature (e.g., Chevalier and Ellison (1997), Sirri and Tufano (1998),

and Huang, Wei, and Yan (2007)), no papers have studied the impact of the performance of
the management company on fund flows. Our main result shows that the prior management
company performance plays an important role in explaining mutual fund flows. For example,
equity funds affiliated with fund companies in the top industry-adjusted performance decile

over the prior 36 months increase their assets under management in the subsequent month by
0.29%. On the other hand, equity funds from companies in the bottom decile lower their assets
by 0.33% in the subsequent month. The importance of company performance as a predictor
of fund flows is robust using alternative performance measures, using alternative evaluation

periods, and after controlling for prior fund performance and other fund characteristics. Thus,
there are important spillovers across different divisions of diversified companies.
   We separately study the money flows and the management turnover of both equity and
bond mutual funds. The impact of the stock price performance of the management company

on the money flows for bond mutual funds has a similar economic magnitude as for equity
funds. For example, bond funds affiliated with fund companies in the top industry-adjusted
performance decile over the prior 36 months increase their assets under management in the

                                               3
subsequent month by 0.14%, whereas bond funds from companies in the bottom decile lower
their assets by 0.23% in the subsequent month. Finding consistent results for both bond and

equity mutual funds strengthens our confidence that the results are not spurious and are not
driven by equity-specific fundamental factors.
   To study the economic reasons for the spillover effects, we separate the mutual funds
companies into two groups by their relative size of the mutual fund segment. If the correlation

between prior stock price performance and fund flows is simply a reflection of the performance
of the mutual funds, then we should observe a stronger relation for companies with relatively
large mutual fund segments. On the other hand, if the economic magnitude of the relation
between fund flows and company performance does not depend on the relative size of the

fund segment, then indirect spillover effects are more important in driving this relation. The
mutual fund segment is relatively small for most of the publicly-traded management mutual
fund companies in our sample. The revenues of equity (bond) mutual funds account for only
0.32% (0.14%) of the total revenues of the median management company. Thus, the mutual

fund segment is of minor importance for most management companies. Although the relative
importance of the mutual fund segment differs substantially between below and above median
equity funds (0.11% vs. 9.63% of total company revenues), we find that the impact of company
performance on fund flows is almost identical across the two groups of companies. This result

indicates that the relation between flows and company returns is unlikely to simply reflect the
superior performance of the mutual funds.
   To investigate whether there is a non-linear relation between company performance and
family flows, we estimate whether flows react more to inferior or superior company perfor-

mance. Whereas the mutual fund literature has shown a higher sensitivity to fund performance
for funds with superior performance, we find a higher sensitivity to company performance for
firms with inferior prior performance. This result shows that funds managed by distressed

                                                 4
companies with poor industry-adjusted stock returns experience significantly larger outflows
than expected by their prior fund performance. Thus, our results give an indication of the

costs of financial distress in financial conglomerates.
   We also study whether there is an impact of the company performance on the labor market
of mutual fund managers. We find a negative relation between manager departures and the
performance of the management company even after controlling for the fund performance.

This result contributes to the mutual fund literature that has shown that the fund performance
has a significant impact on fund manager turnover (e.g., Khorana (1996)).
   Our final question addresses whether the response of fund investors to the company per-
formance is justified. To answer this question, we estimate the relation between the prior per-

formance of management companies and the subsequent fund performance. Although these
performance predictability tests have limited power, we find that funds affiliated with poorly
performing management companies tend to exhibit relatively poor subsequent performance.
Thus, fund investors might rationally withdraw funds from poorly performing management

companies in anticipation of inferior subsequent performance.
   There is a large mutual fund literature that investigates the impact of fund performance
on money flows and manager turnover.1 Although the relation between the performance of
individual funds and subsequent fund flows has received a lot of attention in the mutual fund

literature, no papers have analyzed the relation between the performance of the management
company and the subsequent money flows and manager turnover.
   1
     Papers on the relation between prior performance and subsequent flows include Ippolito (1992), Brown,
Harlow, and Starks (1996), Chevalier and Ellison (1997), Goetzmann and Peles (1997), Sirri and Tufano
(1998), Koski and Pontiff (1999), Zheng (1999), DelGuercio and Tkac (2002), Lynch and Musto (2003), Berk
and Green (2004), Nanda, Wang, and Zheng (2004), Huang, Wei, and Yan (2007), Ivkovich and Weisbenner
(2009), Spiegel and Zhang (2010), Chapman, Evans, and Xu (2010), Pastor and Stambaugh (2010), and Huang,
Sialm, and Zhang (2011). Papers on the relation between manager turnover and fund performance include
Chevalier and Ellison (1999), Hu, Hall, and Harvey (2000), Khorana (2001), Massa, Reuter, and Zitzewitz
(2010), and Deuskar, Pollet, Wang, and Zheng (2010).




                                                    5
      Whereas the early mutual fund literature has focused on individual mutual funds, several
recent papers have studied the implications of family affiliation and the ownership of the

mutual fund families. Massa and Rehman (2008) document that approximately 40% of the
mutual funds between 1990 and 2004 belonged to financial conglomerates. The literature
on the economics of mutual fund families has investigated investment strategies, risk taking,
and incentives in families.2 Our paper contributes to this literature by studying the relation

between the past performance of the management company and the future money flows and
management turnover in mutual funds.
      Studying the spillovers in mutual fund management companies helps us to better under-
stand the industrial organization of diversified conglomerates. Offering mutual funds as part

of a financial conglomerate has advantages because the mutual fund segment can benefit from
synergies, information spillovers, diversification, economies of scope, and easier access to cap-
ital markets. On the other hand, conglomerates have more complex and less transparent
structures and might exacerbate agency problems.3

      In addition, our paper also sheds light on the literature discussing the economic costs of
financial distress. The corporate finance literature has indicated that financially distressed
firms might lose their customers and employees. However, it has been difficult to find direct
evidence for such spillover effects.4 Our paper provides direct evidence that the stock price

performance of mutual fund management companies has a significant impact on the fund
customers (mutual fund flows) and on the fund employees (fund managers) even if the mutual

   2
     Papers in this literature include Khorana and Servaes (1999), Massa (2003), Chen, Hong, Huang, and
Kubik (2004), Nanda, Wang, and Zheng (2004), Gaspar, Massa, and Matos (2006), Gervais, Lynch, and Musto
(2006), Ivkovich (2006), Reuter (2006), Kempf and Ruenzi (2008), Massa and Rehman (2008), Bhattacharya,
Lee, and Pool (2010), Evans (2010), and Gallaher, Kaniel, and Starks (2010).
  3
    See the surveys of Stein (2003) and Maksimovic and Philips (2007) for additional information on the
theoretical and empirical literature on conglomerates.
  4
    See the surveys by Parsons and Titman (2008) and Graham and Leary (2011) for reviews of the literature
on capital structure and corporate strategy.


                                                    6
fund segment accounts for a very small fraction of the total company revenues.
        The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the construction

of our database and summarizes the distribution of the various variables. Sections 3 and 4
study the relation between management company performance and fund flows for stock and
bond funds. Section 5 describes the relation between company performance and fund man-
ager turnover. Finally, Section 6 investigates whether the sensitivity of fund flows to the

management company performance is justified by subsequent differences in fund performance.


2         Data and Summary Statistics

We describe in this section the sample construction and report some key summary statistics.


2.1        Sample Construction

The data on mutual funds is obtained from the survivorship bias-free mutual fund database
provided by the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). We focus on the period
between January 1992 to December 2009, for which management company information is

available. The first sample includes all diversified U.S. equity funds. We exclude specialized
sector funds, international funds and balanced funds.5 The second sample includes all tax-
able U.S. government and corporate bonds funds. We exclude municipal bond funds since
these funds are tax-exempt and cannot be compared directly with taxable bond funds. We

also exclude money market funds and bond funds with more than 50% holdings in equity
securities.6
        Mutual funds must further satisfy the following criteria: First, the management company
    5
  Funds with Lipper objective codes EI, EIEI, ELCC, G, GI, LCCE, LCGE, LCVE, MC, MCCE, MCGE,
MCVE, MLCE, MLGE, MLVE, MR, SCCE, SCGE, SCVE, and SG are retained as equity funds.
    6
   Bond funds with Lipper objective codes A, BBB, GB, GI, GUT, GUS, HY, IID, IUG, MSI, SID, SII, SIU,
SUS, SUT, and USM are retained.



                                                  7
is publicly traded or a subsidiary of a publicly traded company. Second, the funds must have
non-missing management company names, non-missing monthly total net assets, non-missing

turnover and expense ratios, and non-missing Lipper investment objective codes. Third, the
funds must have at least 24 months of non-missing returns.
   From the CRSP mutual fund database, we obtain the names of management companies
and their corresponding management codes. Using these names, we manually search through

the CRSP stock database to find the CUSIPs of the corresponding publicly traded stocks. To
take into account mergers affecting management companies or their parents, we extract a list of
mergers from the SDC Platinum database and assign the funds to the merged companies after
the effective date of the mergers. Using the matched CUSIPs, we obtain monthly stock returns

of management companies or their publicly-traded parent companies (if the management
company is a subsidiary) from the stock files provided by CRSP. We find that 91.4% of
mutual funds in our sample share the same names as their parent company.
   We use Compustat to obtain annual revenues of the management company and the CRSP

mutual fund database to obtain management fees for each fund which allow us to compute
the dependency of the management company on revenues generated by its fund management
segment. To examine fund manager turnover, we receive from Morningstar the identities of
managers and their starting and ending dates at the respective funds.

   Overall, our mutual fund sample includes 6,102 equity funds and 3,155 bond funds after
applying our selection criteria. For most of our analyses, we separately aggregate the equity
and the bond funds offered by each management company. These mutual funds are affiliated
with 118 publicly traded fund management companies. These identified fund families account

for 71% of the assets under management in the mutual fund sector.




                                              8
2.2     Summary Statistics

This section explains the construction of the variables used in our study and reports some key
summary statistics.

2.2.1   Management Company Performance

We measure the performance of a management company using the industry-adjusted stock
returns. We first employ the 48 industry classification by Fama and French to sort management
companies into industries according to their SIC codes.7 We then obtain the value-weighted
portfolio returns for each industry from Kenneth French’s website and compute management

company performance as the average of its industry-adjusted returns (CR) over the past
12, 24, and 36 months, respectively. We require a company to have at least 12 months of
available data to compute the industry-adjusted returns. As investors are more likely to
react to persistent rather than transient management company performance, a 36-month time

horizon allows us to better capture the longer term performance of a firm. However, a 12-
month performance allows us to examine shorter term sensitivity of investors to management
company performance.
   As robustness tests, we use alternative measures of management company performance.

Instead of using industry-adjusted returns, we use the raw average returns of management
companies (CRR) or the risk-adjusted returns according to the Fama-French-Carhart four
factor model (CF F R). To obtain the Fama-French-Carhart risk-adjusted returns, we estimate
the OLS factor loadings of funds on a rolling basis using 24 months of company returns. The

risk-adjusted company return over the prior 12, 24, and 36 months (CF F R) is obtained by
averaging the differences between the actual monthly fund returns and the expected fund
   7
     The   48     industry   classification  is    available   from    Kenneth   French’s   website:
(http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/index.html).



                                                  9
returns using the estimated betas. The factor loadings of company j are computed using the
Fama-French-Carhart four-factor model (FFM):

                                        M                       SM B
                Rj,t − RT B,t = αj,t + βj,t (RM,t − RT B,t ) + βj,t  (RS,t − RB,t )
                                    HM L                   UMD
                                  +βj,t  (RH,t − RL,t ) + βj,t (RU,t − RD,t ) + j,t .            (1)

      The return of company j during time period t is denoted by Ri,t . The index M corresponds

to the market portfolio and the index T B to the risk-free Treasury bill rate. Portfolios of
small and large stocks are denoted by S and B, respectively; portfolios of stocks with high
and low ratios between their book values and their market values are denoted by H and L,
respectively; and portfolios of stocks with relatively high and low returns during the previous

year are denoted by U and D, respectively. The Carhart (1997) model nests the CAPM
model (which includes only the market factor) and the Fama and French (1993) model (which
includes the size and the book-to-market factors in addition to the market factor).

      Panel A of Table 1 reports the characteristics of companies that offer equity mutual funds.8
The average management company in our equity sample experiences an industry-adjusted
return of 0.25% per month over the prior 12 months. The publicly traded companies in the
sample exhibit significant variation in their average monthly industry-adjusted performance, as

reflected by the standard deviation of 2.67%. The mean raw return of management companies
equals 1.28% per month over the prior 12 months and the mean four-factor adjusted return
equals 0.37% per month. Whereas the first three rows list the moments of the mean company
performance over the prior 12 months, the subsequent three rows list the moments of the

standard deviations of the company performance over the prior 12 months. We also compute
the moments of the company performance over the prior 24 and 36 months. The distribution
of these moments is not summarized for brevity.
  8
    The characteristics of management companies differ slightly across the equity and the bond samples
because not all management companies offer both bond and equity funds over all time periods.

                                                  10
       To obtain an impression of the importance of the mutual fund revenues relative to the
total revenues of management companies, we compute for each fund in each year the dollar

amount of management fees as the product of the annual management fees listed in the CRSP
mutual fund database and the average of the total monthly net assets over the past 12 months.
Using annual revenues obtained from Compustat, we sum the dollar management fees across
all member funds under the same management company and divide by the company’s annual

revenue to obtain the revenue percentage (REV P CT ). As the management fee data are
only available from 1998 onwards, the analyses involving REV P CT are restricted to the
sub-sample period 1998-2009. For the equity (bond) funds sample, REV P CT measures the
revenue derived from the management of equity (bond) funds in our sample only.9

       Mutual funds account for a relatively small fraction of the revenues for most management
companies. The management fees of equity (bond) mutual funds account on average for
only 4.90% (1.13%) of the revenues of the management companies. Half of our management
companies have management fees from equity (bond) mutual funds that are below 0.32%

(0.14%) of their total revenues. In some of our analyses, we focus on these companies with
below median revenue dependencies.

2.2.2      Mutual Fund Variables

Since most of our analyses are performed at the management company level, we aggregate
flows into each fund family separately for bond funds and equity funds. First, we sum the
monthly new money (dollar) flows into each fund family following Zheng (1999) and Nanda,
Wang, and Zheng (2004). The monthly new money flow into each family is defined as the

dollar change in the monthly total net asset value (T NA) minus the price appreciation of

   9
    Our results are not affected qualitatively if we use the expense ratio as a proxy for the fund revenues
instead. The expense ratio is available over the whole time period but might include revenues that do not
accrue to the management company.



                                                    11
family assets over the month (R). Assuming that new money is invested at the end of each
month, new money flow into family f in month t is defined as:

                         F LOWf,t = T NAf,t − T NAf,t−1 (1 + Rf,t ),                       (2)

where Rf,t is the weighted-average investor return of all equity or bond mutual funds of a
family and T NAf,t is the sum of the total net asset values of all equity or bond mutual funds
of the management company. To obtain the new money growth rate for fund family f in month

t, we divide the family flows by the aggregate assets of all member funds at the beginning of
the month:
                                                  F LOWf,t
                                   NMGf,t =                 ,                              (3)
                                                  T NAf,t−1
   Panel B of Table 1 summarizes the results for the equity fund sample and Panel C sum-
marizes the results for the bond fund sample. To remove outliers, we winsorize NMG at the

1% and 99% levels. The mean mutual fund family experiences an inflow of 0.05% per month
for their equity funds and 0.03% for their bond funds. The distribution of the new money
growth is skewed to the right as the median is smaller than the mean.
   The flows to a mutual fund family are affected by the aggregate flows to the mutual fund

sector. Individual fund families are likely experiencing fund inflows in periods where the
aggregate mutual fund flows are large. Spiegel and Zhang (2010) suggest using changes in
market share to capture changes in the competitive environment of mutual funds. The change
in the market share CMKT S of fund family f at time t is defined as follows:

                                      T NAf,t      T NAf,t−1
                         CMKT Sf,t = P           −P             .                          (4)
                                       f T NAf,t    f T NAf,t−1


   Alternatively, we also compute the percentage change in market share P CMKT S:

                                           PT N Af,t           T NA
                                                            − P T Nf,t−1
                                             f
                                                 T N Af,t         f
                                                                    A    f,t−1
                          P CMKT Sf,t =                                          .         (5)
                                                     PT N Af,t−1
                                                        f
                                                            T N Af,t−1


                                              12
   For equity funds, we compute the risk-adjusted returns of all member funds within the
fund family using the Fama-French-Carhart four-factor model as described in equation (1).

We use rolling OLS regressions to estimate the factor loadings over the prior 24 months.
The risk-adjusted return F Ri,t of fund i in month t is computed by averaging the difference
between the fund return and the expected return using the estimated Fama-French-Carhart
factor loadings. This method eliminates young funds with fewer than 24 trading months. The

family abnormal returns are computed by taking the TNA-weighted averages of the individual
abnormal returns. The mean monthly four-factor adjusted return of equity mutual funds in
a family equals -0.12% over the prior 12 months. Fund families differ significantly in the
performance of their equity mutual funds. The interquartile range of the mean equity four-

factor adjusted fund family return over the prior 12 months equals [-0.34%, 0.07%].
   An alternative method to control for the performance of mutual funds is to adjust the fund
return for the median return of funds with the same investment styles. Thus, we adjust the
returns of each member fund by the median return of funds within the same Lipper investment

objective code, value-weight these adjusted fund returns by the prior T NAs, and sum these
weighted adjusted returns across all member funds to obtain the monthly style-adjusted fund
returns in a family. We then average the style-adjusted returns over the prior 12, 24 and 36
months to obtain the style-adjusted fund return F SAR.

   Equity funds in our sample outperformed the median Lipper fund in the same objective
code on average by 0.02% over the prior 12 months, whereas bond funds underperformed
the median Lipper fund in the same objective code on average by -0.01%. Not surprisingly,
the cross-sectional deviation of fund performance differs more for equity funds than for bond

funds. The interquartile range of the mean style-adjusted fund return over the prior 12 months
equals [-0.21%, 0.24%] for equity funds and [-0.07%, 0.09%] for bond funds.
   To capture the strategy chosen by the fund family, we follow Nanda, Wang, and Zheng

                                             13
(2004) in constructing (i) a cross-sectional standard deviation of the abnormal fund returns
(Std.Dev.F R), (ii) an indicator variable (ST ARf,t ) that indicates the presence of at least one

member fund with a five-star rating by Morningstar within the family, and (iii) the number of
member funds in the family (NUMF DSf,t ). In each month, the cross-fund return standard
deviation is constructed as the standard deviation of the abnormal risk-adjusted returns (or
investment objective-adjusted returns) of all member funds within fund family. The mean

cross-fund standard deviation for equity funds is 1.36% using four-factor adjusted returns.
The cross-sectional standard deviation of bond funds is lower and equals 0.53% for style-
adjusted returns. Fund families in our sample manage on average 25.11 equity funds and
14.48 bond funds and around 36% of families manage a star equity fund, whereas 29% of

families manage a star bond fund. Following extant studies, we also control for the size,
the turnover ratio, and the expense ratio at the fund family level. The family turnover and
expense ratio is computed by aggregating the T NA-weighted measures at the individual fund
level across all member funds. Equity mutual funds have an average turnover of around 70%

and charge an expense ratio of 1.14%. The turnover of bond funds equals around 134% and
their expense ratio equals 0.90%.

2.2.3   Management Turnover

To examine if the management company performance is a potential determinant of individual
fund manager’s departure, we first match the list of manager names obtained from Morningstar
to our sample funds using the fund’s CUSIP. As not all of our sample funds from CRSP have

non-missing CUSIPs and some funds with available CUSIPs are not covered in the list of funds
with manager names from Morningstar, we have a reduced sample of funds for the analyses
pertaining to management turnover. Thus, we only have available fund manager data for
1,203 equity funds and for 633 bond funds.


                                               14
    To identify managers who leave the fund, we compare the ending date of each manager to
the last trading date of the fund. If the ending date of the manager precedes the last trading

date of the fund, we assign a DEP ART indicator variable to unity, and zero otherwise. Note
that we do not know the reason for departures and cannot distinguish whether the manager
is forced to quit or leaves voluntarily. However, we exclude forced departures due to fund
mergers and liquidations. For funds with multiple managers, we consider that there is a

departure if at least one manager leaves in any month. In each month, we further compute
the manager’s tenure (T ENURE) at the fund using the current date minus the starting date
of the manager. For funds with multiple managers, we use the average tenure across all
managers of the fund. The average tenure equals 48 months for an equity manager and 49

months for a bond manager. We also keep track of whether mutual funds are team managed
or single managed. Team managed funds account for 60% of equity funds and 57% of bond
funds.


3     Flows of Equity Mutual Funds

In this section, we analyze whether the performance of the management company affects
the flows into equity mutual funds. Individual investors might avoid holding mutual funds
affiliated with companies that performed poorly. On the other hand, funds affiliated with

management companies with a good reputation might benefit. Since the performance of the
management company might reflect the performance of its mutual funds, it is important to
control for the performance of the funds. In addition, we also study subsamples of management
companies, where the mutual funds account for a very small portion of the overall revenues

of the publicly traded firms.




                                             15
3.1    Univariate Relation

To obtain a first impression of the relation between firm performance and mutual fund flows,
we sort management companies monthly into deciles according to their industry-adjusted
performance over the prior 12, 24, and 36 months. Panel A of Figure 1 depicts the new money

growth rates over the subsequent month of equity funds managed by companies in different
performance deciles.
   Our main result shows that the prior management company performance plays an im-
portant role in explaining mutual fund flows. For example, equity funds affiliated with fund

companies in the top industry-adjusted performance decile over the prior 36 months increase
their assets under management in the subsequent month by 0.29%. On the other hand, equity
funds from companies in the bottom decile lower their assets under management by 0.33%
in the subsequent month. Since the prior company performance is measured over a rela-

tively long time period, the composition of the decile portfolios remains very stable over time
and the fund flows persist over extended time periods. These results indicate that company
performance has a significant impact on fund flows.


3.2    Bivariate Summary Statistics

To investigate whether the results are robust after controlling for fund performance, we double-
sort funds according to their management company and their fund performance. We sort man-
agement companies monthly into quartiles according to their industry-adjusted performance
over the prior 12, 24, and 36 months, respectively. We independently sort the management

companies into quartiles according to the four-factor adjusted performance of their equity
mutual funds. The mean family flows to equity funds are reported in Table 2. The rows
correspond to companies with different stock performance and the columns correspond to
companies with different mutual fund performance. The standard errors are double-clustered

                                              16
by time and management company following Petersen (2009).
   Panel A1 of Table 2 reports the mean monthly new money growth rates for funds sorted

according to the fund and company performance levels over the prior 12 months. Consistent
with the prior literature, we find that families with superior fund performance exhibit higher
net flows. In addition, we also find that funds of management companies with superior per-
formance also attract significantly higher flows even after keeping fund performance constant.

The inflows into funds of top quartile management companies exceed the net inflows of bottom
quartile management companies by between 0.12 (for bottom quartile fund performers) and
0.46 percentage points (for second quartile fund performers) per month.
   The economic and statistical significance of the results increases substantially if we lengthen

the prior performance horizon, as shown in Panels A2 and A3. For example, the flow difference
between top and bottom management company performance quartiles ranges between 0.48
and 0.60 percentage points using a 24-month performance window. In this case, all the flow
differences are statistically significant at a one percentage point level.

   By sorting the families into quartiles according to their fund performance, we already con-
trol for the variation of contemporaneous fund performance across the four fund performance
groups. To study whether there is additional variation in fund performance within the four
groups, we report in Panels B1-B3 the average four-factor adjusted fund returns over the pre-

vious 12, 24, and 36 months. The fund performance increases when we move across columns
simply because the fund families are sorted according to the fund performance. However, we
find very little additional variation in the fund performance within the four F R quartiles. For
example, the return differences between the fourth and the first CR quartiles in Panel B1

are effectively zero for the two interior portfolios F R2 and F R3, which exhibited in Panel A1
the largest differences in fund flows. This result indicates that the stock price performance of
management companies is primarily driven by different factors than the performance of the

                                                17
affiliated mutual funds. Thus, the sensitivity of flows to company performance summarized
in Panels A1-A3 is unlikely driven by contemporaneous differences in fund performance.

3.3     Multivariate Regressions

To explore in more depth the impact of the company’s performance on equity flows, we use

multivariate OLS regressions including time fixed effects. We cluster the standard errors by
both time and management company:

       NMGf,t = β0,t + β1 CRf,t−1 + β2 F Rf,t−1 + β3 Std.Dev.CRf,t−1                                (6)

                  + β4 Std.Dev.F Rf,t−1 + β5 LOG(T NAf,t−1 ) + β6 T Of,t−1

                  + β7 EXPf,t−1 + β8 LOG(1 + NUMF DSf,t−1 ) + β9 ST ARf,t−1 + f,t ,

 where CR is the industry-adjusted return of the management company, F R is the four-
factor adjusted return of the equity mutual funds in a fund family, Std.Dev.CR is the time-
series standard deviation of CR, Std.Dev.F R is the cross-sectional standard deviation of

the fund-specific four-factor adjusted returns within a fund family, T NA is the total assets
under management for the equity mutual funds of the management company, T O is the
average turnover, EXP is the average expense ratio, NUMF DS is the number of equity
funds managed by the fund family, and ST AR is an indicator variable of whether the fund

family manages a five-star equity fund following Nanda, Wang, and Zheng (2004). We expect
β1 to be positive if the stock performance of the management company attracts flows into the
fund family after controlling for fund performance and other fund characteristics.10
   The first three columns of Table 3 report the coefficient estimates using four-factor ad-

justed fund returns. A one percentage point increase in the industry-adjusted performance of
  10
     Whereas our paper analyzes the impact of performance on flows, a related literature has studied the
impact of flows on fund returns. Gruber (1996), Edelen (1999), Zheng (1999), Wermers (2003), Coval and
Stafford (2007), Chen, Hanson, Hong, and Stein (2008), Zhang (2008), Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang (2010),
and Lou (2009) provide evidence that mutual fund flows have an impact on subsequent fund performance.

                                                  18
the management company increases the new money growth rate by between 0.080 and 0.158
percentage points per month, depending on whether we measure performance over the prior

12 or prior 36 months. Consistent with Chevalier and Ellison (1997), Sirri and Tufano (1998),
and Huang, Wei, and Yan (2007) we find that prior abnormal fund performance has also a
significant impact on fund flows. When interpreting the economic magnitude of company and
fund returns, it is important to take into account that the standard deviation of the company

return is around five times larger than the standard deviation of the risk-adjusted fund re-
turn. For example, a one-standard deviation increase in the performance of the management
company CR during the prior 36 months (which amounts to 1.82%) increases the flows into
equity funds in the subsequent month by 0.29 percentage points. Similarly, a one-standard de-

viation increase in the performance of the mutual fund F R during the prior 36 months (which
amounts to 0.41%) increases the flows into equity funds in the subsequent month also by 0.29
percentage points. The coefficient estimates on the management company performance remain
economically and statistically significant if we use the raw fund return (middle three columns)

or the style-adjusted returns (last three columns) to control for the fund performance. Thus,
the impact of the company performance has an economically meaningful impact on the fund
flows.
   Consistent with Nanda, Wang, and Zheng (2004) we find that families that manage star

equity funds attract significant new money flows. The remaining control variables are less
important in explaining fund flows.
   In the base case results, the new money growth is taken in the month immediately subse-
quent to the 12, 24, and 36 month return window. In an unreported robustness test we find

that the results are almost identical if we include a time gap of one month. Thus, the results
are not driven by short-term factors that might affect fund flows.
   The new money growth rate is fairly persistent over time. In an unreported robustness

                                              19
test, we find that the company performance remains statistically significant if we include the
lagged new money growth rate as one additional explanatory variable.

   Finally, the results are very similar using a Fama and MacBeth (1973) methodology. In this
specification, we first estimate cross-sectional regressions of new money growth on company
performance, fund performance, and the other control variables. In a second stage, we average
the cross-sectional coefficients over the 203 months and compute Newey-West standard errors

using a lag length of 12. For example, the Fama-MacBeth coefficient using a 24 month
performance window equals 0.168 with a standard error of 0.040, which is very similar to the
corresponding coefficient of 0.158 (0.043) in the pooled regression.
   Table 4 shows that the results are also robust using alternative measures of the performance

of the management companies. The different sets of columns show the results using industry-
adjusted company returns, raw company returns, and four-factor adjusted company returns.
The fact that the results are almost identical for industry-adjusted company returns as for
raw company returns indicates that the results are driven by firm-specific and not by macro-

economic industry factors.


3.4    Piecewise Linear Specification

To examine whether the performance-flow relation is non-linear, we estimate the sensitivity
of fund flows separately for underperforming and outperforming funds:


NMGf,t = β0,t + β1 Min(CRf,t−1 , 0) + β2 Max(CRf,t−1 , 0) + β3 Min(F Rf,t−1 , 0) +                (7)

          + β4 Max(F Rf,t−1 , 0) + β5 Std.Dev.CRf,t−1 + β6 Std.Dev.F Rf,t−1 + β7 LOG(T NAf,t−1 )

          + β8 T Of,t−1 + β9 EXPf,t−1 + β10 LOG(1 + NUMF DSf,t−1 ) + β11 ST ARf,t−1 + f,t .


   The first three columns of Table 5 use the four-factor adjusted fund returns and the
last three columns use the style-adjusted fund returns. Although the slope coefficients are

                                              20
positive for both segments, the coefficients are usually more significant for underperforming
funds. Fund management companies that perform poorly relative to their peers tend to

experience lower inflows. Thus, the impact of company performance appears to be particularly
pronounced for fund companies that experience poor stock performance and are financially
distressed. In contrast, we find that fund flows are generally more sensitive to positive fund
performance than to negative fund performance, especially if we also take into account the

impact of star performers.


3.5    Revenue Dependance

A relation between the performance of the management company and the activities of the
affiliated mutual funds can occur due to direct and indirect spillover effects. On the one hand,

the performance of the management company might simply be a reflection of the performance
of the mutual fund segment. Companies that manage successful mutual funds might exhibit
superior stock price performance because the stock price capitalizes the value of the mutual
fund sector to the conglomerate. This direct spillover effect would be particularly pronounced

for management companies where the mutual fund segment accounts for a large fraction of the
company’s revenues. On the other hand, indirect spillover effects between the various business
segments could affect the money flows and the management turnover of mutual funds.
   To address this question, we repeat the previous analysis separately for management com-

panies with low (below sample median) and high (above sample median) revenue dependency
on the fund management businesses. As reported in Table 1, the median percentage share
of revenues from equity mutual funds is just 0.32% of the total revenues of the fund man-
agement companies. The revenue percentage due to equity funds differs significantly across

the two subsamples. Whereas below median families generate on average only 0.11% of their
revenues from equity mutual funds, above median families generate on average 9.63% of their


                                              21
revenues from the equity mutual funds. Thus, it is unlikely that the fund performance would
have a substantial direct impact on the stock price performance of management companies

with below median revenue percentages. This result also confirms the low contemporaneous
correlation between fund and company returns reported in Panels B1-B3 of Table 2.
      Table 6 shows that the results are similar across the two subsamples. For example, a
ten percentage point increase in the average industry-adjusted company performance over

the prior 36 months increases the monthly flows by 1.80 percentage points for below median
revenue percentage companies and by 1.95 percentage points for above median companies.
Thus, our results are not just driven by companies where mutual funds are their main revenue
source. Since the management fee is not available over the whole time period, the sample size

decreases from 11,951 to 8,992 observations. However, in unreported results, we find similar
results if we form the two subsamples according to the expense ratio, which is available over
the whole sample period.


3.6       Subperiod Analysis

To study whether the results are robust over different time periods and economic environments,
we divide our sample into subperiods. To economize on space, we only report the results using
the fund and company performance over the prior 24 months. The first two columns of Table 7
report the results over the 1992-2000 and the 2001-2009 subperiods. The last two columns

divide the sample by the economic environment as proxied by an indicator variable for NBER
recessions.11 Overall, we find slightly stronger results over the 2001-2009 subperiod and during
NBER recessions.
 11
      The NBER recession dates are available from http://www.nber.org.




                                                    22
3.7    Changes in Market Share

Following Spiegel and Zhang (2010), we use the change in the market share to capture changes
in the competitive environment of mutual funds. The results summarized in Table 8 indicate
that the performance of the management company has a significant impact on the change

in the market share of mutual fund families. Well-performing fund management companies
increase their market share.

3.8    Individual Fund Level Analysis

The previous analyses are performed at the management company level. As a robustness test,
we examine in Table 9 the impact of the management company performance on the new money

growth into individual funds while controlling for lagged individual fund characteristics such
as fund size, expenses, turnover ratio, fund age, and whether the fund is a star fund. The first
three columns use the four-factor adjusted fund performance as a control variable and the
last three columns use the style-adjusted fund performance as a control variable. To control

for cross-correlation in the residuals, we cluster the standard errors by time and management
company. The results are not affected substantially using this alternative estimation method.
The performance of the management company continues to have a significant impact on the

flows into the company’s equity funds.


3.9    Index Funds

The spillover effects between the management company and the mutual funds could be caused
by changes in the perception of the investment ability of fund managers. For example, in-

vestors might withdraw money from poorly performing management companies because they
anticipate that the investment ability of the fund managers might deteriorate. Deterioration
of investment ability of the fund managers should matter less to investors of index funds since


                                              23
these funds are passively managed. To investigate this hypothesis, we compute the relation
between management company performance and the flows into index funds. Unfortunately,

focusing on passively managed funds reduces our sample size from 11,951 to 3,133 observa-
tions and reduces the power of our tests. The coefficient on the industry-adjusted 36-month
performance β1 from equation (4) equals 0.078 for the index fund sample, whereas the corre-
sponding coefficient equals 0.158 for the actively managed fund sample. These results indicate

that about half of the effect of company performance carries over to index funds.


3.10    Investor Clienteles

The sensitivity of fund flows to company performance might depend on the clienteles of mutual
funds. Mutual funds offered through defined contribution (DC) retirement plans might exhibit

different sensitivity to firm performance than funds offered directly to investors. We obtain
annual data on the size of the mutual fund assets held in the DC accounts from the 1997-
2010 Pensions & Investments surveys of mutual fund families following Christoffersen, Geczy,
Musto, and Reed (2006) and Sialm and Starks (2011). Unfortunately, we only have data on

the proportion of DC assets for 34% of our sample. Using this restricted sample, we do not
find a statistically significant difference in the relation between company performance and
fund flows between above and below median DC funds.


4      Flows of Bond Mutual Funds

In the previous section, we relate returns of the equity securities of fund management com-
panies to the flows of their equity mutual funds. It is possible that the equity securities of
the management companies might be affected by the same fundamental factors as the equity

funds. To alleviate this concern, we study in this subsection the relation between flows into
fixed-income mutual funds and the stock performance of fund management companies.

                                             24
4.1    Univariate Relation

The univariate relation between firm performance and bond fund flows is reported in Panel
B of Figure 1. Consistent with the equity fund results, we find that the flows into bond
funds are positively related to the prior performance of the affiliated management company.

Whereas bond funds affiliated with management companies in the lowest five performance
deciles using a 36-month window experience outflows, funds in the highest five performance
deciles experience inflows. Furthermore, bond funds in the top performance decile over the
prior 36 months attract flows of 0.14 percentage points per month, whereas funds in the

bottom decile lose flows of 0.23 percentage points.


4.2    Bivariate Summary Statistics

To study the relation between flows into bond mutual funds and the stock performance of
fund management companies, we sort management companies into 16 groups according to the

style-adjusted performance of the fixed-income mutual funds of a management company and
according to the industry-adjusted stock return of the management company. The sorting into
quartiles is performed independently across the two dimensions. The performance measures
of the bond mutual funds and the management company stocks are measured over the prior

12, 24, and 36 months.
   Panels A1 to A3 of Table 10 show that bond funds attract higher inflows of new money if
the stock of their management company outperforms their industry peers. The flow difference
between top and bottom performing management companies ranges between 0.11 and 0.42

percentage points per month for the four bond fund performance quartiles using a 12-month
performance window. The magnitude of the results increases if we sort funds based on the
returns over the prior 24 and 36 months. Although the results are not as strongly statistically
significant as for equity funds, we find qualitatively similar effects for both types of funds.

                                               25
       Consistent with the bivariate sorts on equity funds, we do not find a strong contempora-
neous correlation between the prior industry-adjusted company returns and the contempora-

neous style-adjusted bond fund returns, as shown in Panels B1-B3.


4.3       Multivariate Regressions

Table 11 shows that the performance of the management company over the prior 24 and 36
months has a significant impact on the subsequent flows into bond mutual funds after control-

ling for the prior style-adjusted bond fund performance and other fund characteristics. The
results are not sensitive to whether we measure the performance of the management com-
pany relative to their industry peers, the raw return, or the four-factor adjusted management
company performance.12

       The results on both bond and equity mutual funds indicate that the performance of the
parent company has an impact on the perception of the clients. Mutual fund investors of
poorly performing mutual fund companies tend to withdraw funds at an accelerated rate even
if the mutual funds themselves experience relatively superior fund performance.


5        Management Turnover

Poorly performing companies do not just lose some of their customers, as demonstrated in
the previous two sections, they might also lose some of their key employees. In this section,

we investigate whether the prior performance of the management company has an impact on
the turnover of fund managers.
       Khorana (1996) finds that fund’s past returns and asset growth predict turnover of man-
agers. We adjust a fund’s returns by the median value of funds with the same investment
  12
   In unreported results, we show that the relation between bond flows and the performance of the manage-
ment company stock remains significant if we control for the style-adjusted performance of an individual bond
mutual fund instead of aggregating all bond mutual funds at the family level.


                                                     26
objective code and average the adjusted returns over 36 months. These measures are then
used as proxies for managerial ability.

   To examine whether the management company performance is a predictor of managerial
turnover after controlling for the performance and other fund characteristics, we estimate a
logit model with standard errors clustered by the fund management company:

  DEP ARTf,t = β0,t + β1 CRf,t−1 + β2 F Rf,t−1                                              (8)

                 + β3 LOG(T NAf,t−1 ) + β4 LOG(AGEf,t−1 ) + β5 T Of,t−12 + β6 EXPf,t−12

                 + β7 ST ARf,t−1 + β8 LOG(T ENUREf,t−1 ) + β9 LOG(T EAMf,t−1 ) + f,t ,

where DEP ART is an indicator variable that takes on unity if any manager at fund f departs
in month t, and zero otherwise. We run this specification separately for equity and bond funds
including time fixed effects.

   Khorana (1996) finds that higher turnover of the fund predicts managerial departure and
attributes this finding to the tendency of managers to window-dress by churning the fund’s
holdings excessively. We control for the fund’s turnover ratio (T O), its size (T NA), and its
age (AGE). Berk and Green (2004) argue that managers with higher ability will extract rents

in the form of expenses charged to investors. Therefore, we also control for the fund’s expense
ratio (EXP ). A star fund rating can provide certification for the fund manager’s ability and
affects manager turnover. Thus, we also include a ST AR dummy that indicates whether the
fund has a star rating in the previous month. Lastly, we control for the tenure of the fund

manager and whether the fund is team managed.
   The first three columns report the results for equity mutual funds and the last three
columns report the results for bond mutual funds. Although not all results are statistically
significant, we observe that companies with worse stock price performance generally experience

a higher attrition of managers. In addition, we find higher turnover levels in larger fund

                                              27
families, for managers with shorter tenure, and for team managed funds.


6     Subsequent Fund Performance

Fund investors might rationally withdraw funds from poorly performing management com-
panies in anticipation of inferior subsequent performance. To study whether the response of
fund investors to the company performance is justified, we again sort management companies

into 16 groups according to the fund and the management company performance. Table 13
summarizes in Panel A the four-factor adjusted equity fund returns and in Panel B the style-
adjusted bond fund returns in the subsequent month.
    Whereas the prior fund performance has significant predictability, we find less pronounced

predictability using the company performance. Panel A shows that equity funds that exhibit
the lowest prior fund and the lowest prior company performance exhibit the worst performance
over the subsequent month. Whereas the average equity fund exhibits a four-factor alpha of
-0.13% per month, funds in the lowest fund and company performance quartile exhibit a

four-factor alpha of -0.26%. The performance difference between the highest and the lowest
company performance quartiles is statistically significant for the two lower fund performance
quartiles, but is insignificant for the two higher fund performance quartiles. The results are
weaker for bond funds. It must be kept in mind that the performance predictability tests

have limited power due to the large standard errors in our limited sample of fund families. In
addition, the performance results could also be muted since the fund flows might be sufficiently
large to eliminate a significant amount of performance predictability as suggested by Berk
and Green (2004). Overall, our results indicate that the withdrawals from poorly performing

mutual funds might be justified due to the relatively poor subsequent performance of funds
affiliated with distressed management companies.



                                              28
7    Conclusions

We investigate whether there are important spillover effects across different business segments
of publicly traded firms that also manage mutual funds. We find that the prior stock price

performance of the conglomerate has a significant impact on the money flows and the man-
agement turnover of the affiliated mutual funds. Mutual funds managed by poorly performing
firms experience unexpectedly low flows of new money and exhibit a significantly higher at-
trition of talented fund managers even if the mutual funds themselves perform well. The

economic magnitude of the relation between firm performance and money flows is similar in
magnitude to the well-established relation between fund performance and money flows. These
results indicate that the financial health of a conglomerate has a significant impact on the
prospects of the various business segments. Our results also shed light on the economic costs

of financial distress. Diversified companies that experience poor stock price performance tend
to lose customers and key employees even in business segments that exhibit superior perfor-
mance. On the other hand, business segments do not appear to benefit to a proportional
degree if their parent company exhibits superior stock market performance.




                                              29
References
 Berk, J. and R. C. Green (2004). Mutual fund flows and performance in rational markets.
    Journal of Political Economy 112, 1269–1295.
 Bhattacharya, U., J. H. Lee, and V. K. Pool (2010). Conflicting family values in mutual
    fund families. Indiana University.
 Brown, K. C., W. V. Harlow, and L. T. Starks (1996). Of tournaments and temptations: An
    analysis of managerial incentives in the mutual fund industry. Journal of Finance 51 (1),
    85–110.
 Carhart, M. M. (1997). On persistence in mutual fund performance. Journal of Fi-
    nance 52 (2), 57–82.
 Chapman, D. A., R. B. Evans, and Z. Xu (2010). The portfolio choices of young and old
    active mutual fund managers. Boston College and University of Virginia.
 Chen, J., S. Hanson, H. Hong, and J. C. Stein (2008). Do hedge funds profit from mutual-
    fund distress? USC, Harvard University, and Princeton University.
 Chen, J., H. Hong, M. Huang, and J. Kubik (2004). Does fund size erode performance? Liq-
    uidity, organizational diseconomies and active money management. American Economic
    Review 94, 1276–1302.
 Chen, Q., I. Goldstein, and W. Jiang (2010). Payoff complementarities and financial
    fragility: Evidence from mutual fund outflows. Journal of Financial Economics 97,
    239–262.
 Chevalier, J. and G. Ellison (1997). Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to incentives.
    Journal of Political Economy 105 (6), 1167–1200.
 Chevalier, J. and G. Ellison (1999). Career concerns and mutual fund managers. Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 114 (2), 389–432.
 Christoffersen, S., C. Geczy, D. Musto, and A. Reed (2006). Cross-border dividend taxa-
    tion and the preferences of taxable and non-taxable investors: Evidence from Canada.
    Journal of Financial Economics 78, 121–144.
 Coval, J. and E. Stafford (2007). Asset fire sales (and purchases) in equity markets. Journal
    of Financial Economics 86, 479–512.
 DelGuercio, D. and P. A. Tkac (2002). The determinants of the flow of funds of managed
    portfolios: Mutual funds versus pension funds. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
    Analysis 37, 523–557.
 Deuskar, P., J. M. Pollet, Z. J. Wang, and L. Zheng (2010). The good or the bad? Which
    mutual fund managers join hedge funds? Forthcoming: Review of Financial Studies.
 Edelen, R. M. (1999). Investor flows and the assessed performance of open-end fund man-
    agers. Journal of Financial Economics 53, 439–466.
 Evans, R. B. (2010). Mutual fund incubation. Journal of Finance 65, 1581–1611.
 Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1993). Common risk factors in the return on bonds and
    stocks. Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–53.
 Fama, E. F. and J. D. MacBeth (1973). Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests.
    Journal of Political Economy 81, 607–636.
 Gallaher, S., R. Kaniel, and L. Starks (2010). Investor attention, advertising, and search
    and participation costs for mutual funds. University of Texas at Austin.


                                             30
Gaspar, J.-M., M. Massa, and P. Matos (2006). Favoritism in mutual fund families? Evi-
   dence on strategic cross-fund subsidization. Journal of Finance 61, 73–104.
Gervais, S., A. W. Lynch, and D. K. Musto (2006). Fund families as delegated monitors of
   money managers. Review of Financial Studies 18, 1139–1169.
Goetzmann, W. N. and N. Peles (1997). Cognitive dissonance and mutual fund investors.
   Journal of Financial Research 20 (2), 145–158.
Graham, J. R. and M. T. Leary (2011). A review of capital structure research and directions
   for the future. Forthcoming: Annual Review of Financial Economics 3.
Gruber, M. (1996). Another puzzle: The growth in actively managed mutual funds. Journal
   of Finance 51, 783–810.
Hu, F., A. R. Hall, and C. R. Harvey (2000). Promotion or demotion? An empirical
   investigation of the determinants of top mutual fund manager change. Duke University.
Huang, J., C. Sialm, and H. Zhang (2011). Risk shifting and mutual fund performance.
   Review of Financial Studies 24, 2575–2616.
Huang, J., K. D. Wei, and H. Yan (2007). Participation costs and the sensitivity of fund
   flows to past performance. Journal of Finance 62 (3), 1273–1311.
Ippolito, R. A. (1992). Consumer reaction to measures of poor quality: Evidence from the
   mutual fund industry. Journal of Law and Economics 35 (1), 45–70.
Ivkovich, Z. (2006). Spillovers in mutual fund families: Is blood thicker than water? Uni-
   versity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Ivkovich, Z. and S. Weisbenner (2009). Individual investor mutual fund flows. Journal of
   Financial Economics 92, 223–237.
Kempf, A. and S. Ruenzi (2008). Tournaments in mutual fund families. Review of Financial
   Studies 21 (2), 1013–1036.
Khorana, A. (1996). Top management turnover: An empirical investigation of mutual fund
   managers. Journal of Financial Economics 50, 403–427.
Khorana, A. (2001). Performance changes following top management turnover: Evidence
   from open-end mutual funds. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 36, 371–
   393.
Khorana, A. and H. Servaes (1999). The determinants of mutual fund starts. Review of
   Financial Studies 12, 1043–1074.
Koski, J. L. and J. Pontiff (1999). How are derivatives used? Evidence from the mutual
   fund industry. Journal of Finance 54 (2), 791–816.
Lou, D. (2009). A flow-based explanation for return predictability. London School of Eco-
   nomics.
Lynch, A. W. and D. K. Musto (2003). How investors interpret past fund returns. Journal
   of Finance 58, 2033–2058.
Maksimovic, V. and G. Philips (2007). Conglomerate firms and internal capital markets.
   In Handbook of Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance, Vol. 1, edited by B.
   Espen Eckbo. Elsevier.
Massa, M. (2003). How do family strategies affect fund performance? When performance-
   maximization is not the only game in town. Journal of Financial Economics 67, 249–304.



                                           31
Massa, M. and Z. Rehman (2008). Information flows within financial conglomerates: Evi-
    dence from the banks mutual funds relation. Journal of Financial Economics 89, 288–
    306.
Massa, M., J. Reuter, and E. Zitzewitz (2010). When should firms share credit with em-
    ployees? Evidence from anonymously managed mutual funds. Journal of Financial
    Economics 95, 400–424.
Nanda, V., Z. J. Wang, and L. Zheng (2004). Family values and the star phenomenon:
    Strategies of mutual fund families. Review of Financial Studies 17 (3), 667–698.
Parsons, C. and S. Titman (2008). Capital structure and corporate strategy. In Handbook
    of Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance, Vol. 2, edited by B. Espen Eckbo.
    Elsevier.
Pastor, L. and R. F. Stambaugh (2010). On the size of the active management industry.
    University of Chicago and University of Pennsylvania.
Petersen, M. A. (2009). Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Comparing
    approaches. Review of Financial Studies 22, 435–480.
Reuter, J. (2006). Are IPO allocations for sale? Evidence from mutual funds. Journal of
    Finance 61, 2289–2324.
Sialm, C. and L. Starks (2011). Mutual fund tax clienteles. Forthcoming: Journal of Fi-
    nance.
Sirri, E. R. and P. Tufano (1998). Costly search and mutual fund flows. Journal of Fi-
    nance 53 (5), 1589–1622.
Spiegel, M. and H. Zhang (2010). Mutual fund risk and market share adjusted fund flows.
    Yale School of Management.
Stein, J. (2003). Agency, information and corporate investment. In Handbook of the Eco-
    nomics of Finance, edited by George Constantinides, Milton Harris and Rene Stulz, pp.
    111–165. Elsevier.
Wermers, R. (2003). Is money really ‘smart’ ? New evidence on the relation between mutual
    fund flows, manager behavior, and performance persistence. University of Maryland.
Zhang, H. (2008). Asset fire sales, liquidity provision and mutual fund performance. Uni-
    versity of Texas at Austin.
Zheng, L. (1999). Is money smart? A study of mutual fund investors’ fund selection ability.
    Journal of Finance 54, 901–933.




                                           32
                                                                 Panel A: Equity Funds
                                               0.4


                                               0.3

                   nd New Money Growth (NMG)
                                               0.2


                                               0.1


                                               0.0
                                                     1   2   3        4       5         6      7         8   9   10
                                               0.1
          Equity Fun




                                               0.2


                                               0.3


                                               0.4
                                                                 Management Company Performance Decile

                                                                 12!Mths      24!Mths       36!Mths



                                                                 Panel B: Bond Funds
                                               0.4


                                               0.3
          Bond Fund New Money Growth (NMG)




                                               0.2


                                               0.1


                                               0.0
                                                     1   2   3        4       5         6      7         8   9   10
                                               0.1


                                               0.2


                                               0.3


                                               0.4
                                                                 Management Company Performance Decile

                                                                 12!Mths      24!Mths       36!Mths




Figure 1: Money Flows to Mutual Funds by Management Company Performance
These figures depict the relation between management company performance deciles and new
money growth for equity and bond funds, where the industry-adjusted management company
performance is measured over the prior 12, 24, and 36 months.
Table 1: Summary Statistics of Mutual Funds
This table presents summary statistics for both equity and bond funds. The sample period is from
January 1992 to December 2009.


 Panel A: Fund Management Companies
 Variables                                              Mean     Std.Dev.   25th Perc   Median   75th Perc
 CR (Industry-Adjusted Return; 12 Mths; in %)           0.25       2.67       -1.08      0.12       1.37
 CRR (Raw Return; 12 Mths; in %)                        1.28        3.03      -0.12      1.35       2.77
 CFFR (Four-Factor Adjusted Return; 12 Mths; in %)      0.37       2.52       -0.94      0.23       1.51
 Std. Dev. CR (12 Mths, in %)                           7.64        5.09       4.61      6.21       9.20
 Std. Dev. CRR (12 Mths, in %)                          8.69        5.76       5.23      7.20      10.31
 Std. Dev. CFFR (12 Mths, in %)                         7.66        4.92       4.77      6.36       8.96
 REVPCT Equity Funds (Revenue Percent)                  4.90       12.38       0.09      0.32       1.86
 REVPCT Bond Funds (Revenue Percent)                    1.13        4.98       0.03      0.14       0.47

 Panel B: Equity Mutual Funds
 Variable                                               Mean     Std.Dev.   25th Perc   Median   75th Perc
 NMG (New Money Growth; in %)                            0.05      2.81       -1.03      -0.14      0.85
 CMKTS (Change in Market Share; in 1000s)               -0.01      0.34       -0.04      -0.00      0.02
 PCMKTS (Percent Change in Market Share; in %)          -0.23      3.15       -1.65      -0.34      1.07
 FR (Four-Factor Adjusted Return; 12 Mths; in %)        -0.12      0.49       -0.34      -0.13      0.07
 FRR (Raw Return; 12 Mths; in %)                         0.56       1.64      -0.24       0.86      1.58
 FSAR (Style-Adjusted Return; 12Mths; in %)              0.02      0.62       -0.21       0.02      0.24
 Std. Dev. FR (12 Mths; in %)                            1.36      1.05        0.74       1.15      1.73
 Std. Dev. FRR (12 Mths; in %)                           1.76      1.44        0.88       1.43      2.26
 Std. Dev. FSAR (12 Mths; in %)                          1.48      1.23        0.74       1.19      1.88
 NUMFDS (Number of Funds)                               25.11      34.97         3         9         33
 STAR (Star Fund)                                        0.36       0.48         0         0         1
 TNA (Total Net Assets; in $M)                          9,094     17,723       247       1,342     9,850
 TO (Turnover; in %)                                    70.30      51.39      36.50      61.87     86.50
 EXP (Expense Ratio; in %)                               1.14      0.37        0.96       1.14      1.33

 Panel C: Bond Mutual Funds
 Variable                                               Mean     Std.Dev.   25th Perc   Median   75th Perc
 NMG (New Money Growth; in %)                             0.03     3.14       -1.16      -0.19      1.03
 CMKTS (Change in Market Share; in 1000s)                -0.01     0.43       -0.06      -0.00      0.03
 PCMKTS (Percent Change in Market Share; in %)           -0.07     3.77       -1.70      -0.37      1.22
 FSAR (Style-Adjusted Return; 12Mths; in %)              -0.01     0.33       -0.07       0.01      0.09
 FRR (Raw Return; 12 Mths; in %)                          0.44     0.69        0.19       0.48      0.77
 Std. Dev. FSAR (12 Mths; in %)                           0.53     0.65        0.17       0.35      0.66
 Std. Dev. FRR (12 Mths; in %)                            1.15     1.22        0.37       0.78      1.51
 NUMFDS (Number of Funds)                                14.48     16.87         3         7         21
 STAR (Star Fund)                                         0.29     0.45          0         0         1
 TNA (Total Net Assets; in $M)                          4,714     13,475       179        833      5,059
 TO (Turnover; in %)                                    133.94    119.37      54.00      95.24    183.02
 EXP (Expense Ratio; in %)                                0.90     0.30        0.72       0.86      1.07


                                                   34
Table 2: Equity Fund Flows by Management Company Performance (CR) and
Equity Fund Performance (FR)
The table independently sorts management companies into quartiles by their prior industry-adjusted
stock returns (CR) and by the four-factor adjusted return of their equity funds (FR). Panels A1, A2,
and A3 summarize the mean new money growth rates in the subsequent month based on the fund and
company performance over the prior 12, 24, and 36 months. The family fund flows are computed for
each of the 16 groups as the average percentage new money growth rates (NMG). Panels B1, B2, and
B3 summarize the mean four-factor adjusted return of the mutual funds over the prior 12, 24, and
36 months. The sample period ranges from January 1992 to December 2009. The standard errors
of the differences are clustered by time and management company and are shown in parentheses. *,
**, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                  Panel A1: New Money Growth (12 Month Performance)
                           ALL        FR 1       FR 2       FR 3      FR 4      4-1
                  ALL                −0.52       0.00       0.12     0.82      1.34∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.08)
                  CR 1   −0.02       −0.61      −0.22      −0.03     0.76      1.37∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.16)
                  CR 2     0.10      −0.50      −0.02       0.10     0.80      1.30∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.15)
                  CR 3     0.08      −0.49      −0.01       0.17     0.67      1.16∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.16)
                  CR 4     0.26      −0.49       0.25       0.26     1.03      1.52∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.16)
                  4-1      0.29∗∗∗    0.12       0.46∗∗∗    0.30∗∗    0.26
                          (0.07)     (0.14)     (0.15)     (0.14)    (0.18)
                  Panel A2: New Money Growth (24 Month Performance)
                           ALL        FR 1       FR 2       FR 3      FR 4      4-1
                  ALL                −0.54      −0.03       0.17     0.77      1.31∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.07)
                  CR 1   −0.16       −0.90      −0.32      −0.14     0.72      1.62∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.16)
                  CR 2     0.02      −0.58      −0.07       0.07     0.67      1.25∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.14)
                  CR 3     0.10      −0.38      −0.01       0.27     0.49      0.87∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.19)
                  CR 4     0.40      −0.30       0.26       0.46     1.20      1.50∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.16)
                  4-1      0.56∗∗∗    0.59∗∗∗    0.58∗∗∗    0.60∗∗∗ 0.48∗∗∗
                          (0.07)     (0.15)     (0.17)     (0.13)   (0.17)
                  Panel A3: New Money Growth (36 Month Performance)
                           ALL        FR 1       FR 2       FR 3      FR 4      4-1
                  ALL                −0.54      −0.07       0.29     0.72      1.26∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.08)
                  CR 1   −0.12       −0.78      −0.31      −0.04     0.65      1.43∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.15)
                  CR 2     0.04      −0.59      −0.19       0.35     0.60      1.19∗∗∗
                                                  35                          (0.14)
                  CR 3     0.12      −0.37       0.11       0.28     0.48      0.85∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.15)
                  CR 4     0.36      −0.41       0.12       0.57     1.17      1.58∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.17)
                  4-1      0.48∗∗∗    0.37∗∗     0.43∗∗∗    0.61∗∗∗ 0.51∗∗∗
                          (0.08)     (0.16)     (0.14)     (0.13)   (0.17)
Panel B1: Fund Abnormal Returns over Prior 12 Months
        ALL       FR 1      FR 2      FR 3      FR 4      4-1
ALL              −0.59    −0.24     −0.04       0.31     0.90∗∗∗
                                                        (0.04)
CR 1   −0.15     −0.61    −0.24     −0.04       0.29     0.91∗∗∗
                                                        (0.05)
CR 2   −0.14     −0.60    −0.23     −0.04       0.32     0.92∗∗∗
                                                        (0.04)
CR 3   −0.15     −0.61    −0.24     −0.04       0.28     0.90∗∗∗
                                                        (0.04)
CR 4   −0.13     −0.55    −0.24     −0.05       0.33     0.88∗∗∗
                                                        (0.05)
4-1      0.02     0.06∗     0.00      0.00      0.04
        (0.02)   (0.03)    (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.04)

Panel B2: Fund Abnormal Returns over Prior 36 Months
        ALL       FR 1      FR 2      FR 3      FR 4      4-1
ALL              −0.50    −0.21     −0.06       0.23     0.73∗∗∗
                                                        (0.04)
CR 1   −0.14     −0.53    −0.22     −0.06       0.25     0.78∗∗∗
                                                        (0.05)
CR 2   −0.14     −0.51    −0.21     −0.05       0.22     0.73∗∗∗
                                                        (0.04)
CR 3   −0.14     −0.49    −0.21     −0.06       0.20     0.70∗∗∗
                                                        (0.04)
CR 4   −0.14     −0.49    −0.21     −0.06       0.24     0.73∗∗∗
                                                        (0.05)
4-1      0.00     0.04      0.01      0.00    −0.01
        (0.03)   (0.04)    (0.01)    (0.01)   (0.05)

Panel B3: Fund Abnormal Returns over Prior 36 Months
        ALL       FR 1      FR 2      FR 3      FR 4      4-1
ALL              −0.47    −0.20     −0.07       0.21      0.68∗∗∗
                                                         (0.04)
CR 1   −0.14     −0.53    −0.20     −0.07       0.25      0.78∗∗∗
                                                         (0.06)
CR 2   −0.13     −0.46    −0.20     −0.06       0.20      0.67∗∗∗
                                                         (0.04)
CR 3   −0.13     −0.44    −0.20     −0.07       0.17      0.62∗∗∗
                                                        −0.03
CR 4   −0.12     −0.45    −0.20     −0.07       0.22      0.67∗∗∗
                                                         (0.06)
4-1      0.02     0.08∗     0.00      0.00    −0.03
        (0.03)   (0.05)    (0.01)    (0.01)   (0.07)




                              36
     Table 3: Equity Fund Flows by Management Company Performance: Alternative Fund Performance
     Measures
     This table uses OLS regressions to examine the relation between stock performance of management companies and aggregate
     fund flows into diversified U.S. equity funds managed by these companies. The dependent variable is family-level new money
     growth (N M G) in month t. The stock price performance of management companies is measured using the average industry-
     adjusted returns over the prior 12, 24, and 36 months (CR). F R is the average four-factor adjusted equity fund returns, the
     average raw equity fund returns, or the average investment objective-adjusted equity fund returns over the prior 12, 24, and
     36 months. Std.Dev.CR is the time-series standard deviation of CR. Std.Dev.F R is the cross-sectional standard deviation
     of the fund-specific performance within a fund family. T N A is the family-level monthly total net assets value. T O is the
     TNA-weighted turnover ratio at the family-level. EXP is the TNA-weighted expense ratio at the family-level. N U M F DS
     is the number of equity funds for the management company. ST AR is an indicator variable that takes on unity if the family
     has at least one member fund rated as a star fund. The sample period is from January 1992 to December 2009. Time
     dummies are included. Standard errors are clustered by time and management companies. All independent variables are
     lagged by one month. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the
     10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


                                                    Dependent Variable: Monthly Family Flows (NMG)
                               Four-Factor Adjusted                       Raw                           Style- Adjusted
                                   Fund Return                        Fund Return                        Fund Return
                           12 Mths   24 Mths    36 Mths     12 Mths     24 Mths   36 Mths       12 Mths     24 Mths     36 Mths
37




      CR                   0.080∗∗∗   0.158∗∗∗  0.158∗∗∗       0.071∗∗∗  0.154∗∗∗   0.156∗∗∗       0.067∗∗∗  0.139∗∗∗  0.141∗∗∗
                          (0.024)    (0.043)   (0.049)        (0.024)   (0.041)    (0.047)        (0.023)   (0.041)   (0.047)
      FR                   0.804∗∗∗   0.780∗∗∗  0.712∗∗∗       0.629∗∗∗  0.557∗∗∗   0.452∗∗∗       0.877∗∗∗  1.080∗∗∗  1.053∗∗∗
                          (0.145)    (0.187)   (0.212)        (0.095)   (0.118)    (0.115)        (0.118)   (0.170)   (0.201)
      Std. Dev. CR         0.003      0.024     0.035          0.005     0.024      0.035          0.003     0.021     0.033
                          (0.018)    (0.026)   (0.032)        (0.017)   (0.025)    (0.030)        (0.017)   (0.025)   (0.030)
      Std. Dev. FR         0.032      0.027     0.024          0.036     0.040      0.046          0.093∗∗   0.078∗    0.079∗
                          (0.048)    (0.048)   (0.049)        (0.037)   (0.037)    (0.038)        (0.043)   (0.043)   (0.044)
      LOG(TNA)             0.001      0.001     0.000          0.001     0.001      0.001          0.000     0.000     0.000
                          (0.000)    (0.001)   (0.001)        (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)        (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
      TO                  −0.001    −0.001     −0.001         −0.002    −0.002    −0.002         −0.002     −0.002    −0.002
                          (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.002)        (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)        (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)
      EXP                  0.123      0.031    −0.007          0.097     0.027    −0.002           0.074    −0.019    −0.063
                          (0.243)    (0.224)   (0.220)        (0.232)   (0.213)    (0.209)        (0.232)   (0.212)   (0.207)
      LOG(1+NUMFDS)       −0.002∗∗∗ −0.002∗∗ −0.002∗∗         −0.002∗∗ −0.002∗∗ −0.002∗∗         −0.002∗∗ −0.001      −0.001
                          (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)        (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)        (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
      STAR                 0.007∗∗∗   0.007∗∗∗  0.007∗∗∗       0.006∗∗∗  0.006∗∗∗   0.007∗∗∗       0.006∗∗∗  0.006∗∗∗  0.006∗∗∗
                          (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)        (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)        (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)

      Observations          11,951     11,951     11,951       11,980     11,980     11,980        11,951     11,951     11,951
      R-Squared             0.093      0.097      0.092        0.101      0.102      0.096         0.109      0.114      0.106
     Table 4: Equity Fund Flows by Management Company Performance: Alternative Company Perfor-
     mance Measures
     This table uses OLS regressions to examine the relation between stock performance of management companies and aggregate
     fund flows into diversified U.S. equity funds managed by these companies. The dependent variable is family-level new money
     growth (N M G) in month t. The stock price performance of management companies is measured using the average industry-
     adjusted returns, the average raw returns, and the average four-factor adjusted returns over the prior 12, 24, and 36 months
     (CR). F R is the average four-factor adjusted equity fund returns over the prior 12, 24, and 36 months. Std.Dev.CR is the
     time-series standard deviation of CR. Std.Dev.F R is the cross-sectional standard deviation of the fund-specific performance
     within a fund family. T N A is the family-level monthly total net assets value. T O is the TNA-weighted turnover ratio at the
     family-level. EXP is the TNA-weighted expense ratio at the family-level. N U M F DS is the number of equity funds for the
     management company. ST AR is an indicator variable that takes on unity if the family has at least one member fund rated
     as a star fund. The sample period is from January 1992 to December 2009. Time dummies are included. Standard errors
     are clustered by time and management companies. All independent variables are lagged by one month. Standard errors are
     reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


                                                     Dependent Variable: Monthly Family Flows (NMG)
                                 Industry-Adjusted                         Raw                       Four-Factor- Adjusted
                                  Company Return                    Company Return                     Company Return
                           12 Mths   24 Mths     36 Mths     12 Mths     24 Mths   36 Mths       12 Mths   24 Mths     36 Mths

      CR                   0.080∗∗∗   0.158∗∗∗  0.158∗∗∗       0.082∗∗∗  0.156∗∗∗   0.155∗∗∗        0.073∗∗   0.126∗∗   0.126∗∗
38




                          (0.024)    (0.043)   (0.049)        (0.027)   (0.050)    (0.055)         (0.031)   (0.050)   (0.059)
      FR                   0.804∗∗∗   0.780∗∗∗  0.712∗∗∗       0.797∗∗∗  0.768∗∗∗   0.701∗∗∗        0.998∗∗∗  1.158∗∗∗  1.205∗∗∗
                          (0.145)    (0.187)   (0.212)        (0.145)   (0.189)    (0.212)         (0.167)   (0.245)   (0.298)
      Std. Dev. CR         0.003      0.024     0.035          0.004     0.018      0.024           0.020     0.040     0.053
                          (0.018)    (0.026)   (0.032)        (0.015)   (0.024)    (0.029)         (0.022)   (0.032)   (0.036)
      Std. Dev. FR         0.032      0.027     0.024          0.031     0.028      0.026           0.037     0.033     0.029
                          (0.048)    (0.048)   (0.049)        (0.048)   (0.048)    (0.049)         (0.051)   (0.051)   (0.053)
      LOG(TNA)             0.001      0.001     0.000          0.001     0.000      0.000           0.001     0.000     0.000
                          (0.000)    (0.001)   (0.001)        (0.000)   (0.001)    (0.001)         (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
      TO                  −0.001    −0.001     −0.001         −0.001    −0.001    −0.001          −0.001     −0.001    −0.001
                          (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.002)        (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)         (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)
      EXP                  0.123      0.031    −0.007          0.124     0.047      0.018           0.089     0.031    −0.003
                          (0.243)    (0.224)   (0.220)        (0.245)   (0.229)    (0.229)         (0.265)   (0.250)   (0.246)
      LOG(1+NUMFDS)       −0.002∗∗∗ −0.002∗∗ −0.002∗∗         −0.002∗∗∗ −0.002∗∗ −0.002∗∗         −0.002∗∗ −0.002∗∗ −0.002∗
                          (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)        (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)         (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
      STAR                 0.007∗∗∗   0.007∗∗∗  0.007∗∗∗       0.007∗∗∗  0.007∗∗∗   0.007∗∗∗        0.007∗∗∗  0.006∗∗∗  0.006∗∗∗
                          (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)        (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)         (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)

      Observations          11,951     11,951     11,951        11,980     11,980     11,980       11,956      11,956     11,956
      R-Squared             0.093      0.097      0.092         0.092      0.094      0.09         0.097       0.099      0.097
Table 5: Equity Fund Flows by Management Company Performance: Piecewise
Linear Regression
This table uses OLS regressions to examine the relation between stock performance of management
companies and aggregate fund flows into diversified U.S. equity funds managed by these companies.
The dependent variable is family-level new money growth (N M G) in month t. The industry-adjusted
performance of the management company (CR) and the four-factor adjusted performance of the
equity mutual funds (F R) are divided into two piece-wise linear terms. The performance is measured
over the past 12, 24, and 36 months. Std.Dev.CR is the time-series standard deviation of CR.
Std.Dev.F R is the cross-sectional standard deviation of the fund-specific performance within a fund
family. T N A is the family-level monthly total net assets value. T O is the TNA-weighted turnover
ratio at the family-level. EXP is the TNA-weighted expense ratio at the family-level. N U M F DS
is the number of equity funds for the management company. ST AR is an indicator variable that
takes on unity if the family has at least one member fund rated as a star fund. The sample period
is from January 1992 to December 2009. Time dummies are included. Standard errors are clustered
by time and management companies. All independent variables are lagged by one month. Standard
errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% level, respectively.

                                     Dependent Variable: Monthly Family Flows (NMG)
                          Four-Factor Adjusted Fund Return         Style-Adjusted Fund   Return
                          12 Mths     24 Mths    36 Mths         12 Mths     24 Mths     36 Mths
     Min(CR, 0)             0.087∗∗    0.185∗∗∗     0.206∗∗∗      0.062       0.157∗∗∗     0.187∗∗∗
                           (0.041)    (0.056)      (0.065)       (0.039)     (0.053)      (0.064)
     Max(CR, 0)             0.075∗     0.136∗       0.119         0.068∗      0.122        0.105
                           (0.040)    (0.076)      (0.080)       (0.038)     (0.075)      (0.078)
     Min(FR, 0)             0.828∗∗    0.634        0.111         0.745∗∗∗    0.878∗∗∗     0.905∗∗∗
                           (0.376)    (0.438)      (0.413)       (0.191)     (0.269)      (0.271)
     Max(FR, 0)             0.794∗∗∗   0.840∗∗∗     0.949∗∗∗      1.009∗∗∗    1.284∗∗∗     1.200∗∗∗
                           (0.163)    (0.211)      (0.265)       (0.184)     (0.296)      (0.348)
     Std. Dev. CR           0.004      0.027        0.041         0.002       0.024        0.038
                           (0.014)    (0.023)      (0.031)       (0.014)     (0.022)      (0.029)
     Std. Dev. FR           0.001      0.001        0.001         0.000       0.000        0.000
                           (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.001)       (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)
     LOG(TNA)             −0.001      −0.001      −0.001        −0.002      −0.002       −0.001
                           (0.002)    (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)
     TO                     0.134      0.050        0.023         0.098       0.006      −0.038
                           (0.237)    (0.221)      (0.219)       (0.229)     (0.206)      (0.204)
     EXP                    0.032      0.029        0.028         0.095∗∗     0.079∗       0.082∗
                           (0.048)    (0.048)      (0.049)       (0.043)     (0.043)      (0.044)
     LOG(1+NUMFDS)        −0.003∗∗∗ −0.002∗∗      −0.002∗∗      −0.002∗∗ −0.002∗         −0.001
                           (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)
     STAR                   0.007∗∗∗   0.007∗∗∗     0.007∗∗∗      0.006∗∗∗    0.006∗∗∗     0.006∗∗∗
                           (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)

     Observations          11,951      11,951      11,951        11,951     11,951        11,951
     R-squared             0.094       0.097        0.094        0.109      0.115         0.107




                                                 39
Table 6: Equity Fund Flows by Management Company Performance and Fund
Performance: Subsamples by Revenue Percentage
This table uses OLS regressions to examine the relation between stock performance of management
companies and aggregate fund flows into diversified U.S. equity funds managed by these companies.
The equity funds are partitioned into two groups according to the management company’s revenue
dependency (REV P CT ) in the previous year. REV P CT is the percentage of revenues of the
management company that is generated from management of U.S. equity mutual funds, and is
computed as the product of the annual management fees multiplied by average family T N A over the
12 months in the year and divided by total revenues of the management company. The dependent
variable is family-level new money growth (N M G) in month t. The stock price performance of
management companies is measured using the average industry-adjusted returns over the prior 12,
24, and 36 months (CR). F R is the average four-factor adjusted equity fund returns over the past
12, 24, and 36 months. Std.Dev.CR is the time-series standard deviation of CR. Std.Dev.F R is
the cross-sectional standard deviation of the fund-specific performance within a fund family. T N A
is the family-level monthly total net assets value. T O is the TNA-weighted turnover ratio at the
family-level. EXP is the TNA-weighted expense ratio at the family-level. N U M F DS is the number
of equity funds for the management company. ST AR is an indicator variable that takes on unity if
the family has at least one member fund rated as a star fund. The sample period is from January
1998 to December 2009. Time dummies are included. Standard errors are clustered by time and
management companies. All independent variables are lagged by one month. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses. *, **, *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

                                   Dependent Variable: Monthly Family Flows (NMG)
                        Below Median Revenue Percentage       Above Median Revenue Percentage
                        12 Mths     24 Mths    36 Mths         12 Mths     24 Mths    36 Mths
   CR                     0.062∗∗     0.179∗∗∗   0.180∗∗∗        0.109∗∗∗    0.177∗∗∗   0.195∗∗∗
                         (0.025)     (0.045)    (0.064)         (0.037)     (0.061)    (0.062)
   FR                     0.692∗∗∗    0.736∗∗∗   0.597∗          0.932∗∗∗    1.043∗∗∗   1.064∗∗∗
                         (0.200)     (0.259)    (0.322)         (0.223)     (0.299)    (0.377)
   Std. Dev. CR           0.001       0.038      0.041        −0.002         0.007      0.024
                         (0.025)     (0.034)    (0.039)         (0.018)     (0.029)    (0.045)
   Std. Dev. FR           0.095       0.098      0.095        −0.050      −0.069      −0.084
                         (0.087)     (0.086)    (0.086)         (0.074)     (0.076)    (0.075)
   LOG(TNA)               0.003∗∗∗    0.002∗∗    0.002∗∗         0.000       0.000      0.000
                         (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)         (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)
   TO                     0.000       0.001      0.001        −0.004      −0.004      −0.004
                         (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)         (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)
   EXP                    0.224       0.127      0.075           0.440       0.322      0.247
                         (0.304)     (0.302)    (0.303)         (0.478)     (0.395)    (0.355)
   LOG(1+NUMFDS)        −0.004∗∗∗ −0.004∗∗∗ −0.004∗∗          −0.003∗     −0.002      −0.002
                         (0.002)    (0.001)     (0.001)         (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)
   STAR                   0.008∗∗∗    0.007∗∗∗   0.007∗∗∗        0.005∗∗     0.006∗∗    0.006∗∗
                         (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)         (0.003)     (0.002)    (0.002)

   Observations           4,506       4,506       4,506          4,486       4,486       4,486
   R-Squared              0.084       0.093       0.088          0.150       0.156       0.154




                                                40
Table 7: Equity Fund Flows by Management Company Performance and Fund
Performance: Time Subsamples
This table uses OLS regressions to examine the relation between stock performance of management
companies and aggregate fund flows into diversified U.S. equity funds managed by these companies.
The sample is divided into subsamples based on the time period (1992-2000 and 2001-2009) and based
on the economic environment as proxied by an indicator variable for NBER recessions. The dependent
variable is family-level new money growth (N M G) in month t. The stock price performance of
management companies is measured using the average industry-adjusted returns over the prior 24
months (CR). F R is the average four-factor adjusted equity fund returns over the past 24 months.
Std.Dev.CR is the time-series standard deviation of CR. Std.Dev.F R is the cross-sectional standard
deviation of the fund-specific performance within a fund family. T N A is the family-level monthly
total net assets value. T O is the TNA-weighted turnover ratio at the family-level. EXP is the
TNA-weighted expense ratio at the family-level. N U M F DS is the number of equity funds for the
management company. ST AR is an indicator variable that takes on unity if the family has at least
one member fund rated as a star fund. Time dummies are included. Standard errors are clustered
by time and management companies. All independent variables are lagged by one month. Standard
errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% level, respectively.

                                    Dependent Variable: Monthly Family Flows (NMG)
                                         Subperiods           Economic Environment
                                      1992-       2001-         NBER        NBER
                                      2000        2009        Recessions    Booms
               CR                     0.095∗∗     0.157∗∗∗       0.152∗∗∗    0.145∗∗∗
                                     (0.048)     (0.050)        (0.050)     (0.045)
               FR                     1.096∗∗∗    1.030∗∗∗       0.679∗∗     1.122∗∗∗
                                     (0.257)     (0.211)        (0.318)     (0.182)
               Std. Dev. CR          −0.018       0.026          0.045∗∗∗    0.016
                                     (0.027)     (0.026)        (0.017)     (0.028)
               Std. Dev. FR           0.085∗      0.017          0.034       0.087∗∗
                                     (0.048)     (0.072)        (0.098)     (0.044)
               LOG(TNA)               0.000       0.000          0.000       0.000
                                     (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.000)
               TO                     0.000      −0.003          0.000     −0.002
                                     (0.004)     (0.002)        (0.002)     (0.002)
               EXP                    0.227      −0.223         −0.712∗      0.072
                                     (0.364)     (0.282)        (0.389)     (0.220)
               LOG(1+NUMFDS)          0.000      −0.001         −0.001     −0.001
                                     (0.002)     (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)
               STAR                   0.006∗∗     0.006∗∗∗       0.005∗∗∗    0.006∗∗∗
                                     (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.002)     (0.001)
               Constant              −0.011      −0.004          0.003     −0.009∗
                                     (0.010)     (0.006)        (0.007)     (0.005)

               Observations           4,266        7,685          1,768      10,183
               R-squared              0.124        0.107          0.100       0.117




                                                 41
Table 8: Equity Fund Flows by Management Company Performance and Fund
Performance: Change in Market Share
This table uses OLS regressions to examine the relation between stock performance of management
companies and aggregate market share of diversified U.S. equity funds managed by these companies.
The dependent variable is either the family-level change in the market share or the percentage
change in the market share in month t. The market share is defined as the total value of equity funds
managed by a family divided by the total value of all equity funds. The stock price performance of
management companies is measured using the average industry-adjusted returns over the prior 12,
24, and 36 months (CR). F R is the average four-factor adjusted equity fund returns over the past
12, 24, and 36 months. Std.Dev.CR is the time-series standard deviation of CR. Std.Dev.F R is
the cross-sectional standard deviation of the fund-specific performance within a fund family. T N A
is the family-level monthly total net assets value. T O is the TNA-weighted turnover ratio at the
family-level. EXP is the TNA-weighted expense ratio at the family-level. N U M F DS is the number
of equity funds for the management company. ST AR is an indicator variable that takes on unity if
the family has at least one member fund rated as a star fund. The sample period is from January
1992 to December 2009. Time dummies are included. Standard errors are clustered by time and
management companies. All independent variables are lagged by one month. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses. *, **, *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

                                                   Dependent Variable:
                           Change in Market Share x100        Percentage Change in Market Share
                         12 Mths     24 Mths     36 Mths       12 Mths     24 Mths     36 Mths
   CR                     0.083∗∗∗     0.147∗∗∗    0.163∗∗       0.088∗∗∗    0.159∗∗∗    0.147∗∗∗
                         (0.032)      (0.057)     (0.074)       (0.024)     (0.044)     (0.052)
   FR                     0.664∗∗∗     0.750∗∗∗    0.837∗∗       0.928∗∗∗    0.851∗∗∗    0.766∗∗∗
                         (0.219)      (0.286)     (0.353)       (0.182)     (0.228)     (0.257)
   Std. Dev. CR          −0.017      −0.016      −0.018          0.012       0.034       0.045
                         (0.014)      (0.018)     (0.022)       (0.018)     (0.026)     (0.032)
   Std. Dev. FR          −0.001      −0.001      −0.001          0.017       0.013       0.009
                         (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.054)     (0.054)     (0.054)
   LOG(TNA)              −0.003∗∗    −0.003∗∗    −0.003∗∗        0.001       0.000       0.000
                         (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
   TO                     0.112        0.068       0.054       −0.002      −0.002     −0.002
                         (0.212)      (0.217)     (0.222)       (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)
   EXP                   −0.07       −0.072      −0.076          0.032     −0.066     −0.101
                         (0.053)      (0.053)     (0.054)       (0.263)     (0.246)     (0.243)
   LOG(1+NUMFDS)         −0.002      −0.001      −0.001        −0.002∗∗    −0.002∗∗   −0.002∗
                         (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
   STAR                   0.007∗∗∗     0.006∗∗∗    0.006∗∗∗      0.007∗∗∗    0.007∗∗∗    0.007∗∗∗
                         (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)

   Observations           11,951      11,951      11,951         11,951      11,951      11,951
   R-Squared               0.033       0.035       0.035          0.098       0.098       0.094




                                                 42
Table 9: Equity Fund Flows by Management Company Performance and Fund
Performance: Individual Fund Analysis
This table uses OLS regressions to examine the relation between stock performance of management
companies and fund flows into diversified U.S. equity funds managed by these companies. The
dependent variable is fund-level new money growth (N M G) in month t. The stock price performance
of management companies is measured using the average industry-adjusted returns over the prior
12, 24, and 36 months (CR). F R is the average four-factor adjusted equity fund return or the
style-adjusted fund return over the past 12, 24, and 36 months. Std.Dev.CR is the time-series
standard deviation of CR. Std.Dev.F R is the cross-sectional standard deviation of the fund-specific
performance within a fund family. T N A is the monthly total net assets value of a fund. T O is the
turnover ratio at the fund level. EXP is the expense ratio at the fund level. AGE is the time period
in months since the inception of the fund. ST AR is an indicator variable that takes on unity if the
fund is rated as a star fund in the previous month, and zero otherwise. The sample period is from
January 1992 to December 2009. Time dummies are included. Standard errors are clustered by time
and management companies. All independent variables are lagged by one month. Standard errors
are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level, respectively.

                                  Dependent Variable: Monthly Fund Flows (NMG)
                       Four-Factor Adjusted Fund Return        Style-Adjusted Fund   Return
                       12 Mths     24 Mths     36 Mths       12 Mths     24 Mths     36 Mths
        CR               0.048∗∗    0.075∗∗      0.073∗∗      0.049∗∗     0.104∗∗∗     0.119∗∗∗
                        (0.019)    (0.029)      (0.033)      (0.019)     (0.031)      (0.036)
        FR               1.533∗∗∗   1.955∗∗∗     2.158∗∗∗     1.280∗∗∗    1.647∗∗∗     1.890∗∗∗
                        (0.106)    (0.151)      (0.168)      (0.104)     (0.132)      (0.146)
        Std. Dev. CR   −0.002       0.006        0.009      −0.002        0.004        0.006
                        (0.010)    (0.014)      (0.018)      (0.011)     (0.015)      (0.018)
        Std. Dev. FR     0.064    −0.019       −0.054         0.123∗∗∗    0.081∗       0.046
                        (0.070)    (0.091)      (0.095)      (0.042)     (0.046)      (0.049)
        LOG(TNA)       −0.003∗∗∗ −0.003∗∗∗     −0.003∗∗∗    −0.003∗∗∗ −0.003∗∗∗      −0.003∗∗∗
                        (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)
        TO               0.000      0.000        0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000
                        (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.001)      (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.001)
        EXP            −0.984∗∗∗ −0.939∗∗∗     −0.918∗∗∗    −1.022∗∗∗ −0.985∗∗∗      −0.955∗∗∗
                        (0.119)    (0.121)      (0.121)      (0.117)     (0.118)      (0.118)
        Log(Age)       −0.002     −0.001       −0.001       −0.002      −0.002       −0.002
                        (0.002)    (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)
        STAR             0.024∗∗∗   0.023∗∗∗     0.023∗∗∗     0.023∗∗∗    0.022∗∗∗     0.022∗∗∗
                        (0.002)    (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)

        Observations    301,121    301,121     301,121        301,121    301,121      301,121
        R-squared        0.054      0.056        0.055         0.059      0.06         0.06




                                                 43
Table 10: Bond Fund Flows by Management Company Performance (CR) and
Bond Fund Performance (FSAR)
The table independently sorts management companies into quartiles by their prior industry-adjusted
stock returns (CR) and by the style-adjusted return of their bond funds (FSAR). Panels A1, A2, and
A3 summarize the mean new money growth rates in the subsequent month based on the fund and
company performance over the prior 12, 24, and 36 months. The family fund flows are computed for
each of the 16 groups as the average percentage new money growth rates (NMG). Panels B1, B2, and
B3 summarize the mean style-adjusted return of the bond mutual funds over the prior 12, 24, and
36 months. The sample period ranges from January 1992 to December 2009. The standard errors
of the differences are clustered by time and management company and are shown in parentheses. *,
**, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                 Panel A1: New Money Growth (12 Month Performance)
                          ALL    FSAR 1 FSAR 2 FSAR 3 FSAR 4                   4-1
                 ALL             −0.33      0.08     0.03      0.55           0.88∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.10)
                 CR 1   −0.02       −0.50     0.12    −0.11       0.41        0.91∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.19)
                 CR 2     0.11      −0.05    −0.10     0.14       0.43        0.48∗∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.17)
                 CR 3     0.05      −0.38     0.08    −0.05       0.54        0.92∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.18)
                 CR 4     0.20      −0.38     0.24     0.13       0.83        1.21∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.17)
                 4-1      0.22∗∗     0.11     0.13      0.24       0.42∗∗
                         (0.10)     (0.17)   (0.21)    (0.19)     (0.18)

                 Panel A2: New Money Growth (24 Month Performance)
                          ALL    FSAR 1 FSAR 2 FSAR 3 FSAR 4                   4-1
                 ALL             −0.38      0.00     0.11      0.65           1.03∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.10)
                 CR 1   −0.12       −0.67    −0.03     0.02       0.19        0.86∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.18)
                 CR 2     0.11      −0.13     0.01     0.07       0.47        0.59∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.18)
                 CR 3     0.10      −0.33    −0.06    −0.01       0.80        1.12∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.17)
                 CR 4     0.29      −0.41     0.09     0.36       1.13        1.54∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.19)
                 4-1      0.41∗∗∗    0.27∗    0.12      0.34∗      0.95∗∗∗
                         (0.09)     (0.16)   (0.17)    (0.20)     (0.20)

                 Panel A3: New Money Growth (36 Month Performance)
                          ALL    FSAR 1 FSAR 2 FSAR 3 FSAR 4                   4-1
                 ALL             −0.35      0.00     0.07      0.56           0.91∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.10)
                 CR 1   −0.14       −0.54     0.04    −0.23       0.17        0.71∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.19)
                 CR 2   −0.02       −0.26    −0.17     0.00       0.35        0.61∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.17)
                 CR 3     0.08      −0.25       44
                                             −0.01    −0.01       0.59        0.83∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.17)
                 CR 4     0.36      −0.36     0.13     0.53       1.13        1.49∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.19)
                 4-1      0.50∗∗∗    0.18     0.09      0.76∗∗∗    0.96∗∗∗
                         (0.10)     (0.18)   (0.18)    (0.18)     (0.20)
Panel B1: Fund Style-Adjusted Returns over Prior 12 Months
         ALL     FSAR 1    FSAR 2    FSAR 3     FSAR 4         4-1
ALL              −0.29     −0.03       0.05      0.24         0.53∗∗∗
                                                             (0.05)
CR 1   −0.03     −0.37     −0.03       0.05      0.25         0.62∗∗∗
                                                             (0.11)
CR 2     0.01    −0.24     −0.03       0.05      0.23         0.47∗∗∗
                                                             (0.04)
CR 3     0.00    −0.25     −0.02       0.06      0.23         0.48∗∗∗
                                                             (0.04)
CR 4     0.01    −0.29     −0.02       0.06      0.26         0.55∗∗∗
                                                             (0.05)
4-1      0.04      0.08      0.00      0.01      0.01
        (0.04)    (0.10)    (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.03)

Panel B2: Fund Style-Adjusted Returns over Prior 24 Months
         ALL     FSAR 1    FSAR 2    FSAR 3     FSAR 4         4-1
ALL              −0.21     −0.02       0.04      0.19         0.39∗∗∗
                                                             (0.03)
CR 1   −0.01     −0.25     −0.02       0.04      0.20         0.44∗∗∗
                                                             (0.07)
CR 2     0.02    −0.16     −0.02       0.04      0.20         0.36∗∗∗
                                                             (0.03)
CR 3     0.00    −0.21     −0.02       0.04      0.17         0.37∗∗∗
                                                             (0.03)
CR 4     0.01    −0.20     −0.02       0.04      0.19         0.38∗∗∗
                                                             (0.03)
4-1      0.01      0.05      0.00      0.00    −0.01
        (0.03)    (0.06)    (0.00)    (0.00)   (0.03)

Panel B3: Fund Style-Adjusted Returns over Prior 36 Months
         ALL     FSAR 1    FSAR 2    FSAR 3     FSAR 4         4-1
ALL              −0.17     −0.02       0.03      0.16         0.34∗∗∗
                                                             (0.03)
CR 1     0.01    −0.20     −0.02       0.04      0.20         0.40∗∗∗
                                                             (0.05)
CR 2     0.02    −0.13     −0.02       0.03      0.17         0.30∗∗∗
                                                             (0.03)
CR 3     0.00    −0.15     −0.02       0.04      0.13         0.29∗∗∗
                                                             (0.02)
CR 4     0.00    −0.19     −0.01       0.03      0.16         0.35∗∗∗
                                                             (0.04)
4-1    −0.01       0.02      0.01      0.00    −0.04
       (0.02)     (0.03)    (0.00)    (0.00)   (0.02)




                               45
     Table 11: Bond Fund Flows by Management Company Performance and Fund Performance
     This table uses OLS regressions to examine the relation between the stock performance of management companies and
     aggregate fund flows into U.S. bond funds managed by these companies. The dependent variable is family-level new money
     growth (N M G) into bond funds in month t. The stock price performance of management companies is measured using
     the average industry-adjusted returns, the average raw returns, and the four-factor adjusted returns over the prior 12, 24,
     and 36 months. F SAR is the average investment objective-adjusted bond fund return over the past 12, 24, and 36 months.
     Std.Dev.CR is the time-series standard deviation of CR. Std.Dev.F R is the cross-sectional standard deviation of the fund-
     specific performance within a fund family. T N A is the family-level monthly total net assets value. T O is the TNA-weighted
     turnover ratio at the family-level. EXP is the TNA-weighted expense ratio at the family-level. N U M F DS is the number
     of bond funds for the management company. ST AR is an indicator variable that takes on unity if the family has at least one
     fund rated as a star fund. The sample period is from January 1992 to December 2009. Time dummies are included. Standard
     errors are clustered by time and management companies. All independent variables are lagged by one month. Standard errors
     are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


                                                        Dependent Variable: Monthly Fund Flows (NMG)
                                 Industry-Adjusted                            Raw                       Four-Factor Adjusted
                                  Company Return                        Company Return                     Company Return
                          12 Mths    24 Mths     36 Mths       12 Mths      24 Mths   36 Mths     12 Mths     24 Mths    36 Mths
      CR                   0.015       0.075∗      0.117∗∗       0.020       0.086∗∗    0.115∗∗     0.045      0.102∗∗     0.138∗∗
46




                          (0.030)     (0.042)    (0.050)        (0.030)     (0.043)    (0.049)     (0.032)    (0.048)     (0.055)
      FSAR                 1.435∗∗∗    2.184∗∗∗    2.738∗∗∗      1.438∗∗∗    2.205∗∗∗   2.775∗∗∗    1.411∗∗∗   2.190∗∗∗    2.760∗∗∗
                          (0.232)     (0.394)    (0.537)        (0.235)     (0.398)    (0.540)     (0.239)    (0.411)     (0.562)
      Std. Dev. CR         0.017       0.028       0.03          0.022       0.032      0.035       0.032      0.047∗      0.055∗∗
                          (0.021)     (0.024)    (0.027)        (0.018)     (0.022)    (0.025)     (0.020)    (0.025)     (0.028)
      Std. Dev. FSAR       0.186∗      0.141       0.082         0.182∗      0.137      0.078       0.172∗     0.127       0.064
                          (0.097)     (0.092)    (0.088)        (0.097)     (0.092)    (0.087)     (0.103)    (0.097)     (0.091)
      LOG(TNA)            −0.001∗    −0.002∗∗ −0.002∗∗         −0.001∗∗ −0.002∗∗ −0.002∗∗         −0.001      −0.001     −0.001∗
                          (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)
      TO                  −0.001     −0.001      −0.001        −0.001      −0.001     −0.001      −0.001∗     −0.001∗    −0.001∗
                          (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)
      EXP                 −0.59      −0.576      −0.56         −0.590      −0.567     −0.543      −0.637      −0.563     −0.504
                          (0.420)     (0.416)    (0.409)        (0.419)     (0.419)    (0.414)     (0.452)    (0.453)     (0.451)
      LOG(1+NUMFDS)        0.003       0.003∗      0.004∗∗       0.003       0.003∗     0.004∗∗     0.003      0.003       0.003∗
                          (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)        (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)
      STAR                 0.002∗      0.002∗      0.002∗        0.002∗      0.002      0.002       0.002∗     0.002∗      0.002∗
                          (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)

      Observations          11,103     11,103     11,103       11,103      11,103     11,103        11,123     11,123      11,123
      R-Squared             0.085      0.088      0.087        0.086       0.089      0.088         0.084      0.088       0.087
Table 12: Fund Manager Turnover by Management Company Performance and
Fund Performance
This table presents results from a logit model, where the dependent variable is a DEP ART indicator
variable that equals one if an individual fund has a departing manager. For funds with multiple
managers, DEP ART takes on unity if there is at least one manager who departs. The first three
columns investigate departures of equity funds and the last three columns investigate departures of
managers of bond funds. The stock price performance of management companies is measured using
the average industry-adjusted returns over the prior 12, 24, and 36 months (CR). F R is the average
four-factor adjusted equity return over the past 36 months or the style-adjusted bond fund return
over the past 36 months. T O is the turnover ratio at the fund-level. EXP is the expense ratio at
the fund-level. ST AR is an indicator variable that takes on unity if the fund is a star fund in the
previous month. In each month, we compute the average tenure (T ENURE) of all managers
of the fund. T EAM is an indicator variable for whether the fund is a team managed fund.
Time dummies are included. Standard errors are clustered by fund and time. All independent
variables are lagged by one month. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, ***
represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                          Dependent Variable: Management Turnover
                                    Equity Funds                            Bond Funds
                       12 Mths        24 Mths     36 Mths        12 Mths      24 Mths     36 Mths
     CR                −3.925∗∗∗      −3.941∗∗∗ −1.612           −2.147       −1.393      −0.096
                        (1.250)        (1.504)     (1.452)        (1.681)      (2.117)     (2.141)
     FR                −8.866∗∗      −12.106∗∗∗ −14.896∗∗∗       −7.633       −4.926     −10.503
                        (3.637)        (4.552)     (4.637)        (9.700)    (14.585)    (16.303)
     LOG(TNA)            0.077∗∗∗       0.077∗∗∗    0.077∗∗∗       0.065∗∗∗ −0.861        −0.882
                        (0.019)        (0.019)     (0.019)        (0.021)      (0.021)     (0.021)
     LOG(AGE)          −0.060         −0.060      −0.050         −0.019       −0.014      −0.009
                        (0.078)        (0.078)     (0.078)        (0.119)      (0.120)     (0.119)
     TO                  0.008          0.004     −0.003         −0.041∗      −0.042∗     −0.041∗
                        (0.034)        (0.035)     (0.036)        (0.024)      (0.024)     (0.024)
     EXP                 4.213          3.909       3.842       −21.422∗     −21.392∗    −21.861∗
                        (6.244)        (6.279)     (6.305)      (11.921)     (11.942)    (11.882)
     STAR              −0.270∗∗       −0.255∗∗    −0.249∗∗       −0.074       −0.078      −0.068
                        (0.118)        (0.119)     (0.117)        (0.192)      (0.194)     (0.194)
     LOG(TENURE)       −1.013∗∗∗      −1.011∗∗∗ −1.012∗∗∗        −1.051∗∗∗ −1.052∗∗∗ −1.051∗∗∗
                        (0.032)        (0.032)     (0.032)        (0.038)      (0.037)     (0.037)
     TEAM                0.525∗∗∗       0.529∗∗∗    0.529∗∗∗       0.522∗∗∗     0.525∗∗∗    0.524∗∗∗
                        (0.064)        (0.063)     (0.064)        (0.085)      (0.085)     (0.085)

     Observations       94,870        94,870       94,870         55,817       55,817      55,817
     R-Squared          0.150          0.149        0.149          0.160        0.160       0.160




                                                   47
Table 13: Future Performance of Equity and Bond Funds by Management Com-
pany Performance (CR) and Fund Performance (FR)
The table independently sorts management companies into quartiles by their prior industry-adjusted
stock returns (CR) and by the adjusted return of their equity and bond funds (FR and FSAR).
Panel A summarizes the four-factor adjusted returns of equity funds in the subsequent month based
on the equity fund and company performance over the prior 12 months. Panel B summarizes the
style-adjusted returns of bond funds in the subsequent month based on the bond fund and company
performance over the prior 12 months. The sample period ranges from January 1992 to December
2009. The standard errors of the differences are clustered by time and fund and are shown in paren-
theses. *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

               Panel A: Equity Funds Using Prior 12 Month Performance
                         ALL       FR 1        FR 2       FR 3      FR 4         4-1
               ALL               −0.18 ∗∗∗
                                            −0.15  ∗∗∗
                                                        −0.13 ∗∗∗
                                                                  −0.07        0.11∗∗
                                  (0.04)      (0.04)    (0.04)     (0.05)     (0.05)
               CR 1 −0.16∗∗∗ −0.26∗∗∗ −0.19∗∗∗ −0.12∗∗            −0.07        0.19∗∗
                       (0.04)     (0.06)      (0.05)    (0.05)     (0.06)     (0.08)
               CR 2 −0.12∗∗∗ −0.23∗∗∗ −0.13∗∗∗ −0.13∗∗∗ −0.03                  0.20∗∗
                       (0.04)     (0.07)      (0.05)    (0.05)     (0.06)     (0.09)
               CR 3 −0.14∗∗∗ −0.13∗∗        −0.20∗∗∗ −0.13∗∗      −0.09        0.05
                       (0.04)     (0.06)      (0.05)    (0.05)     (0.07)     (0.07)
               CR 4 −0.11∗∗∗ −0.12∗∗        −0.09∗      −0.14∗∗∗ −0.09         0.03
                       (0.04)     (0.05)      (0.05)    (0.05)     (0.08)     (0.09)
               4-1      0.05       0.15∗∗      0.09∗    −0.02     −0.02
                       (0.03)     (0.06)      (0.06)    (0.05)     (0.07)

               Panel B: Bond Funds Using Prior 12 Month Performance
                        ALL       FSAR 1     FSAR 2     FSAR 3     FSAR 4       4-1
               ALL               −0.15∗∗∗   −0.00       0.04        0.08∗∗∗    0.22∗∗∗
                                  (0.04)    (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.03)     (0.06)
               CR 1   −0.02      −0.24∗      0.00       0.05        0.10∗∗∗    0.34∗∗
                      (0.03)      (0.13)    (0.01)     (0.02)      (0.04)     (0.14)
               CR 2   −0.02      −0.15∗∗∗   −0.01       0.03∗       0.04       0.19∗∗∗
                      (0.02)      (0.04)    (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.04)     (0.07)
               CR 3   −0.00      −0.11∗∗∗    0.00       0.05∗∗∗     0.05       0.16∗∗
                      (0.02)      (0.04)    (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.04)     (0.06)
               CR 4    0.02      −0.08      −0.01       0.02        0.11∗∗∗    0.19∗∗∗
                      (0.02)      (0.05)    (0.01)     (0.02)      (0.04)     (0.07)
               4-1     0.04        0.16     −0.01      −0.03        0.01
                      (0.04)      (0.14)    (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.04)




                                                 48
