NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LABOR MARKET FLOWS IN THE CROSS SECTION AND OVER TIME
Steven J. Davis
Jason Faberman
John C. Haltiwanger
Working Paper 17294
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17294

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2011

This paper was presented at the Spring 2011 Carnegie-Rochester Conference. We thank Jennifer Hayden
for excellent research assistance. We thank seminar participants at EUI, Princeton, Chicago, Rochester,
the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, workshop participants
at various conferences and Ayegül ahin, Hermann Gartner, Christopher Reicher, Tom Cooley and
Yongsung Chang for comments on an earlier draft. We thank the Kauffman Foundation and the Booth
School of Business at the University of Chicago for financial support. The views expressed are solely
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official positions or policies of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve System, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, the U.S. Bureau
of the Census, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or the views of other staff members.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Steven J. Davis, Jason Faberman, and John C. Haltiwanger. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Labor Market Flows in the Cross Section and Over Time
Steven J. Davis, Jason Faberman, and John C. Haltiwanger
NBER Working Paper No. 17294
August 2011
JEL No. E24,J63,J64
ABSTRACT
Many theoretical models of labor market search imply a tight link between worker flows (hires and
separations) and job gains and losses at the employer level. Partly motivated by these theories, we
exploit establishment-level data from U.S. sources to study the relationship between worker flows
and job flows in the cross section and over time. We document strong, highly nonlinear relationships
of hiring, quit and layoff rates to employer growth in the cross section. Simple statistical models that
capture these cross-sectional relationships greatly improve our ability to account for fluctuations in
aggregate worker flows. We also evaluate how well various theoretical models and views fit the patterns
in the data. Aggregate fluctuations in layoffs are well captured by micro specifications that impose
a tight cross-sectional link between worker flows and job flows. Aggregate fluctuations in quits are
not. Instead, quit rates rise and fall with booms and recessions across the distribution of establishment
growth rates, but more so at shrinking employers. Finally, we use our preferred statistical models –
in combination with data on the cross-sectional distribution of establishment growth rates – to construct
synthetic JOLTS-type measures of hires, separations, quits and layoffs back to 1990.
Steven J. Davis
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Steven.Davis@ChicagoBooth.edu
Jason Faberman
Economic Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 S. LaSalle St.
Chicago, IL 60604
jfaberman@frbchi.org

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17294

John C. Haltiwanger
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
haltiwan@econ.umd.edu

1. Introduction
Many theoretical models of labor market search carry strong implications for the relationship of
hires and separations to job gains and losses at the employer level. Partly motivated by these theories,
we exploit establishment-level data from U.S. sources to study the empirical relationship between
worker flows and job flows in the cross section and over time. The evidence supports a hybrid view that
incorporates aspects of several distinct theories of labor market dynamics. Tracking the cross-sectional
distribution of establishment growth rates, and applying simple models of cross-sectional behavior,
greatly improves our ability to account for aggregate fluctuations in hires, separations, quits and layoffs.
Previous work has not delivered a thorough and convincing explanation for the relationship
between worker flows and job flows. One difficulty is that worker flow and job flow measures typically
derive from different data sources, and are comparable only at high levels of aggregation. Even then,
standard sources of data on these measures differ in scope, sampling frequency and other respects that
hinder direct comparison. We overcome these difficulties by exploiting micro data from the Job
Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS). JOLTS data yield internally consistent measures of
hires, separations, quits, layoffs, job creation and job destruction at the establishment and aggregate
levels.
To deal with weaknesses in the JOLTS sample design, we rely on the comprehensive Business
Employment Dynamics (BED) to track the cross-sectional distribution of establishment-level growth
rates over time. Specifically, we combine BED data on the establishment growth rate distribution with
JOLTS data for hires, separations, layoffs and quits conditional on establishment growth rates to
measure the aggregate worker flow rates. Combining JOLTS and BED data also enables us to construct
synthetic data on worker flows back to 1990, nearly doubling the time-series length of JOLTS-type
worker flow measures.

1

To guide our empirical work, we consider several theoretical models. Models in the spirit of
seminal work by Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) (hereafter MP) imply a tight link between job flows
and worker flows. Our empirical work assesses how closely models with these tight links fit the data.
We also consider empirical specifications motivated by models that stress the role of search on the job,
learning about match quality, firm profitability, and the impact of aggregate conditions on the propensity
to quit. We evaluate alternative specifications in terms of their fit to cross-sectional patterns in the
establishment-level data, their ability to generate the observed movements in aggregate worker flows,
and their marginal explanatory power for aggregate worker flows after conditioning on aggregate
variables.
Figures 1 and 2 plot our quarterly, seasonally adjusted time series for JOLTS-type worker flow
measures, along with job creation and destruction rates from the BED.1 All rates cover the nonfarm
private sector and are expressed as a percent of employment. We define job creation as the sum of
employment gains at new and expanding establishments as in Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1996).
We define job destruction analogously. Figure 1 shows that job destruction and layoffs move together
over time, while quits move counter to both. Job destruction and layoffs exhibit pronounced spikes in
late 2008 and early 2009 and then decline in nearly parallel fashion. Figure 2 shows that job creation
and hires rates decline from 2006, bottom out in 2009Q1, and then partly recover. The hiring rate
moves much more than the job creation rate over this period. Our study explores the micro level sources
of these aggregate movements.
Looking across establishments, hiring and separation rates exhibit powerful elements of the
“iron-link” behavior implied by MP-style search models. That is, hires are tightly linked to job creation,
1

To conform to the BED sampling frequency, we cumulate monthly establishment-level JOLTS observations to the quarterly
frequency. We then construct our aggregate worker flow series by combining the cross-sectional relationships of worker
flows to establishment-level growth rates in JOLTS micro data with employment growth rate distributions from the BED.
This approach, described more fully in Section III below, follows Davis, Faberman, Haltiwanger and Rucker (2010). Worker
flows prior to 2001Q3 in Figures 1 and 2 are synthetic data, constructed as described in Section V below.

2

and separations are tightly linked to job destruction. When plotted as functions of establishment-level
growth rates, hiring and separation rates exhibit nonlinear “hockey-stick” shapes. The hires relation is
nearly flat to the left of zero growth (contracting employers) and rises more than one-for-one with
employment growth to the right of zero (expanding employers), with a pronounced kink at zero. The
separations relation is a mirror image of the hires relation. The hockey-stick shape for separations is
starkly at odds with the simplifying assumption adopted in many search models of a uniform separation
rate. Turning to the components of separations, both quits and layoffs rise with job destruction, but
layoffs dominate the adjustment margin for rapidly contracting establishments. We also consider how
the cross-sectional relations vary with aggregate conditions. As it turns out, the cross-sectional layoff
relation is highly stable over time. In contrast, the cross-sectional quit relation varies markedly with
aggregate conditions. Specifically, the quit relation shifts downward when aggregate conditions are
weak, especially at contracting establishments.
Several theoretical models provide insight into the reasons for departures from an iron-link
relationship between worker flows and job flows. Faberman and Nagypál (2008) consider a model of
on-the-job search that delivers an “abandon-ship” effect at struggling employers. Firms vary in their
idiosyncratic profitability and grow faster when more profitable. Because wages increase with firm
profits in their model, workers at low-profitability firms are more likely to accept an outside offer.
Consequently, quit rates decline with the idiosyncratic component of firm profitability. Barlevy (2002)
considers a model with on-the-job search and a match-specific component of productivity. Because
firms create fewer vacancies when aggregate conditions are weak, employed workers encounter better
matches at a slower pace during recessions. As a result, workers tend to remain longer in poor matches,
which Barlevy refers to as the “sullying” effect of recessions. In sum, Faberman and Nagypál highlight
the role of cross-sectional variation in firm-level circumstances for quit rates, whereas Barlevy

3

highlights the role of variation over time in aggregate conditions. Our evidence indicates that both
effects are at work.
In Jovanovic (1979, 1985) and Moscarini (2005), gradual learning about match quality leads to a
separation rate that declines with match tenure. Because more rapid growth involves a higher share of
young matches, these models suggest that separations rise with the growth rate of expanding employers.
Pries and Rogerson (2005) integrate elements of Jovanovic-style learning into an MP model.
Separations occur because of job destruction, as in the MP model, and because of learning effects about
match quality. Thus, the model of Pries and Rogerson generates elements of iron-link behavior in hires
and separations while rationalizing a positive relationship between separations and growth at expanding
employers. The data support this hybrid view of the cross-sectional relationship between hires,
separations and employer growth.
Motivated by these theoretical ideas, we develop parsimonious statistical models of how worker
flows vary in the cross section, and how the cross-sectional relations move over time. The statistical
models serve three objectives. First, they provide guidance in evaluating, developing and calibrating
theoretical models of labor market flows. Second, they allow us to investigate whether tracking the
cross-sectional growth distribution adds to our understanding of aggregate movements in labor market
flows. Third, they yield a framework for constructing synthetic data on aggregate hires, separations,
quits and layoffs in the period before the advent of JOLTS.
When we consider specifications that impose time-invariant relations of worker flows to
employer growth rates in the cross section, the statistical models perform reasonably well in tracking the
aggregate movements of hiring and layoff rates. However, the same type of model fails miserably in
tracking the aggregate behavior of quits. Consequently, it also fares poorly in accounting for the

4

aggregate separations rate. When we allow the worker flow-employer growth relationships to vary with
aggregate conditions, our ability to track aggregate quits and separations improves dramatically.
Our work in this paper has many antecedents. There is a large body of previous research on job
flows and worker flows. We review research in this area in Davis and Haltiwanger (1999) and Davis,
Faberman and Haltiwanger (2006). Labor market flows and job vacancies play central roles in modern
theories of unemployment based on search and matching models. See, for example, Pissarides (2000),
Rogerson, Shimer and Wright (2005) and Yashiv (2007) for reviews of work in this area. Models that
treat hires as the outcome of a matching function carry implications for the relationship between hires
and vacancies in the cross section and over time. We explore some of those implications in Davis,
Faberman and Haltiwanger (2010).
The paper proceeds as follows. Section II discusses the conceptual underpinnings that guide our
empirical work. We start with the model of Cooper, Haltiwanger and Willis (2006), which extends the
basic MP model to multi-worker firms. We then consider models that endogenize the worker’s quit
decision, as in Faberman and Nagypál (2008) and Barlevy (2002), and conclude with models of learning
about match quality, such as Jovanovic (1979). Section III describes our data and empirical measures.
Section IV presents our statistical models and investigates how well they account for worker flows in the
cross section and over time. Section V constructs synthetic JOLTS-type data on worker flows, and
Section VI concludes.
2. Conceptual Underpinnings and Theoretical Implications
In thinking about worker flows and job flows, it is useful to begin with an identity:
eit = eit −1 + hit − l it − q it ,

(1)

where e it is employment at establishment i in period t and h, l and q denote hires, layoffs and quits.
Separations are the sum of quits and layoffs. Theory provides guidance about how employers use hires,
5

layoffs and quits to adjust employment and about the factors that lead to worker turnover in excess of
employment changes. In what follows in this section, we first consider search and matching models that
involve an “iron link” between hires and job creation on the one hand and separations and job
destruction on the other. We then consider theories that relax the iron link. Lastly, we discuss aggregate
implications and motivate our empirical specifications.
2.1. Models with an Iron Link
Every hire reflects a newly created job in the canonical search and matching model of Mortensen
and Pissarides (1994), and every separation reflects a job that vanishes. That is what we mean by an
iron link between worker flows and job flows. One goal of our study is to assess how well this iron link
characterizes the data. However, the basic MP model has no role for multi-worker employers, an
essential aspect of our empirical work. So we borrow from Cooper, Haltiwanger and Willis (2007,
CHW) to illustrate the implications of the iron link in a multi-worker version of MP.2
Employers in the CHW model face common and idiosyncratic shocks and produce output
according to a strictly concave function of the labor input. When hiring new workers, employers incur
fixed and variable costs of posting vacancies. Workers separate for exogenous reasons, and some
employers layoff additional workers subject to fixed and variable firing costs. Employers choose layoffs
and vacancies – effectively, hires as well – to maximize the present discounted value of profits. Workers
do not search on the job.
The following law of motion links employment changes and worker flows in CHW:
eit = (1 − q )eit −1 + η (U t , Vt )v it − l it ,

2

Other recent search-theoretic analyses with multi-worker firms include Elsby and Michaels (2008), Veracierto (2009),
Fujita and Nakajima (2010), Schaal (2010) and Trapeznikova (2010).

6

(2)

where q is the quit rate, η (U t , Vt ) is the job-filling rate, and vit is the number of vacancies posted at the
beginning of the period.3 The job-filling rate derives from a standard matching function with constant
returns to scale in the aggregate numbers of unemployed workers and vacant jobs. Period-t hires for the
employer are hit = η (U t , Vt )v it .
An employer in the CHW model operates in one of three regions each period, depending on the
aggregate and idiosyncratic shock values: (i) positive vacancies and zero layoffs, (ii) zero vacancies and
positive layoffs, or (iii) an inaction region with zero vacancies, no layoffs and no replacement hiring.
Solving the model yields a stochastic equilibrium path for the cross-sectional distribution of
employment changes, hires, quits and layoffs. The realized path depends in complex ways on the
interaction of the aggregate and idiosyncratic driving forces and the key parameters of the revenue, cost
and matching functions. Aggregate shocks shift the entire cross-sectional distribution of growth rates,
while parameters governing adjustment costs and the variance of idiosyncratic shocks strongly influence
its shape. Model-based outcomes exhibit an iron-link mapping of job flows to hiring, layoffs, and quits.
Figure 3 depicts the iron link. It shows the relationship of the hiring, layoff, and quit rates to
employer growth rates in the cross section. There is a mass point with no hiring or layoffs at growth rate
− q . To the right of − q , employers post vacancies and hire new workers. Employers in this range

have zero layoffs, and hiring rises one-for-one with increases in employment. To the left of − q ,
employers engage in no hiring and the layoff rate rises one-for-one with the rate at which the employer
contracts.
Given the iron link relations illustrated in Figure 3, the cross-sectional distribution of
employment growth rates fully determines aggregate hires and layoffs. This feature of the model has
interesting implications. For example, modest recessions that shift the central tendency of the cross-

3

We use uppercase letters for aggregate quantities and lowercase letters for establishment outcomes.

7

sectional distribution from positive values to a value near zero produce large drops in aggregate hires
with relatively little increase in aggregate layoffs. In contrast, a deep recession that shifts much of the
mass in the cross-sectional distribution across the kink point in Figure 3 produces a large jump in
layoffs. Thus, the highly nonlinear micro relations in Figure 3 imply differential responses of hires and
layoffs to mild and deep recessions. Below, we treat the aggregate implications of cross-sectional
worker flow relations in a more formal manner.
2.2. Relaxing the Iron Link
There are several ways to relax the iron link feature of MP-style models. If we exogenously vary
the quit rate in the CHW model, we obtain the implications shown in Figure 4. As the quit rate varies,
the kink point moves and the layoff and hires relations shift accordingly. Specifically, a fall in the quit
rate from q (G 0 ) to q(G1 ) causes the cross-sectional hiring and layoff relations to shift rightward. That
is, the fall in the quit rate creates an environment where employers require fewer hires when expanding
and more layoffs when contracting to achieve a given growth rate. More generally, if the quit rate varies
systematically with labor market slack, then so do the cross-sectional relations for hires and layoffs.
This insight applies in more complex models as well.
Models with endogenous quit behavior deliver other interesting implications. As discussed in
the introduction, the model of Faberman and Nagypál (2008) implies that quit rates decline with
employer growth rates in the cross section. Workers are more likely to abandon struggling employers
because they pay lower wages and cannot match outside offers from more profitable employers.
Inspecting Figures 3 and 4, it is apparent that a nonlinear quit relation implies nonlinear relations for one
or both of hires and layoffs as well. Somewhat paradoxically, weaker employers face greater needs for
replacement hiring to offset, at least partly, a greater attrition rate. Thus, the model of Faberman and
Nagypál can deliver a negative slope in the hires relation over some range. In the model of Barlevy
8

(2002), employers post fewer vacancies when aggregate conditions are weak. As a result, poorly
matched employees encounter new job opportunities at a slower rate, and they quit less frequently. This
implication of the Barlevy model provides an explanation for the downward shift in the quit rate in
Figure 4 and the resulting shifts in the layoff and hiring relations.
Models that feature learning about match quality as in Jovanovic (1979) yield additional insights.
Under weak conditions, these models imply that employment relationships dissolve at a rate that
declines with match duration. A newly hired worker is more likely to quit because he learns a job is not
to his liking, or to be fired because his employer learns he cannot perform. Naturally, the proportion of
new employees tends to rise with an employer’s expansion rate. Thus, learning about match quality can
cause quits and layoffs to rise with the growth rate of employment at expanding employers. Learning
also leads to additional separations at shrinking employers when recent replacement hires do not work
out. More generally, learning about match quality implies that worker flows beget further worker flows,
as stressed by Hall (1995), Pries (2004), and Pries and Rogerson (2005).
The lesson of this discussion is that the stark relations depicted in Figures 3 and 4 are too simple
to fully capture the patterns in the data. Nevertheless, we think Figures 3 and 4 are useful starting points
for two reasons. First, they provide a straightforward exposition of the links between worker flows and
establishment-level growth in a prominent class of search models. We will investigate how closely the
data conform to the relations exhibited in Figures 3 and 4. Second, our discussion provides guidance for
formulating statistical models that relate worker flows to employer growth rates.
2.3. Implications for Aggregate Outcomes and the Relationship to Cross-Sectional Behavior
To draw out the aggregate implications of the iron link relation and the other theoretical effects
discussed above, express the aggregate hiring rate as

9

Ht =

∑

g

f t ( g )ht ( g ) ,

(3)

where ht(g) is the mean hiring rate for establishments with growth rate g at time t, and ft(g) is the
corresponding share of employment with growth rate g at t. This equation implies that movements in
the aggregate hiring rate arise from changes over time in the cross-sectional relationship between hires
and establishment growth rates, shifts in the growth rate distribution, and interactions between the two.
Analogous remarks apply to separations, quits and layoffs. Of course, equation (3) is simply an
accounting identity. Moving beyond the identity requires behavioral models of the micro relationships
between worker flows and employer growth rates.
Consider, for example, the CHW model with its time-invariant iron link between worker flows
and establishment growth. Substituting the behavioral relations shown in Figure 3 into (3) yields the
following expressions for aggregate rates of hires, layoffs and quits:

H t = ∑ g ft ( g )h ( g ) ,
Lt = ∑ g ft ( g ) l ( g ) , and

(4)

Qt = ∑ g ft ( g )q = q ∀t .

and
In the empirical work below, we fit ,  

 relations using JOLTS micro data pooled over

the 2001 to 2010 period. In doing so, we allow the quit rate to vary with employer growth, and we let
the data freely determine the kink points, if any, in the cross-sectional relations. We also allow for hires
in excess of job creation and separations in excess of job destruction. Even under these relaxed
conditions, equations (4) preserve a key aggregate implication of the iron link: fluctuations in aggregate
worker flows arise entirely from movements in the cross-sectional distribution of establishment growth
rates. We will evaluate how well this implication describes the behavior of aggregate worker flows.

10

~
More generally, the cross-sectional behavioral relations vary over time, and we write ht ( g ) ,
~
lt ( g ) , and q~t for the hiring, layoff and quit relations in period t. Proceeding as before, and replacing
~
~
the time-invariant relations in (4) with ht ( g ) , lt ( g ) , and q~t , yields the corresponding aggregate flow
rates. When the cross-sectional behavioral relations vary over time, movements in the establishmentlevel growth rate distribution no longer suffice to fully account for fluctuations in aggregate worker
flows. Nevertheless, we can still obtain informative characterizations of the aggregate flows in terms of

~
~
statistical models for ht ( g ) , lt ( g ) , and q~t . Moreover, we can combine these models with data on ft(g)
to construct synthetic measures of aggregate worker flows outside the period covered by JOLTS data.
Figure 4 illustrates a case where the cross-sectional relations exhibit iron-link behavior in any
given period, but they shift up and down over time with the aggregate quit rate. In this case, the

~
behavioral relation for the hires rate takes the form ht ( g ) = 

 ,

where X is a vector of

indicators for aggregate labor market conditions and  is a parameter vector that governs the size of the
upward and downward shifts in the cross-sectional hires relations. Analogous remarks apply to the
cross-sectional relations for separations, layoffs and quits. We investigate statistical models of this form
and evaluate their ability to account for the cross-sectional and aggregate behavior of worker flows. We
also investigate more flexible models that allow the shape of the cross-sectional relations to vary
systematically with aggregate conditions.
3. Data and Measurement
We now turn to the description of the two data sources used and describe the key methodological
concepts for the analysis.

11

3.1. Data Sources
This study relies on two micro data sources, Business Employment Dynamics (BED) and the Job
Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS), both produced by the BLS. The BED contains
longitudinally linked administrative records for all businesses covered by state unemployment insurance
agencies – virtually a census of nonfarm private business establishments. The data are quarterly and
include employment and payroll for each establishment plus information on industry, location and
whether the establishment belongs to a multi-unit firm. The BLS uses the BED to produce quarterly
statistics on gross job creation and destruction from 1992, although micro data exist back to 1990.4 Our
BED micro data run from 1990Q2 through 2010Q2. Data access restrictions preclude our use of BED
data for Connecticut, Florida, Massachusetts, Michigan, Mississippi, New Hampshire, New York,
Pennsylvania, and Wyoming. Time-series data on job creation and destruction rates generated from our
version of the BED closely mimic the published series that cover all states.
The JOLTS samples about 16,000 establishments each month and includes data on employment
in the pay period covering the 12th of the month. Establishments report hires, quits, layoffs, and other
separations (deaths, retirements, and intra-firm transfers) over the course of the month. For quits, the
establishments identify employees who left voluntarily (excluding retirements and intra-firm transfers).
For layoffs, the establishments identify involuntary separations initiated by the employer.5 The survey
begins in December 2000 and covers the nonfarm economy. Our JOLTS micro data run from January
2001 through June 2010.

4

For more details on the BED, see Spletzer et al. (2004). The BLS does not publish job flow statistics for 1990-91 because of
issues related to administrative changes during that period. We follow Faberman (2008b) to address those changes.
5
The JOLTS survey instructions for layoffs and discharges include the following examples: layoffs with no intent to rehire,
layoffs lasting more than 7 days, discharges resulting from mergers, downsizing, or closings, firings or other discharges for
cause, terminations of permanent or short-term employees, terminations of seasonal employees (whether or not they are
expected to return next season). For more details on the JOLTS, see Clark and Hyson (2001), Faberman (2008a) and Davis,
Faberman, Haltiwanger, and Rucker (2010). Details on recent revisions to JOLTS methodology are available at
http://www.bls.gov/jlt/methodologyimprovement.htm.

12

To construct quarterly worker flows at the establishment level, we require observations in all
three months of the quarter. Dropping observations that violate this requirement reduces the number of
establishments in our JOLTS sample by about 12 percent. This sample restriction produces slightly
lower aggregate worker flow rates, but it does not alter their cyclical patterns. We also address other
measurement issues related to the JOLTS data: timing differences in the measurement of worker flows
and employment, the construction of sample weights at a quarterly frequency, and imputed worker flow
rates for opening and closing establishments. The latter are covered by the BED but are not captured in
the JOLTS sample frame. The appendix explains in detail how we address these matters. Our final
sample contains over 277,000 establishment-quarter observations.
3.2. The Cross-Sectional Distribution of Establishment Growth Rates
We compute employment growth as the difference between employment in the third month of
the current quarter and the third month of the previous quarter, and we divide by the simple mean of
current and previous employment to obtain a rate. (We use the same average of current and previous
employment to compute worker flow rates.) This approach yields consistent aggregation and ensures
that all growth rates are bounded, with entry and exit corresponding to values of +2 and -2. Given the
comprehensive nature of the BED, we compute the cross-sectional distribution of employment growth
rates directly from the micro data without need to adjust for sample weights. We focus on employmentweighted outcomes throughout the paper, unless noted otherwise.
Figure 5 displays kernel density estimates of the establishment-level growth rate distribution in
2006Q1-2006Q4, a period of expanding aggregate employment, and 2008Q3-2009Q2, a period of sharp
contraction. There is a clear leftward shift of the growth rate distribution from 2006 to the 2008-09
period. Table 1 reports summary statistics for the growth rate distribution in selected expansion and
contraction periods. Establishments with steady employment levels over the quarter account for 13.9 to
13

16.1 percent of aggregate employment, depending on time period. Establishments that grow or shrink by
more than 10 percent in the quarter account for 31 percent of employment in 1991, 29 percent in 199899, and 26 percent in 2006 and 2008Q3-2009Q2. This evolution towards a more compressed growth
rate distribution is also apparent in the behavior of aggregate worker flows.
3.3. Measuring Aggregate Worker Flows
To measure aggregate worker flow rates, we combine JOLTS-based estimates of mean worker
flow rates by growth rate bin with BED-based measures of the growth rate distribution. This method
exploits identities of the sort described by equation (3). We use 195 bins that partition the full range of
feasible growth rates, with narrower bins near the mode of zero growth. In defining bins, we allow for
mass points at -200, 0 and 200 percent growth corresponding to exit, no change and entry. Letting wt(g)
denote the mean worker flow rate for bin g in quarter t, we measure aggregate worker flow rates as
Wt =

∑

g

f t ( g ) wt ( g ) .

(5)

Because our JOLTS sample covers continuing establishments only, we do not have JOLTSbased worker flow rates for exits and entrants. Thus, we impute worker flow rates for entrants and exits
when implementing (5). See the appendix for details. We prefer the aggregate worker flows computed
according to (5) by combining BED and JOLTS data to the published JOLTS data, because our
approach encompasses worker flows at exits and entrants, and because the BED provides a more
accurate measure of the cross-sectional growth rate density. See Davis, Faberman, Haltiwanger and
Rucker (2010) for additional discussion and analysis on this point.
4. Worker Flows in the Cross Section and Over Time
Guided by the theoretical discussion in Section II, we specify statistical models of how worker
flows vary with employer growth in the cross section and how the cross-sectional relations move over
14

time. We fit the models to establishment-level data and asses them in terms of cross-sectional fit, ability
to replicate the time-series behavior of aggregate worker flows, and the marginal explanatory power of
model-implied values for aggregate worker flows after conditioning on business cycle indicators. We
also use the estimated statistical models to evaluate certain implications of the theoretical models.
4.1. Empirical Specifications
Our first specification treats hires, separations, layoffs, and quits as time-invariant functions of
establishment-level growth rates. Specifically, for each worker flow rate we regress the establishmentlevel observations on a vector of dummy variables for the 195 growth rate bins,

wet ( g ) = α ( g ) + ε et ( g )

(6)

where e indexes establishments, g indexes growth rate bins, and t indexes quarters. Fitted values in (6)
given by wˆ D ( g ) = αˆ ( g ) describe the average cross-sectional worker flow relations in our JOLTS
sample. This “fixed cross section” specification is consistent with the iron link feature of MP models,
but it is flexible enough to accommodate learning about match quality as in Pries and Rogerson (2005)
and the abandon-ship effect in Faberman and Nagypál (2008). Note that a strict MP-type iron link
implies a perfect fit for (6). We examine R-squared values for fitted versions of (6) to quantify how
closely the data conform to this implication. We also examine the shape of the fitted relationships to
gauge whether and how closely they match the implications of various theoretical models.
Recall that quit rates, and therefore hiring and separation rates, rise and fall in a pro-cyclical
manner in the model of Barlevy (2002). To accommodate such behavior, our “baseline” specification
relaxes (6) to let the cross-sectional relations shift up and down as functions of business cycle indicators:

wet (g) = α (g) + β1Gt+ + β 2Gt− + β3∆Gt + β 4 JFt + ε et (g)

15

(7)

+
−
where Gt is the growth rate of aggregate employment, Gt = max{0, Gt } , Gt = min{0, Gt } ,

∆Gt = Gt − Gt −1 is an accelerator term, and JFt is the job-finding rate calculated from Current Population
Survey data on unemployment by duration.6
To let the cross-sectional relations respond to business cycle conditions in more complicated
ways, we extend the baseline specification by adding terms that involve interactions between the cycle
indicators and the establishment-level growth rates. Specifically, we introduce a set of five indicator
variables, I ( g ) , for establishment-level growth rates less than or equal to -10 percent, greater than -10
percent but less than zero, exactly zero, positive but less than 10 percent, and greater than or equal to 10
percent. Thus, our “flexible” specification is given by
wet ( g ) = α ( g ) + β1Gt+ + β 2Gt− + β 3 ∆Gt + I ( g )δ1Gt + I ( g )δ 2 JFt + ε et ( g ) .

(8)

Specification (8), unlike (7), allows the worker flow response to aggregate conditions to differ among
establishments based on how rapidly they grow or shrink.
4.2. Worker Flows and Employer Growth in the Cross Section
Figure 6 displays worker flow relations estimated from the fixed cross-section specification (6).
The figure shows clear similarities to the theoretical relations in Figure 3. For example, the hiring
relation exhibits a hockey-stick shape similar to the one implied by MP models. There are also clear
departures from the implications of MP models. First, hires rise more than one-for-one with job creation
to the right of zero. As discussed in Section II, this pattern suggests that a higher incidence of recently
formed matches at more rapidly growing establishments leads to higher rates of learning about match
quality, generating higher separation rates and more need for replacement hires. Second, hires occur at

6

We use standard methods to calculate the job-finding rate from data on unemployment by duration. For details, see Davis,
Faberman, Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda (2010). We use the published data from Current Employment Statistics to
compute the growth rate of aggregate employment.

16

all growth rates, another piece of evidence that points to replacement hiring. Third, while there is a
pronounced kink in the hiring relation, it occurs at zero growth rather than the mean quit rate. Finally,
the hires rate declines with establishment growth rates over much of the range to the left of zero. This
pattern is consistent with an abandon-ship effect in which more rapidly declining employers face a
greater need for replacement hiring.
Many of these same effects appear in the separations relation, which is nearly a mirror image of
the hires relation. For example, separation rates rise with job creation rates to the right of zero, in line
with the view that rapidly growing employers experience high turnover rates among recent hires. To the
left of zero, separations rise more rapidly than job destruction, in line with the abandon-ship effect and a
greater need for replacement hires at more rapidly shrinking employers.
Turning to the breakdown of separations into quits and layoffs, several other patterns emerge.
Layoffs rise sharply with job destruction, and they dominate the employment adjustment margin among
rapidly shrinking employers. In contrast, quits account for a larger share of separations at
establishments that shrink by less than 20 percent in the quarter – and at growing establishments. In the
appendix, we display a version of Figure 6 that covers a wider range of growth rates. The zoomed-out
version of Figure 6 reveals even more clearly that quit rates top out at about 20 percent per quarter, and
that layoffs are the primary margin of employment adjustment at rapidly contracting establishments.
Quit and layoff rates, like the hiring rate, are smallest at employers with stable employment levels.7
The patterns in Figure 6 differ from the cross-sectional relationships found by Abowd, Corbel,
and Kramarz (1999) using establishment-level data for France. They find that hiring is the primary
margin of employment adjustment at the establishment level, even for contracting establishments. This

7

For visual clarity, Figure 6 omits the cross-sectional relation for other separations (deaths, retirements, and intra-firm
transfers). They are very small on average, amounting to about a half percent of employment, and somewhat greater at
rapidly contracting establishments.

17

interesting point of contrast between their results and ours may reflect differences between France and
the United States in the nature of labor adjustment. The topic warrants investigation in future work.
Table 2 presents regression R-squared values for several specifications fit to the establishmentlevel JOLTS data. A potential concern about our specifications is that the 195-bin partition is too coarse
to adequately approximate the underlying relationships of worker flows to employer growth rates. To
investigate this concern, we augment each specification by adding 192 bin-specific slope terms. (There
is no reason to introduce slope terms for the zero-width bins at -2, 0 and +2.) Comparing the first two
columns in Table 2 reveals, however, that the bin-specific slope terms yield very modest gains in the
regression fit of the fixed cross-section specification. For the sake of simplicity and parsimony, we drop
the bin-specific slope terms in the rest of the paper.
As discussed above, the strict iron-link feature of MP-type models implies a perfect fit for the
fixed cross-section specification. We do not take this implication literally, because MP models
deliberately abstract from many real-world features that play a role in worker flows. Still, it is
interesting to ask how fully employer growth alone accounts for establishment-level variation in worker
flows. According to Table 2, the fixed cross-section specification accounts for 54 percent of
establishment-level variation in hiring rates and 51 percent for separation rates. It accounts for 47
percent of the variation in layoff rates and 16 percent of quit rate variation. These R-squared values fall
well short of a perfect fit, but we are somewhat surprised by the extent to which the fixed cross-section
model accounts for establishment-level variation in hires, separations and layoffs. In this regard, it is
worth mentioning some of the many factors omitted from the model. In particular, it contains no
controls for industry, employer size or age, wages, job tenure, education and other worker
characteristics, the longer-term growth trajectory of the employer, local labor market conditions, and
aggregate labor market conditions. Despite these omissions, this simple specification accounts for more

18

than half of the variation in hiring and separation rates across employers. Clearly, the employer growth
rate is a major proximate determinant of worker flows.
The remaining columns of Table 2 show the gains in fit from introducing cycle indicators and
allowing for interactions between the cycle indicators and establishment-level growth rates. The
baseline specification, which adds cycle indicators only, yields very modest gains in fit. The flexible
specification, which also includes the interaction terms, improves the fit by several percentage points for
each type of worker flow. Evidently, the relationship of worker flow rates to employer growth rates
varies with aggregate labor market conditions. Table 2 also shows that even the flexible specification
accounts for only about a quarter of the cross-sectional variation in establishment-level quit rates.
The large role for establishment-level variation in quit rates conditional on own growth rate is an
interesting finding, but it need not matter for movements in aggregate quit rates. To see this point,
consider a multi-worker MP model with quit rates that vary exogenously among establishments. In
particular, suppose the idiosyncratic component of the establishment-level quit rate is drawn from a
common, time-invariant distribution. This assumption generates dispersion in worker flow rates among
establishments with the same employment growth rate. Suppose, in addition, that the common
component of quit rates varies with aggregate conditions as in our earlier discussion of Figure 4. Under
these assumptions, there is dispersion in worker flow rates among establishments with the same
employment growth rate, but common factors drive the average shape and location of the cross-sectional
worker flow relations.
For the analysis that follows, what matters is how well our statistical specifications capture
variation in worker flow rates at the level of growth rates bins crossed with time periods. These binquarter outcomes provide building blocks for aggregation and the construction of our synthetic worker
flow series. To obtain the bin-quarter outcomes, we compute the employment-weighted worker flow

19

rates for all 195 bins by quarter. To evaluate how well our statistical models capture the bin-quarter
variation in worker flow rates, we estimate analogs of (6)-(8) at the bin-quarter level of aggregation.
We summarize the main results of our regressions at the bin-quarter level here and report the full
results in the appendix. The fixed cross-section specification accounts for 93 percent of the bin-quarter
variation in the hiring rate and 92 percent for the separation rate. It accounts for 88 percent of the binquarter variation in layoff rates and 65 percent for the quit rate. The baseline and flexible specifications
yield very modest improvements in fit for hires, separations and layoffs. The gains in fit are larger for
the quit rate, with an R-squared value of 69 percent for the flexible specification. The flexible
specification yields modest gains in fit relative to the baseline specification for quits and tiny gains for
hires, separations and layoffs. That is, except perhaps for quit rates, the R-squared metric provides little
evidence that the shapes of the cross-sectional relations vary systematically with the cycle indicators.
The success of our statistical specifications in accounting for bin-quarter variation in worker flow rates
bodes well for their ability to capture the behavior of aggregate worker flows.
4.3. Aggregate Behavior Implied by the Fixed Cross-Section Specification
We now investigate how well our cross-sectional statistical models account for the behavior of
aggregate worker flows. To start, we compare the actual worker flows to the aggregate flows implied by
the fixed cross-section specification. To generate the implied flows, we replace the   functions in
(5) with wˆ D ( g ) = αˆ ( g ) obtained by fitting the fixed cross-section model to JOLTS data from 2001Q1 to
2010Q2. Plugging in the BED data for   and the wˆ D ( g ) functions yields the model-implied worker
flow rates.

20

Figure 7 plots seasonally adjusted versions of the model-implied rates alongside the actual
worker flow rates.8 As seen in the figure, the layoff series implied by the fixed cross-section model
captures much of the time-series variation in the actual layoff rate. The fixed cross-section model fares
less well in replicating the actual hires and separations rate, and it completely fails to replicate the actual
quit rates. In fact, the quit rate series implied by the fixed cross-section model is essentially a flat line
for most of the period. It also predicts a rise in the quit rate during the 2008-09 downturn, which is
nothing like the behavior of actual quit rates in this period.
Table 3 quantifies the extent to which the fixed cross-section model replicates movements in the
actual worker flow rates. (Like Figure 7, Table 3 includes results for other specifications that we discuss
below). The first column of Table 3 reports the standard deviation of the actual worker flow rates. The
remaining columns in the top panel report the root mean squared value of the difference between the
model-implied and actual rates. For hires, the rate implied by the fixed cross-section model accounts for
36 percent of the time-series variation in the actual hires rate, computed as 100 times [1 –
(0.872/1.366)]. The correlation between the model-implied and actual hiring rate is 0.94. For layoffs,
the model-implied rate captures 41 percent of movements in the actual layoff rate, and the correlation
between the two series is 0.82. The model performs less well in replicating the behavior of the
separations rate, and it captures very little of the time-series variation in the quit rate. We turn next to
the cyclical behavior of the cross-sectional worker flow relations.
4.4. Shifts in the Cross-Sectional Relations over Time
Before proceeding to the baseline and flexible specifications, we fit the fixed cross-section
specification separately for three periods: 2001Q2 – 2003Q1 (a mild recession followed by a prolonged

8

We seasonally adjust the model-implied and actual worker flow rates using the Census X-11 procedure. We also drop the
time series observations for 2001Q1 and Q2, because the JOLTS sample is much smaller in these early quarters – about 2,700
observations per quarter as compared to more than 6,300 in other quarters.

21

“jobless recovery”), 2006Q1 – 2006Q4 (an expansion period), and 2008Q3 – 2009Q2 (a deep
recession). Each period covers four or eight consecutive quarters to ensure that seasonal effects do not
drive the estimation results. For this exercise, we restrict attention to quarterly growth rates from -30 to
30 percent to focus on bins with ample observation counts. Establishments in this growth rate range
account for about 90 percent of aggregate employment.
Figure 8 displays the results. The layoff relation displays considerable stability over time.
Rapidly shrinking establishments rely more heavily on layoffs (conditional on own growth) during the
severe recession of 2008-09, but the layoff relation is nearly time invariant throughout the rest of the
growth rate range. In other words, there is a strong element of iron-link behavior in the cross-sectional
layoff relation. In marked contrast, the quit relation shifts up and down as aggregate employment
expands and contracts. Conditional on own-establishment growth, the quit rate is several percentage
points lower in 2008-09 than in the other two periods. This pattern holds for the entire growth rate range
and is most pronounced at rapidly shrinking establishments. Moreover, for shrinking establishments
there is a clear ordering of the cross-sectional quit relations over the cycle: quit rates are highest in the
2006 expansion period, somewhat lower in the weak labor market early in the decade, and much lower
in the severe recession of 2008-09. Extending our earlier metaphor, workers abandon ship at higher
rates at more rapidly contracting employers, but they are much more likely to go down with the ship
when stormy seas prevail.
The separation relation largely inherits the cyclical behavior of the quit relation, although there
are partly offsetting shifts in the underlying quit and layoff relations at rapidly shrinking establishments.
Otherwise, the shifts in the separation relation look smaller only because the vertical scale covers a
larger range. The cross-sectional hiring relation exhibits more stability over time than the separation

22

relation, but it is less stable than the layoff relation. In particular, employers face less need for
replacement hires in weak labor market conditions, and this effect is stronger at shrinking employers.
Summing up, Figure 8 shows that the cross-sectional relations shift over time in a systematic cyclical
manner. The quit relation, in particular, is highly sensitive to aggregate labor market conditions.
4.5. Results for the Baseline and Flexible Specifications
To evaluate the performance of the baseline and flexible specifications, we proceed in the same
manner as before with the fixed cross-section specification. That is, we estimate specifications (7) and
(8) over the 2001Q1 to 2010Q2 period, generate model-implied worker flow rates by plugging the
estimated functions into (5), and then compare to the actual worker flow rates. Figure 7 and Table 3
contain the results. As it turns out, the estimation results for the baseline and flexible specification
imply nearly identical worker flow rates. Thus, we omit the worker flow rates implied by the flexible
specification in Figure 7 and focus on rates implied by the simpler baseline specification. See the
appendix for plots of the worker flow rates implied by the flexible specification.
Figure 7 shows that the baseline specification greatly improves on the fixed cross-section model
in terms of replicating the actual worker flow rates. The improvement is especially dramatic for the quit
rate. The baseline specification captures the large drop in hiring and quit rates during 2008 and 2009 and
the subsequent turnaround in the hiring rate. It also captures the broad swings in the quit rate in the first
seven years of the decade. The baseline specification yields less improvement for the layoff rate,
because shifts in the fixed cross-section specification already account for much of the movements in the
layoff rate. However, the baseline specification captures more of the layoff spike in late 2008 and 2009,
reflecting the shift away from quits and towards layoffs for contracting establishments seen in Figure 8.

23

By more accurately tracking quits and layoffs, the baseline model replicates a declining and weakly
procyclical total separations rate. 9
Turning to Table 3, the third and fourth columns show that the baseline and flexible
specifications capture most of the time-series variation in the worker flow rates. The baseline
specification accounts for 74 percent of the time-series variation in the hires rate, computed as 100 times
[1 – (0.375/1.366)], 66 percent for the separations rate, 74 percent for the quit rate, and 59 percent for
the layoff rate. The correlation between actual and model-implied flow rates is high in all cases, 0.92
for quit rate implied by the baseline specification and 0.95 to 0.97 for the other worker flows. The
flexible specification yields modest improvements in fit according to the root mean squared value of the
discrepancy between actual and model-implied rates but no improvements in correlation.
The results for the baseline specification support for the view that statistical models of the sort
depicted in Figure 4 yield a reasonably accurate accounting of movements in the aggregate worker flow
rates. Put differently, by estimating the shape and cyclical shifts in the cross-sectional worker flow
relations and combining them with the cross-sectional distribution of establishment growth rates, we can
account for most of the movements over time in aggregate worker flow rates. We exploit this finding in
Section V to construct synthetic measures of aggregate worker flow rates before the advent of JOLTS.
4.6. The Marginal Value of Tracking the Cross Section
Thus far, our aggregate analysis focuses on the extent to which model-implied worker flow rates
replicate actual worker flow rates. We now turn the question around and investigate whether tracking
the cross section improves our understanding of the aggregate worker flow rates. We proceed as
9

Close inspection of Figure 7 reveals that the worker flow rates implied by the baseline specification exhibit less highfrequency variation than the actual worker flow rates. In this regard, we remark that the “actual” rates are subject to greater
sampling error than the model-implied rates, because estimation of the actual rates entails no pooling across time periods.
Recall that the JOLTS sample size is fairly modest, and that a small number of establishments at the extremes of the growth
rate distribution account for a disproportionate share of the estimated actual worker flows. Thus, we place little weight on
high-frequency movements of the actual flow rates not captured by the model-implied rates.

24

follows. First, we regress each aggregate flow rate on several cycle indicators. We use the same cycle
indicators as before: the positive and negative pieces of the aggregate employment growth rate, an
accelerator term, and the job-finding rate. The regression R-squared value serves as our metric of how
successfully the cycle indicators account for time-series movements in the worker flow rates. Second,
we expand the regression specification for each worker flow rate to include the rate implied by the fixed
cross-section specification, i.e., the rate generated by plugging wˆ D ( g ) = αˆ ( g ) into equation (5).
Because this specification involves time-invariant cross-sectional relations, all movements in the modelimplied rates arise from movements in the cross section of establishment growth rates. We use the
incremental R-squared contribution to gauge the marginal value of tracking the cross section.
Table 4 reports the results. Column 1 shows that the cycle indicators account for most of the
variation in aggregate worker flow rates. R-squared values range from 53 percent for the layoff rate to
93 percent for the quit rate. Colum 2 shows the marginal value of tracking the cross section. The
model-implied worker flow rate is highly statistically significant in all cases, and its inclusion yields
dramatic improvements in fit. The R-squared value jumps from 53 to 88 percent for layoffs, from 65 to
94 percent for separations, and from 81 to 97 percent for hires. The incremental R-squared gain of 3
percentage points for the quit rate corresponds to a reduction in the standard error of the residual by
more than half. Clearly, the cross section contains a great deal of useful information in accounting for
movements in aggregate worker flow rates. We see this result as an important finding, because it says
that economic and statistical models of worker flows in the cross section offer the promise of large
advances in our understanding of aggregate hires, separations, layoffs and quits.
4.7. On the Quit-Layoff Distinction
As we have stressed, MP-type models imply a tight, time-invariant link between separations and
job destruction. Our results show that such a link exists between layoffs and job destruction but not

25

between quits and job destruction. Our evidence also shows that much of the variation in aggregate
layoff rates reflects changes over time in the cross-sectional growth rate distribution interacted with a
stable cross-sectional layoff relation. In contrast, movements in the growth rate distribution alone
account for little of the variation in aggregate quit rates. Instead, the main story for quits appears to
involve worker responses to outside labor market conditions.
These sharply different proximate determinants of quits and layoffs are noteworthy in light of
other research on differences in worker outcomes between quits and layoffs. Using Current Population
Survey data, Elsby, Hobijn, and Şahin (2010) find that about 90 percent of laid-off workers flow into
unemployment as compared to less than 20 percent of workers who quit. Earlier studies by Leighton
and Mincer (1982), Mincer (1986) and McLaughlin (1990) find a similar pattern using other data
sources. Much other research finds that laid-off workers have inferior earnings paths compared to
workers who quit. Elsby Hobijn, and Şahin (2010) also show that higher layoffs account for most of the
rise in unemployment inflows in recessions, confirming many previous studies. Theoretical models that
abstract from the quit-layoff distinction cannot address these empirical regularities.
We also find that quit rates and separation rates are closely related to employer growth rates in
the cross section, and that the behavior of quits and separations varies strongly with aggregate labor
market conditions. These aspects of our results are at odds with standard simplifying assumptions in
many search models. In particular, many models posit a uniform separation (or quit) rate in the cross
section and abstract from forces that link separations and quits to aggregate conditions. In our view,
relaxing these assumptions is likely to produce better economic models of worker flows and their
connection to unemployment outcomes. Recent theoretical work that endogenizes quits, layoffs and
hiring in search models with multi-worker firms includes Veracierto (2009), Schaal (2010) and
Trapeznikova (2010). Another issue is whether the empirical findings on the quit-layoff distinction can

26

be accommodated in models with privately efficient separation outcomes. See Hall and Lazear (1984)
and McLaughlin (1990, 1991) on this issue.

5. Synthetic Data on Aggregate Worker Flows
Our empirical methods and results provide a framework for constructing synthetic data on
worker flows before the advent of JOLTS. The key idea is to combine statistical models for the crosssectional worker flow relations with data on the cross-sectional distribution of establishment growth
rates. We employ exactly that approach. Specifically, we use the estimated baseline specification (7)
+
−
and data on  , Gt , Gt , ∆ , and JFt to construct the time series of estimated cross-sectional relations

wˆ tB ( g ) . We plug these functions into (5) along with BED data on the cross-sectional distribution of

establishment growth rates to construct data for the pre-JOLTS period. BED micro data are available
from 1990Q2, so our synthetic worker flow series start then. Figures 1 and 2 plot the resulting synthetic
flows through 2001Q2 and actual flows thereafter. We use synthetic rates for the first two quarters of
2001, because the JOLTS sample sizes are much smaller in early 2001.
As seen in Figure 1, layoff and job destruction rates move together closely. Both series spike
sharply in the 1990-91 recession, exhibit a moderate but prolonged rise in the 2001 recession, and rise
very sharply in 2008-09. The quit rate is strongly procyclical, declining around all three recessions.
Figure 2 shows that hiring and job creation rates also move together. Both series exhibit mild declines
during the 1990-91 recession, a moderate decline during the 2001-03 period, and a precipitous drop
during the 2008-09 recession. The hiring rate exhibits larger swings over the cycle, reflecting a greater
need for replacement hiring during booms when job creation is also high.
Figures 1 and 2 also show a downward drift in worker and job flow rates in the period covered
by our data. This result indicates that U.S. labor markets became less fluid and dynamic over period

27

covered by our data, at least as measured by worker flows and job flows. For example, job creation,
hiring and quit rates are higher during the expansion in the second half of the 1990s than the expansion
from 2004 to 2006. It can be difficult to disentangle cyclical and secular movements over a twenty-year
period, but we have documented a downward drift in the pace of labor market flows using other data
sources, some of which extend back in time to the 1970s and 1980s. See Davis et al. (2006) and Davis,
Faberman, Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda (2010).
We carry out two validation exercises for our synthetic worker flow measures. First, we sort the
micro data into two broad regions to conduct a cross-region validation exercise. Specifically, we fit the
baseline specification to JOLTS data for the Northeast-Mideast region, an aggregate of the standard
Census regions for the Northeast and Midwest. We evaluate the own-region performance of the baseline
specification as before by quantifying how closely the model-implied rates replicate the actual ownregion rates. To conduct the cross-region validation exercise, we combine estimated models based on
data for the Northeast-Midwest region with growth rate distributions for the South-West region to
generate model-implied rates for the South-West region. We then compare the resulting model-implied
rates to the actual rates for the South-West region. In other words, we rely on data for the NortheastMidwest region to estimate the statistical model used to generate synthetic data for the South-West
region. We also reverse the roles of the two regions and repeat the same steps.10
Table 5 presents the results for the own-region comparison between actual and model-implied
rates and for the cross-region validation exercise. The root mean squared values of the difference
between actual and model-implied rates are typically larger when the baseline statistical model is fit

10

Regional versions of the aggregate variables used to estimate our baseline specification are not readily available, so we use
national aggregates for this purpose. This substitution of national for regional aggregates is likely to degrade the quality of
the resulting model-implied series and cause us to understate the performance of our method for constructing synthetic data.
We also note that in generating the cross-validation series, we remove the mean difference between the own-region and
cross-region model-implied worker flow rate based upon the fixed cross section distribution model.

28

using data for the other region. In some cases it is much larger. However, even when based on micro
data for the other region, model-implied rates remain highly correlated with actual rates, ranging from
0.79 to 0.96. The appendix shows plots for the full set of region-specific worker flow rates – actual rates
and model-implied rates based on own-region and other-region micro data. It is evident in both regions
that both of the model-implied rates track the actual series reasonably well. This pattern holds
especially for layoffs (which from Table 5 is also the series for which the differences in root mean
squared error are the smallest).
In our second validation exercise, we compare the behavior of our layoff rate series to three
measures that should, in theory, exhibit similar behavior: the job destruction rate, the inflow rate into
unemployment as measured by Current Population Survey (CPS) data on unemployment by duration,
and initial claims for unemployment insurance (UI) as a percent of covered employment. We focus on
layoffs in this exercise, because conceptually similar series are available from several distinct data
sources. Both the layoff and UI claims series capture involuntary separations of workers from jobs. As
we remarked above, Elsby, Hobijn, and Şahin (2010) show that most laid-off workers flow into the CPS
unemployment pool.
Figure 9 plots our synthetic and actual layoff rate series alongside the other three measures. The
four series exhibit a remarkable degree of co-movement, especially with respect to cyclical fluctuations.
All three series exhibit strong countercyclical behavior and sharp spikes in each of the three recessions
covered by our sample period. The most notable departure is that the two unemployment series show
greater declines during expansions. Nevertheless, Figure 9 supports the view that our synthetic layoff
estimates capture important features of actual layoff behavior outside the JOLTS sample period.

29

6. Concluding Remarks
We exploit establishment-level data from the JOLTS and BED data to study the relationship
between worker flows and job flows in the cross section and over time. To put structure on the
empirical analysis, we begin with models that imply a tight link between job flows and worker flows in
the spirit of the seminal work by Mortensen and Pissarides (1994). Consistent with these models, we
find powerful, highly nonlinear relationships of worker flows to employer growth rates in the cross
section. The layoff relation, in particular, exhibits considerable stability over time. We also find much
evidence that other economic forces play important roles in the cross-sectional and time-series behavior
of worker flows. These forces include learning about match quality and the need for replacement hires,
on-the-job search, an abandon-ship effect that yields higher quit rates at struggling employers, and
strongly pro-cyclical movements in quit rates even after conditioning on the employer’s growth rate.
We develop statistical models for evaluating how well various models and views fit the patterns
in the data. Aggregate fluctuations in layoffs are well captured by empirical specifications that impose a
tight cross-sectional link between worker flows and job flows. Aggregate fluctuations in quits are not.
Allowing the cross-sectional relations to vary with aggregate conditions leads to huge improvements in
the ability of the statistical models to account for the aggregate behavior of quits and large
improvements for the other worker flows as well. We also show that the cross section contains
information that greatly improves our ability to account for movements in aggregate worker flow rates.
These finding indicate that economic and statistical models of worker flow behavior in the cross section
can significantly enhance our understanding of aggregate hires, separations, layoffs and quits.
Aggregate hires are much more volatile than aggregate job creation over time. In a cyclical
downturn, hires fall because of a decline in job creation rates and because quit rates fall sharply. That is,
the strong procyclicality of quits drives a wedge in the aggregate relationship between hires and job

30

creation. The strong procyclicality of quits also helps reconcile the differences in cyclicality between
job destruction and separations.
We exploit our statistical models of worker flow behavior in the cross section and historical BED
data to construct synthetic JOLTS-like measures of hires, separations, layoffs and quits back to 1990. In
this way, we nearly double the length of the time series on hires, separations, layoffs and quits available
for analysis in future research. While not the focus of the current analysis, these extended series show a
downward drift over time in the pace of worker flows. Other sources of data also point to secular
declines in the pace of worker flows and job churning activity in the U.S. economy over the past 30
years or more. Investigating the reasons for the secular declines in the pace of job and worker
reallocation activity is an important topic for research.

31

References
Abowd, J., Corbel, P., Kramarz, F., 1999. The entry and exit of workers and the growth of employment:
an analysis of French establishments. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 81, 170-187.
Abowd, J., Vilhuber, L., 2011. National estimates of gross employment and job flows from the
Quarterly Workforce Indicators with demographic and industry detail. Journal of Econometrics, 161,
82-99.
Barlevy, G., 2002. The sullying effect of recessions. Review of Economic Studies, 69, 65-96.
Brown, C., Haltiwanger, J.C., Lane, J. 2006. Economic Turbulence: Is a Volatile Economy Good for
America? University of Chicago Press.
Clark, K.A., and Hyson, R., 2001. New tools for labor market analysis: JOLTS. Monthly Labor Review,
124, 32-37.
Cooper, R., Haltiwanger, J.C., Willis, J., 2007. Search frictions: matching aggregate and establishment
observations. Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 56-78.
Davis, S.J., Faberman, R.J., Haltiwanger, J.C., 2006. The flow approach to labor markets: new evidence
and micro-macro links. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20, 3-24.
Davis, S.J., Faberman, R.J., Haltiwanger, J.C., 2010. The establishment-level behavior of vacancies and
hiring, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 16265.
Davis, S.J. Faberman, R.J., Haltiwanger, J.C., Jarmin, R., Miranda, J. 2010. Business volatility, job
destruction and unemployment. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2, 259-287.
Davis, S.J., Faberman, R.J., Haltiwanger, J.C., Rucker, I., 2010. Adjusted estimates of worker flows and
job openings in JOLTS. In: Abraham, K. , Harper, M., Spletzer, J.R. (Eds.), Labor in the New Economy,
University of Chicago Press, 187-216.
Davis, S.J., Haltiwanger, J.C., 1999. Gross job flows. In: Ashenfelter, O., Card, D. (Eds.), Handbook of
Labor Economics, Volume 3B, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Davis, S.J., Haltiwanger, J.C., Jarmin, R., Miranda, J., 2006. Volatility and dispersion in business
growth rates: publicly traded versus privately held firms. NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 21, 107-156.
Davis, S.J., Haltiwanger, J.C., Schuh, S., 1996. Job Creation and Destruction. MIT Press.
Elsby, M., Michaels, R., 2008. Marginal jobs, heterogeneous firms and unemployment flows. National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 13777.

32

Elsby, M., Hobijn, B., Şahin, A., 2010. The labor market in the Great Recession. Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1, 1-48.
Faberman, R.J., 2008a. Studying the labor market with the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey.
In: Dunne, T., Jensen, J.B., Roberts, M.J. (Eds.), Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data,
Chicago Press, 83-108.
Faberman, R.J., 2008b. “Job flows, jobless recoveries, and the Great Moderation,” Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper 08-11.
Faberman, R.J., Nagypál, E., 2008. Quits, worker recruitment, and firm growth: theory and evidence.
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper 08-13.
Fujita, S., Nakajima, M., 2009. Worker flows and job flows: a quantitative analysis. Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper 09-33.
Hall, R.E., 1995. Lost jobs. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 221-256.
Hall, R.E., Lazear, E.P., 1984. The excess sensitivity of layoffs and quits to demand. Journal of Labor
Economics, 2, 233-257.
Jovanovic, B., 1979. Job matching and the theory of turnover. Journal of Political Economy, 87, 972990.
Jovanovic, B., 1985. Matching, turnover, unemployment. Journal of Political Economy, 92, 108-122.
Leighton, L., Mincer, J., 1982. Labor turnover and youth unemployment. In: Freeman, R., Wise, D.
(Eds.), The Youth Labor Market Problem: Its Nature, Causes and Consequences, University of Chicago
Press.
McLaughlin, K., 1990. General productivity growth in a theory of quits and layoffs. Journal of Labor
Economics, 8, 75-98.
McLaughlin, K., 1991. A theory of quits and layoffs with efficient turnover. Journal of Political
Economy, 99, 1-29.
Mincer, J., 1986. Wage changes in job changes. Research in Labor Economics, 8A, 171-197.
Moscarini, G., 2005. Job matching and the wage distribution. Econometrica, 73, 481-516.
Pissarides, C., 2000. Equilibrium Unemployment Theory. Second edition, MIT Press.
Pries, M.J., 2004. Persistent employment fluctuations: a model of recurring job loss. Review of
Economic Studies, 71, 193-215.

33

Pries, M.J., Rogerson, R., 2005. Hiring policies, labor market institutions, and labor market flows.
Journal of Political Economy, 113, 811-839.
Rogerson, R., Shimer, R., Wright, R., 2005. Search-theoretic models of the labor market: a survey.
Journal of Economic Literature, 43, 959-988.
Schaal, E., 2010. Uncertainty, productivity and unemployment in the Great Recession. Mimeo.
Princeton University.
Spletzer, J.R., Faberman, R.J., Sadeghi, A., Talan, D.M., and Clayton, R.L., 2004. Business
Employment Dynamics: new data on gross job gains and losses. Monthly Labor Review, 127, 29-42.
Trapeznikova, I., 2010. Employment adjustment and labor utilization. Mimeo, Northwestern University.
Veracierto, M., 2009. Establishment dynamics, vacancies, and unemployment: a neoclassical synthesis.
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper 2009-14.
Yashiv, E., 2007. Labor search and matching in macroeconomics. European Economic Review, 51,
1859-1895.

34

Figure 1. Quits, Layoffs, and Job Destruction
10.0

Percent of
Employment

10.0

9.0

9.0

8.0

8.0

7.0

7.0

6.0

6.0

Job Destruction
Layoffs

5.0

5.0

Quits
4.0

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

4.0

Sources: Quit and layoff rates (2001Q3 – 2010Q2) are authors’ calculations using JOLTS establishment microdata weighted
to an aggregate value for each quarter using growth rate densities from the BED. Job destruction rates (1990Q2 – 2010Q2)
are authors’ tabulations directly from the BED data. All estimates are seasonally adjusted. All rates are percentages of
employment. Backcasted estimates of the quit and layoff rates are included to the left of the dashed vertical line.

Figure 2. Hiring and Job Creation
11.0
10.0

18.0

Percent of
Employment

17.0

9.0

16.0

8.0

15.0

7.0

14.0

6.0

13.0

5.0

12.0

Job Creation (left axis)

4.0

11.0

Hires (right axis)
2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

10.0
1990

3.0

Sources: Hiring rates (2001Q3 – 2010Q2) are authors’ calculations using JOLTS establishment microdata weighted to an
aggregate value for each quarter using growth rate densities from the BED. Job creation (1990Q2 – 2010Q2) rates are
authors’ tabulations directly from the BED data. All estimates are seasonally adjusted. All rates are percentages of
employment. Backcasted estimates of the hiring rate are included to the left of the dashed vertical line.

35

Figure 3. Implied Worker Flows from a Search Model with Multi-Worker Firms, Constant
Exogenous Quit Rate

Notes: The figure depicts hiring, layoff, and quit rates as a function of the firm-level quit rate for a search model with multiworker firms and a constant, exogenous quit rate, q , faced by all firms. See text for model details.

Figure 4. Implied Worker Flows from a Search Model with Multi-Worker Firms, Time-Varying
Exogenous Quit Rate

Notes: The figure depicts hiring, layoff, and quit rates as a function of the firm-level quit rate for a search model with multiworker firms and a exogenous quit rate, q , that varies with aggregate conditions, G, and is faced by all firms. See text for
model details.

36

Figure 5. The Cross-Sectional Distribution of Establishment-Level Growth Rates
10.0

Kernel
Density

9.0

2006q1 - 2006q4

2008q3-2009q2

8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
-30.0 -25.0 -20.0 -15.0 -10.0

-5.0

0.0

5.0

10.0

15.0

20.0

25.0

30.0

Establishment-Level Growth Rate (Percent)
Source: Authors’ tabulations using BED establishment data. Estimates are employment-weighted kernel density functions of
establishment-level growth rates.

Figure 6. Worker Flow Rates as a Function of Establishment-Level Growth
100.0

Hires
Layoffs

Total Separations
Quits

Percent of Employment

80.0

60.0

40.0

20.0

0.0
-80.0

-60.0

-40.0

-20.0

0.0

20.0

40.0

60.0

80.0

Establishment-Level Employment Growth (Pct. of Employment)
Source: Authors’ calculations using JOLTS establishment data pooled over 2001Q1 – 2010Q2. Estimates are employmentweighted averages of the establishment-level growth rates within intervals. Save for the endpoints and zero growth point,
estimates are smoothed using a 5-bin moving average.

37

Figure 7. Aggregate Flows Compared to Flows Generated by Alternative Statistical Models
(a) Hiring Rate
(b) Separation Rate
17.0

17.0

16.0

16.0

15.0

15.0

14.0

14.0

13.0

13.0

12.0

12.0

Actual
Implied by Fixed Cross-Section Relation
Implied from Baseline Specification

11.0

Actual
Implied by Fixed Cross-Section Relation
Implied from Baseline Specification

11.0

(c) Layoff Rate

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

(d) Quit Rate

9.0

9.0

8.0

8.0

7.0

7.0

6.0

6.0

Actual
Implied by Fixed Cross-Section Relation
Implied from Baseline Specification

5.0

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

10.0
2001

10.0

Actual
Implied by Fixed Cross-Section Relation
Implied from Baseline Specification

5.0

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

4.0
2001

4.0

Source: Authors’ calculations using estimates of worker flow-growth relationships derived from the JOLTS establishment data interacted with growth rate densities derived from
BED data for 2001Q3 – 2010Q2. See text for details of the methodologies. Estimates are seasonally adjusted.

38

Figure 8. Worker Flows and Vacancies as a Function of Establishment-Level Growth, Selected Periods
(a) Hiring Rate
(b) Separation Rate
2001Q2 - 2003Q1
50.0
40.0

2006Q1 - 2006Q4

2001Q2 - 2003Q1

2008Q3 - 2009Q2

50.0

Percent of
Employment

2008Q3 - 2009Q2

Percent of
Employment

40.0

30.0

30.0

20.0

20.0

10.0

10.0

0.0

0.0

-30.0

-20.0

-10.0

0.0

10.0

20.0

30.0

-30.0

Establishment-Level Employment Growth Rate

-20.0

2001Q2 - 2003Q1

0.0

10.0

20.0

30.0

(d) Quit Rate

2006Q1 - 2006Q4

2008Q3 - 2009Q2

2001Q2 - 2003Q1
30.0

Percent of
Employment

20.0

20.0

10.0

10.0

0.0
-30.0

-10.0

Establishment-Level Employment Growth Rate

(c) Layoff Rate
30.0

2006Q1 - 2006Q4

2006Q1 - 2006Q4

2008Q3 - 2009Q2

Percent of
Employment

0.0
-20.0

-10.0

0.0

10.0

20.0

30.0

-30.0

Establishment-Level Employment Growth Rate

-20.0

-10.0

0.0

10.0

20.0

30.0

Establishment-Level Employment Growth Rate
Source: Authors’ calculations using JOLTS establishment data pooled over the listed periods. Estimates are employment-weighted averages of the establishmentlevel growth rates within intervals that increase in width with the absolute value of the growth rate. Save for the zero growth point, reported estimates are
smoothed using a 3-bin moving average.

39

Figure 9. Synthetic Layoff Estimates Compared to Other Job Loss Data
Job Destruction (left axis)
Percent of
10.0
Layoffs (Left Axis)
Employment
Unemployment Inflows, CPS (Left Axis)
9.0
Initial UI Claims (Right Axis)

7.0
6.0

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1.0

1998

4.0

1997

2.0

1996

5.0

1995

3.0

1994

6.0

1993

4.0

1992

7.0

1991

5.0

1990

8.0

Sources: Layoff rates (2001Q3 – 2010Q2) are authors’ calculations using JOLTS establishment microdata
weighted to an aggregate value for each quarter using growth rate densities from the BED. Prior to 2001Q3
(to the left of the dashed vertical line), layoff rates are a synthetic series based on our baseline statistical
model of worker flows (see text for details). Job destruction rates are authors’ tabulations directly from the
BED data. Unemployment inflow rates are calculated from the CPS. Initial unemployment insurance claims
rates are from published statistics. All estimates are seasonally adjusted. All rates are percentages of
employment.

Table 1. The Cross-Sectional Distribution of Establishment-Level Growth Rates,
Selected Periods
Fraction of Employment
2001q22008q3at…
1991
1998-99
2003q1
2006
2009q2
Establishments with
Contractions > 10%,
16.0
14.0
14.5
12.6
14.0
including Closings
Establishments with
27.4
26.9
29.3
28.0
30.8
Contractions ≤ 10%
Establishments with No Net
14.3
13.9
14.8
15.5
16.1
Change
Establishments with
27.4
30.0
28.0
30.7
27.4
Expansions ≤ 10%
Establishments with
Expansions >10%, including
14.8
15.2
13.4
13.2
11.6
Openings
Average Quarterly Growth
-0.35
0.64
-0.43
0.43
-1.59
Rate During Period (%)
Source: Authors’ tabulations using BED establishment-level data for the indicated time periods. Table
entries report employment shares in the indicated growth rate categories. The last row reports the average
growth rate of aggregate employment in the indicated periods.

Table 2. R-Squared Values for Regression Models Fit to Establishment-Level Data,
2001Q1 to 2010Q2
Augmented
Augmented
Fixed Cross- Augmented
Fixed CrossBaseline
Flexible
Section
Section
Specification
Specification
Specification
Hiring Rate
0.542
0.543
0.545
0.588
Separation Rate
0.507
0.509
0.511
0.556
Quit Rate
0.159
0.162
0.170
0.239
Layoff Rate
0.463
0.466
0.467
0.521
Notes: Table entries report R-squared values for worker flow rate regressions fit to establishment-level
JOLTS data. The fixed cross-section specification contains dummy variables for 195 growth rate bins.
The augmented version adds 192 slope terms, one for each growth rate bin excluding those for exit, exit
and no employment change. The augmented baseline specification adds four time-varying business cycle
indicators, and the augmented flexible specification also includes terms that allow for interactions between
the cycle indicators and five dummy variables for broad establishment growth rate categories. See text for
details. Regressions are fit by weighted least squares using sample weights and employment weights.

41

Table 3. Model-Implied Worker Flow Rates Compared to Actual Worker Flow
Rates, Aggregate Time Series Data from 2001Q3 to 2010Q2
Implied by
Implied by
Implied by
Actual
Fixed CrossBaseline
Flexible
Series
Section
Specification
Specification
Standard
Root Mean Squared Value:
Deviation
Actual Series Minus Model-Implied Series
Hiring Rate
1.366
0.872
0.375
0.373
Separation Rate
1.052
0.862
0.355
0.352
Quit Rate
1.018
0.986
0.264
0.242
Layoff Rate
0.564
0.330
0.232
0.218
Hiring Rate
Separation Rate
Quit Rate
Layoff Rate

Correlation of Implied Series with Actual Series
0.943
0.966
0.964
0.559
0.949
0.946
0.201
0.971
0.971
0.824
0.924
0.928

Notes: All results in this table pertain to seasonally adjusted time series. Unadjusted data yield broadly
similar results. See text for details of estimation and aggregation methods.

Table 4. Marginal Explanatory Power of Worker Flow Rates Implied by the Fixed
Cross-Section Specification, 2001Q3 to 2010Q2
Actual Rate Regressed on
Actual Rate Regressed on
Cycle Indicators and Rate
Four Cycle Indicators
Implied by Fixed Cross
Section Specification
R-Squared Value
R-Squared Value [p-value]
Hiring Rate

0.808

.966 [.000]

Separation Rate
Quit Rate
Layoff Rate

0.652
0.929
0.525

.944 [.000]
.961 [.000]
.880 [.000]

Notes: The cycle indicators are positive and negative pieces of the aggregate employment growth rate, the
change in the growth rate of aggregate employment, and the job-finding rate. The specification used in the
rightmost column also includes the aggregate worker flow rate implied by the fixed cross section model.
The p-value is for the null hypothesis of a zero coefficient on the model-implied worker flow rate. Each
regression has 36 quarterly observations covering the period from 2001Q3 to 2010Q2. See text for
additional details.

42

Table 5. Results of Cross-Region Validation Exercises for Synthetic Worker Flows
Root Mean Squared Value of Actual Minus Model-Implied Rate
Northeast-Midwest Region
South-West Region
Own
Cross-Region
Own
Cross-Region
Region
Validation
Region
Validation
Hiring Rate
0.558
0.674
0.404
0.600
Separation Rate
0.579
0.668
0.356
0.549
Quit Rate
0.404
0.481
0.283
0.525
Layoff Rate
0.322
0.339
0.242
0.234

Hiring Rate
Separation Rate
Quit Rate
Layoff Rate

Correlation of Actual and Model-Implied Rates
Northeast-Midwest Region
South-West Region
Own
Cross-Region
Own
Cross-Region
Region
Validation
Region
Validation
0.888
0.842
0.967
0.961
0.865
0.785
0.948
0.880
0.891
0.874
0.973
0.939
0.863
0.845
0.916
0.918

Notes: “Own Region” results involve a comparison of regional worker flows to flows generated by fitting
the baseline statistical model to micro data for the same region. “Cross-Region Validation” results involve
a comparison of regional worker flows to flows generated by fitting the baseline statistical model to micro
data for the other region. In conducting the Cross Region Validation exercise, we remove a region fixed
effect for each worker flow rate. Each regional time series measure has 36 quarterly observations covering
the period from 2001Q3 to 2010Q2. See text for additional details.

43

