                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     JAPANESE GOVERNMENT DEBT AND SUSTAINABILITY OF FISCAL POLICY

                                            Takero Doi
                                            Takeo Hoshi
                                        Tatsuyoshi Okimoto

                                        Working Paper 17305
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17305


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




We thank Shin-ichi Fukuda, Yasushi Iwamoto, Hugh Patrick and two anonymous referees for valuable
suggestions. We also thank participants of the 23rd NBER-TCER-CEPR Conference at University
of Tokyo and the 12th annual conference of the Association for Public Economic Theory at Indiana
University and seminars at University of California, San Diego and Australian National University
for helpful comments. Doi has received a financial support from the Grant-in-Aid for Specially Promoted
Research from Japan’s Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology: “Economic
Analysis of Intergenerational Issues: Searching for Further Development” (grant number 22000001).
 All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w17305.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Takero Doi, Takeo Hoshi, and Tatsuyoshi Okimoto. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Japanese Government Debt and Sustainability of Fiscal Policy
Takero Doi, Takeo Hoshi, and Tatsuyoshi Okimoto
NBER Working Paper No. 17305
August 2011
JEL No. E62,H62,H63

                                              ABSTRACT

We construct quarterly series of the revenues, expenditures, and debt outstanding for Japan from 1980
to 2010, and analyze the sustainability of the fiscal policy. We pursue three approaches to examine
the sustainability. First, we calculate the minimum tax rate that stabilizes the debt to GDP ratio given
the future government expenditures. Using 2010 as the base year, we find that the government revenue
to GDP ratio must rise permanently to 40%-47% (from the current 33%) to stabilize the debt to GDP
ratio. Second, we estimate the response of the primary surplus when the debt to GDP ratio increases.
We allow the relationship to fluctuate between two “regimes” using a Markov switching model. In
both regimes, the primary surplus to GDP ratio fails to respond positively to debt, which suggests
the process is explosive. Finally, we estimate a fiscal policy function and a monetary policy function
with Markov switching. We find that the fiscal policy is “active” (the tax revenues do not rise when
the debt increases) and the monetary policy is “passive” (the interest rate does not react to the inflation
rate sufficiently) in both regimes. These results suggest that the current fiscal situation for the Japanese
government is not sustainable.


Takero Doi                                           Tatsuyoshi Okimoto
Faculty of Economics                                 Graduate School
Keio University                                      of International Corporate Strateg\
Mita 2-15-45, Minato-ku                              Hitotsubashi University
Tokyo 108-8345                                       2-1-2 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku
JAPAN                                                Tokyo 101-8439, Japan
and TCER                                             tatsuyoshi.okimoto@gmail.com
tdoi@econ.keio.ac.jp

Takeo Hoshi
School of International Relations and Pacific StudLHV
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and TCER
and also NBER
thoshi@ucsd.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17305
1. Introduction

Mounting government debt is a serious issue in many countries in Europe, the U.S., and Japan.

The concern on sustainability of increasing government debt already put Greece into a serious

crisis, and other European countries had to bail out Greece twice already (May 2010 and July

2011) in concert with the IMF. Ireland (November 2010) and Portugal (April 2011) followed

suit. Increasing debt and slow economic growth has increased the cost of financing for other

troubled economies such as Spain and Italy. The fiscal problem for the U.S. looked less pressing,

but the political gridlock and the inability to come up with a credible plan to put the government

finance in order drove the U.S. dangerously close to default this month (August 2011). Although

the worst case scenario of the outright default was avoided at the last minute, the U.S. politicians

still face a difficult task of building a consensus on how the burden of deficit reduction should be

shared.

          Japan also suffers from a serious problem of the government debt. Indeed Japan’s

problem seems more serious when we look at the (gross) debt to GDP ratio. The OECD figure

for 2010 shows that Japan’s debt to GDP ratio was 198%, which is much higher than the U.S.

(93%), the U.K. (81%), France (92%), Germany (80%), and even Greece (129%).

          Japan’s debt is a result of continued deficits of many more years than the U.S. or Europe.

The start of the increasing government debt goes back to the fiscal stimulus packages in the early

1990s, when the Japanese economy suffered from the collapse of asset prices. There have been a

couple of attempts of fiscal consolidation, but neither of them lasted long enough to achieve the

initial goals, and the debt has continued to increase.

          This paper examines the sustainability of Japan’s fiscal policy. There are two

contributions that the paper makes to the discussion of fiscal sustainability for Japan. First, the



                                                   3
paper presents reliable quarterly data for the budget deficit and the government debt of Japan

from 1980 to 2009. The data are comprehensive in that the coverage includes both central and

local governments and almost all the government accounts including the social security fund.

We also create the data series for only the central/local governments, excluding the social

security account.

       Second, the paper takes three complementary approaches to examine the sustainability.

The first approach is that of Broda and Weinstein (2005) and Doi (2009). Here the question is

how much the government needs to raise the tax revenue to stabilize the debt to income ratio in

the long run given the future government expenditures and transfers. The second approach is an

extension of Bohn (1998), and considers the dynamic feedback from the level of government

debt to future government surpluses. The third approach considers the responses of tax revenues

to the level of debt as well as the fluctuations in the government expenditures, following Davig

and Leeper (2007).

       The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we briefly trace the evolution of

the Japan’s government debt over the last 20 years. Section 3 explains how we construct the

quarterly data series of budget deficit and government debt that we use for the empirical analysis.

In Section 4, we update the analyses of Broda and Weinstein (2005) and Doi (2009), and

calculate the minimum tax rate that Japan needs to stabilize the debt to GDP ratio. Section 5

estimates a feedback rule from the level of government debt to the primary surplus à la Bohn

(1998) to see if we observe stabilizing response of fiscal surpluses as the government debt

increases in Japan. We consider the possibility that such a feedback rule has fluctuated between

two different regimes over time. Section 6 estimates the fiscal policy function that models the

tax revenues as a function of the government debt, output gap, and the government expenditure.



                                                4
The model allows two regimes with different responses of the government revenues. We also

estimate a monetary policy function that is also state contingent, and discuss the interactions

between the fiscal policy regimes and the monetary policy regimes. Section 7 concludes.



2. Accumulation of Government Debt in Japan: 1991-2010

            In the fiscal year 1990, the Japanese government believed that it had succeeded in

containing the budget deficit problem that plagued them since the late 1970s, but it did not last

long. To fight the recession following the collapse of asset price boom, the government turned to

a series of fiscal stimulus during the first half of 1990s.1 Figure 1 shows the deficit to GDP ratio

and the debt to GDP ratio for the 1990s and the 2000s. The numbers are for the government

sector as a whole, which includes the central as well as local governments and the social security

funds. The numbers for 2010 and 2011 are for the initial budgets.

            The figure shows that the government continued to run budget deficit throughout the last

two decades. There have been some episodes when the budget deficit declined in proportion to

GDP when the economy recovered and/or the government tried to reduce the deficits (1996,

2000, 2005-2007). The deficit to GDP ratio, however, increased from 2.5% in 1993 to about 8%

by the end of the 1990s and most of the 2000s. Reflecting this trend in the deficits, the debt to

GDP ratio steadily increased from 74% to 200% by the end of 2000s.

            Figure 2 shows the budget surplus of eight OECD countries (G7 plus Greece) as % of

GDP. Note a negative number means budget deficit. From 1997 to 2005, Japan’s budget deficit

to GDP ratio was the largest among G7 countries and even higher than that of Greece most of the

time.



1
    Doi and Ihori (2009, pp.24-31) summarizes major developments of Japanese fiscal policy from 1981 to 2007.

                                                          5
       The gross debt to GDP ratios for the eight countries are shown in Figure 3. From 1999

on, Japan has the highest debt to GDP ratio among these countries. The ratio exceeded 200%

after 2010. In terms of net debt, which subtracts the financial assets that the government sector

owns from the gross debt, Japan looks slightly better. The Japanese government sector owns

substantial financial assets (most notably in the social security funds), some of which are

invested in the Japanese government bonds. For example, as of March 2009, the social security

funds (reserves for government-run pension systems) had the net financial assets of about 200

trillion yen (about 40% of GDP). Figure 4 shows the net debt to GDP ratios for the eight

countries. Even with this measure, however, the Japan’s debt to GDP ratio has been the highest

since 2008. The net debt to GDP ratio stood around 120% for Japan in 2010.

       The Japanese government debt has been rising very rapidly. It is obvious that the debt to

GDP ratio cannot continue growing forever. At one point, the debt to GDP must be stabilized

(unless the Japanese government declares defaults). What are the conditions to stabilize the debt

to GDP ratio at a certain level in the future? How much longer would the debt to GDP ratio

continue rising before it starts to decline? How is such a policy change likely to happen in Japan

given its past fiscal policy regimes? These are the questions that we ask in this paper.



3. Data Construction

       The fiscal data used in the econometric analysis in Sections 5 and 6 are constructed from

the national income accounting published by the Cabinet Office of the Japanese government.

We create quarterly time series from the first quarter of 1980 to the first quarter of 2010 for

government expenditure, revenue, primary deficit, and debt for two alternative definitions of the

government sector: the central/local governments and the general government sector that also



                                                  6
includes the social security funds. The data set is available as the electronic appendix for this

working paper. It is also available for download at

http://web.econ.keio.ac.jp/staff/tdoi/DHOdata.html.

         The total expenditure and revenue series for the general government are readily available

in the national income accounting at quarterly frequency with a couple of exceptions. For the

capital transfers and net purchases of land, the data are available only at annual frequency. We

can use, however, two types of annual series: calendar years and fiscal years. For the initial year

(1980), we create the quarterly numbers by dividing the amount for the calendar year by four.

Then, we calculate the first quarter number for the second year by subtracting the sum of the last

three quarters of the first year from the fiscal year number for the first year. Subtracting the first

quarter number from the calendar year number for the second year, we can calculate the number

for the last three quarters. Iterating this process, we can estimate the first quarter number and the

total of the last three quarters for every year. Finally, the number for the last three quarters each

year is divided into individual quarterly numbers, taking into account the trend increase observed

in the first quarter numbers.2

         The revenues and expenditures by subsector are available only annually, so we construct

the quarterly data in the following way. For most items, we first estimate the quarterly amount

for the social security funds sector, and the numbers for the central/local governments sector are

obtained by subtracting the numbers for the social security account. The exceptions are transfers

2
  Let Yt be the amount for the fiscal year t and Xit be the estimated amount for the i-th quarter of year t; i.e., Yt = X2t
+ X3t + X4t + X1t+1. We estimate the am ounts for the second, third, and fourth quarter of each year from the total
amount for the calendar year and the first quarter amount using the following formulas.
                                 3 X 1t  X 1t 1
         X 2t  (Yt  X 1t 1 )
                                6( X 1t  X 1t 1 )
                                2 X 1t  2 X 1t 1 Yt  X 1t 1
         X 3t  (Yt  X 1t 1 )                     
                                6( X 1t  X 1t 1 )    3
                                 X  3 X 1t 1
         X 4t  (Yt  X 1t 1 ) 1t
                                6( X 1t  X 1t 1 )

                                                            7
within the general government sector. For those series, data on the central/local governments

side are publicly available, so we calculate the quarterly amount for the central/local

governments first and then subtract the number from the general government sector number to

obtain the amount for the social security sector. Table 1 shows how each relevant item in the

national income accounts is estimated for each subsector.

       Some expenditure or revenue items apply only to the central and local governments. For

example, many tax revenue items, including income tax revenue and value added tax revenue,

accrue only to the central and local governments. For those items, we can safely assume the

amount for the social security funds is always zero. Some other items such as social security

contributions apply only to the social security funds. For those items, we just take the quarterly

amount for the entire general government sector as the amount for the social security funds. For

the other items, we estimate the quarterly amounts for social security account by prorating the

annual numbers. The expenditures and revenues related to financial transactions other than the

interest payment, such as dividends received, rents paid and purchases of land, are estimated by

dividing the annual amounts by four. The other items including the interest payment, the final

consumption, the fixed capital formation, the current transfers are calculated so that the

proportion of the social security account (in the general government sector) at each quarter is the

same as the proportion of annual flows for the fiscal year.

       For the transfers within the general government sector, we first use Ministey of Finance

“Financial Statistics Monthly” and Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications “White

Paper on Local Public Finance” to estimate the amount for the local/central governments sector.

Then, we calculate the number for the social security sector by subtracting the number for the

local/central government sector from the number for the general government sector.



                                                 8
        We also adjust for temporary fluctuations caused by known unusual events that happened

in each account.3 Such special transfers between public corporation and the government are

excluded from government expenditures and revenues series.

        The debt outstanding series in the national income accounting is available only in annual

frequency, too. Again we estimate the quarterly series using both calendar year series and fiscal

year series. Since the debt outstanding is a stock data, the amount at the end of the fourth quarter

is the same as the amount at the end of the calendar year, and the amount at the end of the first

quarter is the same as the amount at the end of the previous fiscal year. For the periods before

1998, we estimate the second quarter and third quarter numbers by linearly interpolating the

series. For the periods after 1998, we use the Bank of Japan Flow of Funds data to match the

seasonal pattern of the debt outstanding series for each sector to the seasonal pattern of the

corresponding data in the flow of funds statistics.4

        We construct the budget surplus (called net lending / net borrowing in the official SNA

statistics) and primary surplus at quarterly frequency from the revenues and expenditures series.

The budget surplus (or deficit) number is generally not equal to the increase in the net

government asset (or debt), because the latter includes the capital gains (and losses) and other



3
  These include transfers of liabilities from the Japanese National Railways Settlement Corporation and the Special
Account for National Forest Service to the general account of the central government in 1998, returns of the public
part of pension reserves from employee pension funds to the Welfare Insurances Special Account of the central
government (so-called daikō henjō) for years from 2003 onward, transfers of assets and liab ilities from the former
Japan Highway Public Corporation and other three highway-related public corporations to the Japan Expressway
Holding and Debt Repaym ent Agency, which took place in the privatization of these public corporations in 2005,
transfers of funds from the Special Account for Fiscal Loan Program Funds to the Special Account for Government
Bonds Consolidation Fund, which are based on the special law on issues of government bonds in 2006, transfers of
funds from the Special Account for Fiscal Investment and Loan Program to the Special Accoun t for Government
Bonds Consolidation Fund and the General Account, which are based on the act on Special Accounts, and the
special law on the issues of transfers of funds from the Special Account for Fiscal Investment and Loan Program in
2008.
4
  The BOJ Flow of Funds data for debt outstanding by subsector are not available for periods before the fourth
quarter of 1997. The numbers reported in the System of National Accounting (SNA) and those in the flow of funds
statistics, however, do not match, perhaps reflecting different treatments of capital gains.

                                                        9
changes in the value of government assets and liabilities. So we define reconciliation term as

follows:

        Net debt at the end of this year = net debt at the end of previous year

                                        – “net lending /net borrowing”

                                        + special factor term + reconciliation term

        As the measure of debt for our analysis, we used the “adjusted net debt” proposed by Doi

(2008), which is defined as the gross debt of the government sector minus the financial assets

owned by the government sector that are readily disposable. This differs from the standard

definition of the net debt in that some financial assets at the central and local governments such

as the fiscal adjustment funds of the local governments are not subtracted from the gross debt.

These financial assets are held as a buffer for unexpected losses and not expected to be drawn

down to redeem the debt.

        Figure 5 shows gross debt, net debt, and adjusted net debt as percentage of GDP for the

general government sector. To remove the seasonality, the figure shows the four quarters

moving averages. The time series patterns of the series are quite similar. The adjusted net debt

that we use for the empirical analysis is closer to the net debt than to the gross debt in its level.

The adjusted net debt to GDP ratio for the general government sector rose rapidly starting in the

mid 1990s and reached almost 150% by 2010.

        Similarly, the debt to GDP ratio series for the central/local governments is shown in

Figure 6. Note that the gross debt for the central/local governments is exactly the same as the

gross debt for the general government as a whole, because the social security account so far

holds net assets. The adjusted net debt series is also very close to the gross debt, suggesting most

of the difference between the gross debt and the adjusted net debt in Figure 5 comes from the



                                                  10
social security funds. The adjusted net debt to GDP ratio for the central/local governments also

started to rise sharply in the mid 1990s and reached around 180% by 2010.

       Figure 7 shows expenditure and revenue as percentage of GDP for the general

government sector. The seasonality has been removed by taking four quarters moving average

again. The expenditure here does not include the interest payment, so that the difference

between two series shows the primary balance. For the general government sector that includes

the social security funds, the primary balance was in surplus in the late 1980s and the early 1990s.

After the mid 1990s, however, the primary balance has been in red consistently.

       The expenditure and revenue series for the central/local governments are shown in Figure

8. The time series patterns for both series look quite similar to those in Figure 7. After the mid-

1990s, the primary balance has been in red consistently.



4. Minimum Tax Rate for Sustainable Fiscal Policy

       This section calculates the minimum amount of taxes (in proportion to GDP) that makes

the fiscal policy sustainable at a certain future date, given the future paths for government

expenditures, following the method used by Broda and Weinstein (2005) and Doi (2008, 2009).

This approach defines the sustainable fiscal policy to be the one that stabilize the debt to GDP

ratio at the level in the base year, as proposed in Blanchard et al (1990). We start from a basic

inter-temporal budget constraint for the government:

                                      Bt  Bt 1  Gt  Tt  iBt 1                                 (1)

where Bt stands for the amount of government debt outstanding at the end of period t, Gt and Tt

are the government expenditure (including transfers) and the tax revenues respectively during the




                                                   11
period t, and i is the interest rate that is assumed to be constant. Dividing the both side of the

equation by GDP for the period t, Yt, and rearranging it, we get:

                                       Bt Gt  Tt 1  i Bt 1
                                                             or                                    (2)
                                       Yt   Yt     1   Yt 1

                                                              1 i
                                           bt  gt   t          bt 1                             (3)
                                                              1 

where bt, gt, and τt denote the government debt, the government expenditure, and the tax

revenues respectively divided by GDP, and η is the growth rate of GDP, which is also assumed

to be constant. We assume i   . If the long-run growth rate of GDP exceeded the long-run

interest rate, sustainability of fiscal policy would not be an issue.

       Rearranging the terms, we can express the debt to GDP ratio as a function of the future

debt to GDP ratio and the future primary surplus:

                                                 1       1
                                       bt 1         bt       ( t  gt )                          (4)
                                                 1 i      1 i

Solving the equation forward, we get:

                                                   n                  t
                                       1         n
                                                         1  
                                 b0         n 
                                               b                ( t  gt )                        (5)
                                       1 i      t 1  1  i 


The current debt to GDP ratio must be equal to the present discount value of the future debt to

GDP ratio and the series of future primary surpluses.

       The sustainability requires that the debt to GDP ratio at some distant future n comes back

to the level at the period zero. We can calculate the constant tax rate τ* that makes b0=bn to be:

                                                   n 1 n
                                                                       t  
                             i  b  1   1      1   g         if i  
                            1   0   1  i   t 1  1  i  t 
                       *                                                                        (6)
                            1    n
                              gt           if i  
                             n t 1


                                                         12
       Broda and Weinstein (2005) calculated the number for Japan under some alternative

scenarios. Looking at the formula, we see that the tax rate necessary to make the fiscal policy

sustainable is high when (1) the initial debt to GDP ratio is high, (2) the levels of future

government spending are high, (3) the interest rate is high, and (4) the growth rate is low.

       Taking the fiscal year 2003 as the base year, Broda and Weinstein (2005) find that the

Japan needs to raise the tax revenues to around 35% of GDP if the government expenditure is to

grow at the rate of GDP, and to around 40% of GDP if the government expenditure is to grow at

the rate of GDP per workers, in order to stabilize the net debt to GDP ratio. These numbers were

compared to the tax rate of around 27%, the actual number for Japan in 2003 (including the

social security contributions). The numbers required for sustainability are high but not extremely

high, compared with the tax rates in other advanced economies. For example, the 35% number

is comparable to the U.S. tax rate (including the social security contributions). The higher 40%

number, which is required to sustain more generous government expenditures in the future, is

comparable to many countries in EU.

       Thus, the calculation led Broda and Weinstein (2005) to conclude that the fiscal situation

in Japan is not as dire as some observers claimed. It is important to note, however, that the

Japanese government debt increased further since the time they did this calculation. Doi (2009)

performed a similar calculation using fiscal 2008 as the base year. He finds that the tax rate that

makes the fiscal policy sustainable tends to be higher than those estimated by Broda and

Weinstein. For example, if the government expenditure grows at the rate of GDP, the necessary

tax rate is about 40% even under the scenarios with less generous government transfers. Thus,

Doi finds that the sustaining fiscal policy became substantially difficult after five years. Japan




                                                  13
needs to increase the tax rate to the levels comparable to many countries in EU just to sustain

less generous growth in government expenditures.

       In Doi (2009), a new population projection in December 2006 presented by the National

Institute of Population and Social Security Research is used (Broda and Weinstein (2005) use the

2002 projection). In the 2006 projection, the fertility rate forecast for 2050 was lowered to about

1.2 from the 2002 projection value of 1.39. The revision reflects a growing tendency among

Japanese women to get married and give birth later in life and increasing divorce rate. The

average age for Japanese women to give birth to the first child was 29.1 years old in 2005, up

from 27.5 years old in 1995, according to the Ministry of Health, Welfare and Labor (hereafter

MHWL) statistics. Japan's falling fertility rate has made it one of the world's most rapidly aging

countries, with 20.7 percent of the population aged 65 or older in 2006. According to the latest

census data, the country's population peaked in 2004 at 127.790 million. The population fell by

22,000 in 2005.

       After the publication of Broda and Weinstein (2005), newer sets of estimates of some

future government expenditures became available. Thus, Doi (2009) used those, rather than

assuming the expenditures grows at the rate of GDP (or GDP per worker) for those expenditures

and transfers.

       For the public expenditures on medical and long term care, the 2008 estimates published

by the National Congress on Social Security known as the “simulation” were used. Because the

study disclosed the detailed inputs for the simulation (unusually transparent for a study done by a

Japanese government organization), one could tweak the numbers as one sees fit. The cost on

medical and long term care reported in the “simulation” includes the co-pay of the people who

receive the service. To conform to the national income accounting framework, the future



                                                14
estimates of co-pay burdens are subtracted from the projected costs to obtain the future stream of

medical and long term care burdens for the public sector.

       The “simulation” considers several alternative scenarios for the future reforms of the

national healthcare and long term care system. Scenario A assumes that the current system will

continue without any reforms. Scenario B assumes some reforms to address rapidly increasing

demand for healthcare and long-term care, and includes some sub-scenarios with different levels

of generosity of the reform. In this paper, we focus on Scenario B1 with the least generous

benefits stream and Scenario B3 which is the most generous.

       For the public pension related expenditures, the 2009 pension prediction released by the

MHLW in February 2009 is used. The prediction provides the forecasts for the future social

security expenditures every five years. The basic inputs for the simulation are carefully

documented and published, so one can modify those to fit the purposes of the analysis. Both the

“simulation” and the pension prediction report different forecasts based on different

macroeconomic assumptions. We take the baseline case, which assumes the nominal growth rate

of 2.0%, the nominal rate of return of the pension system of 4.1%, and the inflation rate of 1.0%.

       The government expenditure items other than healthcare, long-term care and pension

related ones are assumed to increase at the growth rate of GDP per worker.

       In this section, we extend the analysis of Doi (2009) using 2010 as the base year. The

initial adjusted net government debt to GDP ratio is 152.8 percent. In Doi (2009), the adjusted

net government debt to GDP ratio at the end of 2010 is estimated to be 144.0 percent. Thus, the

deficit situation has already worsened substantially over the past year.

       Following Doi (2009), we consider three different cases, which differ in the scenario for

the healthcare and long-term care reform. Case 1 assumes no reforms (Scenario A). Cases 2 and



                                                 15
3 assume the least generous reform (Scenario B1) and the most generous reform (Scenario B3)

respectively. Figure 9 shows the forecasts for the future government expenditures for each case.

The ratio of the government expenditures to GDP never exceeds 40 percent in every case. This

shows that the government projections for social security benefits and healthcare and long-term

care expenses imply that those expenditures will be somehow contained even without additional

reforms for healthcare and long-term care.

       Table 2 shows the tax rate (τ*) that is necessary to reduce the debt to GDP ratio in 2105

back to the level of 2010. The calculation is based on equation (6). For the length of horizon (n),

we consider two cases: 95 years and 38 years. The 95 years horizon is roughly the same as the

longer horizon considered by Broda and Weinstein (2005) (98 years) and the horizon considered

by Doi (2009) (90 years). The 38 years horizon is exactly the same as the shorter horizon

considered by Broda and Weinstein (2005). Panel A reports the results for the 95 years horizon

and Panel B reports the results for the 38 years horizon.

       Panel A shows that the tax rates that are necessary to stabilize the debt to GDP ratio in

about 100 years are higher than those in Broda and Weinstein (2005) or Doi (2009) for similar

assumptions on the growth rate and the interest rate. For example, if we assume the interest rate

is higher than the growth rate by 2% and no further reform on the national healthcare and long-

term care systems (Case 1), the tax revenue to GDP ratio must be raised to 44.1% immediately to

achieve the sustainability. The ratio of the government revenues to GDP is forecasted to be

32.9% for 2010 (OECD Economic Outlook). Thus, our calculation suggests that the government

increase the revenues by more than 11 percent of GDP through tax increases and increases in

social security contributions by taxpayers. Panel B shows that the sustainable tax rates for the

38 years horizon in our Cases 1, 2, and 3 are only slightly higher than those for the 95 years



                                                16
horizon. This suggests that taking a longer horizon and spreading the cost over many

generations would not reduce the tax burden of each generation very much.5

         Figure 10 shows the path of the primary balance for each case. The figure shows that the

primary balance of two to four percent of GDP has to be maintained for years. The primary

balance reaches close to 10% of GDP toward the end. Even in the booming 1980s, Japan did not

experience primary surplus continuing for a decade. Although such magnitude of primary

surplus is possible, it is hard to imagine that voters would accept such sustained fiscal austerity

without resistance.

         Even with the extremely high tax rates, the debt to GDP ratio is forecasted to rise

substantially before it starts to come down. Figure 11 shows the implied path for the adjusted net

debt to GDP ratio for each case. In all the cases that we consider, the debt to GDP ratio goes

higher than 200 percent before it comes down. Noting that the total financial assets of the

household sector currently amount to about 300 percent of GDP, the government may face

substantial trouble refinancing the debt somewhere along this path.

         Thus, the optimistic picture painted by Broda and Weinstein (2005) completely

disappears when we update the analysis using more recent data. Fiscal expansion after the global

financial crisis substantially worsened the conditions. To stabilize the debt by increasing the tax

rate, the Japanese government would have to raise the revenue by 11% of GDP or more.




5
  We also tried th e calculation with simpler assumptions about the future government expenditures and transfers
following Broda and Weinstein (2005). We considered their Case 2 where the government expenditure and transfer
per person are expected to grow at the rate of GDP and their Case 3 where the government expenditure and transfer
per person are expected to grow at the rate of GDP per worker. It turns out these scenarios provide more extreme
versions of the future government expenditures and transfers than the scenarios that we consider. In their Case 2, the
government expenditures to GDP ratio eventually start to decline more rapidly than any of our cases. In their Case 3,
the government expenditures to GDP ratio continues to grow indefinitely. In eith er case, the qualitative result does
not change. The tax rate that achieves sustainability is higher than that calculated by Broda and Weinstein (2005).
For their Case 3, for example, a tax rate higher than 55% is necessary to stabilize the debt to GDP ratio in 95 years.

                                                         17
       To make the situation worse, the Great East Japan Earthquake struck on March 11, 2011.

A large amount of additional government expenditure will be necessary for reconstruction of the

affected areas. The cost for rebuilding the lost infrastructures is estimated to be around 16 to 25

trillion yen (about 200 or 300 billion dollars at the exchange rate of 80 yen per dollar) by the

Japanese government. According to the Basic Principles for Reconstruction that the government

agreed on July 29, 2011, the government will spend 19 trillion yen in the five years (about $240

billion or about 4.1% of GDP in 2010).

       How has the disaster and additional expenditures on the recovery efforts changed the

fiscal sustainability? For simplicity, let us consider the case when the government immediately

pays for the total reconstruction expenditure by issuing new bonds. This is the case when the

reconstruction expenditure has the maximum impact for the sustainability calculation.

       Following steps similar to the derivation above, one can show that the minimum tax rate

for sustainability τ* is given by:

                                              n 1
                                                                    t
                                                                         
                         i  b  1  1   d   1  g 
                                                          n
                                                                               if i  
                       1  0   1 i    0 t 1  1 i  t 
                  *                                                                           (7)
                        1         n
                                         
                        d0   gt            if i  
                        n      t 1   

where d0 denotes the ratio of the reconstruction expenditure to GDP. Comparing this to the

equation (6), we see that the sustainable tax rate increases by

                                               1
                        i     1    
                                          n
                                                                       1
                               1        d0        if i   or       d 0 if i                (8)
                        1     1  i                            n


Substituting d0 with 4.1% (the amount of reconstruction spending in the next five years

according to the Basic Principles for Reconstruction), we see the increase in the sustainable tax



                                                      18
rate is limited to 0.05 to 0.20 percentage points in the 95 years horizon case. Thus, although the

reconstruction cost may be substantial, its impact on the sustainability calculation is minimal

because the cost can be spread over the long horizon.

       We can use the equation (8) to examine the impact of a one-time reduction of the

outstanding debt through outright default or instantaneous inflation. For example, if we consider

an extreme case where the value of current debt is cut by half (d0=-76.4%), the sustainable tax

rate falls by 0.8 to 3.1 percentage points in the 95 years horizon case. The numbers are larger (in

absolute term) than the impacts of the reconstruction expenditure, but does not change the fiscal

sustainability problem very much. Japan would still need large amount of tax increase to

stabilize the debt. This suggests that the problem for Japan mostly comes from the future

government expenditures and transfers that are expected to far exceed the future tax revenues.

Although the current level of debt looks enormous, that is only a small part of the much bigger

problem. Thus, the reduction of the value of just current debt outstanding does not solve the

problem by itself.



5. Does the Japanese Government Increase the Primary Surplus as the Government Debt

   Grows?

       Will the Japanese government raise the tax rate drastically to stabilize the debt to GDP

ratio? One way to answer this question is to examine how the fiscal policy responded to rising

government debt in the past. If we observe the tendency for the government to reduce the

primary deficit sufficiently in response to increasing government debt, for example, we can infer

that the government may increase the tax rate to stabilize the debt eventually. Thus, this and the




                                                19
next section examine the Japanese government’s responses to rising government debts in the last

30 years to see if we are likely to see drastic tax increases in the near future.

        This section applies the approach proposed by Bohn (1998) that examines the response of

the primary surplus to the debt. To illustrate the approach, let xt denote the ratio of primary

surplus to GDP and suppose it is a linear function of the debt to GDP ratio in the (end of the)

previous period:

                                      xt     bt 1   xt 1   zt  ut                             (9)

where z is a vector of stationary variables that influences the primary surplus and u is a Gaussian

white noise with variance  . In contrast to Bohn (1998), we allow the smoothed adjustment of
                           2




primary surplus by including the AR(1) term.

        In the following analysis, we use two variables for z. The first is GVAR, which is

defined to be the temporary deviation from the trend level of government expenditure divided by

GDP, namely GVAR t  (Gt  Gt* ) / Yt , where G t* is the trend level of government expenditure

calculated using the method proposed by Hodrick and Prescott (1997). The budget balance can

worsen to finance a temporary surge in the government expenditure (such as a war) without

jeopardizing the long-run sustainability. Thus, we expect to find the primary surplus respond

negatively to this variable. The other stationary variable is GDP gap, which attempts to capture

the fluctuations of the primary surplus coming from the automatic stabilizer function of the

government budget.6 GDP gap is measured as the deviation of the Hodrick-Prescott trend. The

primary surplus is likely to fall during economic downturns, so we expect a positive coefficient

on this variable.

6
 Bohn uses the unemployment rate to capture the business cycle fluctuations. Instead of GDP gap, he uses YVAR
which is defined as YVARt  (U t  U m )(Gt* / Yt )
                                                    , where Ut is th e unemployment rate, Um is th e median
unemployment rate for the sample. The choice of the variables follows Barro (1986).

                                                       20
         Note that the relation between the primary surplus and debt for a constant interest rate

and a constant growth rate:

                                                  bt  (1  i   )bt 1  xt                          (10)

Substituting (9) into (10) obtains:

                                    bt  (1  i     )bt 1   xt 1     zt  ut             (11)

Noting that xt 1  (1  i   )bt 2  bt 1 :

                           bt  (1  i       )bt 1   (1  i   )bt  2     zt  ut .     (12)

Thus, bt is expressed in the ADF regression form as:

                        bt  {(i   )(1   )   )}bt 1   (1  i   )bt 1     zt  ut     (13)

Thus, bt is stationary if   (i   )(1   ) . Thus, if the primary surplus responds substantially

positively to an increase in the debt to GDP ratio (assuming that the interest rate is higher than

the growth rate), the debt to GDP ratio tends to be stabilized in the long run.

         Intuitively, the debt to GDP ratio grows over time at the rate of the interest rate minus the

growth rate of GDP even if the primary balance is zero. In order for this ratio to be stabilized in

the long run, the primary surplus must be at least as large. If the primary surplus follows the

process specified in the equation (9), the long run level of the primary surplus to GDP ratio is

given by  / (1   ) times the debt to GDP ratio. Thus, if  / (1   ) is greater than the interest

rate minus the growth rate, the government debt is sustainable.

         If we allow the response of the primary surplus to the debt to GDP ratio to depend on the

level of debt to GDP ratio, so that   f (bt 1 ) , one can show that the debt process is sustainable

if there exists b* such that f (b)  (i  )(1   ) for all b > b*.




                                                              21
       Table 3 reports the estimation result of the equation (9) by maximum likelihood

estimation (MLE). The definition of the government sector here is the general government that

includes the social security funds. We use the average of the adjusted net debt to GDP ratio for

the previous four quarters as bt-1. All other variables are seasonally adjusted using X12-ARIMA,

if the seasonally adjusted series are not available. The sample period used for this estimation is

1981Q1 to 2010Q1.

       The table reports the results for two alternative specifications. Model 1 is a simple linear

specification. Model 2 includes the quadratic term (bt 1  b ) 2 , where b is the sample mean of b.

This is a simple way to introduce the dependence of the size of response (β) on the debt to GDP

ratio. In both specifications, the coefficients estimates on GVAR and GDP gap are both

statistically significant and have the expected signs. In Model 1, the coefficient estimate on the

debt to GDP ratio is negative and significant, which implies the process is explosive as long as

the interest rate exceeds the growth rate.

       Inclusion of the quadratic term in Model 2 slightly improves the fit of the model. This

can be seen from the value of Markov switching criterion (MSC) proposed by Smith, Naik, and

Tsai (2006), which can be used to compare regression models with and without Markov

switching. The MSC of Model 2 is slightly lower than that of Model 1 but not much. The result

on the sustainability is the same as that in Model 1. The coefficient estimates on the linear term

and the quadratic term of the debt to GDP ratio are both negative, suggesting that the primary

surplus responds negatively to an increase in the debt to GDP ratio. Thus, the debt dynamics for

Japan has been explosive.




                                                 22
         The result that the debt dynamics is not sustainable is consistent with what Doi and Ihori

(2009) found using annual data from 1956 to 2000.7 The result is not surprising if we look at the

Figure 12, which plots the primary balance to GDP ratio against the debt to GDP ratio over the

sample period. Overall we see the negative relation between primary balance and debt. But we

also observe that the primary balance increased as the debt to GDP ratio increased during some

sub-sample periods. This suggests the possibility that the debt dynamics was sustainable at least

in some years.

         To address this possibility, we estimate the dynamics with possible regime changes.

Instead of (9), we consider the specification:

                           xt   ( S t )   ( S t )bt 1   ( S t ) xt 1   ( S t ) z t   ( S t )ut .     (14)

Here St denotes the policy regime that follows a two-state Markov chain with transition

probability matrix

                                                      p11 1  p22 
                                                                   ,
                                                      1  p11 p 22 



whose (i, j ) element indicates the probability that the policy regime moves to Regime i from

Regime j .

         A natural interpretation of “regimes” would be different fiscal policy stances by different

administrations. But, we cannot have the number of regimes as large as the number of distinct

administration to get statistically reliable estimates. This is especially so for Japan in the recent




7
  Doi and Ihori (2009) follow Bohn (1998) and use the unemployment based measure to account for business cycle
fluctuations. When we use the unemployment based measure instead of GDP gap, the result changes in a couple of
ways. First, t he point estimate of the coefficient on the linear term of debt to GDP ratio becomes positive but it is
not statistically significant. Second, the model with th e quadratic term shows a better fit. The qualitative result,
however, remains the same. The debt dynamics is unsustainable at least for the level of debt to GDP ratio as high as
that in recent years.

                                                                 23
years when the typical administration lasted only for four quarters (or less). Thus, this paper

restricts the number of potential regimes to be two.

           Table 4 reports the estimation result by the MLE assuming normality. We again consider

two alternative specifications: with or without the quadratic term. The estimation result of

Model 1 suggests the existence of two regimes with somewhat different responses of the primary

balance to increasing government debt. In Regime 1, the coefficient on the debt to GDP ratio is

negative, suggesting an increase in the debt to GDP ratio leads to a reduction in the primary

balance. The reduced primary balance (or the increase in the primary deficit) would increase the

growth rate of debt. The situation is clearly unsustainable. In this regime, the coefficient

estimate on GDP gap is positive and statistically significant, suggesting strong counter-cyclical

fluctuations of primary deficit. The probability that the economy stays in this regime in the next

period is estimated to be about 0.97. So the average duration of this regime is more than 8

years.8

           In Regime 2, the coefficient estimate on the debt to GDP ratio is positive, suggesting that

the dynamics could be sustainable. The coefficient estimate, however, is small and not

statistically different from zero. In this regime, the coefficient on GDP gap is not significantly

different from zero, suggesting little counter-cyclical fiscal policy. The probability that the

economy stays in the regime is 0.96, or the regime continues for about six years and a quarter on

average.

           The likelihood for the model with Markov switching is larger than that for the model

without regime changes. Indeed, the MSC clearly selects the model with regime changes over

the model without regime changes.


8
    The average duration of Regime i is given by 1 /(1  p ii ) . See Kim and Nelson (1999, p. 72).

                                                           24
       Figure 13 shows the smoothed probability of state being Regime 1 for Model 1. We can

see two occasions when the debt dynamics were clearly unsustainable (Regime 1). One is the

period from the early 1990s to the early 2000s. This roughly corresponds to the period often

referred to as the “lost decade.” The primary deficit increased, while the debt to GDP ratio rose,

making the debt dynamics clearly explosive. The other Regime 1 period is the late 2000s, when

the budget deficit increased again as a response to the global economic crisis. In Regime 2, the

point estimate of the coefficient on the debt to GDP ratio is positive but it is not significantly

different from zero. Thus, the debt is not quite sustainable even in this regime, but the dynamics

is less explosive than Regime 1. The figure shows Japan was in Regime 2 in the late 1980s. The

period is often considered to have been a period of fiscal consolidation, although the model

suggests that the debt dynamics was explosive even then. The other Regime 2 period emerged in

the mid 2000s, which corresponds to the fiscal consolidation attempt under the Koizumi

government.

       Model 2 includes the quadratic term in the specification. Again Regime 1 is a clearly

unsustainable regime: the budget balance falls as the debt to GDP ratio increases for all the

possible values of the debt to GDP ratio. The probability that the economy stays in this regime is

estimated to be 0.97. In Regime 2, the coefficient on the debt to GDP ratio is positive, so the

dynamics can be sustainable. The positive coefficient estimate on the linear term, however, is

again small and not statistically different from zero.

       The MSC values suggest that Model 1 with Markov switching is the overall preferred

model. The model suggests that the primary surplus did not respond positively to increasing debt

to GDP ratio in either regime. Thus, a fiscal policy change that is required to restore fiscal




                                                  25
sustainability for the general government sector will have to be an unprecedented change (at least

in the last 30 years).9

         Tables 4 and 5 report the estimation results using the central/local governments as the

definition of the government sector. Note that this analysis focuses only on the sustainability of

the central/local governments, ignoring the social security system which probably has more

serious sustainability issue. Thus, the question we ask here is whether the narrowly defined

government is fiscally sustainable if the issue for the social security system is somehow solved

separately. The results are similar to those for the general government sector. In the model

without Markov switching (Table 5), the coefficient estimate on the lagged debt to GDP ratio is

negative and significant. Thus, the primary surplus increases when the debt to GDP ratio

increases, making the dynamics explosive.

         Table 6 shows the estimation results for models with regime changes. Again the MSC

selects the models with regime switching over those without regime switching. Among the

models with regime switching, the MSC becomes the smallest for the model without the

quadratic term of the debt to GDP ratio (Model 1). Similar to the result for the general

government, the coefficient estimate on the debt to GDP ratio is positive but not statistically

significant from zero. Thus, the situation is not sustainable even for the narrowly defined

government sector.10




9
  When we use the unemployment rate based measure instead of GDP gap to proxy for the business cycle, the model
with the quadratic term with Markov switching becomes the most preferred model by the MSC. In Regime 2, the
policy becomes sustainable for low levels of debt to GDP ratio. S uch sustainable situation, however, did not
actually happened in the last 30 years because the debt to GDP ratio was already high when the economy was in
Regime 2 with high probability.
10
   When we use the unemployment based measure of business cycle, the model with the quadratic term and Markov
switching becomes the most preferred model for the central/local governments. In Regime 2, the process is found to
be sustainable for relatively high level of debt to GDP ratio. Even then, the steady state level of debt to GDP ratio is
very high, exceeding 140% even in the most favorable case (the interest rate is equal to the growth rate).

                                                          26
       In summary, the analysis in this section points to serious problems for the Japan’s

government debt. For both the general government sector and the central/local government only,

the fiscal policy is found to be unsustainable, even when we allow for the possibility of regime

changes.

       Ito, Watanabe, and Yabu (2011) estimate a similar model of the debt dynamics with

possible regime changes. Looking at a longer sample period (1885-2004), they find the Japanese

fiscal policy is overall stable. In the periods 1885-1925 and 1950-1970, the primary surplus

responded substantially positively to an increase in the debt. Our result, which comes from the

analysis of the sample after 1980, is not inconsistent with their finding, because our sample

period does not contain those years when they find the fiscal policy was sustainable. We

interpret their result to imply that the Japanese fiscal policy can be sustainable if Japan can go

back to the policy regime in 1885-1925 (roughly under the gold standard) and in 1950-1970

(effective balanced budget legislation) with high probability. Without such drastic changes, the

fiscal policy is unsustainable.



6. Fiscal Sustainability and Monetary Policy

       The analysis in Section 5 looked at the response of the primary surplus to the debt. Thus,

it was not clear whether the tax revenue or the government expenditure changes responding to

the changes in the level of government debt. This section focuses on the adjustment of the tax

revenue side and investigates if the tax revenue has shown the tendency to increase as the debt

increases given the government expenditure.

       We examine how the tax revenue responds to the debt to GDP ratio by estimating a

Markov switching model used by Davig and Leeper (2007). They specify the fiscal policy



                                                 27
function in terms of the tax revenue to GDP ratio as a function of the debt to GDP ratio, output

gap, and government purchases:

                       t   ( St )   ( S t )bt 1   y ( St ) gapt   g ( St ) g t   ( S t )ut   (15)

where gapt stands for the output gap. We calculate the output gap as the deviation of GDP from

its Hodrick-Prescott trend.

       Table 7 shows the estimation results of the fiscal policy function (15) for the general

government sector by the MLE assuming normality. Two regimes are identified. In Regime 1,

the coefficient estimate on the debt to GDP ratio is negative, suggesting the tax revenue falls

when the debt to GDP ratio increases. The smoothed probability of Regime 1 is shown in Figure

14. According to the terminology originally developed by Leeper (1991), an “active” policy is

not constrained by the level of government debt. The fiscal policy in Regime 1 is “active” in this

sense. In contrast, a “passive” policy responds prudently to shocks to the government debt. For

the U.S. data, Davig and Leeper (2007) find the fiscal policy alternates between the “active”

phase and the “passive” phase that is characterized by a positive coefficient on the debt to GDP

ratio. For the general government sector of Japan, we find the coefficient on the debt to GDP

ratio in Regime 2 to be zero.

       Thus, regardless the state, the tax revenue fails to increase when the debt to GDP ratio

rises. In both regimes, the tax revenue increases when the government expenditure increases but

by much less than one-to-one. The fiscal dynamics for Japan does not show the tax adjustment

to make the fiscal policy sustainable.

       Table 8 shows the estimation result for the central/local governments. The result is

qualitatively the same as that in Table 7. In Regime 1, the fiscal policy is active, with tax




                                                            28
revenues responding negatively to increases in the debt to GDP ratio. In Regime 2, the

coefficient estimate on the debt to GDP ratio is zero.

        An active fiscal policy is not necessarily unsustainable. As Davig and Leeper (2011) and

others show, an active fiscal policy can be sustainable if the monetary authority acts “passively”

and allows the price level to adjust eventually to make the value of the government bonds

outstanding equal to the present discount value of future expected primary surpluses. Because

the Japanese fiscal policy has looked active in the last 30 years both at the level of the general

government sector and at the level of the central/local governments, it is important to check how

the monetary policy has been conducted.11

        To check this, we estimate the following monetary policy function, which is potentially

state dependent.

                     rt   M ( StM )   M ( StM ) t   y ( StM ) gapt   e ( StM )ext   ( StM )vt ,      (16)

where rt is the nominal interest rate, πt is the inflation rate, gapt is the GDP gap and ext is the

deviation of the real exchange rate from its trend. The trend GDP and the trend real exchange

rate are the HP trend of each series. StM is the monetary policy regime that evolves according to

a Markov chain.

        Table 9 reports the estimation results. Column 1 reports the estimated coefficients from

the model without regime switches. The estimated coefficient on the inflation rate is much

greater than one, suggesting an active monetary policy to maintain a targeted inflation rate.

When the actual inflation rate goes up above the target rate, the central bank raises the interest

11
  The literature on “active” versus “passive” policies so far has not considered the implications of the zero bound
for the nominal interest rate, which could be important for the Japanese case. Takeda (2002) was probably the first
paper to discuss the implications of “active” and “passive” fiscal policies using the data from Japan. Using the data
from an earlier period (1970-1990) and slightly different specifications, he finds both fiscal and monetary policies
are “passive.” If both policies are passi ve, the price level is in determinate. He in terprets this to imply the
passiveness of the policies allow the deflation in Japan and suggests a (temporarily) active fiscal policy to be a
solution to end the deflation.

                                                             29
rate by more than one to one, raising the real interest rate. Such monetary policy eventually

brings the inflation rate back to the target level. Thus, the model that ignores the possibility of

regime changes for the monetary policy suggest that the monetary policy in Japan has been

“active” in the sense that the central bank reacted strongly to deviations of the inflation rate from

its target level. The combination of active fiscal policy and active monetary policy is

unsustainable. This combination cannot continue forever. Eventually, either the fiscal authority

or the monetary authority is forced to be inactive and accommodate the other.

        The coefficients on the variables other than the inflation rate are not precisely estimated

in the model without regimes changes, although the point estimates have the expected signs.

When the output falls below the trend (gap variable is negative), the monetary policy becomes

more expansionary (lower interest rate). When the real exchange rate appreciate above the trend

(ex variable is positive), the monetary policy becomes expansionary.

        The result for active monetary policy disappears when we estimate a model with regime

switches. The last two columns of Table 9 report the result for the Markov switching model.

The MSC suggests that the model with regime switches is much more preferred to the one

without. The coefficient on the inflation rate is less than one in both regimes, suggesting the

monetary policy is inactive. Regime 1 is relatively more active but the coefficient estimate is

still less than one. The response to the output gap in Regime 1 is large but not precisely

estimated. The response to the exchange rate is significantly different from zero.

        Regime 2 shows the smaller response of the interest rate to all the variables, but each

coefficient estimate is statistically significantly different from zero. Regime 2 also shows low

volatility of the interest rate.




                                                 30
       Figure 15 shows the smoothed probability of Regime 1. Regime 1 lasted for the first 15

years of the sample. From the third quarter of 1995 (note this is when the Bank of Japan lowered

the target rate to 0.5%) to the fourth quarter of 1995, the monetary policy quickly moved to

Regime 2, which has been continuing for the next 15 years.

       Given this result, we suspect that the result for active monetary policy in the model

without regime switches came mostly from the comparison between the period before 1995 (high

inflation rate and high interest rate) and the period after 1995 (low inflation rate and low interest

rate). Within each regime, the interest rate never responded to the inflation rate by more than

one for one.

       The analysis of this section finds fluctuations of regimes of fiscal policy and monetary

policy. Unlike the results for the U.S. found by Davig and Leeper (2007), we do not find the

policies fluctuate between active and inactive regimes. For the fiscal policy, both regimes are

active. The result does not change when we examine only the central/local governments

ignoring the solvency of the social security system. For the monetary policy, both regimes are

inactive. Thus, this section’s analysis suggests that the active fiscal policy has been supported by

inactive monetary policy in Japan for the last 30 years. If this pattern persists, the most likely

scenario for the future reconciliation of the mounting government debt may be the reduction of

the value of government debt through inflation under accommodative monetary policy, however

unlikely it seems in the current deflationary environment.



7. Conclusions

       In this paper, we have examined the fiscal sustainability of Japan using three alternative

but complementary approaches and for two alternative definitions of the government sector. All



                                                 31
the results point to the same conclusion: the Japanese government debt poses serious challenges.

To stabilize the debt to GDP ratio, Japan needs to implement a tax rate hike with an

extraordinary magnitude. Such tax increase to make the fiscal policy sustainable would

represent a drastic departure from the Japanese fiscal policy in the last 30 years. The fiscal

policy in Japan is found to be unsustainable even when we allow the possibility of regime

changes. If the government fails to reduce the primary deficit by increasing the taxes and

reducing the expenditures and transfer payments, Japan would be forced to reduce the value of

government debt through either inflation or outright default.




                                                 32
References

Barro, Robert (1986). “US. Deficits since World War I,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 88,

       195-222.

Blanchard, O., J.-C. Chouraqui, R.P. Hagemann and N. Sartor (1990). “The sustainability of

       fiscal policy: New answers and to an old question,” OECD Economic Studies, 15, pp.7-

       36.

Bohn, Henning (1998). “The Behavior of U.S. Public Debt and Deficits,” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics, 113, 949-963.

Broda, Christian, and David E. Weinstein (2005). “Happy News from the Dismal Science:

       Reassessing Japanese Fiscal Policy and Sustainability,” in Takatoshi Ito, Hugh Patrick,

       and David E. Weinstein (Eds.) Reviving Japan’s Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,

       pp.40-78.

Davig, Troy, and Eric M. Leeper (2007). “Fluctuating Macro Policies and the Fiscal Theory,”

       NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006, Volume 21, 247-298.

Davig, Troy, and Eric M. Leeper (2011). “Monetary-Fiscal Policy Interactions and Fiscal

       Stimulus,” European Economic Review, forthcoming.

Doi, Takero (2008). “Simulation analysis of policies to ensure Japan's fiscal sustainability,” Mita

       Journal of Economics vol.100 no.4, pp.131-160.

Doi, Takero (2009). “Zaisei Shutsudo no Utage no ato ni,” in Takatoshi Ito and Naohiro Yashiro

       (Eds.) Nihon Keizai no Kassei-ka (Revitalizing Japan’s Economy). Tokyo, Japan: Nihon

       Keizai Shimbun-sha, pp.155-189.

Doi, Takero and Toshihiro Ihori (2009). The Public Sector in Japan: Past Developments and

       Future Prospects. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.



                                                33
Hodrick, Robert, and Edward C. Prescott (1997), "Postwar U.S. Business Cycles: An Empirical

       Investigation," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 29 (1), 1–16.

Ito, Arata, Tsutomu Watanabe, and Tomoyoshi Yabu (2011). “Fiscal Policy Switching in Japan,

       the U.S., and the U.K.” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies,

       forthcoming.

Kim, Chang-Jin and Charles Nelson (1999), State-Space Models with Regime Switching:

       Classical and Gibbs-Sampling Approaches with Applications. Cambridge, MA: MIT

       Press.

Leeper, Eric M. (1991). “Equilibria under ‘active’ and ‘passive’ monetary and fiscal policies,”

       Journal of Monetary Economics, 27, 129-147.

Smith, Aaron, Prasad A. Naik, and Chih-Ling Tsai (2006). “Markov-Switching Model Selection

       using Kullback-Leibler Divergence,” Journal of Econometrics, 134, 553-577.

Takeda, Yosuke (2002). “Defure ka ni okeru zaisei seisaku ruru wo motomete” (Searching for

       the Fiscal Policy Rule in a Deflationary Economy), (The Ministry of Finance) Financial

       Review, 64, 140-179.




                                               34
Table 1. Calculation of Quarterly Data by Sub-Sector
                         Transactions                              Central and local   Social security funds
                                                                    governments
Income and Outlay Accounts
 1. Taxes on production and imports ,receivable
   (1) Taxes on products
       a. Value added type taxes (VAT)                                     I                    0
       b. Import duties                                                    I                    0
       c. Others                                                           I                    0
   (2) Other taxes on production                                           I                    0
 2. (less) Subsidies ,payable                                              I                    0
 3. Property income ,receivable
   (1) Interest                                                           IV                    II
   (2) Distributed income of corporations
       a. Dividends                                                        I                     0
       b. Withdrawals from income of quasi-corporations                   IV                    III
   (3) Property income attributed to insurance policy holders              I                     0
   (4) Rent                                                               IV                    III
 5. Property income, payable
   (1) Interest                                                           IV                    II
   (2) Rent                                                                I                    0
 8. Current taxes on income, wealth, etc., receivable
   (1) Taxes on income                                                     I                    0
   (2) Other current taxes                                                 I                    0
 9. Social contributions, receivable
   (1) Actual social contributions
       a. Compulsory employers' actual social contributions               0                    I
       b. Compulsory employees' social contributions                      0                    I
   (2) Imputed social contributions                                Same as 12(2) by     Same as 12(2) by
                                                                      definition           definition
10. Other current transfers, receivable
  (1) Non-life insurance claims                                           IV                    III
  (2) Current transfers within general government
     a. From central government                                            V                   IV
     b. From local government                                             V                    IV
     c. From social security funds                                         V                   N/A
  (3) Current international cooperation                                    I                    0
  (4) Miscellaneous current transfers                                     IV                    II
12. Social benefits other than social transfers in kind ,payable
  (1) Social security benefits in cash                                     0                    I
  (2) Unfunded employee social benefits                                   IV                    II
  (3) Social assistance benefits                                           I                    0
13. Other current transfers ,payable
  (1) Net non-life insurance premiums                                     IV                    III



                                                           35
  (2) Current transfers within general government
      a. To central government                                         Same as 10(2)b             A part of 10(2)c
      b. To local government                                           Same as 10(2)a             A part of 10(2)c
      c. To social security funds                                    Same as 10(2)a & b                N/A
  (3) Current international cooperation                                       I                          0
  (4) Miscellaneous current transfers                                        IV                          II
17. Final consumption expenditure                                            IV                          II
Capital Finance Accounts
19. Capital transfers, receivable
  (1) From other sub-sectors of general government                     Same as 10(2)               Same as 10(2)
  (2) From residents
      a. Of which capital taxes                                               I                           0
      b. Of which special factors                                             I’                          I’
      c. Other items                                                         IV                          III
  (3) From the rest of the world                                              I                           0
20. (less) Capital transfers, payable
  (1) To other sub-sectors of general government                       Same as 13(2)               Same as 13(2)
  (2) To residents
      a. Of which special factors                                             I                           0
      b. Other items                                                         IV                          III
  (3) To the rest of the world                                                I                           0
22. Gross fixed capital formation                                            IV                           II
23. (less) Consumption of fixed capital                                      IV                          II
24. Changes in inventories                                                   IV                          III
25. Purchases of land, net
      a. Of which special factors                                             I                           0
      b. Other items                                                         IV                          III
26. Net lending(+)/net borrowing(-) (1-2+3-5+8+9+10-12-13-
17+19-20-22+23-24-25


Notes: The item numbers correspond to those used by the official reports of national income accounting.
The letter in each cell shows how the item for the subsector is estimated.
         0. The amount is zero.
         I. Same as the amount for the entire general government
         I’. Same as the amount for the entire general government if the special factor for the quarter applies to the
         subsector.
         II. Calculated so that the proportion of the social security account in each quarter is the same as the
         proportion of annual amounts for the year.
         III. Calculated by dividing the annual amounts by four.
         IV. Subtracting the amount for the social security account from the amount for the whole general
         government sector
         V. Estimated from the Ministry of Finance "Receipts and Payments of Treasury Funds with the Private
         Sector" and the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications "White Paper on Local Public Finance" is
         adopted.




                                                         36
Table 2. Simulation Results of Government Revenue-GDP Ratio Required for Fiscal
Sustainability

Panel A. 95 years horizon,  (nominal growth rate) = 2%

                  Case 1        Case 2     Case 3         Broda and               Doi
                                                        Weinstein (2005)        (2009)

   Rate Gap                                              Case 2       Case 3
(interest rate)

   0% (2%)           39.9%       38.8%      38.9%        32.3%        44.9%     37.2%

   1% (3%)           41.8%       40.9%      41.0%        33.7%        44.4%     38.8%

   2% (4%)           44.1%       43.4%      43.5%        34.9%        43.9%     40.8%

   3% (5%)           45.2%       44.6%      44.7%        36.0%        43.3%     41.7%

   4% (6%)           46.7%       46.4%      46.5%        36.9%        42.9%     43.1%

      n              95          95           95             98        98        90



Panel B: 38 years horizon,  (nominal growth rate) = 2%

                                                               Broda and
                                                             Weinstein (2005)
                          Case 1 Case 2 Case 3
      Rate Gap
                                                             Case 2    Case 3
   (interest rate)

      0% (2%)              41.1%      40.9%    41.0% 35.3%             40.2%

      1% (3%)              42.5%      42.4%    42.5% 35.9%             40.4%

      2% (4%)              44.7%      44.6%    44.7% 36.5%             40.6%

      3% (5%)              45.4%      45.3%    45.4% 37.0%             40.8%

      4% (6%)              46.8%      46.8%    46.9% 37.6%             41.0%

          n                38         38           38          38        38




                                                        37
Table 3. Estimation Results of the Debt Dynamics for General Government Sector

                   Explanatory
                                           Model 1                Model 2
                    variable
                                            0.0020                0.0014
                     constant
                                           (0.0009)              (0.0008)
                         bt 1             -0.0037               -0.0016
                                           (0.0013)              (0.0015)
                                                                 -0.0063
                     (bt 1  b ) 2
                                                                 (0.0033)
                                           -0.3169               -0.2708
                      GVARt
                                           (0.0869)              (0.0863)
                                            0.0009                0.0009
                     GDP gap
                                           (0.0002)              (0.0002)
                                            0.8614                0.8954
                           ρ
                                           (0.0502)              (0.0469)
                                            0.0028                0.0027
                          
                                           (0.0002)              (0.0002)
                  Log-likelihood            523.10                524.85
                        MSC                 -916.4                -917.7


Notes: Estimated by the MLE assuming the error term are normally distributed with mean 0 and
variance  2 . The dependent variable is the prim ary balance divided by GDP. Num bers in the
parentheses are standard errors. GVAR is the deviation of the government expenditure from its
trend divided by GDP. GDP gap is measured as the deviation from the Hodrick-Prescott trend. ρ
is the coefficient on the lagged dependent variab le. MSC reports the va lue of Markov switching
criteria proposed by Smith, Naik, and Tsai (2006).




                                              38
Table 4. Models with Markov Switching for General Government Sector

                                    Model 1                                Model 2
                        Regime 1              Regime 2         Regime 1              Regime 2
    Transition            0.9722               0.9638            0.9710               0.9703
    probability         (0.0193)              (0.0193)          (0.0233)             (0.0227)
                          0.0015               0.0012            0.0012               0.0017
     Constant
                        (0.0008)              (0.0006)          (0.0010)             (0.0008)
         bt 1           -0.0057               0.0007           -0.0057               0.0007
                        (0.0012)              (0.0010)          (0.0020)             (0.0015)
                                                                -0.0027              -0.0046
     (bt 1  b ) 2
                                                                (0.0034)             (0.0068)
                         -0.2803              -0.2226           -0.2423              -0.2156
      GVARt
                         (0.0875)             (0.0842)          (0.0811)             (0.1000)
                          0.0013               0.0001            0.0011               0.0000
     GDP gap
                         (0.0002)             (0.0002)          (0.0002)             (0.0003)
                          0.7057               0.9378            0.6347               0.9094
           ρ
                         (0.0542)             (0.0338)          (0.0710)             (0.0466)
                          0.0023               0.0013            0.0019               0.0016
          
                         (0.0002)             (0.0001)          (0.0002)             (0.0002)
  Log-likelihood                     563.9                                  564.1
        MSC                         -955.1                                 -942.8
     Without
                                    -916.4                                 -917.7
    switching


Notes: Estimated by the MLE assum ing normality. The dependent variable is the prim ary
balance divided by GDP. Num bers in the parentheses are standard errors. bt-1 is the average of
the debt to GDP ratios f or the last four quarters, and b is its average ov er the sam ple period.
GVAR is the deviation of the governm ent expenditure from its trend divided by GDP. GDP ga p
is measured as the deviation from the Hodrick-Prescott trend. ρ is the coefficient o n the lagged
dependent variable. MSC repor ts the value of Markov sw itching criteria proposed by Sm ith,
Naik, and Tsai (2006).




                                                 39
Table 5. Estimation Results of the Debt Dynamics for Central/Local Governments

                   Explanatory
                                             Model 1            Model 2
                   variable
                                              0.0012             0.0012
                   constant
                                             (0.0006)           (0.0006)
                   bt 1                     -0.0021            -0.0021
                                             (0.0007)           (0.0009)
                                                                -0.0003
                   (bt 1  b ) 2
                                                                (0.0021)
                                             -0.4165            -0.4136
                   GVARt
                                             (0.0885)           (0.0859)
                                              0.0007             0.0007
                   GDP gap
                                             (0.0002)           (0.0002)
                                              0.8298             0.8314
                   ρ
                                             (0.0490)           (0.0455)
                                              0.0025             0.0025
                   
                                             (0.0002)           (0.0002)
                   Log-likelihood             533.40             520.59
                   MSC                        -937.0             -934.8


Notes: Estimated by the MLE assuming the error term are normally distributed with mean 0 and
variance  . The dependent variable is the prim ary balance divided by GDP. Num bers in the
           2


parentheses are standard errors. GVAR is the deviation of the government expenditure from its
trend divided by GDP. GDP gap is measured as the deviation from the Hodrick-Prescott trend. ρ
is the coefficient on the lagged dependent variab le. MSC reports the va lue of Markov switching
criteria proposed by Smith, Naik, and Tsai (2006).




                                              40
Table 6. Models with Markov Switching for Central/Local Governments

                                      Model 1                        Model 2
                              Regime 1         Regime 2       Regime 1      Regime 2
          Transition           0.9656           0.9652         0.9654         0.9652
          probability         (0.0298)         (0.0291)       (0.0316)      (0.0320)
                               -0.0010          0.0008         -0.0012        0.0009
          Constant
                              (0.0008)         (0.0006)       (0.0010)      (0.0006)
           bt 1               -0.0029          0.0003         -0.0026        0.0005
                              (0.0009)         (0.0007)       (0.0016)      (0.0009)
                                                               -0.0007       -0.0013
           (bt 1  b ) 2
                                                              (0.0028)      (0.0044)
                               -0.3339             -0.3613     -0.3285       -0.3582
          GVARt
                               (0.0669)            (0.1231)   (0.0764)      (0.1175)
                                0.0009             -0.0002     0.0009        -0.0002
          GDP gap
                               (0.0002)            (0.0002)   (0.0002)      (0.0003)
                                0.5870              0.8981     0.5999         0.8864
          ρ
                               (0.0587)            (0.0463)   (0.0706)      (0.0589)
                                0.0017              0.0016     0.0017         0.0016
           
                               (0.0002)            (0.0002)   (0.0002)      (0.0002)
          Log-likelihood                  569.2                       566.9
          MSC                             -966.0                      -953.1
          Without
                                          -937.0                      -934.8
          switching


Notes: Estimated by the MLE assum ing normality. The dependent variable is the prim ary
balance divided by GDP. Num bers in the parentheses are standard errors. bt-1 is the average of
the debt to GDP ratios f or the last four quarters, and b is its average ov er the sam ple period.
GVAR is the deviation of the governm ent expenditure from its trend divided by GDP. GDP ga p
is measured as the deviation from the Hodrick-Prescott trend. ρ is the coefficient on the lagged
dependent variable. MSC repor ts the value of Markov sw itching criteria proposed by Sm ith,
Naik, and Tsai (2006).




                                                    41
Table 7. Estimation Results of the Fiscal Policy Function for General Government Sector

                                           Regime 1                     Regime 2
                                            0.9374                        0.9771
       Transition probability
                                           (0.0404)                      (0.0165)
                                            0.0623                        0.0812
              Constant
                                           (0.0070)                      (0.0040)
                                           -0.0268                       -0.0003
        Lagged (debt / GDP)
                                           (0.0035)                      (0.0009)
                                           -0.0004                        0.0001
             GDP gap
                                           (0.0003)                      (0.0002)
     Government expenditure /               0.6425                        0.3196
             GDP                           (0.0762)                      (0.0353)
                                            0.0020                        0.0020
                 
                                           (0.0003)                      (0.0002)
           Log-likelihood                                  549.4
               MSC                                         -948.3
         Without switching                                 -915.6


Notes: Estimated by the MLE assum ing normality. The dependent variable is the tax revenue
divided by GDP. Numbers in the parentheses are standard errors. The lagged debt to GDP ratio
is the average of the debt to GDP ratios for the previous four quarters. GDP gap is m easured as
the deviation from the Hodrick-Prescott tre nd. MSC reports the value of Markov switching
criteria proposed by Smith, Naik, and Tsai (2006).




                                              42
Table 8. Estimation Results of the Fiscal Policy Function for Central/Local Governments

                                              Regime 1               Regime 2
                                                0.9607                0.9238
            Transition probability
                                               (0.0243)              (0.0389)
                                                0.0842                0.0398
            Constant
                                               (0.0040)              (0.0038)
                                               -0.0095                0.0008
            Lagged (debt / GDP)
                                               (0.0008)              (0.0007)
                                                0.0001                0.0002
            GDP gap
                                               (0.0002)              (0.0001)
            Government expenditure /            0.1179                0.4742
            GDP                                (0.0446)              (0.0369)
                                                0.0022                0.0011
            
                                               (0.0002)              (0.0001)
            Log-likelihood                                 562.3
            MSC                                            -974.9
            Without switching                              -928.9


Notes: Estimated by the MLE assuming normality. The dependent variable is the tax revenue
divided by GDP. Numbers in the parentheses are standard errors. The lagged debt to GDP ratio
is the average of the debt to GDP ratios for the previous four quarters. GDP gap is measured as
the deviation from the Hodrick-Prescott trend. MSC reports the value of Markov switching
criteria proposed by Smith, Naik, and Tsai (2006).




                                              43
Table 9. Estimation Results for Monetary Policy Function

                                        Model
                                        without            Model with switching
                                       switching
                                                       Regime 1              Regime 2
                                                          0.991               0.991
        Transition probability
                                                         (0.011)             (0.012)
                                         2.500            4.140               0.333
        constant
                                        (0.120)          (0.234)             (0.035)
                                         1.681            0.875               0.137
        πt
                                        (0.079)          (0.139)             (0.030)
                                         0.033            0.192               0.056
        gapt
                                        (0.095)          (0.134)             (0.013)
                                        -0.017           -0.090              -0.008
        ext
                                        (0.018)          (0.020)             (0.003)
                                         1.272            0.975               0.123
        
                                        (0.084)          (0.084)             (0.011)
        Log-likelihood                  -194.16                    -49.58
        MSC                             515.861                    259.585

Notes: Estimated by the MLE assuming the error term are normally distributed with mean 0 and
variance  . The dependent vari able is the average overnig ht call rate. Num bers in the
              2


parentheses are standard errors. gap is the GDP gap, which is measured as the deviation from
the Hodrick-Prescott trend. ex is the deviatio n of the real ef fective exchange r ate from its
Hodrick-Prescott trend. MSC reports the valu e of Markov switching criteria proposed by Smith,
Naik, and Tsai (2006).




                                              44
Figure 1. Budget Deficit and Government Debt: Fiscal 1993 to 2011

 250%                                                                                                                                        14%




                                                                                                                                      205%
                                                                                                                               199%
                                                                                                                        193%
                                                                                                                                             12%




                                                                                            175%



                                                                                                                 174%
                                                                                                   172%
                                                                                                          167%
                                                                                     166%
 200%




                                                                              158%
                                                                       152%
                                                                144%
                                                                                                                                             10%




                                                         135%
                                                  127%
 150%


                                           113%
                                                                                                                                             8%
                                    100%
                             94%
                      86%



                                                                                                                                             6%
               79%
        74%




 100%
                                                                                                                                             4%
  50%
                                                                                                                                             2%

   0%                                                                                                                                        0%
        1993
               1994
                      1995
                             1996
                                    1997
                                           1998
                                                  1999
                                                         2000
                                                                2001
                                                                       2002
                                                                              2003
                                                                                     2004
                                                                                            2005
                                                                                                   2006
                                                                                                          2007
                                                                                                                 2008
                                                                                                                        2009
                                                                                                                               2010
                                                                                                                                      2011
                                                                Fiscal Year

                             Debt/GDP (left axis)                             Deficit/GDP (right axis)


Source: OECD Economic Outlook 87 database. Annex Table 27.




                                                                              45
Figure 2. Budget Surplus for Selected OCED Countries (% of GDP)

   4

   2

   0

   -2

   -4

   -6

   -8

  -10

  -12

  -14




                Canada            France           Germany
                Greece            Italy            Japan
                United Kingdom    United States




                                           46
Figure 3. Gross Government Debt of Selected OECD Countries (% of GDP)

 220
 200
 180
 160
 140
 120
 100
  80
  60
  40
  20




        Canada           France           Germany          Greece
        Italy            Japan            United Kingdom   United States




                                        47
Figure 4. Net Debt for Selected OECD Countries (% of GDP)

  140


  120


  100


   80


   60


   40


   20


    0




         Canada          France           Germany           Greece
         Italy           Japan            United Kingdom    United States




                                         48
Figure 5. Gross Debt, Net Debt, and Adjusted Net Debt for General Government Sector (4
quarters moving average, % of GDP)

  2.5



   2



  1.5



   1



  0.5



   0
   1980Q4     1985Q4      1990Q4     1995Q4      2000Q4       2005Q4

                          Debt      net debt     gross debt




                                          49
Figure 6. Gross Debt, Net Debt, and Adjusted Net Debt for Central/Local Governments (4
quarters moving average , % of GDP)

  2.5



   2



  1.5



   1



  0.5



   0
   1980Q4      1985Q4     1990Q4      1995Q4      2000Q4       2005Q4

                          Debt      net debt      gross debt




                                          50
Figure 7. Government Revenue and Expenditure for General Government Sector (% of
GDP)

  0.16



  0.15



  0.14



  0.13



  0.12



  0.11



   0.1
    1980Q4    1985Q4     1990Q4      1995Q4    2000Q4   2005Q4

                           Revenew       Expenditure




                                        51
Figure 8. Government Revenue and Expenditure for Central/Local Governments (% of
GDP)

  0.11




   0.1




  0.09




  0.08




  0.07
    1980Q4    1985Q4     1990Q4      1995Q4    2000Q4   2005Q4

                           Revenew       Expenditure




                                        52
Figure 9. Future Government Expenditures
                                                 Case 1

             45%
             40%
             35%
             30%
             25%
             20%
             15%
             10%
              5%
              0%
                2010   2020   2030    2040    2050      2060   2070   2080     2090       2100
                         Non-social security benefits          Social security benefits
                         Total Expenditure




                                                 Case 2

             45%
             40%
             35%
             30%
             25%
             20%
             15%
             10%
              5%
              0%
                2010   2020   2030    2040    2050      2060   2070   2080     2090       2100
                         Non-social security benefits          Social security benefits
                         Total Expenditure




                                                   53
                                   Case 3

45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
  2010   2020   2030    2040    2050      2060   2070   2080     2090       2100
           Non-social security benefits          Social security benefits
           Total Expenditure




                                     54
Figure 10. Primary Surplus under Each Scenario (with tax increases to τ*)



 10%
  9%
  8%
  7%
  6%
  5%
  4%
  3%
  2%
  1%
  0%
    2010     2020    2030    2040    2050    2060     2070     2080   2090   2100

                               Case 1        Case 2          Case 3




                                            55
Figure 11. Adjusted Net Debt to GDP Ratio under Each Scenario

   250%



   200%



   150%



   100%



    50%



    0%
      2010    2020    2030   2040       2050        2060     2070   2080   2090   2100

                                    Case 1          Case 2     Case 3




                                               56
Figure 12. Primary Balance and Adjusted Net Debt as a Percentage of GDP: 1980-2010



    2.5%

    2.0%

    1.5%

    1.0%

    0.5%

    0.0%

    -0.5%

    -1.0%

    -1.5%

    -2.0%

    -2.5%
        0.00%   20.00% 40.00% 60.00% 80.00% 100.00% 120.00% 140.00% 160.00%




                                          57
Figure 13. Smoothed Probability of Regime 1 for the Model 1 for General Government
      Sector

         1

        0.9

        0.8

        0.7

        0.6

        0.5

        0.4

        0.3

        0.2

        0.1

         0
         1981Q1   1985Q1   1989Q1   1993Q1    1997Q1   2001Q1   2005Q1   2009Q1




                                        58
Figure 14. Smoothed Probability of Regime 1 for the Fiscal Policy Function of General
Government Sector


   1

  0.9

  0.8

  0.7

  0.6

  0.5

  0.4

  0.3

  0.2

  0.1

   0
   1981Q1    1985Q1    1989Q1    1993Q1    1997Q1    2001Q1    2005Q1    2009Q1




                                            59
Figure 15. Smoothed Probability for Regime 1 for the Monetary Policy Equation

   1

  0.9

  0.8

  0.7

  0.6

  0.5

  0.4

  0.3

  0.2

  0.1

   0
   1981Q1    1985Q1    1989Q1   1993Q1    1997Q1    2001Q1    2005Q1    2009Q1




                                          60
