                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      FREE TO PUNISH? THE AMERICAN DREAM AND THE HARSH TREATMENT
                              OF CRIMINALS

                                             Rafael Di Tella
                                              Juan Dubra

                                         Working Paper 17309
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17309


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2011




We thank Ricardo Perez Truglia for extremely helpful suggestions; as well as Anthony Doob for generous
help understanding Canadian data. We also thank Jeff Miron (the editor), our commentators (Glenn
Loury and Justin McCrary), as well as Sallie James, Marc Mauer, Eric Rasmusen, and participants
at the Cato Papers on Public Policy Conference, for extremely helpful suggestions. For ideas and exceptional
research assistance we thank Javier Donna, Ramiro Galvez, Irene Mussio, Ricardo Perez Truglia and
James Zeitler. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. This research was financed by the Cato Institute.¸˛

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Rafael Di Tella and Juan Dubra. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Free to Punish? The American Dream and the Harsh Treatment of Criminals
Rafael Di Tella and Juan Dubra
NBER Working Paper No. 17309
August 2011
JEL No. E62,K14,P16

                                           ABSTRACT

We describe the evolution of selective aspects of punishment in the US over the period 1980-2004.
We note that imprisonment increased around 1980, a period that coincides with the “Reagan revolution”
in economic matters. We build an economic model where beliefs about economic opportunities and
beliefs about punishment are correlated. We present three pieces of evidence (across countries, within
the US and an experimental exercise) that are consistent with the model.


Rafael Di Tella
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field Rd
Boston, MA 02163
and CIFAR
and also NBER
rditella@hbs.edu

Juan Dubra
Universidad de Montevideo
Montevideo, Uruguay
dubraj@um.edu.uy
                           Free to Punish?
        The American Dream and the Harsh Treatment of Prisoners




                                        1. INTRODUCTION
    Several pieces of data suggest that contemporary policies concerning criminal
punishment in America are harsh, both relative to other rich countries and relative to the
country’s own history. For example, the incarceration rate in the United States in the
early 1970s was around 100 per 100,000 of total population, whereas it is now over 700
per 100,000. Figure 1 illustrates. It is also the highest in the world. In comparison, the
average incarceration rate for European countries is somewhat over 100 (see, e.g.,
Walmsley 2007). Other aspects of America’s penal policy also appear harsh when
compared with other countries at similar levels of development, such as the use of the
death penalty. 1 An important question, and one we take up in this paper, concerns the
causes of harsh punishment in America.




1
  According to Amnesty International, in 2008, the United States was one of only eight countries with more
than 500 prisoners on death row. With 3,263, it was second behind Pakistan. The other six countries
included China, Thailand, Kenya, Bangladesh, Nigeria, and Uganda. Many countries have designed
reforms based on what they see as best practices in the United States 1`(see, e.g., the contributions in Di
Tella, Edwards, and Schargrodsky 2010).
                                        FIGURE 1
              Combined U.S. Incarceration Rate (Federal and State Jurisdiction)
                                        1925–2009




SOURCE: Bureau of Justice Statistics and University of Albany, Sourcebook of Criminal
Justice Statistics, 2003.
    The answer proposed in this paper is that beliefs concerning economic opportunities
cause desired punishment levels in society. Although the explanation we present is
relatively narrow, it is connected to the more ambitious notion that Americans punish
criminals at this unprecedented scale because it is considered legitimate to do so. This
stands in contrast to commonly discussed alternatives such as deterrence or the political
economy of the “prison-industrial complex.” To emphasize (and at the risk of
exaggerating), we are claiming that even if there was a well estimated deterrent effect of
imprisonment widely accepted by criminologists, this would not explain the observed
increase in U.S. imprisonment because somebody would need to produce evidence that
voters agree that this is a good idea.2 Part of the difficulty is to include explanations for
policies that are in all likelihood counterproductive from a recidivism standpoint (such as

2
  Experimental evidence by Carlsmith et al. (2002) suggests that individuals are motivated by retribution
concerns (over deterrence) when choosing punishment. They study individuals who are given a short
vignette describing a theft and are asked for a sentence recommendation. They show that when the
probability of catching the thief in the vignette changes, the sentencing recommendation does not change,
contrary to what deterrence suggests. On the other hand, sentences were harsher when the thief’s
motivation changes (in one case he wanted money to redistribute to the poor and in another he needed it for
cancelling betting debts).
charging inmates telephone rates that are significantly higher than those for the general
population; see, e.g., Dannenberg 2011). And, of course, it would be hard to write down a
deterrence model that fits the magnitude of the incarceration changes without dramatic
(and implausible) changes in the other variables of the model.3 A similar difficulty affects
many explanations based on the political economy of the prison-industrial complex. If the
expansion is driven by corruption or lobbying by interest groups, why do so many
Americans support these policies? To qualify as an answer to the question of why such
harsh punishment in America, we think, there has to be an explanation for why so many
Americans are happy to support harshness levels that in other countries would be
considered completely out of all proportion.
    We organize our paper around a model and several pieces of evidence that are
consistent with this hypothesis. In the model, we focus on agents that differ in the
expected rewards for work and hence in their preferred economic system (as in Piketty
1995). Differences in the power of incentive schemes used (or in tax rates) induce further
differences in effort and, a posteriori, differences in the propensity to commit crime.
Inferences about the characteristics of criminals (for example, those formed by judges)
differ across economic systems. This provides an economic explanation for why some
ideological beliefs go together. Specifically, we show that people whose values and
beliefs simultaneously include the harsh treatment of criminals and the virtues of free
markets (and support low taxes) hold a coherent model of how the world works. Put
differently, criminals are “meaner” in systems where there are more economic
opportunities, so the belief that there are more economic opportunities (for example, in
America relative to Europe, or within the United States after 1980 and the Reagan
presidency) is the driver of the demand for harsh punishment.4 Our explanation is thus
connected to work on the expressive content of the law, where policymakers “send a

3
  For example, it would require a large increase in the income of the lowest decile (the legal alternative for
many criminals) in the United States relative to France.
4
  Merton (1938) argued that high crime rates in America were a result of the psychological stress created by
the gap between a reality of limited opportunities and a generalized belief in the “American dream.” See
also Messner and Rosenfeld (2001) and Cullen and Agnew (2003). They do not explain, however, why
such harsh punishment might be associated with these beliefs, particularly if such mitigating circumstances
are present. Closer in spirit to our approach is the fascinating comparative historical study by Whitman
(2003). He argues that American rejection of status-oriented European societies based on a strong state led
to the adoption of egalitarian harsh punishment.
message” about society’s values by setting harsh sentences (see Sunstein 1996 and
Benabou and Tirole 2011).
   We provide different pieces of evidence that are consistent with the idea that
economic beliefs cause punishment. First, we compare the United States to other
countries and show that the desire to punish criminals and certain economic beliefs (such
as that effort, rather than luck, matters in the determination of income) are relatively more
widespread in the United States. We also note that there is a positive correlation between
these two variables in a small cross section of countries. This section reveals two key
limitations of our paper. The first is causality: obviously this correlation does not
establish a causal link, and even if it did (later in the paper we have some causal
evidence), it does not show that the link originates in the particular mechanisms outlined
in our model. The second is measurement error: any study dealing with people’s beliefs
and with punitiveness (either people’s desire to punish or as expressed in the
classifications of the legal system) has to deal with imprecise measures, particularly when
it involves people living in different time periods or geographical jurisdictions. This
makes it difficult to design convincing tests to distinguish between alternative
hypotheses.
   Our second piece of evidence reveals that, within the United States, beliefs about the
economic system have moved toward the right end of the ideological spectrum over time,
particularly for African Americans. We also show that the proportion of people who
support the death penalty and the average belief in “effort pays” are positively correlated
across U.S. states. The data also show that there is a correlation between beliefs and
punitiveness at the individual level: people who believe effort pays also support the death
penalty.
   Finally, we conduct an experiment to provide at least suggestive evidence on one
aspect of the causal link between beliefs and punitiveness. Students are randomly
exposed to hypothetical situations involving criminals from neighborhoods with different
economic opportunities. Students who were exposed to a criminal who grew up in a
neighborhood with good educational prospects that were associated with economic
progress supported tougher punishment (for the same crime) than those exposed to a
criminal who did not have those opportunities. Although the causal link we develop in
the model is more complex and there is obviously a question of the external validity of
this empirical exercise, the evidence suggests that beliefs in economic opportunities cause
punitiveness.
        Our paper is related to a large literature on the structure of ideology. Several authors
have studied the nature of political beliefs, many of them observing the fact that
ideological beliefs often come in bundles (see, e.g., de Tocqueville 1955, Lipset 1979,
inter alia; see also the discussions in Rokeach 1973, Feldman 1988, Inglehart 1990, and
Zaller 1991).5 Two important questions are why beliefs about one issue differ across
people within the same society who presumably observe the same reality, and why beliefs
about different processes (e.g., whether firms pollute too much and whether effort pays)
are often correlated. One interesting approach puts emphasis on explaining the structure
of beliefs as a coherent outcome when individuals organize information using metaphors
(see, e.g., Lakoff 1996). An alternative approach is taken by psychologists who study
belief bundling as originating in personality traits and goes back to the work on fascism
and authoritarian personality by Adorno et al. (1950). Views about motivated social
cognition emphasize that belief systems are adopted largely to satisfy some psychological
need (see Jost et al. 2003 for a recent example and discussion of the relevant literature).6
        An alternative approach, which we emphasize, focuses on how the economic
structure might connect beliefs across issues through political and economic choices (see,
e.g., Hall and Soskice 2001). A classic example in economics is Piketty (1995), who
shows that people who believe effort pays are more likely to believe that low taxes are
best — a connection that might be reinforced when people choose compensation
schemes. In this paper we take this approach by emphasizing that people who believe
effort pays will vote for (and choose privately) high-powered incentive schemes, which


                     !"#                                              $ %                 &       '
                (          )        !* $ +           !!,$            -        !!*$
"   .                                                            /        0          1$
    (                          /     /                      2            (3           (
                                                                                              4
               5,,* - (            5,,*$ 2
                  (                             (                5,,6$               5, $
                                         (       (
will have a consequence on desired sentences because the type of people committing
crimes in such settings will differ from those choosing to be criminals in places with low-
powered incentives.
        In Section 2 we present a simple model to illustrate how beliefs may cause
differences in the way societies organize their economic systems, the types of criminals,
and in the desired punishments. In Section 3 we present our three pieces of evidence:
some cross-country evidence, evidence for the United States, and finally evidence from
our experimental exercise. Section 4 concludes.


    2. A MODEL WHERE BELIEFS ABOUT THE ECONOMIC SYSTEM CAUSE
                                         PUNISHMENT
        In this section we present a variation of the model in Di Tella and Dubra (2008) that
incorporates several improvements. First, in order to analyze the increase in punitiveness
and in the belief that effort pays in the United States in the past 30 years, we have
incorporated income changes in order to study the role of GDP growth, an element that
seems important in a model where beliefs matter.7 Second, we provide a better (more
precise) approach to modeling whether exerting effort is profitable. Finally, the model is
more flexible because the source of variation across individuals is a “type,” which can
now be interpreted in several ways. For example, as “laziness” (in accordance with the
World Values Survey question concerning whether poverty is due to laziness or because
of bad luck) or more generally as any other innate or “environmental” factor that makes
effort by the individual more costly (for example, if the individual has erroneous
perceptions about the “profitability” of exerting effort or if the individual’s education was
not conducive to good work habits). This allows naturally for discussions of several
topics that others have argued are important in the decision to commit crime (like
segregation in particularly “bad” neighborhoods, or identity).8
        The basic model has three agents: firms, workers, and the government who must
simultaneously choose their actions. Firms must choose whether they want a market

#   7                                                                        0          1
                      (     ( (
*                          5, ,$
technology, M, where effort and training by workers matters, or a bureaucracy, B, where
output is independent of effort. Workers must choose whether they will be criminals, or
they will work with low effort               , or work with high effort            . The government
must choose a punishment level, time in jail, t for criminals.
        For a parameter g representing technological progress, the wealth level                    of
the individual when facing a technology                    and exerting effort               is given
by                        ,                , and                                 . In this paper, w is
exogenous, but it can easily be made the endogenous result of a competitive model.
        Workers are of one of two types: low        or high     , and let   denote the probability
of a type          . For a wealth level gw and effort e, an individual of type     has a utility
                                      if he chooses to work. As will be clear shortly, low types
will be more likely to become criminals.
        From the form of the utility function, at least three interpretations arise: First, one can
interpret          as a hardworking type, since the cost of effort is lower than for the “lazy”
type       : for the hardworking individual the cost of effort is            while for the lazy one
it is          . A second interpretation is that a type       was raised in an environment with
“low-quality” work habits, so that a greater effort level is required to obtain the same
results as somebody who was raised in an environment conducive to “high-quality” work
habits. In this case, the effort level e is not measured in “hours” but rather in effective
units of effort. Finally, a somewhat related interpretation is that a type           is one who
believes that effort is not very useful (say, has a low productivity) and so a lot of hours of
effort would be needed to obtain a certain objective; meanwhile a type                thinks that
effort is highly productive and that a small number of hours would suffice to obtain the
given objective. In this interpretation, for example, eH could be “obtain a university
degree,” while           could be “be a high school graduate.” Types        may then think that
obtaining a degree would involve 20 hours of study per week, while types                  could
believe that it would require 40 hours.
        The payoffs for the worker and the per-worker profit of the firm are presented in the
matrices shown in Figure 2, where the matrix on the right has simplified using
and            .
                                                FIGURE 2
                                Firm's Technology Choice
                                Market         Bureaucracy                           M                   B

             High Effort   gwh - (1- ) eH,    gwm - (1- ) eH,            H   gwh +       - 1,      gwm +     - 1,

    Worker

             Low Effort    gwl - (1- ) eL,    gwm - (1- ) eL,            L   gwl           ,       gwm         ,




      As we explain below, this economic structure gives rise to two different equilibria:
the “American equilibrium” and what can be called the “French equilibrium.” In the
American equilibrium most workers choose a high level of effort (or training) because
they believe that effort pays; in this equilibrium, given that workers are exerting effort, it
is profitable for firms to choose a market technology, and this “confirms” that workers’
beliefs that effort pays are correct in equilibrium. In the French equilibrium, workers
anticipate that effort does not pay and choose low effort; firms correctly forecast this
behavior and choose a bureaucracy, ensuring that workers’ beliefs that effort doesn’t pay
are correct in equilibrium.9
      If the individual decides to participate in the labor market, he collects his lifetime
wealth and pays his effort cost. If he opts for crime, his payoff is                            , where c is the
expected utility of crime and           is a taste shock for criminal activity. In order to link the
punishment rate with the utility of the individuals, we assume that the direct utility from
crime is a continuous function c(t) where the variable t is time in jail. Of course, other
dimensions (like the probability of apprehension) matter, but in order to simplify our
analysis we take them as given. We also assume that c is decreasing in t. The taste shock
    is the meanness of the individual (a large          is an unkind individual), which is drawn
from a density f that is positive in its support [         min,   max]   and has a cumulative distribution
function F. In Di Tella and Dubra (2008) we discuss alternative interpretations of .




9
 For a model where stigma and self-fulfilling expectations of criminality lead to multiple equilibria, see
Rasmusen (1996).
   Given a pair of presumed strategies (s,t) for the firm and the government, the
individual decides whether to enter the crime market by comparing his utility
             with       . He commits a crime if and only if                               .
   The government must choose the time in jail for a criminal, which in turn determines
c. In other words, once the government has proved that the individual has committed a
crime, it must decide the time t he must spend in jail. We assume that for some increasing
function q, the government has a utility                     of punishing with t years a type ;
if the government knew that the individual was of a certain meanness , it would choose
a punishment level                 . Since q is increasing, it means that the government wants to
punish “worse” individuals more. More generally, and denoted by Eh the expected value
with respect to a belief h about , the government must choose t to maximize
                     !. This yields a desired punishment of                  !.
   To see why we obtain our basic results (higher punishment in America than in
“France” and higher punishment in America today than 30 years ago), note that the
government’s beliefs about the types of apprehended criminals, h in the formulation
above, depends on the economic system. For example, if criminals in a certain
environment are “meaner” on average than in another because economic opportunities
are better (and hence only really mean individuals commit crimes), then the government
will choose a harsher punishment.


2.1 Two worked-out examples
   We now present two worked-out examples in order to illustrate how the model
operates.
                           #         $                       #                                #
   Set          ",          ,          , and      . Let        and          , and let &           be the
                                     %                       %                                %

probability of type      . Let '         (, ')   ", and '        . Let us also assume that
         #
               , that   is uniformly distributed in [– 2, 2], and finally that                    (

** + *".
   With these parameters, two equilibria arise:
      •       The “American Dream equilibrium,” where the firm chooses a market technology,
              high-effort types exert effort while low-effort types don’t (a portion of each type
              commits crimes), and the government chooses a high punishment level.
      •       The “French equilibrium,” where the firm chooses a bureaucracy technology, all
              types exert low effort (and again, some individuals of each type commit crimes),
              and the government chooses a low punishment level.

      It is easy to check that these are the unique equilibria in pure strategies. We first
analyze the “French equilibrium,” which is easier. Since workers are choosing low effort,
it is a best response for the firm to choose a bureaucracy. Assume now that the desired
                                                         ,           -
punishment by the government is                                          , and we will then check that this is indeed
                                                                     .

optimal. Given a bureaucracy, neither                                     nor    would choose to exert high effort, so the
                                                                                              #                                ,
only choice is between low effort, which yields                                               , or crime that gives
#         ,             --
                        .
                                      . Individuals in this equilibrium commit crimes if and only if
--              #                 -
.
              / , or         / .. Hence, the expected value of                            if a crime has been committed (in a
                                                                            -                         -2
bureaucracy) is the midpoint between 2 and .:                                        01       !            . Then, the optimal strategy
                                                                                                      -3
                                                                                                                       -
of the government is to choose                       ,                      !         (           !    ** + *"             , as was to be
                                                                                                                       .

shown.
      The “American equilibrium” is somewhat more involved, since different s behave
differently. 10 In order to analyze the equilibrium, assume that the desired punishment by
                                                 4       -
the government in this case is                           %
                                                             , and we will then check that this is indeed the

optimal thing to do. A type                      with meanness                   has to choose among: high effort, which
                                                 -       2                                                       $
yields                                       "               ; low effort, which gives utility %; and crime, which
                                                 %       %

                    4                   #    4               $
nets him                                                     %
                                                                          . Therefore, he commits a crime if and only if
       -
     / . Similarly, low types                    commit crimes if and only if                              / . Since all types
                    -                                                                                                  -
greater than commit crimes and only                                       individuals with types                           become



,                             %             8(   (                                                                    (
                                                                 &              8(        (                           (
criminals, the probability that an individual becomes a criminal (in a market technology)
is

                                                                                 "                                 :
     5 1           65 7                "8     5       957                 8              "           9"
                          "                                           "              (       "            (       :"
                                                            .
                                                                                             -
     Therefore, the posterior belief that a criminal has a type                                  is the probability

of a type in that range, times the probability that it is a               , divided by the probability of a
crime being committed:

                                               5      5          "                               :"
              57                  ;1    8                                      9"            9
                              "                       5 1                 (          (            :           :

     Hence the expected value of               in the American equilibrium is: the probability that                    is
       -
in [0, ] multiplied by the expected value conditional on                      in that interval (which is just
                                                                                                 -
the midpoint of the interval), plus the probability that              is greater than , multiplied by the
                                                                                                     -
expected value conditional on that interval (again, the midpoint between and 2). That is,

                                                           1 1 12 5 61
                                       E (µ ; C , M ) =     × + × =
                                                          13 4 13 4 52

     Then, the optimal strategy of the government is              4                  !               (        !   ** +
       -
*"     %
           , as was to be shown. Given the strategies of workers, where most exert high effort
                                        #
(a proportion larger than &             %
                                           ), it is optimal for firms to choose a market technology.
This completes the analysis of the first example, where punishment in the American
equilibrium is larger than in the French equilibrium.
     The above example concerns a “cross section of punitiveness levels.” Our second
worked-out example concerns the analysis of a “time series” of what happens when the
economy grows. In order to analyze this case, we leave all parameter values as before,
                                       3
but increase g from 1 to                   . This has the effect of raising wages in both the French
                                       $

and American equilibria. Following the same steps as before, it is easy to check that
 ,       -<#           4                            -3
               while        is approximately             . The desired punishment increased by 15 percent
         2 <                                         $

in the French equilibrium, while it increased by 160 percent in the American equilibrium.
If we interpret growth in g as the increase in incomes during the 1980s and 1990s, this
example illustrates two stylized facts from the imprisonment literature: a small increase
in severity in the “French equilibrium” (and more generally around the world, see
Walmsley 2007) and an even larger increase in the desired punishment in the “American
equilibrium.”
        The appendix discusses possible ways to extend the model, connecting it to issues
that others have claimed to be relevant to the crime-punishment discussion (such as
biased sampling in segregated neighborhoods).


                                           3. THREE PIECES OF EVIDENCE
        We now focus on three pieces of evidence connecting beliefs and punitiveness. As
emphasized above, the evidence is only suggestive of the relationship outlined in the
model, as establishing tight causal links is beyond the scope of the paper. Note also that
there are many peculiarities of the U.S. penal system (and several of them contribute to
increases in punitiveness, such as “truth-in-sentencing” laws), but we do not review them
here (see, e.g., Austin et al. 2000).11 Instead, we selectively include pieces of evidence
that we see as relevant to a theory connecting imprisonment to beliefs.
        Before presenting the evidence, we note some selected observations related to the
evolution of the U.S. data. First and most basic is that punitiveness in the United States is
higher now than it was historically. See Figure 1 above. Several legal initiatives gradually
loosened restrictions on the activities of law enforcement officials in the 1970s. Later on,
the Comprehensive Crime Control and Sentencing Reform Acts of 1984 introduced
stricter sentencing (mandatory minimums for many categories of drug- and gun-related
offenses) and new search and seizure powers. Over time, truth-in-sentencing laws have
been introduced federally and in several states. These require prisoners to serve 85


    .            7           9 (       :                    (     (                          (    0
                               1                     0                 ;
(           1           0                           (               (             (                   1
            0&         9           %        :   .    <     .    1 :( 5# !!!
percent of their sentence before being eligible for parole. In 1994, a popular ballot
initiative brought in California’s controversial “Three Strikes Law,” with lengthy and
mandatory prison terms for repeat offenders. Simultaneously, it is possible to observe
reductions in prison alternatives (electronic monitoring) and re-entry programs (including
parole, probation, psychiatric care, and rehabilitation). The increase in imprisonment was
not steady, with a clear break around 1980 — a time when ideological changes associated
with the Reagan revolution took place (some are documented in Section 3.2. below). The
rate of incarceration in the United States hovered around 100 per 100,000 population
from the 1920s (when we first have readily available data) to 1980, when it began an
upward trend. During the early 2000s it stabilized somewhat. Indeed, formal estimates (as
in Perron 2005) indicate structural breaks in 1978 and 2001.
     A substantial part of this increase has taken place in minimum security prisons.12
Between 1979 and 2005, the percentage of inmates held in maximum security was
halved, from 40 percent to 20 percent; the percentage of inmates in minimum security
nearly doubled, from 18 percent to 34 percent.13 In 1979, state prisons held less than one
minimum security prisoner for every maximum security prisoner; in 2005, state prisons
held nearly three minimum security prisoners for every one maximum security prisoner.
It appears that a lot of the changes in incarceration rates involve offenders who are
judged to be less dangerous.
     As is well known, some minorities are imprisoned at disproportionate rates. For
example, the black incarceration rate (relative to the black population) is substantially
higher than the white incarceration rate, in some states by a factor of almost 10 (see, e.g.,

12
  One factor is longer sentences for less severe crimes. The “war on drugs” has played a role, as there has
been a substantial increase in those incarcerated for drug offenses. Austin et al. (2000) write:
         [I]n 1980 the number of prisoners convicted for a drug offense was six percent of the
         state prison population, which numbered less than 300,000. By 1998 the numbers had
         increased by 237,000, or 21 percent of the state prison population. Furthermore, the
         average sentence for drug offenses had increased from 13 months in 1985 to 30 months
         by 1994.
At the federal level the increase was 10-fold. Mauer (2008) reports that burglars in the United States serve
an average of 16 months in prison, whereas in Canada they serve five months on average (and seven
months in England).
13
   The estimates in this paragraph use population estimates from the U.S. Census Bureau (various years)
and inmate statistics from the U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Census of State and
Federal Adult Correctional Facilities, 1979, 1984, 1990, 1995, 2000, and 2005.
Mauer and Ryan 2007). Convincing evidence of racism is provided by Alesina and La
Ferrara (2011) who study all death penalty appeals that became final between 1973 and
1995 and show that the probability of judicial error is up to 9 percentage points higher for
minority defendants who killed white victims than for those who killed minority
victims. 14 There is a large body of work on racism and the mass incarceration of so many
black (and Hispanic) young men, which we do not review here (for a recent example, see
Alexander 2010). Even though these accounts make many valid points, they fail to
account for the simple fact that few people who support punishment see themselves as
racist. Interestingly, a first look at the evidence suggests that the increase in the overall
incarceration rate has approximately preserved the 1980 differences in incarceration rates
by race. Given that there was large difference in 1980, the increase in imprisonment has
affected blacks disproportionately. As a percent of the total population in each group, the
incarceration rates of blacks was over six times that of whites both in 1980 and in 2009.15
                           TABLE 1
             Racial Disparity in Incarceration Rates
                                                      Ratio of
              Percentage   Percentage
                                                        Black
               of White     of Black
     Year                                            Percentage
              Population   Population
                                                      to White
             Incarcerated Incarcerated
                                                     Percentage
     1980        0.18%               1.11%                6.3
     1990        0.36%               2.36%                6.6
     2000        0.41%               3.41%                8.3
     2009        0.43%               2.99%                6.9




14
   Other work in criminology has studied bias in the legal system using the assumption that racial
differences in arrests indicate differences in criminal involvement. One study concluded that close to 76
percent of the racial bias in imprisonment can be attributed to differences in criminal involvement of racial
groups (see Blumstein 1993; in 1978 this proportion was 80 percent). Although the assumption of unbiased
arrest rates seems contrary to anecdotal evidence (we were unable to find convincing studies that could be
generalized), Hindelang (1978) found that the racial differences in arrests mirrored racial identities of
offenders as reported by the victims in the National Crime Victimization Survey, although this evidence
refers to the period prior to the escalation in imprisonment.
15
   Calculations based on “Correctional Populations in the United States and National Prisoner Statistics,”
U.S. Department of Justice. Population figures taken from U.S. Census estimates.
     It is interesting to compare the United States with other countries. In 2007, the
incarceration rate in the United States was 756 per 100,000 population, whereas it was
significantly lower for Europe (average of 125). Although in some countries there
certainly was an increase in imprisonment, the dynamics are nowhere as extreme as in the
United States. Canada, which in many ways is a good counterfactual, is characterized by
its stability: since the 1950s it has imprisoned approximately 100 per 100,000 population
(Webster and Doob 2007).16
     Crime rates in the United States are not generally much higher than those prevailing
in Europe. See Table 2 for data for a U.S.-Europe comparison across crime categories
during the late 1990s. Homicide is the one possible exception: Figure 3 provides a graph
of incarceration rates and a measure of homicides (from the World Health Organization).
Incarceration and homicide rates have a mildly positive correlation (see Bushway and
Paternoster 2009 and Durlauf and Nagin 2010 for clear discussions, including the
difficulties in making causal interpretations given the possible presence of deterrent and
political economy effects, as well as references to previous work). The United States is
still an outlier, with extremely high levels of incarceration. This is the same conclusion
emerging from the study by Raphael and Stoll (2009), who decompose the changes in
incarceration and find that only a small proportion of the increase is attributable to
increases in criminal behavior (at most 17 percent of total growth). These authors
attribute the bulk of the increase to longer time served and to an increase in the likelihood
of being sent to prison (conditional on committing a crime).17




16
   Unfortunately, it is not possible to see if Quebec has different punitiveness than the rest of Canada
looking at imprisonment rates due to several features of the Canadian legal system (for example, there is a
lot of shifting of prisoners across provinces). See Doob and Webster (2006). Furthermore, the Canadian
federal system (which holds those sentenced to more than two years) is quite substantial and it is not easy
to obtain data on the province in which they were sentenced. For 1995 and 2003, the three largest provinces
(British Columbia, Ontario, and Quebec) are quite similar in their overall imprisonment rates. We are
extremely grateful to Anthony Doob for providing us with these data. Kensey and Tournier (1999) describe
prison inflation in France in detail. Walmsley (2007) writes that prison populations have risen in 69 percent
of European countries.
17
   These authors note that average time served in the aggregate has not increased even though we now have
longer sentences (conditional on type of crime.). The reason is that prison admissions have shifted toward
less serious offenses, consistent with the increase in minimum security prisons we document.
                                            TABLE 2
                 Crime and Punishment in the United States and Europe, Late 1990s
                           Incarceration     Victim                      Crime
                                   Rate             Rate        Total     Car     Property     Sex    Person

United States                       645              24.2      5,375     19.6       10.8       2.5       5.7
Europe                              88               25.2      7,984      19         9.6       2.9        4
Austria                             85               18.8      6,285     11.7        6.6       3.8       2.1
Canada                              115              25.2      9,979     17.3       13.1       2.7        4
England & Wales                     125              30.9        n/a     24.7       12.8        2        5.9
Finland                             55               18.9      7,650     12.9         5        2.5       4.1
France                              90               25.3      6,765     20.7        9.5       0.9       3.9
Netherlands                         85               31.5      7,422     25.9       13.3       3.6        4
Sweden                              60                24       12,670     20         7.5       2.9       4.5
Switzerland                         90               26.7      5,116     18.6         9        4.6       3.1

NOTES: The figures for Europe correspond to the unweighted average across the European countries in the
table. Data on incarceration rates comes from the first edition of the World Prison Population List.
Incarceration Rates are prison populations per 100,000 of national population. The incarceration rates are
from 1997, except for England and Wales and France, where the data are from 1998. Crime is the total
recorded crime per 100,000 population from the United Nations Surveys on Crime Trends and the
Operations of Criminal Justice Systems. All data are from 1994 except for the Netherlands, which are for
1986. Victim Rate is the victimization rate (the proportion of the population victimized in one year), for 1995
(the latest year available) in Mayhew, P. and J.J.M. van. Dijk Criminal Victimization in 11 Industrialized
Countries: Key Findings from the 1996 International Crime Victims Survey, The Hague: Ministry of Justice,
WODC, 1997. Car is victimization rates for car theft, theft from car, car damage, motorcycle theft, and
bicycle theft from the same surveys. Property is victimization for burglary, attempt at burglary, robbery, and
theft of personal property from the same surveys. Sex is sexual offenses victimization from the same surveys.
Person is assault and threat victimization from the same surveys.
                                         FIGURE 3
                     Prison Population and Homicides on OECD Countries
                                            2004




NOTES: The variable on the y-axis (Prison Population) is the number of prisoners in the country’s national
prison system (including pretrial detainees/remand prisoners) per 100,000 of the country’s national
population. The source is the World Prison Brief, International Centre for Prison Studies, 2003. The
variable on the x-axis (Homicides) is the number of homicides (defined as unlawful death purposefully
inflicted on a person by another person) per 100,000 of the country’s national population in 2004. The data
were obtained from the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime’s homicide statistics, which are based
on public health sources. The sample covers 31 OECD countries.



3.1 Punishment and Economic Beliefs in the United States and Other Developed
Countries
    Given the difficulties in interpreting data involving legal definitions across countries,
and that incarceration confounds the amount of crime, enforcement efforts, and other
factors with desired punitiveness, it is useful to study alternative measures. We derive a
measure of desired punishment from the 2004–2005 International Crime Victim Survey
(ICVS). This is a comprehensive survey developed to monitor crime, perception of crime,
and attitudes toward the criminal justice system in a comparative international
perspective, financed largely by the United Nations and the European Union.18 The main
question for our purposes is:

        People have different ideas about the sentences which should be given to
        offenders. Take for instance the case of a man of 20 years old who is found guilty
        of burglary for the second time. This time, he has stolen a colour TV. Which of
        the following sentences do you consider the most appropriate for such a case: (1)
        Fine, (2) Prison, (3) Community service, (4) Suspended sentence, (5) Any other
        sentence.

A simple way to summarize the data is through the percentage of respondents opting for
imprisonment as punishment for the recidivist burglar. The percentage of the public
opting for imprisonment as punishment for a recidivist burglar in the United States was
47, while the average for 22 European countries included in the sample was 25.4 (s.e.
2.4).
     Data on beliefs about the economic system come from the fifth wave of the World
Values Survey (2005–2008). The first belief that we use is based on the standard question
on self-placement the ideological spectrum:

        In political matters, people talk of "the left" and "the right." How would
        you place your views on this scale, generally speaking?

The response takes values from 1 to 10, where 1 is Left and 10 is Right.
     The second belief is constructed based on the following question:

        Now I'  d like you to tell me your views on various issues. How would you place
        your views on this scale? 1 means you agree completely with the statement on
        the left; 10 means you agree completely with the statement on the right; and if
        your views fall somewhere in between, you can chose any number in between.

        Agreement: Hard work brings success.

We inverted the scale so that 1 means “Hard work doesn´t generally bring success — it´s
more a matter of luck and connections,” and 10 means “In the long run, hard work
usually brings a better life.”


18
  Standardized questionnaires and other aspects of data collection provide some reassurance regarding data
quality. The biggest apparent drawback is that it is telephone-based, although it appears that experimental
work in the Netherlands comparing answers to the ICVS survey using telephone (CATI) interviews with
face-to-face interviews produce similar results (see Scherpenzeel 2001, cited in van Dijk et al. 2008).
   The last belief is constructed based on the following question:

       Many things may be desirable, but not all of them are essential characteristics of
       democracy. Please tell me for each of the following things how essential you
       think it is as a characteristic of democracy:

       Governments tax the rich and subsidize the poor.

We inverted the scale so 1 means “It definitely is an essential characteristic of
democracy,” and 10 means “Not at all an essential characteristic of democracy.” Note
that these beliefs are coded so that higher numbers indicate the respondent is closer to
what is typically interpreted as the right end of the ideological spectrum. As revealed by
several prior papers (see, e.g., Alesina et al. 2001), beliefs in the United States are more
toward the right end of the ideological spectrum than in Europe.
   More interestingly, Figure 4 reveals that there is a positive relationship between right-
wing answers (using the three measures of beliefs) and the percentage of people
recommending prison in the ICVS question. In Di Tella and Dubra (2008) similar results
are presented using somewhat different samples.
                                                                      FIGURE 4
                                     Beliefs and Demand for Punishment across Countries

               80                                                               a.

                                                                                            Mexico
Percentage voting for imprisonment
                            60




                                                         Japan
                                     Turkey (Istanbul)
                                                                          England & Wales                        Bulgaria
                                                                                                       United States
                                                                          Canada
                40




                                                                 SwedenPoland
                                                              Netherlands Australia
                                                           Norway
    20




                                     Germany
                                                        Spain
                                          Finland
                                              Switzerland           France
               0




                                         4               4.5              5            5.5            6             6.5
                                                 Belief that redistribution is not essential for democracy
                                                                                              c.



                            80
                                                                                                                             Mexico

            Percentage voting for imprisonment
                                        60                                                                                            Hong Kong
                                                                                                Japan
                                                                                                                             Turkey (Istanbul)
                                                              Bulgaria                  England & Wales
                                                                                                           United States
                                                                                                  Canada
                            40




                                                                                                           New Zealand

                                                                                                     Sweden
                                                                                                     Australia      Poland
                                                                                    Netherlands
                                                                                                     Norway
                                                                            Italy
                20




                                                           Germany
                                                       Spain
                                                                                                     Finland
                                                              France                Switzerland
                            0




                                                 4.5                   5                5.5                           6                 6.5
                                                                           Right-wing political orientation


NOTES: The variable on the y-axis is derived from the question: “People have different ideas about the
sentences which should be given to offenders. Take for instance the case of a man of 20 years old who is
found guilty of burglary for the second time. This time, he has stolen a colour TV. Which of the following
sentences do you consider the most appropriate for such a case: (1) Fine, (2) Prison, (3) Community
service, (4) Suspended sentence, (5) Any other sentence.” (ICVS, 2004–2005) The y-axis variable is the
percentage of the public opting for imprisonment as punishment for the recidivist burglar. The x-axes use
data on beliefs about the economic system from the fifth wave of the World Values Survey (2005–2008). In
panel (a) the belief comes from the question: “Many things may be desirable, but not all of them are
essential characteristics of democracy. Please tell me for each of the following things how essential you
think it is as a characteristic of democracy: Governments tax the rich and subsidize the poor.” We inverted
the scale so 1 means “It definitely is an essential characteristic of democracy,” and 10 means “Not at all an
essential characteristic of democracy.” In panel (b) the question used is: “Now I'd like you to tell me your
views on various issues. How would you place your views on this scale? 1 means you agree completely with
the statement on the left; 10 means you agree completely with the statement on the right; and if your views
fall somewhere in between, you can chose any number in between. Agreement: Hard work brings success.”
We inverted the scale such that 1 means “Hard work doesn´t generally bring success — it´s more a matter
of luck and connections,” and 10 means “In the long run, hard work usually brings a better life.” Panel (c)
uses self-placement: “In political matters, people talk of "the left" and "the right." How would you place
your views on this scale, generally speaking?” The response takes values from 1 to 10, where 1 is Left and
10 is Right.


3.2 The Punishment–Economic Beliefs Correlation in the United States
    We now turn to evidence within the United States. We divide the evidence into
movements in the aggregate data in the United States and correlations across states; we
then turn to individual-level correlations.
   Data on beliefs come from the U. S. General Social Survey (GSS), a repeated cross-
section of randomly sampled Americans (for a description see Davis and Smith 2005).
Each survey is an independently drawn sample of English-speaking persons 18 years of
age or over, living in the United States. One of the basic purposes of the GSS is to gather
data on contemporary American society in order to monitor and explain trends and
constants in attitudes, behaviors, and attributes. We focus on two concerning the role of
effort (vs. luck) in the income-generating process, which might loosely be called “self-
reliance.”
   The first question in the GSS that can serve such purpose is:

          Some people say that people get ahead by their own hard work; others say that
          lucky breaks or help from other people are more important. Which do you think
          is most important?”

The options were “Hard work most important,” “Hard work, luck equally important,” and
“Luck most important.” We created the variable Effort Pays, which takes the value 1 if
the individual responded “Luck most important,” 2 if the individual responded “Hard
work, luck equally important,” and 3 if the individual responded “Hard work most
important.” (We treat “Don’t Know” as a missing value.) Thus, higher values of Effort
Pays can be interpreted as an individual that is more likely to believe that effort pays.
   The second alternative measure of self-reliance can be created exploiting the answers
to the following question:

          Some people think that the government in Washington should do everything
          possible to improve the standard of living of all poor Americans; they are at Point
          1. Other people think it is not the government's responsibility, and that each
          person should take care of himself; they are at Point 5. Where would you place
          yourself on this scale, or haven' t you made up your mind on this?

We created the variable Not-Washington, which is simply the answer to the question, so
that higher values mean that the respondent is more “individualist” in the sense that he
believes that each person should take care of him. (We treat “Don’t Know” as a missing
value.)
   The questions discussed above are not present in all of the years in the GSS, although
they are present in most years after 1983. As a consequence, we will use 1984–2008 as
our sample frame.19 Data definitions appear in Table 3, and descriptive statistics in Table
4.
                                                   TABLE 3
                                                 Data Definitions
 Desire to Punish
   Death Penalty       "Do you favor or oppose the death penalty for persons convicted of murder?" 1 if the
                       individual answered "Favor" and 0 if the individual answered either "Oppose" or "Don’t
                       Know."
     Courts            "In general, do you think the courts in this area deal too harshly or not harshly enough with
                       criminals?" (1) Too harsh; (2) About right; (3) Not harsh enough.
 Beliefs about Self
 Reliance
   Effort Pays         "Some people say that people get ahead by their own hard work; others say that lucky breaks
                       or help from other people are more important. Which do you think is most important? Hard
                       work most important (3); Hard work, luck equally important (2); or Luck most important
                       (1)."
     Not-Washington    "Some people think that the government in Washington should do everything possible to
                       improve the standard of living of all poor Americans; they are at Point 1. Other people think
                       it is not the government'
                                               s responsibility and that each person should take care of himself;
                       they are at Point 5. Where would you place yourself on this scale, or haven't you have up
                       your mind on this?" Scale is inverted.

 NOTE: Data from the General Social Survey. See Table 4 for descriptive statistics.


                                TABLE 4
                            Descriptive Statistics
                      Observa            Standard
                                Mean               Minimum Maximum
                       tions             Deviation

 Death Penalty         27,915      0.7  0.46          0          1
 Courts                31,056      2.75 0.55          1          3
 Effort Pays           19,092      2.54  0.7          1          3
 Not-Washington        18,667      2.91 1.16          1          5
 NOTES: Data from the General Social Survey over the years 1984–2008.
 See Table 3 for data definitions.


3.2.1 Aggregate Data
     Figure 5 shows the co-evolution of imprisonment rates and two measures of self-
reliance beliefs (Effort Pays and Not-Washington) over the sample period.20 The


!+                                          ((           =
       (                        /                       !*                      !*"
                         >             ? !!5 !!      !!# !!! 5,, 5,,6           5,,
incarceration rate increased sharply during the period 1984–1998 and has stabilized since
then. Both Effort Pays and Not-Washington increased during the same period 1984–1998
and they have decreased somewhat since then. Figure 6 splits the GSS sample into white
respondents and those self-identifying as black. The black sub-sample is considerably
smaller, so Figure 6 is only suggestive of any real differences across whites and blacks.
Still, it is interesting to note that

     •      blacks tend to believe less in the prevalence of the “American Dream”: values
            for both Effort Pays and Not-Washington are lower for blacks than for whites;
            and
     •      there seems to be some increase in the percentage of blacks reporting the
            typical right-wing answers.

Even though the data are far too noisy for definite conclusions, this last observation
points to the intriguing possibility that what enables harsher punishment in America is the
increases in the belief in economic opportunity among blacks, which is the group most
affected by the policy. In other words, the legitimacy of punishment also appears to have
increased during this period.




20
  We measure punishment as the number of prisoners in state correctional facilities per 100,000 of state
population (also includes prisoners sentenced in federal courts, but serving in state prisons) compiled by the
U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation using data from the U.S. Census Bureau.
                                        FIGURE 5
       Self-reliance Beliefs and Incarceration Rates over Time in the United States
                                                                          a.



                           500




                                                                                                                      2.5000 2.5200 2.5400 2.5600 2.5800
                                                                                                                        Belief that hard work gets people ahead
              Prisoners per 100,000 people
                    300    200   400




                                              1985    1990         1995          2000          2005           2010
                                                                          Year

                                                       Incarceration Rate               Effort pays (right)



                                                                            b.




                                                                                                                     2.7000 2.8000 2.9000 3.0000 3.1000
                            500




                                                                                                                           Belief that poor should help selves
               Prisoners per 100,000 people
                     300    200   400




                                              1985    1990         1995          2000          2005           2010
                                                                          Year

                                                     Incarceration Rate            Not Washington (right)




NOTES: Data on beliefs are year averages from the General Social Survey. See Not-
Washington and Effort Pays in Table 3 for the data definitions. The incarceration rate is
the number of sentenced inmates incarcerated under state and federal jurisdiction per
100,000 population.

SOURCE: U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation
                                                                    FIGURE 6
      Self-reliance Beliefs and Incarceration Rates over Time in the United States

                                                                             a.




                                                                                                                                                          2.7
                                       500




                                                                                                                     Belief that hard work gets people ahead
          Prisoners per 100,000 people




                                                                                                                                                 2.6
                             400




                                                                                                                                        2.5
                 300




                                                                                                                               2.4
                          200




                                                                                                                     2.3
                                             1985      1990        1995           2000          2005          2010
                                                                          Year

                                                        Incarceration Rate               Effort Pays(black)
                                                        Effort pays(white)




                                                                             b.



                                                                                                                                                            3.2
                                      500




                                                                                                                        Belief that poor should help selves
         Prisoners per 100,000 people




                                                                                                                                                     3
                            400




                                                                                                                                      2.6    2.8
                300




                                                                                                                        2.2     2.4
                       200




                                             1985      1990        1995           2000          2005          2010
                                                                          Year

                                                    Incarceration Rate                   Not Washington (black)
                                                    Not Washington (white)



NOTES: Data on beliefs are within-race year averages from the General Social Survey.
See Not-Washingon and Effort Pays in Table 3 for the data definitions. The incarceration
rate is the number of sentenced inmates incarcerated under state and federal jurisdiction
per 100,000 population.

SOURCE: U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation
     The GSS also reports data that can be interpreted as “desired punishment”: the
answers to the question: “Do you favor or oppose the death penalty for persons convicted
of murder?” We create the variable Death Penalty, which takes the value 1 if the
individual answered “Favor” and 0 if the individual answered either “Oppose” or “Don’t
Know.”21 Note that Death Penalty measures a particularly extreme form of punishment,
which may differ from desires to punish using jails and prisons. Our model does not
distinguish between these two forms of punishment, but in richer psychological models
these two desires may differ. For example, a person that is religious may cherish all
forms of life and refuse to kill convicted criminals, but may certainly favor long
sentences for criminals. Another question available from the GSS on desired punishment
is Courts, namely "In general, do you think the courts in this area deal too harshly or not
harshly enough with criminals?" and gives very similar results.
     These data (on punitiveness from the GSS) are useful for many reasons. First, while
the incarceration rate gives a measure of actual punishment, Death Penalty is a measure
of desired punishment. The relationship between individual beliefs and incarceration
rates is indirect and involves a time lag: beliefs affect political choices, which in turn may
affect aspects of the economic system (such as tax rates), and then there would be an
effect on future incarceration rates. On the contrary, the relationship between individual
beliefs and Death Penalty is both direct and contemporaneous. Second, the data on Death
Penalty vary at the individual level, while the data on incarceration rates vary at the state
level only. Third, the GSS data are only representative at the national level, not at the
state level. This implies a noisy relationship between GSS state-average beliefs and state-
average incarceration rates. This can be avoided by using all data from the GSS (e.g.,
Death Penalty or Courts to capture punitiveness).
     Figure 7 looks at the raw correlation of beliefs on self-reliance and desired
punishment for the cross-section of U.S. states, with both measures originating in the
GSS sample (so the lack of representative sample is not as serious). The data correspond
to the state averages for the period 1984–2008. States where individuals have more self-


21
  The share of individuals answering “Don’t Know” is very stable over time and close to 5 percent. All the
results are practically the same if we treat those observations as missing values instead.
reliance beliefs display a higher share of the population in favor of the death penalty. This
is consistent with the cross-country evidence presented before.
                                         FIGURE 7
              Self-reliance Beliefs and Desired Punishment across U.S. States
                                                                                              a.
                                                                                   Averages 1984-2008

                                                  1                                                                                UT
                     Share favoring death penalty
                                            .9

                                                                                                                              WY
                                                                                                         OK
                                      .8




                                                                           WV                       SD
                                                                                                     MT     NH
                                                                                             FL OH
                                                                                              PA
                                                                                              CA          MO IN   ID
                                                                                                                  AZ
                                                                                              NC
                                                                                                 ND
                                                                                                SC       GATX
                                                                                                            CO
                                                                                                           WA
                               .7




                                                                                    KS             OR
                                                                                                  IL
                                                                                         CT
                                                                                          ARNM VA  MSDE TN   RI
                                                                                      NJ    IA WIMI                     AL
                                                                                   MD NY             AK            MN
                                                                                                                  ME
                                                                                      MA
                         .6




                                                                                                     KY
                                                                                                      HI
                                                                                                   VTLA
                   .5




                                                        DC

                                                        2.3             2.4             2.5           2.6         2.7                   2.8
                                                                          Belief that hard work gets people ahead

                                                                             95% CI                           Fitted values
                                                                             State averages



                                                                                              b.
                                                                                   Averages 1984-2008
                                                   1




                                                                                                                                        UT
                      Share favoring death penalty
                                             .9




                                                                                                                        WY
                                                                                                                         OK
                                       .8




                                                                             WV          NH                             MT    SD
                                                                                                 OHFL AZ
                                                                                                 PA ND
                                                                                                CA      MOIN ID
                                                                                                        TX
                                                                                                 SC
                                                                                                NC GA OR CO WA
                                .7




                                                                                      IL            VA   KS
                                                                                    NM ARRI CT      MSTN                DE
                                                                           NJ                   IA   AL
                                                                                         AK MIWI ME     MN
                                                                                   NYMD        MA KY
                         .6




                                                              HI                  VT
                                                                   LA
                                     .5




                                                        DC

                                                       2.4         2.6               2.8             3                  3.2             3.4
                                                                            Belief that poor should help selves

                                                                                95% CI                        Fitted values
                                                                                State averages


NOTES: Data on beliefs are state averages from the General Social Survey. See Not-
Washington, Effort Pays, and Death Penalty in Table 3 for the data definitions.


3.2.2 Individual Data
    The GSS data allow us to study further the aggregate correlation between self-
reliance and punishment in more detail, for example conditioning on other observable
information (e.g., individual controls, state income inequality, state crime rates, etc.).
Table 5 studies the individual-level relationship between self-reliance and punishment
using a regression framework. The variable on the left-hand side of the estimating
equation is Death Penalty (columns 1–4) and Courts (columns 5–8). As right-hand side
variable we use Effort Pays (and in separate regressions, Not-Washington).22 The
regressions are OLS and the results are qualitatively the same if, instead, we use a
logit/probit model. All regressions use heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered
at the state level. All regressions include time effects and state fixed effects. The
individual-level control variables are: age of respondent, gender, a dummy for African-
American race, a dummy for whites, a set of three dummies for marital status, income, a
set of five dummies for employment status, education, number of adults, and number of
children in household. The state-level control variables are: crime rate for homicides,
property crime rate, current real GDP per capita, GDP growth, income inequality (Gini
coefficient), share of African-American population, and the share of white population.23
In order to control semi-parametrically for other macro variables, we also include a set of
state-specific time trends.




22
   In Table 12 of their paper, Alesina et al. (2001) present a regression that connects Death Penalty with
Not-Washington with a different set of controls (and also obtain a strong correlation) and provide a broader
discussion of the possible reasons for the differences in welfare policy across Europe and America.
23
   There is a large literature on inequality and incarceration (see, e.g., Western 2002, 2006).
                                                    TABLE 5
                                           Punitive Regression Results
Dependent Variable:                      Death Penalty                                     Courts
                               (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)          (5)       (6)            (7)    (8)

Effort Pays                  0.022*** 0.016***                           0.044*** 0.037***
                              -0.004   -0.004                             -0.005   -0.005
Not-Washington                                   0.057*** 0.039***                             0.046*** 0.037***
                                                  -0.003   -0.003                               -0.004   -0.004

Time Effects                   Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes      Yes             Yes    Yes
State fixed effects            Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes      Yes             Yes    Yes
Individual Controls            No       Yes        No         Yes          No       Yes             No     Yes
State Controls                 No       Yes        No         Yes          No       Yes             No     Yes
State-specific time trends     No       Yes        No         Yes          No       Yes             No     Yes

Observations                  22,309   22,093     21,843     21,620       21,074   20,871       20,580    20,378
R-squared                      0.01     0.08       0.03       0.09         0.04     0.07         0.05      0.08
Number of States                49       49         49         49           49       49           49        49
NOTES: Heteroskedastic-robust standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant
at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Left-hand side variable: columns (1) to (4) is Death Penalty; Columns (5) to (8) is Courts. The
individual-level control variables are: age of respondent, gender, a dummy for African-American race, a dummy for white, a
dummy for American citizen, a set of three dummies for marital status, income, a set of five dummies for employment status,
education, number of adults, and number of children in household. The state-level control variables are: crime rate for
homicides, property crime rate, current real GDP per capita, GDP growth, income inequality (Gini coefficient), share of
African-American population, and the share of white population.

SOURCES: Data from the General Social Survey (GSS) for years: 1984, 1985, 1986, 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1993,
1994, 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004, 2006 and 2008. See Table A for data definitions, and Table 3 for descriptive statistics.
   As seen in Table 5, the correlation between Effort Pays and Death Penalty is positive
and statistically significant, even after accounting for many parametric and semi-
parametric controls. That is to say, self-reliance beliefs are associated with harsher
desired punishment. Nevertheless, the magnitude of the coefficient does decrease when
including individual controls. The same findings are true for the correlation between Not-
Washington and Death Penalty, or when we use Courts (columns 5–8) as left-hand side
variable.
   The coefficient on Effort Pays is significant from an economic point of view. For
example, in a causal interpretation a one-standard-deviation increase in Effort Pays (0.7)
would increase Death Penalty by almost 8 percentage points (0.7 × 0.11). The coefficient
on Not-Washington is also economically significant: a standard-deviation increase in Not-
Washington (1.16) would increase Death Penalty by almost 4.5 percentage points (1.16 ×
0.038). Similar conclusions are obtained when Courts is used.


3.3. An Experiment Where Some Students Face Criminals Who Had Opportunities
Growing Up
   The experiment took place at a large business school of an Ivy League university in
April 2011. The participants were potentially a highly selected sample. All 180 students
from a second-year class on macroeconomics were sent invitations to participate in the
online survey. The name of the survey was “Survey of Attitudes,” and students had to
prepare a class on Jamaica and were given material on the macroeconomic performance
of Jamaica and the country’s relationship with the International Monetary Fund. They
were told that the survey was anonymous and that it would only take five minutes to
complete it. Most students were second-year MBA students, although there were a
handful of exceptions (e.g., Ph.D. students). Students were not offered any money or
course credit for participating in the survey. However, the professor in charge of the class
sent the invitation with the link to the online survey from his own email address; this
probably contributed to the high response rate: 128 out of 180 students logged in and
completed the entire survey. The survey was posted on a Monday morning and students
were given until Tuesday midnight to participate. Some 115 out of the 128 respondents
(90 percent) completed the survey on Monday.
   The online survey consisted of four consecutive screens. The first screen was exactly
the same for all respondents and included a series of nine demographic questions about
the respondent (e.g., gender, age, relative income). Once they finished answering those
questions, respondents were shown a second screen with some brief information about
education and crime in Jamaica.
   Participants were randomized into two groups. The Cherry Gardens group saw the
following description:

     Jamaica’s development has been extremely uneven. In some regions of the country,
     economic growth was significant and there was substantial progress in areas like
     health and education. For example, in the neighborhoods around Cherry Gardens in
     Kingston, public schools (which are free, government run) had very attractive
     teacher/pupil ratios (on average 24:1), with a large proportion of students
     graduating high school (on average 81%), and most of them obtaining jobs, many
     of them very well paid. The statistics reveal that crime is a serious problem, both in
     rich and in poor neighborhoods.
     Recently, there has been an intense debate regarding the sentences that should be
     given to offenders. We would like to know your opinion about this issue. Take for
     instance the case of a 21 year old man from the Cherry Gardens area who was
     found guilty of burglary for the second time. This time, he has stolen a TV.

The Jones Town group saw the following description:

       Jamaica’s development has been extremely uneven. In some regions of the
       country, economic growth was non-existent and there was no progress in areas
       like health or education. For example, in the neighborhoods around Jones Town
       in Kingston, public schools (which are free, government run) had very
       unattractive teacher/pupil ratios (on average 41:1), with a low proportion of
       students graduating high school (on average 31%), and only a minority of them
       obtaining jobs, few of which were well paid. The statistics reveal that crime is a
       serious problem, both in rich and in poor neighborhoods.
       Recently, there has been an intense debate regarding the sentences that should be
       given to offenders. We would like to know your opinion about this issue. Take
       for instance the case of a 21 year old man from the Jones Town area who was
       found guilty of burglary for the second time. This time, he has stolen a TV.

Relative to the Jones Town treatment, the Cherry Gardens treatment depicts a more
positive image of Jamaica, where most people can get a job if they put their minds to it.
   Right after the randomized treatment, respondents were asked their opinion about
what the government should do with the individual in the example:

       Which of the following sentences do you consider the most appropriate for such
       a case? A. Fine; B. Prison; C. Community service; D. Suspended sentence.

This question closely resembles the question in the ICVS discussed in Section 3.1.
   After answering this question, the respondent was presented with another question
about the example:

       The judge decided to send him to prison. For how long do you think he should go
       to prison? A. 1 month or less; B. 2–6 months; C. 6 months–12 months; D. 1 year;
       E. 2 years; …; N. Life Sentence.

This is another question included in the ICVS.
   After answering that question, the respondent was asked a final question about the
example:

       The government is considering a proposal whereby prisoners would be offered
       reductions in their sentences if they complete their education (primary and
       secondary courses would be expanded and made available in all Jamaican
       prisons). Do you agree with this proposal? A. Strongly Disagree; B. Disagree; C.
       Neither Agree Nor Disagree; D. Agree; E. Strongly Agree.

The third and fourth screens had all the information about the treatment introduced in the
second screen, in case the respondent needed a refresher.
   The data definitions of the variables used appear in Table 6, and their corresponding
descriptive statistics appear in Table 7. A total of 65 respondents were in the Cherry
Gardens group and 63 in the Jones Town group. As a routine check that the treatment
was balanced, Table 8 shows the differences by treatment group in responses to pre-
treatment questions.
                                                      TABLE 6
                                                   Data Definitions
                         Dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the individual in the example belonged to the Cherry
Cherry Gardens           Gardens group, and 0 if belonged to the Jones Town group.
Respondents were then given the following text: "Take for instance the case of a 21-year-old man from the [Cherry
Gardens/Jones Town] area who was found guilty of burglary for the second time. This time, he has stolen a TV."


Post-Treatment
Questions
                         Which of the following sentences do you consider the most appropriate for such a case? (1)
Punitiveness             Fine; (2) Prison; (3) Community service; (4) Suspended sentence.
                         Dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the individual chose the option "Prison" for the above
Prison                   question.
                         “The judge decided to send him to prison. For how long do you think he should go to prison?”
                         The options were given in bins, as in the original ICVS question. To construct months of
Months of                incarceration, we compute the mean (in months) of each bin (noted in parenthesis): 1 month or
incarceration            less (0.5); 2–6 months (4); 6 months–12 months (8.5); 1 year (18); 2 years (30). Since there
                         were no responses above 2 years, we will not care about those cases.

                         The government is considering a proposal whereby prisoners would be offered reductions in
                         their sentences if they complete their education (primary and secondary courses would be
Rehabilitation           expanded and made available in all Jamaican prisons). Do you agree with this proposal? (1)
                         Strongly Disagree; (2) Disagree; (3) Neither Agree Nor Disagree; (4) Agree; (5) Strongly
                         Agree.
Pre-Treatment
Female                   Dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the individual is female.
Age                      Age of respondent in years.
American                 Dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the individual grew up in the United States.
Never Married             Dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the individual has never been married.
Number of Children        Number of children that the respondent has.
                          Compared to your classmates…, would you say that your family income while you were
                          growing up was below average, about average, or above average? (1) Well below average; (2)
Relative Income           Somewhat below average; (3) About average; (4) Somewhat above average; (5) Well above
                          average.

                          Are you planning on staying in the United States after graduation, for at least 5 years? (1) No,
Stay in America           unlikely; (2) Undecided; (3) Yes, likely.
                          Dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the individual answered the survey on Monday, and 0
Monday                    if answered on the next day.
SOURCE: Data from the online experiment survey.
                                      TABLE 7
                                Descriptive Statistics
                                                  Standard
                           Observations Mean                Minimum Maximum
                                                  Deviation
Cherry Gardens                  128          0.51        0.5           0           1
Punitiveness                    127          2.57        0.7           1           4
Prison                          127          0.39       0.49           0           1
Months of
incarceration                   127          6.32       6.31          0.5          30
Rehabilitation                  128          4.13        0.9           1            5
Female                          128          0.34       0.47           0            1
Age                             128         27.24        1.6          24           33
American                        128          0.46        0.5           0            1
Never Married                   128          0.83       0.38           0            1
Number of Children              128          0.05       0.32           0            3
Relative Income                 128          2.52       1.16           1            5
Stay in America                 128          2.2        0.92           1            3
Monday                          128          0.9         0.3           0            1
SOURCE: Data from the online experiment survey.



                              TABLE 8
           Mean Difference Tests for Pre-treatment Variables
                         Cherry           Jones
                        Gardens          Town       Difference1             |t|2
Female                    0.385           0.286        0.099               1.182
Age                      27.015          27.476       -0.461               1.644
American                   0.4            0.524       -0.124               1.405
Never Married             0.846            0.81        0.037               0.546
Number of
Children                  0.046           0.063       -0.017               0.31
Relative Income           2.569           2.476        0.093               0.454
Stay in America           1.923           1.683        0.241               1.482
Monday                    0.923           0.873        0.05                0.933
Observations               65               63
NOTES: The first two columns display the mean of the variables within each
group. 1Cherry Gardens – Jones Town. 2The t-statistic from the mean-
difference test whose null hypothesis is that the means are equal between the
Cherry Gardens and Jones Town groups.
SOURCE: Data from the online experiment survey.


   The hypothesis is that respondents in the Cherry Gardens group will want to punish
criminal behavior more severely because they perceive that the individual in the example
had better opportunities not to become a criminal. As expected, the three measures of
desired punishment suggest that people in the Cherry Gardens group desired more severe
punishments compared to the Jones Town group. The first measure of punishment is the
type of sentence. Figure 6 shows the distribution of responses for both groups. There are
no major differences in the proportion of people choosing fine and suspended sentence,
but there are major differences in the percentage of people choosing prison and
community service. The simplest way to compare the answers is to look at what
percentage of respondents chose prison, the most severe option. Some 45 percent of
respondents in the Cherry Gardens group chose prison, compared to 32 percent in the
Jones Town group. The p-value of the two-sided mean difference test is 0.155 (one-sided
yields 0.078). Although the difference is (marginally) not significant at the 10 percent
level, it is statistically significant once we include a set of control variables in order to
improve precision, as shown later.
                                       FIGURE 8
                  Differences in Desired Sentences by Treatment Groups
   #,@
   ",@                                                                          9    >

    ,@                                                                          :   .

   A,@
   6,@
   5,@
    ,@
    ,@
                  %                   B             9      (                   (


NOTES: Number of observations: 127. See Punitiveness in Table 6 for data definition.
SOURCE: Data from the online experiment survey.

    Figure 9 shows the distribution of responses to the second post-treatment question by
treatment group. Relative to the Jones Town group, people in the Cherry Gardens group
are less likely to choose prison sentences between 2 and 12 months and more likely to
choose prison sentences between 1 and 2 years. In order to be able to compare the
responses cardinally, we constructed the variable Months of Incarceration, which takes
the value of the mean number of months in the corresponding option (e.g., 4.5 months for
the category “3–6 months”). The difference between the Cherry Gardens and Jones Town
groups is statistically significant at conventional levels: the p-value of the two-sided test
of mean difference is 0.097.
                                        FIGURE 9
                Differences in Desired Incarcerations by Treatment Groups
    ,@
   A@                                                                        9       >
   A,@                                                                       :   .
   6@
   6,@
   5@
   5,@
     @
    ,@
     @
    ,@
                            5; "            "; 5                                 5
NOTES: Number of observations: 128. See Incarceration in Table 6 for data definition.
SOURCE: Data from the online experiment survey.

   Finally, Figure 10 presents the distribution of answers for the question on the support
for the rehabilitation program. In both Cherry Gardens and Jones Town groups, most
people responded either “Partially Agree” or “Strongly Agree” (89 percent of
respondents). However, relative to the Jones Town group, respondents in the Cherry
Gardens group were much more likely to agree partially rather than strongly. The
difference is not statistically significant at conventional levels: the p-value of the two-
sided difference test is 0.228 (the p-value of the two-sample Wilcoxon rank-sum test is
0.056). Nevertheless, the results are statistically significant when introducing control
variables as a mean of increasing precision, as shown below.
                                      FIGURE 10
         Differences in Support for Rehabilitation Programs by Treatment Groups
   #,@
            9    >
   ",@
            :   .
    ,@
   A,@
   6,@
   5,@
    ,@
    ,@
                              B            C               B


NOTES: Number of observations: 128. See Rehabilitation in Table 6 for data definition.
SOURCE: Data from the online experiment survey.

   In order to increase the precision of the estimates, we will perform the same mean-
difference test, but in a regression fashion. The dependent variables are going to be three
different measures of desired punitiveness. The first is Prison, a dummy variable that
takes the value 1 if the individual recommended a prison sentence instead of a fine,
community service, or suspended sentence. The second dependent variable is the
recommended prison sentence in months, Months of Incarceration. The third dependent
variable is Rehabilitation, a categorical value that represents how much the individual
agrees or disagrees with the proposal of a rehabilitation program for prisoners. The first
set of control variables includes just gender, age, and a dummy for growing up in
America. The extended set of controls includes all the rest of pre-treatment questions
available in the online survey, including a dummy for completion of the survey on the
same day it was released (perhaps those who were more conscientious might also be
more conservative in their attitudes toward crime; but see Table 8 for mean difference
tests across pre-treatment variables). For the dependent variable Prison, we estimate a
logit model and then report the marginal effects at the mean of the control variables. For
Months of Incarceration we report OLS coefficients. For Rehabilitation we use the
ordered logit model and we present the marginal effect on the probability of the highest
outcome (“Strongly Agree”) at the mean of control variables. We always report
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors.
   The regression results are presented in Table 9. The treatment had an economically
and statistically significant effect on all the dependent variables: relative to Jones Town,
being in the group Cherry Gardens increases the probability of recommending a prison
sentence by more than 15 percentage points, it increases the desired incarceration rate by
approximately two months, and it decreases the probability of strongly agreeing with the
implementation of the rehabilitation program by 15 percentage points.
                                                           TABLE 9
                                                        Regression Results
                                         Prison                   Months of Incarceration                    Rehabilitation
Dependent Variable:             (1)       (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)       (6)           (7)         (8)          (9)

                                                                                                       -
Cherry Gardens                 0.124 0.154* 0.190**              1.860* 1.940* 2.135*               0.128*     -0.154**     -0.157**
                               -0.086 -0.087 -0.092              -1.101 -1.111 -1.16                -0.075      -0.075       -0.076

Basic Controls                  No       Yes         Yes           No        Yes        Yes           No          Yes          Yes
Extended Controls               No       No          Yes           No        No         Yes           No          No           Yes

Observations                    127      127         127           127       127        127           128         128          128
NOTES: Heteroskedastic-robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
The coefficients for Prison are the marginal effects at the mean of the independent variables for a logit model. The coefficients for
Months of Incarceration are OLS coefficients. The coefficients for Rehabilitation are the marginal effects on the probability of
reporting the highest category, “Strongly agree,” at the mean of the independent variables using an ordered logit model. The basic
set of controls includes gender, age and a dummy for growing up in America. The extended set of controls includes Never Married,
Number of Children, Relative Income, Stay in America, and Monday. See Table 6 for data definitions and Table 7 for descriptive
statistics.
SOURCE: Data from the online experiment survey.
We interpret this experimental evidence as supportive of the hypothesis that beliefs cause
punishment. We should note that it has limited value, however, as a means to identify the
particular channels highlighted in our model, as these are much more specific. And, of
course, strong causal inferences are not feasible with such a small-scale exercise (for
example, although the two scenarios involve burglars with similar criminal history who
are caught stealing the same thing — a TV — a longer survey might be able to develop a
better control for income).


                                    4. CONCLUSIONS
   Incarceration in the United States is the highest it has ever been and it is the highest in
the world. What is the reason for this? Given that incarceration affects minorities
disproportionately, it is easy to see racism as the basic cause (see, for example, Bonczar
and Beck 1997). One problem with racism as a cause is that few people who support
increases in punitiveness consider themselves racist. Thus, one restriction that we impose
on candidate answers is that people accept their own theories (explaining their support for
increases in punitiveness). Our answer is based on beliefs: we argue that the increase in
punitiveness is associated with widespread belief in economic opportunities for those
willing to put in the effort. Our explanation connects incarceration and differences in pay
(and inequality), as argued by Western (2006), although in our model both are caused by
beliefs about economic opportunities. In brief, we argue that harsh punishment is caused
by the American dream.
   The paper describes selective facts related to the evolution of punishment in the
United States over the period 1980–2004. We note that imprisonment started increasing
around 1980, a period that coincides with the “Reagan revolution.” A large part of the
increase involves expansion of the use of minimum-security prisons. While minorities are
imprisoned at a disproportionate rate, the ratio of the incarceration rates for blacks versus
whites has not changed even as these rates increased substantially. The contrast with the
European experience, where imprisonment rates are much lower, suggests that
differences in beliefs and ideologies could play a big role, as suggested by Tonry (1998).
   We then build an economic model where beliefs about economic opportunities and
beliefs about punishment are correlated. There is a “French equilibrium,” where workers
believe effort does not pay, firms set up bureaucratic systems (low-powered incentive
schemes), and where criminals on average are “kinder.” There is an “American
equilibrium” where workers believe effort pays (and exert effort), firms set up a market
technology (high-powered incentive schemes), and the proportion of mean types who
become criminals is larger than in the French equilibrium. With increases in income, one
can observe that there is a demand for harsher punishment. We present three pieces of
evidence (across countries, across states in the United States, and an experimental
exercise) that are consistent with the model.



                   5. APPENDIX: EXTENSIONS OF THE MODEL

   In this section we present an extension of the model of Section 2. The idea is to
sketch how several interesting questions concerning crime can be incorporated into the
model and therefore illustrate what the beliefs–punitiveness connection has to say about
those questions.
   The first simple extension of the model we consider is incorporating “opportunities
available to criminals” in the utility function of the government. In this modification, the
government’s utility of a strategy              by the firm and t by the government, when
beliefs about   are given by h, is for a parameter x,
                                                        =>         !6
   In the above equation O(s) represents the opportunities available to individuals when
the firm chooses s. A natural definition of opportunities is >                     , the
difference in income between choosing high and low effort. Similarly, >             .
   In order to understand why incorporating opportunities in the utility function of the
government is interesting, consider the following situation: The firm had chosen a market
technology, a criminal was caught, and we know both his type , and that he is a         who
chose   . It seems natural that individuals (or the government) would want to set a
harsher punishment if they knew that       was high so that, by exerting effort, he could
have avoided becoming a criminal. One possible reason for this harsher desired
punishment is “identity”: people want to believe that they are not the kind of people who
can be “fooled” or “taken advantage of”; they are probably willing to forgive a theft from
somebody who had no opportunities, but they wouldn’t forgive a thief who could have
made an honest living but is taking advantage of their forgiveness. The formulation above
captures the idea that when there are more opportunities — a larger O(s) — the
government chooses a harsher punishment: the desired punishment is given by
         ?       =>    !.
     In the above formulation, we have postulated that O(s) is calculated from the model.
But one can also interpret O(s) as the “ideology” of the government, make it an
exogenous parameter, and calibrate it from external data (say, opinion polls of officials)
and note that increases in O(s) lead to increases in punishment.
     A second addition one can make to the model is:

     •    making returns to effort depend on the individual’s type;
     •    include a choice of one of two neighborhoods; at the time of choosing effort, the
          individual picks a rule that specifies a choice of neighborhood conditional on
          realized income.

     In this variation, the types would be irrelevant regarding the cost of effort (say, setting
 L   =   H)   but making the return to each effort random and dependent on the type. Also,
and just to simplify, the choice of neighborhood would be made so as to minimize the
distance between one’s expected income and the neighborhood’s average income.
     This extension can be used to address the important issue of the criminal behavior of
African Americans and the harsh punishment they face. At least two different
explanations for the harsh punishment arise in this model. The first (which does not use
the neighborhood choice feature) is that the government holds a belief that criminals
(regardless of their race) face very good opportunities in the legal market and therefore
should be punished harshly. 24
     A second explanation is rooted on the intriguing observation that acquiring skills
(e.g., obtaining a university degree) may be more profitable for poor African Americans
than for whites, but that they are less prone to doing so than their white counterparts. That
is, some data suggest that although African Americans earn less than whites in either
category, the wage increase of obtaining a degree is larger for African Americans. In this
model, the government punishes harshly because opportunities are in fact large. And one

24
   This prediction runs in the opposite direction of models based on deterrence: the better the opportunities
in the legal market, the less one has to punish criminals to deter them.
could obtain the result that African Americans are less prone to acquiring a degree and
therefore more likely to engage in criminal behavior, through one of two methods.
   In one variation of the model, individuals have a belief about the return to each effort
level and choose an effort level and a neighborhood rule (what neighborhood to choose,
depending on the income); the beliefs about the return to each effort level must be
consistent with the distribution of effort levels and incomes in the neighborhood he
settles on. The story told by this version of the model is that individuals living in poor
neighborhoods incorrectly estimate the returns to schooling because they only get to meet
the lower tail of college-graduate wage earners (those who returned to the poor
neighborhood).
   In order to sketch the second variation, imagine that the distribution of wages for
college graduates is either $1 for sure, or $1 with probability 95 percent and $100 with
probability 5 percent. The prior belief of the individual is that each distribution has the
same probability. In order to estimate the returns to schooling, the individual samples a
few people, but since sampling a graduate who earns $1 is so likely, the individual is
likely to finish his sampling with a (downwardly) biased estimate of the returns to
schooling. In fact, if the individual samples only once, with a probability of 97.5 percent,
he will estimate that the distribution “degenerate at $1” is the most likely. One can
incorporate this idea (developed in Benoît and Dubra 2011) into this model (without the
need of biased sampling or neighborhood choices) to obtain the same predictions as in the
previous paragraph.
                                     REFERENCES
Adorno, T. W., E. Frenkel-Brunswik, D. J. Levinson, and R. N. Sanford. 1950. The
   Authoritarian Personality. Harper.
Alesina, A., E. Glaeser, and B. Sacerdote. 2001. "Why Doesn'
                                                           t the United States Have a
   European-Style Welfare State?" Brookings Papers on Economics Activity, Fall: 187–
   278.
Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara. 2011. “A Test of Racial Bias in Capital Sentencing.”
   Harvard Institute of Economic Research Discussion Paper No. 2192. May.
Alexander, M. 2010. The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of
   Colorblindness. New York Press.
Austin, J., M. A. Bruce, L. Carroll, P. L. McCall, and S. C. Richards. 2000. “The Use of
   Incarceration in the United States.” National Policy White Paper. American Society
   of Criminology, National Policy Committee.
Benabou, R. and J. Tirole. 2011. “Laws and Norms.” Mimeo.
Benoît, J.-P. and J. Dubra. 2011. “Apparent Overconfidence.” Econometrica.
Bonczar, T. P. and A. J. Beck. 1997. “Lifetime Likelihood of Going to State or Federal
   Prison.” U. S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics. March.
Blumstein, A., J. Cohen, and D. Nagin. 1978. “Deterrence and Incapacitation: Estimating
   the Effects of Criminal Sanctions on Crime Rates.” National Academies Press.
Blumstein, A. 1993. "Racial Disproportionality of U. S. Prison Populations Revisited."
   Colorado Law Review, Vol. 64: 743–760.
Bushway, S. and R. Paternoster. 2009. “The Impact of Prison on Crime.” In S. Raphael
   and M. A. Stoll, eds., Do Prisons Make Us Safer? The Benefits and Costs of the
   Prison Boom. Russell Sage Foundation. Pp. 119–150.
Cullen, F. and R. Agnew. 2003. “Anomie/strain Theories of Crime, Part V.” In F. Cullen
   and R. Agnew, eds., Criminological Theory: Essential Readings. Roxbury Publishing
   Company.
Davis, J. A. and T. W. Smith. 2005. General Social Surveys, 1972–2004. Machine-
   readable data file. Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of
   Connecticut.
Dannenberg, J. 2011. “Nationwide PLN Survey Examines Prison Phone Contracts,
   Kickbacks.” Prison Legal News, Vol. 22, No. 4: 1–16.
Di Tella, R. and J. Dubra. 2008. “Crime and Punishment in the American Dream.”
   Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 92: 1564–1584.
Di Tella, R., S. Edwards, and E. Schargrodsky. 2010. The Economics of Crime: Lessons
   for and from Latin America. NBER/University of Chicago Press.
Durlauf, S. N. and D. S. Nagin. 2010. “The Deterrent Effect of Imprisonment.” Mimeo.
   Carnegie Mellon University.
Doob, A. N. and C. M. Webster. 2006. “Countering Punitiveness: Understanding
   Stability in Canada’s Imprisonment Rate.” Law and Society Review, Vol. 40, No. 2:
   325–367.
Feldman, S. 1988. “Structure and Consistency in Public Opinion: The Role of Core
   Beliefs and Values.” American Journal of Political Science, Vol. 32, No. 2: 416–440.
Flanagan, S. 1987. “Value Changes in Industrial Societies.” American Political Science
   Review, Vol. 81: 1303–1319.
Hall, P. and D. Soskice. 2001. Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional Foundations of
   Comparative Advantage. Oxford University Press.
Hochschild, J. 1981. What’s Fair? American Beliefs about Distributive Justice. Harvard
   University Press.
Inglehart, R. 1990. Culture Shift in Advanced Societies. Chicago University Press.
Jost, J. T., and M. R. Banaji. 1994. “The Role of Stereotyping in System-Justification and
    the Production of False Consciousness.” British Journal of Social Psychology, Vol.
    33, No. 1: 1–27.
Jost, J. T., J. Glaser, A. W. Kruglanski, and F. J. Sulloway. 2003. “Political Conservatism
    as Motivated Social Cognition.” Psychological Bulletin, Vol. 129, No. 3: 339–375.
Kensey, A. and P. Tournier. 1999. “Prison Population Inflation, Overcrowding and
   Recidivism: The Situation in France.” European Journal on Criminal Policy and
   Research, Vol. 7: 97–119.
Ladd, E. C. and K. Bowman. 1998. Attitudes towards Economic Inequality, AEI Press.
Lakoff, G. 1996. Moral Politics: How Liberals and Conservatives Think. University of
   Chicago Press.
Lipset, S. M. and S. Rokkan. 1967. “Cleavage Structures, Party Systems, and Voter
   Alignments: An Introduction.” In S. M. Lipset and S. Rokkan, eds., Party Systems
   and Voter Alignments. Free Press.
Lipset, S. M. 1979. The First New Nation. Norton.
Liptak, A. 2008. “US: Inmate Count in U.S. Dwarfs Other Nations.” New York Times.
   April 23.
Mauer, M. 2008. “Testimony of Marc Mauer before the Maryland Commission on
  Capital Punishment on Race and the Criminal Justice System.” The Sentencing
  Project. August 19.
Mauer, M. and R. S. King. 2007. “Uneven Justice: State Rates of Incarceration by Race
  and Ethnicity: A Report by the Sentencing Project.” Mimeo.
Merton, R. K. 1938. “Social Structure and Anomie.” American Sociological Review, Vol.
   3 (October): 672–682.
Messner, S. and R. Rosenfeld. 2001. “Crime and the American Dream,” Ch. 19. In F.
  Cullen and R. Agnew, eds., Criminological Theory: Essential Readings. Roxbury.
Perron, P. 2005. “Dealing with Structural Breaks.” Mimeo. Boston University.
Putterman, L., J. Roemer, and J. Sylvestre. 1998. “Does Egalitarianism Have a Future?
    Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 36: 861–902.
Piketty, T. 1995. “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics.” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, Vol. 110, No. 3: 551–584.
Rapahel, S. and M. Stoll. 2009. “Why Are So Many Americans in Prison?” In S. Raphael
   and M. A. Stoll, eds., Do Prisons Make Us Safer? The Benefits and Costs of the
   Prison Boom. Russell Sage Foundation. Pp. 27 72.
Rasmusen, E. 1996. “Stigma and Self Fulfilling Expectations of Criminality.” Journal of
   Law and Economics, Vol. 39: 519–544.
Rokeach, M. 1973. The Nature of Human Values. Free Press.
Sampson, R. J. and C. Loeffler. 2010. “Punishment’s Place: The Local Concentration of
   Mass Incarceration.” Daedalus. Vol. 139 (Summer): 20.
Sanfey, A. G., J. K. Rilling, J. A. Aronson, L. E. Nystrom, and J. D. Cohen. 2003. “The
   Neural Basis of Economic Decision-making in the Ultimatum Game.” Science, Vol.
   300: 1755–1758.
Shariff, A., J. C. Karremans, K. D. Vohs, J. W. Schooler, and J. D. Greene. 2011. “For
   They Know Not What They Do: Diminishing Free Will Beliefs Reduces Retribution
   and Increases Forgiveness.” Mimeo. University of Minnesota.
Scherpenzeel, A. 2001. Mode Effects in Panel Surveys: A Comparison of CAPI and
   CATI. Bundesamt fur Statistik.
Sunstein, C. 1996. “On the Expressive Function of Law.” University of Pennsylvania
   Law Review, Vol. 144, No. 5: 2021–2053.
Tonry, M. 1998. “Introduction: Crime and Punishment in America.” In M. Tonry, ed.,
   The Handbook of Crime and Punishment. Oxford University Press.
Van Dijk, J. J. M., J. N. van Kesteren, and P. Smit. 2008. Criminal Victimisation in
   International Perspective, Key Findings from the 2004–2005 ICVS and EU ICS.
   Boom Legal Publishers.
Vohs, K. D. and J. R. Schooler. 2008. “The Value of Believing in Free Will: Encouraging
   a Belief in Determinism Increases Cheating.” Psychological Science, Vol. 19: 49–54.
Walmsley, R. 2007. World Prison Population List, 7th edition. International Centre for
  Prison Studies, School of Law, King'
                                     s College London.
Webster, C. M. and A. N. Doob. 2007. “Punitive Trends and Stable Imprisonment Rates
  in Canada.” Crime and Justice: A Review of Research, Vol. 36: 297–369.
Western, B. 2002. “The Impact of Incarceration on Wage Mobility and Inequality.”
  American Sociological Review, Vol. 67, No. 4: 526–546.
Western, B. 2006. Punishment and Inequality in America. Russell Sage.
Whitman, J. Q. 2003. Harsh Justice: Criminal Punishment and the Widening Divide
  between America and Europe. Oxford University Press.
Zaller, J. 1991. “Information, Values and Opinions.” American Political Science Review,
    Vol. 85, No. 4: 1215–1237.
