NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF POLLUTION ON LABOR SUPPLY:
EVIDENCE FROM A NATURAL EXPERIMENT IN MEXICO CITY
Rema Hanna
Paulina Oliva
Working Paper 17302
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17302

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2011

We thank Jonathan Hill, Katherine Kimble, and Sebastian Bustos for outstanding research assistance.
We thank Maria Teresa Garrido, Luisa Soto and Gerardo Guillen for their cooperation for this project.
We also thank Alberto Abadie, David Card, Lucas Davis, Stefano DellaVigna, Edward Glaeser, Michael
Greenstone, Asim Khwaja, Peter Kuhn, Shelly Lundberg, Sendhil Mullainathan, Matt Neidell, Ben
Olken, Rohini Pande, Heather Royer, Reed Walker and Heidi Williams for helpful comments, as well
as participants at the NBER Summer Institute Environmental Meetings. Funding for this project comes
from the Science Sustainability Program at the Center for International Development at Harvard, the
Harvard Center for Population and Development Studies, and UCMexus. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Rema Hanna and Paulina Oliva. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Effect of Pollution on Labor Supply: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Mexico
City
Rema Hanna and Paulina Oliva
NBER Working Paper No. 17302
August 2011
JEL No. O0,Q0,Q5,Q53
ABSTRACT
Moderate effects of pollution on health may exert an important influence on labor market decisions.
We exploit exogenous variation in pollution due to the closure of a large refinery in Mexico City to
understand how pollution impacts labor supply. The closure led to an 8 percent decline in pollution
in the surrounding neighborhoods. We find that a one percent increase in sulfur dioxide results in a
0.61 percent decrease in the hours worked. The effects do not appear to be driven by labor demand
shocks nor differential migration as a result of the closure in the areas located near the refinery.

Rema Hanna
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rema_hanna@ksg.harvard.edu
Paulina Oliva
UC, Santa Barbara
oliva@econ.ucsb.edu

The Eect of Pollution on Labor Supply: Evidence from a
Natural Experiment in Mexico City∗
Rema Hanna

Harvard Kennedy School, NBER, BREAD, and IZA

Paulina Oliva

University of California Santa Barbara

August 2, 2011

Abstract
Moderate eects of pollution on health may exert an important inuence on labor market
decisions. We exploit exogenous variation in pollution due to the closure of a large renery in
Mexico City to understand how pollution impacts labor supply. The closure led to an 8 percent
decline in pollution in the surrounding neighborhoods. We nd that a one percent increase in
sulfur dioxide results in a 0.61 percent decrease in the hours worked. The eects do not appear
to be driven by labor demand shocks nor dierential migration as a result of the closure in the
areas located near the renery.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we estimate the relationship between pollution and labor supply in Mexico City. High
levels of pollution may cause temporary illness, which in turn may cause lost working hours. Under∗

We thank Jonathan Hill, Katherine Kimble, and Sebastian Bustos for outstanding research assistance. We thank

Maria Teresa Garrido, Luisa Soto and Gerardo Guillen for their cooperation for this project. We also thank Alberto
Abadie, David Card, Lucas Davis, Stefano DellaVigna, Edward Glaeser, Michael Greenstone, Asim Khwaja, Peter
Kuhn, Shelly Lundberg, Sendhil Mullainathan, Matt Neidell, Ben Olken, Rohini Pande, Heather Royer, Reed Walker
and Heidi Williams for helpful comments, as well as participants at the NBER Summer Institute Environmental
Meetings.

Funding for this project comes from the Science Sustainability Program at the Center for International

Development at Harvard, the Harvard Center for Population and Development Studies, and UCMexus.

1

standing the relationship between pollution and lost working hours is vital for assessing the benets
of more stringent environmental regulation. This question is of particular importance for developing
countries, which are often hesitant to enter international climate change treaties (or are lax about
enforcing them) due to fears that tougher regulations may lead to reductions in productivity and business growth. Furthermore, an understanding of the eects of pollution reduction on hours worked is
necessary to design optimal pollution taxation policies (Schwartz and Repetto 2000, Williams 2003).
The eect of pollution on work hours is theoretically ambiguous.

On one hand, if pollution

damages the health of an individual and his or her dependents, reductions in pollution will decrease
the disutility from work causing work hours to rise. In other words, with better air quality, individuals
may be less likely to miss work because either they or their children are home sick.

1

However, there

are also many reasons why reductions in pollution would not increase work hours. First, it is possible
that the eect of pollution on adult health is not large enough to interfere with attendance at work,
or that individuals already practice mitigating behaviors on high pollution days (such as staying
indoors) to minimize illness.

2

Second, pollution may additionally aect the utility derived from the

consumption of leisure and health-related goods. If individuals enjoy leisure more due to better health
or individuals substitute away from consumption of health-related goods when pollution is reduced,
they might adjust their hours of work downwards. If these eects are large enough, the overall eect
of pollution on work hours may even be negative. Finally, improvements in worker productivity as a
result of reduced pollution may increase wage earning potential, which would have ambiguous eects
on the number of hours worked.

3

In light of these opposing theoretical impacts, the relationship

between pollution and hours worked is ultimately an empirical question.
Our study estimates the short-run elasticity of work hours with respect to pollution.

4

Estimating

this eect is challenging due to the presence of confounding factors: for example, a decline in business

1 Currie, Hanushek, Kahn, Neidell, and Rivkin (2009), Ransom and Pope (1992), Gilliland et al. (2001), and Park et
al. (2002) have found signicant eects of pollution on student absenteeism. This may translate to higher absenteeism
among workers that are responsible for child care.

2 We will discuss the evidence on the health eects of reneries in Section 3.

3 Crocker and Horst (1981) and Gra and Neidell (2011) both show empirically that changes in pollution are linked
to increases in productivity for farm workers. Given our empirical strategy, we cannot isolate what fraction, if any, of
the observed changes in hours worked can be explained by changes in productivity. Nonetheless, we will discuss the
theoretical channel through which productivity changes may aect hours worked in Section 2. We also test for changes
in observed wages in Section 5.

4 Pollution can also have long-run health impacts (e.g. by increasing the prevalence of lung or digestive diseases),

which in turn reduce employment and hours worked. In this paper, we will be unable to look at long-run impacts, but
we hope to pursue this in future work.

2

activity may aect both pollution levels and employment patterns.

5

To overcome this problem, we

exploit exogenous variation in pollution that resulted from the closure of a large oil renery in the
Mexico City Metropolitan Area (MCMA) in March of 1991. The closure was mandated to reduce the
high levels of pollution experienced in MCMA during the 1980s. It successfully reduced pollution:
neighborhoods located within a ve-kilometer radius to the renery experienced, on average, an
eight percent reduction in sulfur dioxide (SO2 ) relative to other neighborhoods. Using a xed eects
strategy, we exploit these changes to understand whether pollution levels aected labor supply.
Specically, we compare the changes in work outcomes for individuals who lived in neighborhoods
located near the renery (that experienced a fall in pollution) with those who lived in neighborhoods
far from the renery (that did not experience a fall).
We nd robust evidence that the renery closure lead to increased hours of work.

After the

closure, the areas within 5 kilometers of the renery experienced about a 5 percent increase in hours
worked, controlling for week xed eects and neighborhood xed eects. Using the renery closure
as an instrument for pollution, we nd that a one percent increase in

SO2

results in about a 0.43 to

0.67 percent decrease in hours worked the following week. The results are robust to the inclusion of
demographic controls and neighborhood specic year trends.
Our analysis rules out two sources of potential bias in these estimates.

First, many pollution

regulations have a direct eect on business conditions, and thus the labor market.

6

As such, it is

dicult to disentangle the eect of reduced pollution on labor market activities from the direct eect
of the regulations on the labor market. The renery closure presents a case where we can rule out
the direct eect of the policy on the labor market. Theoretically, it is possible that the closure could
have aected the labor market independently of health if there were a reduction in labor demand
both from the renery itself and businesses located in the surrounding neighborhoods. If labor supply
is upward sloping, this would cause wages to fall and unemployment to increase near the renery,
leading us to

underestimate

7

the elasticity.

This is unlikely to have occurred, as we do not observe

dierential changes in wage in neighborhoods located near the renery after the closure, and we nd

5 Several studies (such as Pönka, 1990) have looked at the association between pollution and worker absenteeism,
and have found that

SO2

levels are associated with illness-related absenteeism.

6 Recent papers, such as Walker (2011), study the eect of environmental regulations that impose additional costs

on polluting rms, which would have direct implications for the labor market.

7 While less likely, one can also imagine cases where labor supply is downward sloping, which would cause our

estimate to be upwardly biased. We discuss this further in Section 4.

3

a small increase to no change in unemployment near the renery after the closure. Nonetheless, we
estimate an additional empirical model that exploits the variation in pollution levels produced by
dierences in altitude and wind patterns within areas that are located at the same distance from the
renery. Since areas at a similar distance from the renery would experience similar labor market
shocks related to the renery closure, the pollution eects that we nd within these areas are not
susceptible to bias from a labor market mechanism. Using this triple-dierence approach, we nd a
strong relationship between pollution levels and hours worked (similar in magnitude and signicance
to the primary results), despite the fact that this model is very restrictive. Therefore, we can rule
out that the observed results are due to an independent eect of the renery closure on the labor
market.
Second, changes in air quality may result in selective sorting. More specically, wealthier or more
educated individuals may move into the newly clean neighborhoods and these individuals may be
more likely to be employed or work long hours.

This would cause us to overestimate the eect.

To reduce the probability of bias, we restrict our analysis to the ve years after the closure.

In

addition, we test for sorting using information on migration and demographic characteristics. We do
not observe increased migration rates near the renery after the closure, nor do we observe dierences
in demographic characteristics in these areas after the closure. The lack of change in migration and
demographic characteristics increases our condence that the labor supply outcomes we observe are
not driven by sorting.
Finally, we test for the heterogeneity of the treatment results. We nd suggestive evidence that
parents with children under ve have a larger labor supply response to pollution, but a limited
sample size precludes conclusive evidence.

While we nd no evidence that blue and white collar

workers respond dierently to changing pollution, most of our estimated eects appear driven by
workers on a xed salary, who are likely to have the smallest opportunity cost of work absenteeism.
Our ndings support the conclusion that the economic gains from increased worker attendance
helped to oset the costs of the renery closure.

Our preferred estimates imply that the renery

closure led to about a 5-percent increase in hours worked for those who lived near the renery. Given
an average annual wage of 13,700 1993 Mexican Pesos (USD 3,600), this translates to a 756 Peso (USD

4

198) gain in work over the course of a year.

8

This substantial increase demonstrates the importance

of accounting for work eort gains when calculating the economic benets of tougher environmental
regulation.
The paper proceeds as follows:

Section 2 provides a conceptual framework for understanding

how changes in pollution may aect work. Section 3 provides a background on the renery closure,
discusses the data that we compiled for the study, and provides a brief overview of renery emissions
on health. In Section 4, we describe our empirical strategy. We present our ndings in Section 5,
and then discuss their policy implications in Section 6. Section 7 concludes.

2

Conceptual Framework

This paper seeks to document the importance of non-mortality costs of air pollution by providing a
credible estimate of how pollution levels aect labor supply decisions. In this section, we outline a
partial equilibrium model to explore the underlying mechanisms that drive the relationship between
pollution and hours worked.

2.1 Labor Supply and Air Quality
We consider a partial equilibrium framework where individuals maximize utility with respect to
consumption,
in

c

and

e.

c,

and hours worked,

Note that

concave, i.e. that

e

e.

is a bad, so

ucc < 0

We model air quality,

and

We assume utility is given by

ue < 0,

while

uc > 0.

u = u(c, e; α)

and is separable

We assume that the utility function is

uee < 0.

α, as an argument of the utility function that aects the marginal utility of

both consumption and hours worked. We focus on the partial eects of air quality on hours worked,
and therefore we assume that exposure to air quality is exogenous.

9

Specically, we hypothesize that

8 This number corresponds to the national average yearly earnings from the National Accounting System (SCN).
9 Relaxing this assumption would aect the observed results in the following manner: Suppose that there are
two neighborhoods, and one of the neighborhoods experiences a permanent reduction in pollution.

The area that

experienced the air quality shock could attract individuals whose marginal utility for clean air is higher than the
marginal utility of the previous residents of the aected area. The resulting observed change in hours worked depends
on whether the newcomers have a high marginal disutility of work with respect to air quality or whether they have
a high marginal value for consumption given a certain level of air quality. The newcomers could experience stronger
changes in hours worked than the leavers if the strong preferences for air quality are predominantly linked to a reduction
in the disutility of work. If newcomers have higher consumption value for air quality, but do not experience additional

5

better air quality increases a worker's health as well as the health of his or her dependents, making
it less costly for the worker to devote time to work.
disutility of work:

ueα > 0.10

In other words, better air quality lowers the

The relationship between air quality and consumption is ambiguous.

For example, if improved air quality increased the utility derived from additional consumption (i.e.
better air quality may improve the utility derived from amusement park visits or shopping outdoors),
then consumption and air quality would be complements:

ucα > 0.

also reduce the marginal utility derived from consumption (ucα

However, better air quality could

< 0).

This would be the case if, for

example, asthma medication or gym memberships were substitutes for clean air.
We can rewrite the optimization problem faced by the individual using the indirect utility function:

max v(e) = λ(α) · we − g(e; α)

where

w

is the wage rate at time

t.

(1)

Note that for tractability, we assume the individuals are wage-

takers, and the wage is unaected by pollution; we discuss the implications of these assumptions in
Section 2.2. The marginal utility of lifetime income along the optimal path is represented by

λ(α);

this term captures changes in the value of income stemming from individual reoptimization decisions
on both consumption and hours worked. Finally,

g(e; α)

can be interpreted as the disutility of hours

worked given a certain level of air quality:

ˆ

e

g(e; α) = −

ue (x; α)dx

(2)

0

Note that the assumption

ueα > 0

translates into

geα < 0.

the utility translates into a convexity assumption for
increases with hours (gee

Similarly, the concavity assumption for

g(e; α),

since the marginal disutility of work

> 0).

Optimal work hours for a given level of air quality,

α,

are the solution to the rst order condition

reductions in the disutility of work, the change in hours of work could be smaller for the newcomers. We revisit this
issue in the empirical section, and test for the presence of dierential migration into the areas surrounding the renery
after the closure.

10 You could also argue the opposite assumption, that better air quality produces a net increase in the disutility of

work (ueα

< 0).

This may result, for example, if individuals who work in oces would rather be outside in a low

pollution environment. This is unlikely to happen in our empirical framework since we measure the eect of pollution
on the hours of work in the following week, and only contemporaneous air quality makes leisure more attractive. The
model predictions under

ueα < 0 are further discussed in Appendix 1.
ueα > 0.

are largely consistent with the predictions yielded by

6

As we discuss in Section 5, our empirical results

for (1):

ge (e; α) = λ(α)w
Given additive separability of hours of work and consumption, the change in hours worked as air
quality increases is given by (see the Appendix for a formal derivation):

∂λ
w
−geα + ∂α
de
=
dα
gee

(3)

The change in hours of work with respect to pollution depends on the sign of the two terms in the
numerator of (3). The rst term captures the substitution eect stemming from a reduction in the
disutility of work. This term will be unambiguously positive since the disutility of work is decreasing
in air quality.
The second term in the numerator of (3) can be interpreted as an income eect.

On net, we

expect this eect to be negative. Intuitively, this term incorporates several eects (see the Appendix
for a formal derivation of

∂λ
). First, as income rises with more hours worked, we would expect the
∂α

disutility of work to increase relative to the utility of consumption. Second, as air quality improves,
the marginal utility of income (λ(α)) will change as a result of a new optimal level of consumption.
Better air quality may reduce the marginal utility gain from consumption if consumption is predominantly a substitute for air quality (individuals would work less, as consumption goods are less
valuable with better air quality). If the income eect is large enough to dominate the substitution
eect, the overall eect of pollution on work hours may even be negative.
It is important to note, however, that there are also cases where the income eect may be positive, thereby amplifying the substitution eect.

If air quality is predominantly a complement of

consumption, the marginal utility of income (λ(α)) could increase with improved air quality, thus
increasing work hours (intuitively, individuals would work more in order to purchase consumption
goods, as the value of the goods rises with improved air quality).

A positive income eect would

result in an unambiguous increase in hours worked.
In sum, the partial equilibrium model predicts that high air quality should result in an increase in
hours worked, unless a negative income eect dominates.

11

Next, we relax the simplifying assumption

11 Note that, in a general equilibrium framework, aggregate labor supply may be mechanically aected as individuals

7

above that pollution does not aect worker productivity, and explore how changes in productivity
may aect hours worked.

2.2 Productivity eects
Worker productivity may improve as air quality improves. If wages reect the marginal productivity
of hours worked, higher work productivity would result in higher wages. Assume wages depend on
air quality,

α,

through the following function:

w(α) = f1 (e · φ(α), K)φ(α)

where

f1 (·, K)

(4)

is the marginal productivity of labor eciency units for given capital

K,

and

φ(α)

is the number of labor eciency units per hour of work. Assume further that air quality increases
the productivity of hours worked, which yields

∂
φ(α)
∂α

> 0.12

degree one in the production function. Then, in equilibrium,

For simplicity, assume homogeneity of

f1 (e · φ(α), K) = sL

and

∂w(α)
∂
= sL φ(α) > 0
∂α
∂α

(5)

Higher wages will have two additional eects on labor supply besides the ones discussed above: a
wage substitution eect and a wage income eect. The rst eect is unambiguously positive, while
the second eect is unambiguously negative (see the Appendix for a mathematical expression and
further discussion of these two eects).

Unless labor supply is downward sloping (which implies

a dominating income eect), the productivity eect will increase labor supply beyond what the
Equation 3 describes.
supply more hours of work as air quality improves. This shift would lead to a new labor market equilibrium with lower
wages and more aggregate hours of work. However, because the equilibrium wage would fall, the increase in hours of
work would be smaller than in the case where wages did not change.

12 Crocker and Horst (1981) and Gra and Neidell (2011) nd a negative empirical relationship between air pollution

and productivity. Frankenberg et al. (2005) estimate that haze from res in Indonesia caused older adults to be more
likely to report having diculty carrying a heavy load than older adults in non-haze areas. In addition, there is a
large medical literature linking iron supplements, which improve respiratory functioning, to productivity (for example,
see Davies et al., 1984; Haas and Brownlie, 2001; Zhu and Haas, 1998; Woodson et al., 1978).

In turn, there is

evidence from experimental studies that iron supplements can improve work output and productivity (Basta et al.,
1979; Thomas et al., 2003; Li et al., 1994).

8

3

Background and Data

3.1 The Renery Closure
In this study, we exploit the exogenous variation in pollution that resulted from the closure of a large
oil renery in the Mexico City Metropolitan Area (MCMA) in March of 1991.

The Azcapotzalco

Renery opened in 1933 in the Northwestern quadrant of MCMA (see Figure 1). It was taken over
by Pemex (originally Petromex) during the oil expropriation in Mexico that started in 1932. In 1946,
the renery's capacity was expanded from 7.5 thousand to 50 thousand barrels per day in response
to growing demand, mainly within the MCMA.

13

The expansion in production continued and by

1976 the renery had doubled its capacity to 105 thousand barrels per day. At its peak, the renery
complex occupied 174 hectares and included fourteen rening facilities, three petrochemical facilities,
218 storage tanks, auxiliary service facilities, a water treatment plant, laboratories, administrative
buildings, recreational facilities and a residential area for employees. The renery represented around
35 percent of the total rening capacity in the country. It produced and distributed nal products
mainly to the MCMA, such as gas, turbosine, gasoline, kerosene, diesel and other fuels as well as
petrochemicals.
When the renery rst opened, the land use in the area was mainly agricultural. Between the
1940's and the 1980's, the MCMA had grown considerably, and by the late 1980s, the renery was
surrounded by residential areas. The closure of the renery on March 18th of 1991 was mandated
to reduce the high levels of pollution experienced in the MCMA during the 1980s.

14

The winter

of 1990-1991, just before the renery was closed, was considered one of  the most toxic in Mexico
City history, triggering a 16% to 20% jump in the incidence of respiratory infections, nosebleeds and
emphysema.

15

In fact, the Ministry of Environment estimated that, at its peak, the Azcapotzalco

13 Around this date, the renery was renamed "18 de Marzo" in commemoration of the oil expropriation date.
14 Complaints regarding reneries emissions still persist in Mexico today. For example, families living near the
Francisco I. Madero Renery in the state of Tamaulipas, which is currently operating, led a complaint in 2009 due
to pungent smells, throat irritation and skin infections caused by renery fumes (Milenio, 2008).

Moreover, when

cleanup activities of the Azcapotzalco Renery began in 2009 (to convert the land to a public space), health concerns
were once again raised as the excavation reintroduced buried pollutants back into the air.

Complaints were made

regarding increased headaches, dizziness, nausea, diarrhea, irritation of the respiratory tract, allergies, asthmatic crisis,
etc.

(http://www.kaosenlared.net/noticia/mexico-vecinos-azcapotzalco-luchan-contra-danos-salud-contaminacion-ex;

accessed on June 6, 2011).

15 Mexico City's Menacing Air, Time Magazine, April 1, 1991.

9

Renery emitted about 85 thousand tons of air pollutants per year, or about two percent of total air
pollution across the MCMA (García Villanueva et al., 2009).

3.2 Sulfur Dioxide and Health
This study will focus on
reneries.

16

SO2 ,

a U.S. criteria pollutant, and one of the main gases emitted by oil

Due to the strong link between

SO2

and renery emissions, the two air monitoring

stations closest to the Azcapotzalco Renery began monitoring

SO2

in 1986. We devote this section

to summarizing some of the literature results on the health eects of exposure to
Subjects exposed to

SO2

SO2 .

showed decreased lung functioning and increased respiratory symptoms

in most controlled human experiments. The eects were stronger for high levels of exposure. It is
worth noting, however, that there are also a few studies that nd limited to no results.

17

While the

trials provide evidence for potential impacts of short-term (5-10 minutes) exposure, individuals may
not necessarily experience these adverse eects in the real world if they take precautions on high
pollution days, mitigating the eect of pollution on both health and work outcomes.
from the epidemiology literature on the eects of ambient

SO2

18

Evidence

on respiratory symptoms of adults are

mixed, and therefore, it is not clear from this literature that the

SO2

reductions that we study would

be large enough to aect work outcomes (EPA, 2008). However, there is at least some suggestive
evidence that the health outcomes attributed to

SO2

may be large enough to induce absenteeism:

Peel et al. (2005) and Ito (2007) document an association between short-run exposure to

SO2

and

emergency room visits, while Schwartz et al. (1996) documents a marginal association between shortrun exposure and increases in hospital admissions due to asthma for those aged 65 and above. Some
of the respiratory symptoms associated with

SO2

may not appear immediately after exposure: Peel

16 Bevilacqua and Braglia (2002) measure emissions for seven reneries over a four year period, and nd that
comprises the largest share of emissions.

García Villanueva et al.

SO2

(2009) documents that the emissions from the

Azcapotzalco Renery, which we study in this paper, were composed primarily of sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide and
nitrogen oxides; the renery also emitted particulate matter (PM), volatile organic compounds (VOC), uorhidrics
acid and sulfuric acid.

17 Trials have documented decreased lung function (increased respiration rates, decreases in peak ow, bronchocon-

striction, and increased airway resistance), particularly for asthmatic subjects with

SO2

exposure (for a summary of

ndings, see EPA, 2008). Moreover, a series of studies have observed increase respiratory symptoms (coughing, chest
tightness, throat irritation) among exercising asthmatics who are exposed to
Linn et al., 1983; Linn et al., 1987).

SO2

(for example, see among others,

18 For example, Neidell (2009) provides evidence that individuals practice avoidance behaviors (e.g. stay indoors) to

prevent illness on high pollution days.

10

et al. (2005) study the lag structure between pollution levels and emergency visits and nd that the
risk ratios for asthma were the strongest for lag of 5 to 8 days.

19

In addition, as we discuss in the conceptual framework, adults may work fewer hours if their
children are sick due to high levels of pollution. Children and infants are among the most susceptible
to air pollution (including

SO2 ),

as lung development continues throughout adolescence and a de-

veloping lung is particularly at risk from exposure to toxins (Dietert et al., 2000). Countless papers
in epidemiology literature document the association between

SO2

and respiratory symptoms in chil-

dren (for example, Schwartz et al. (1994) document associations between the incidence of respiratory
symptoms and

SO2 ;

Schildcrout et al. (2006) show that the sum of

SO2

over the past three days

is related to asthma symptoms; etc). In the economics literature, Lleras-Muney (2005) found that
high

SO2

concentrations led to increased hospitalization rates for children, although the eect is not

signicant. In addition, Jayachandran (2009) documents that smoke from the Indonesian wild-res,
a large source of natural

SO2 ,

had large eects on infant mortality rates.

20

3.3 Data
Pollution Data
The pollution data are drawn from the Automatic Network of Atmospheric Monitoring (RAMA),
which consists of 25 stations placed throughout the MCMA. Hourly sulfur dioxide (SO 2 ) concentrations are available for 15 stations in the MCMA from 1986 to today. During the sample period, data

21

for other pollutants were not systematically collected.

SO2

is one of the main pollutants generated

by the reneries, and, as set out above, is believed to have substantial impacts on respiratory health
(see Section 2). However, it is important to note that

SO2

measurements are correlated with other

pollutants and will thus proxy for renery-originated air pollution in our elasticity estimates. In addition to looking at the eect of

SO2

on work outcomes, we will also present reduced-form estimates

of the eects of the renery, which should provide a measure of the  full policy eect of the renery

19 SO also contributes to acid rain, but acid rain in itself should not have adverse eects on health.
2
20 Other key papers in the economics literature that document signicant eects of pollution on infant mortality
include Currie and Neidell (2005) and Chay and Greenstone (2003a,b), but these studies do not explicitly measure the
eect of

SO2 ,

which is the focus of our study.

21 During this time,

a similar analysis (e.g.

CO and N O2 were only measured in several stations, but not in enough of them to conduct
N O2 was measured only in 5 stations. CO was measured in 13 stations, but not in the two

stations closest to the renery).

11

closure.

Labor Market Data
We obtained labor market data from the National Employment Panel Survey of Mexico (ENEU).
ENEU is a moving quarterly panel in which each individual is surveyed for ve consecutive quarters
and then exits the sample. We restrict the sample to individuals in the Mexico City Metropolitan
Area, which includes two states (Distrito Federal and Estado de Mexico).
We focus on the 1989 to 1993 surveys, the years surrounding the renery closure.

22

As we are

interested in short-run labor market responses, we restrict the sample to individuals in the adult
module (aged 12 and over) who are currently in the labor force (54 percent of sample, Appendix

23

Table 1).

We focus on two key work variables.
the week prior to the survey.

24

Our primary focus is on the number of hours worked in

Individuals who were unemployed are assigned zero hours worked

in order to account for selection. We additionally consider the unemployment rate as an outcome
for two reasons. First, as we discuss below, we would like to test whether the closure led to lower
employment levels near the renery. Second, lower pollution may lead to health improvements, and
thus a higher probability of nding employment in a given week.
It is important to note several key facts regarding the data. First, in each quarter, individuals
are randomly assigned a week to be interviewed and most of the labor market questions refer to
the week prior to that week.

Therefore, we can precisely link the daily measures of pollution to

these weekly employment measures. Second, the data contain information on the census block that
the individual lives in (in Mexico, this is known as the basic geo-statistic area).

This allows us

22 Focusing on the years around the closure reduces the probability of selective migration. Moreover, the 1994 data
are not fully comparable to the earlier years of data. First, randomly selected census blocks comprise the sampling
units of the survey.

The rotating nature of the panel demanded a new set of households was selected from within

the census blocks every quarter; this was done until all households within each census block were exhausted.
happened for nearly all census blocks between 1993:Q4 and 1994:Q1.

This

After that, new census blocks were selected.

Second, the survey questionnaire changed in 1994:Q2, compromising the comparability of key variables over time.
Finally, 1994 was marked by political unrest that culminated in one of the largest economic crisis in Mexico.

23 The labor force variable was constructed as follows: Individuals were assigned to be in the labor force if they

worked in the last week, owned a business, owned a business but did not work in the last week, were starting a
business, were looking for paid work, were trying to carry out a job on their own, were in the process of starting a
business, or were currently trying to sell something to support themselves or their family.

24 The survey collects the number of hours worked

each day

is available in the public database.

12

in the last week. Unfortunately, only the weekly total

to link each individual's residence to the closest pollution measurement station. The survey lacks
data on the census block where the individual works. However, individuals presumably experience
substantial morning and evening exposure when they are at home. Moreover, the closure may have
aected morning pollution disproportionately.

Figure 2 graphs average

prior to and after the renery closure. Prior to the renery closure,

SO2

SO2

by hour of day, both

peaked between 6 and 11 in

the morning. While average pollution fell at all hours of the day after the closure, the morning peak

25

was particularly reduced.

Third, the survey includes rich data on both demographics and work characteristics.

This is

important for two reasons. First, this allows us to test whether demographic characteristics changed
dierentially for households in the neighborhood of the renery after the closure, allowing us to
observe whether the closure induced selective migration.

Second, it allows us to test for the het-

erogeneity of the treatment eect by a number of key characteristics, such as the physical nature
of the job (i.e. blue or white collar work), the type of payment scheme, and the presence of young
dependents.
Finally, the data also include information on the weekly wage. As we discuss in Section 4, we
would like to understand if the estimated eect is being driven by changes in wages as a result of the
closure. Note that there are several concerns with the wage data. First, missing data appeared to
be entered as 0, with many individuals having 0 weekly wage despite having a xed salary and
positive hours worked; these individuals were not included in the wage regressions. Second, for those
who were currently unemployed, the questions ask for the worker's typical wage. Since we cannot
know what time periods the individuals used to estimate their typical wage, we again did not include
them in the wage regressions.

Finally, the survey asked for the weekly wage, but did not ask for

the specic wage schedule. This means that for workers with variable earnings, the wage per unit
of work is unobservable. Thus, we consider the wages only for individuals who have a xed salary
in the wage regression. This restriction means that our wage measure will capture changes in wages
due to individuals moving into and out of xed salary jobs (about 70 percent of the employed), but
may miss changes in wages for laborers with variable weekly earnings.

25 We estimated the models in Tables 3 and 4 using

SO2

from 6 AM to 11AM rather than over the full day. The

empirical results are similar in both sign, magnitude, and signicance.

13

Wind and Altitude Data
We will estimate models that exploit variation in the change in pollution from the closure that is
generated from altitude and wind patterns. Data on the altitude of the census block centroid come
from topology maps.

Data on wind speed and wind direction, by station, were not collected for

the period of our study. Therefore, we use the 10-year averages of wind speed and wind direction
information from 1997 to 2006 for 10 of the air monitoring stations used in our study. Wind patterns
are very persistent over time: the correlation of wind-speed across years for a particular week-of-theyear and location is around 0.8.

Thus, the measures of wind speed and wind direction should be

informative of the wind patterns during the period of study.

Matching the Labor and Pollution Data
To estimate the eect of pollution on labor supply, we matched the households in the ENEU survey
with pollution readings. To do so, we linked the census blocks in the ENEU to GIS maps and obtained
the latitude and longitude of the center of each block. There were 481 census blocks in the ENEU (see
Appendix Table 1). However, the earliest available georeferenced maps correspond to census blocks
in 2000, and census block identication numbers are only concorded back to 1995.

We obtained

non-georeferenced maps for the 1990 census blocks from the Instituto Nacional de Estadística y
Geografía (INEGI) and manually concorded the data. As shown in Appendix Table 1, we were able
to ascertain the locations of 389 census blocks (or 81 percent of them).

26

However, as Columns 1 and

2 of Appendix Table 2 shows, the census blocks that we were unable to match to a location on the
maps do not appear to be signicantly dierent than those that we were able to match.
Following Currie and Neidell (2005), we created census block-specic measures of pollution using
the inverse of the distance to the nearby stations as weights. There is a trade o between including
areas that are far from a station where pollution estimates are imprecise and including more observations in the analysis. We only included census blocks that were within eight kilometers (or ve miles)

27

of a station.

Therefore, 265 census blocks (or 55 percent of them) were included in the regression

26 There are two reasons why we could not fully concord the identication numbers of the census blocks across
years. First, in some cases, the areas were very small and/or the maps were blurry and we could not fully read the
identication numbers in the 1990 maps. Second, if a census block was split into two before 1990, we would be unable
to locate the original on the 1990 map.

27 We tested whether the primary results are sensitive to this restriction. We rst estimated the main regressions

14

analysis (Appendix Table 1). Most of the census blocks that were near a station are located within
Distrito Federal, which comprises the center part of the city and is also where the renery is located
(190 out of 199 census blocks in Distrito Federal were within eight kilometers of a station). Only
75 out of 190 matched census blocks in Estado de Mexico (the outer areas of the city) were near a
station and thus included. Areas in the inner part of the city are quite dierent than the outer areas,
and thus, we expected that the census blocks located near at least one station would be dierent
than those located farther away from the stations. As Appendix Table 2 conrms, the included areas
have higher unemployment and lower hours worked than those that are not included, suggesting that
the stations may be placed predominantly in poorer neighborhoods.

4

Empirical Strategy

Our objective is to estimate the elasticity of the number of hours (Yint ) that individual
time

t

in census block

n

with respect to pollution at time

t − 1, Pin(t−1) ,

i

worked at

or the parameter

β1

in

equation (6):


ln(Yint ) = β0 + β1 ln Pin(t−1) + uint
where

uint ,

(6)

the error term, condenses all unobserved determinants of the hours worked. We focus on

pollution levels from the week prior to the interview, as respiratory diseases may take several days
with a shorter range (5km), in which we would have more precise pollution data, but a smaller sample size. Although
the sample size falls, most of the main results on hours worked and unemployment stay the same sign, magnitude,
and remain signicant. However, while the magnitude of the models that include the location-specic trend is similar
(if anything, a bit larger in magnitude), we lose power due to the reduced sample size. We then estimated the main
regressions where there is larger range (10km), when the pollution data are noisier but we have a larger sample size. In
this case, more census blocks from Estado de Mexico are included. We were concerned that these neighborhoods would
have dierential trends in employment characteristics than the main sample as they were experiencing high levels of
growth during this time period. In this case, the basic xed eects model is of similar magnitude and sign for hours
worked, but the estimate is no longer signicant at conventional levels. The model including census block-specic year
trends (our preferred model) is of the same sign, slightly larger in magnitude and signicant at the 5 percent level.

15

28

to develop.

To consistently estimate

β1 ,

we require the following identication assumption to hold:

E uint  ln Pin(t−1)



=0

(7)

However, there are many reasons to believe that (7) does not hold. For example, both worker hours
and pollution levels may vary with business cycles (Chay and Greenstone, 2003).
income variables in

uint

Thus, omitted

could generate a spurious negative correlation between pollution and hours

worked. On the other hand, the bias could be positive if, for example, wealthier households live in
areas with low levels of pollution.
Instead, we take advantage of the plausibly exogenous variation in pollution from the renery
closure. Specically, we estimate the following model using an instrumental variables approach:

where

P ost(t−1)


ln Pin(t−1) = θ0 + αt−1 + δn + θ1 (P ost(t−1) × Din ) + in(t−1)

(8)


ln(Yint ) = β0 + β1 ln Pin(t−1) + αt−1 + δn + νint

(9)

is an indicator variable for weeks after the renery closure,

kilometers between the census block
block xed eects, and

νint

n

and the renery,

αt−1

Din

is the distance in

are week xed eects,

δn

are census-

represents all unobserved determinants of labor supply. We instrument

for pollution in Equation (9) with

(P ost(t−1) × Din ).

In this model, the estimate for

β1

is unbiased

if, conditional on week and census block xed eects, there are no unobserved determinants of labor
supply that change dierentially by distance after the closure.


E (P ost(t−1) × Din )  νint |αt−1 , δn = 0

(10)

Contrary to assumption (7) above, assumption (10) would hold if there are income shocks that aect

28 The empirical evidence suggests a lag of up to a week: for example, Peel et al. (2005) study the lag structure
between pollution levels and emergency visits and nd that the risk ratios for asthma were the strongest for lag of 5
to 8 days. The employment data only includes the weekly measure of work (and not daily measures), and therefore,
we cannot include a separate lag per work day. Instead, we explore how pollution levels in the previous week aects
employment outcomes this week. As an additional test, we also estimated a model that measures the elasticity for
pollution in the concurrent week.

The observed eects are similar in magnitude, but have higher standard errors.

Results are available upon request.

16

both labor supply and pollution as long as these shocks are common to all areas in the MCMA. In
addition, assumption (10) is robust to permanent dierences in labor supply outcomes across dierent
census blocks of the MCMA.
Since our instrument is an interaction between distance and timing, the identication assumption,
(10), relies on the fact that areas both close to and far from the renery have similar trends in labor
supply. This may not be the case if, for example, areas on the outskirts of the city (far from the
renery) are growing at a faster rate than areas closer to the center of the city (near the renery).
However, the panel structure of the data allows for additional controls that purge the eect of the
renery closure of any bias associated with dierential neighborhood trends. The augmented model
includes census block-specic linear year trends,

δn × T(t−1) ,

in both our rst stage and second stage

equations:


ln Pin(t−1) = θ0 + αt−1 + δn + θ1 (P ost(t−1) × Din ) + δn × T(t−1) + in(t−1)

(11)


ln(Yint ) = β0 + β1 ln Pin(t−1) + αt−1 + δn + δn × T(t−1) + νint

(12)

In this model, the exclusion restriction would be violated if other events that aected labor supply
occurred at the exact time of the renery closure and also disproportionally aected workers that
lived near the renery. This is unlikely, as we are condent that no other policies or economic events
coincided with the exact timing and location of the renery closure.
The exclusion restriction may still, however, be violated if the renery closure itself impacted the
labor market independently of the health channel. Moreover, the exclusion restriction could also be
violated if dierential migration into the areas surrounding the renery occurred after it closed (i.e.
sorting). We next discuss how these factors could theoretically aect the estimated elasticity of hours
worked with respect to pollution levels and the additional specications that we will test for these
factors.

17

Direct Eects on the Labor Market
We rst explore the sign and plausibility of a direct eect of the renery closure on observed labor
supply outcomes. By causing the lay-o of renery sta, the closure could have mechanically lowered
hours worked for the renery workers.

Renery workers were often provided with housing in the

neighborhoods surrounding the renery as part of their employment benets, and many of them
remained living in the area after the renery closed (Bazán 1999).

Thus, the presence of renery

workers in the neighborhoods around the renery would lead us to

underestimate

the relationship

between pollution and labor supply that is due to health.
This downward bias would be large if the renery workers comprised a large share of the labor
market. However, employment at the renery was not large relative to the overall labor market. The
Azcapotzalco Renery employed about 5,000 people at the time of its closure. This represented only
about 0.56 percent of the population in the municipalities located in a ve kilometer range of the
Renery, and 0.03 percent of the entire population of Mexico City (1990 Census). After the closure,
2,600 of these employees were forced into early retirement. About 1,500 were transitory employees
and were laid o according to the minimum requirements mandated by the labor law. The rest were
laid o according to the union's collective contract, which oered better terms than the labor law
(García Villanueva et al., 2009).

29

Even if the renery jobs themselves did not comprise a large share of the labor market, it is
still possible that the closure could have aected the labor market if businesses located near the
renery were aected by closure and labor markets were very localized (i.e. individuals work in the
neighborhood in which they live). Specically, both the increased unemployment due to the renery
and a slowdown of business activity near the renery could have resulted in a localized labor demand
shock that would have reduced equilibrium wages.

If labor supply is upward sloping, this fall in

wages should have led to reductions in work hours. Thus, the IV method would

underestimate

the

eect of pollution on labor supply.
While less likely, there are also reasons to believe a negative demand shock could lead us to

29 Total oil workers constitute less than 0.5 percent of our pre-closure sample (note that this includes anyone who
worked in oil-connected industries and not just those who worked at the renery). Appendix Table 3 conrms that
employment in the oil industry fell from 0.48 percent in 1989:Q1 to almost zero percent in 1993:Q4 within our sample.
The fall began prior to the closure, and the reduction of oil workers was concentrated near the renery (see Figure 3).

18

overestimate the eect of pollution on labor supply. For example, if labor supply is downward sloping,
workers may have responded to lower equilibrium wages by increasing hours of work. However, the
empirical evidence does not support this: using data for the 1990-2000 period, Arceo and Campos
(2010) estimate that the labor supply elasticity is 0.17 for men and 0.61 for women in the Mexican
labor force. Non-wage eects in local labor markets could also bias our estimates upward. If real
wages are rigid, a negative labor supply shock could increase the threat of unemployment for those
employed and lead to increased work eort, some of which could be in the form of reduced absenteeism.
However, rigidity of real wages is unlikely to happen in a context of high ination (Fehr and Goette,
2005), and the annual ination rate in Mexico in 1991 was 22 percent.
Existing data suggest that the labor market within Mexico City is quite integrated across neighborhoods; and therefore, the demand shock from the renery was likely spread across a wide area. Data
from the MCMA travel survey of 1994 reveal that, on average, individuals commute 57 kilometers to
go to work, while the average census block in our sample is 0.36 square kilometers. Nevertheless, we
conduct additional analysis to understand whether the closure had an eect on hours worked that is
independent of the health channel.
First, we use our dierence-in-dierence design to directly test for localized wage eects as a
consequence of the renery closure.

This method will only provide suggestive evidence for two

reasons. First, wages may also be capturing productivity changes. Second, even with no eects on
wages, an increased threat of unemployment could lead to less absenteeism in the presence of wage
rigidity.
Instead, we exploit additional within-neighborhood variation in pollution to isolate the health
channel from other localized eects of the renery closure. More specically, we conduct a tripledierence approach using data on wind patterns and altitude. The intuition is as follows: Assume the
closure had an eect on hours worked (and employment in general) that was independent of the health
gains from reduced pollution levels, and that this eect also faded away as a function of the distance
to the renery. Take the census blocks that lie between

d and d+1 miles from the renery.

The health-

independent eect of the renery closure on hours of work should have been nearly identical for all
individuals inside this mile-wide ring. Now assume that the census blocks north of the renery have
east-west fast winds, whereas the census blocks south of the renery have north-south mild winds.

19

For a small

d, the renery closure would have had a larger eect on the pollution faced by those census

blocks that lie south of the renery than on those that lie north of the renery (for a very large

d,

however, the renery closure should have no eect on pollution within the mile-wide ring). Therefore,
the information on wind patterns interacts with the distance from the renery and the timing of the
closure to produce variation in pollution levels that is independent from any other localized direct
eects of the renery closure.

30

In addition, the interaction of altitude with distance and the timing

of the renery closure may also provide exogenous variation in pollution: pollution concentrations
vary at dierent levels from the ground due to thermal inversions and pollution exposure from wind
patterns.
In a regression framework, we estimate:


ln Pin(t−1) = θ0 + θ1 (P ost(t−1) × Din × W in(t−1) ) + θ2 (P ost(t−1) × Din ) + θ3 (P ost(t−1) × W in(t−1) )
+θ4 (Din × W in(t−1) ) + θ5 W in(t−1) + αt−1 + δn + in(t−1)
(13)


ln(Yint ) = β0 + β1 ln Pin(t−1) + β2 (P ost(t−1) × Din ) + β3 (P ost(t−1) × W in(t−1) )

(14)

+β4 (Din × W in(t−1) ) + β5 W in(t−1) + αt−1 + δn + ηint
Specically, we instrument pollution in Equation 14 with
of

β1

(P ost(t−1) × Din × W in(t−1) ).

The estimate

is unbiased if:


E (P ost(t−1) × Din × W in(t−1) )ηint |W, αt−1 , δn = 0
where

W = [(P ost(t−1) ×Din ), (P ost(t−1) ×W in(t−1) ), (Din ×W in(t−1) ), W in(t−1) ], and W in(t−1) includes

wind speed, wind direction and altitude. Note that this model only exploits the variation in pollution
due to wind patterns and topography within areas that are equidistant from the renery, while
holding constant all the dierential changes in pollution that occur across close and distant areas,

(P ost(t−1) × Din ).

As such, this is a very restrictive model.

30 Schlenker and Walker (2010) use a similar methodology to generate variation in pollution in a given distance from
an airport.

20

Selective Migration/Sorting
The closure may have altered the attractiveness of surrounding neighborhoods for individuals with
strong preferences for air quality (or any other neighborhood attributes linked to the renery presence). If wealthier or healthier people moved closer to the renery after it closed, the estimates may
simply be capturing the dierences in labor supply between the old and new residents of the renery
neighborhood.

31

We address this issue in two ways. First, our estimates are based on a sample that

spans the ve years around the closure to reduce the time frame for dierential sorting. Second, we
explore whether migration rates as well as time-xed demographics (such as gender, education and
marital status) changed dierentially for workers who lived close to the renery.

5

Results

5.1 Sample Statistics and Basic Correlation
Table 1 provides sample statistics for the full sample (Column 1), and the periods before (Column
2) and after (Column 3) the closure.

We present the mean of each variable with the standard

deviation in parenthesis below the mean, and the number of observations below that.
provides information on

SO2 ,

Panel A

while Panel B provides information on labor market outcomes. Panels

C and D provide information on the characteristics that we explore in the heterogeneity results.
Pollution concentrations are high (Panel A). The mean
million (Column 1); mean

SO2

SO2

level was 4.46 parts per hundred

in the United States during the same period was 0.82 parts per

hundred million, and the 90th percentile was 1.05. Pollution fell by about a fth in the post-closure
period from 5.02 (Column 2) to 4.04 parts per hundred million (Column 3).

32

On average, the labor market outcomes were fairly constant over the sample period (Panel B).

31 For a sample in California, Coey (2003) shows that households with weaker health are located in areas with
cleaner air, and ignoring this aect may cause one to underestimate infant mortality rates.

32 Of course, this overall fall in pollution may have also been due to other policies, as the closure of the renery was

part of a set of policies aimed at improving the air quality in the MCMA. However, all other policies had either no
eects or a city-wide eect, and therefore, should not aect our xed eects strategy for measuring the impact of the
renery closure. For instance, the Driving Restrictions program (Hoy No Circula program), which aected all vehicles
in circulation, was introduced in 1989 (see Davis (2008) for an evaluation of this program). In 1990, Pemex introduced
unleaded gasoline. Low

SO2

diesel and three-way catalytic converters were both introduced in 1993, but in both cases

the introductions were gradual and their eects were not localized (Secretaría de Medio Ambiente, DF).

21

About four percent of those in the labor force were unemployed, with no change in the post-closure
period. Individuals typically worked 38.07 hours per week, with slightly higher hours worked in the
post period (38.27 as compared to 37.79 prior to the closure).
Panels C and D provide data on the demographic and job characteristics, respectively. Thirty-six
percent are female, 15 percent are above the age of 50, and 37 percent have at least one child who
is under the age of 5. Eighty-three percent of workers who are employed have blue collar positions
(Column 1); this gure remained constant over the sample period (Columns 2 and 3).

Of those

employed, 69 percent reported to be exclusively on a xed salary contract; the remaining 30 percent
received at least part of their earnings in the form of incentive payments: the worker was paid by
the hour, by the day, by the task, by commission, received tips, or a share of the prots (henceforth
this group will be referred to as variable earnings workers).
In Table 2, we provide the correlation between pollution and the labor market outcomes.
Column 1, we present the coecient estimate of

β1

In

from Equation 6, where the outcome variable of

interest is the natural log of hours worked and the dependent variable is the natural log of the mean
of

SO2

33

during the last week.

In Column 2, we present this estimate, conditional on census block

xed eects and week xed eects, while we additionally include demographic controls in Column
3. Columns 4 - 6 replicate the analysis in Columns 1-3, but instead focuses on unemployment. Note
that unemployment is divided by 100 for ease of interpretation (as it is a level-log model).
We observe a negative relationship between the labor market variables and pollution.

A one

percent increase in pollution is associated with a 0.01 percent fall in hours worked, but the coecient
is insignicant (Column 1). Controlling for the xed characteristics of neighborhoods and weeks, a one
percent increase in pollution is associated with a 0.02 percent fall in hours worked; this is signicant
at the 10 percent level (Column 2). Including demographic variables does not signicantly alter the
coecient estimate (Column 3). Pollution is also negatively associated with unemployment, but the
coecient estimate cannot be distinguished from zero when census block and week xed eects are
included (Columns 4 - 6).
The inclusion of week and census block xed eects should help reduce the bias in the OLS
estimate.

Specically, the inclusion of week xed eects removes all time-varying shocks to work

33 We take the natural log of hours worked plus one to account for zeros in hours worked.

22

outcomes that are common to the entire city. This is important if we believe time-varying shocks
(such as exchange rate uctuations, changes in domestic policies, etc.)

have had large eects on

both work outcomes and pollution. Census block xed eects absorb the unobserved heterogeneity
in the determinants of labor outcomes that are common to a particular neighborhood in the city.
However, these estimates may still be biased for two reasons.

First, these estimates would still

be biased if there were shocks that aect a particular location at a particular time. For example,
suppose there is a large factory in a neighborhood, and that due to increased work orders that week,
the factory increases work hours.

The longer work hours at the factory may also result in higher

pollution levels. Alternatively, suppose that certain neighborhoods have increased trac due to road
construction patterns that week; increased trac may increase pollution, but it might also reduce
the hours that individuals have available for work. Second, the OLS estimates will almost surely be
attentuated due to classical measurement error.

With relatively few stations, and with estimated

pollution measures per census block, we expect measurement error is an important concern in this
case. This is particularly a problem in developing countries where stations are relatively sparse as
compared to developed country settings. The xed eects approach will exacerbate the measurement
error problem, biasing the estimated parameters towards zero. Our instrumental variables approach,
to be discussed next, addresses these potential confounding eects, as well as classical measurement
error in the pollution measures.

5.2 First Stage Results
Figure 4 provides a graph of

SO2 ,

by week, for census blocks within and beyond a ve kilometer

radius from the renery, controlling for census block xed eects. After the renery closes (March
1991), pollution falls in the census blocks close to the renery relative to census blocks farther away.
The spikes in pollution around winter time, like the ones observed at the beginning of 1989 and the
end of 1991, are a common phenomenon in Mexico City. At this time of the year, thermal inversions
and wind direction conspire to prevent pollution from owing out of the valley.

Due to the high

variance in pollution, the seasonal patterns, and the falling pollution trends for both groups, Figure
4 illustrates the need to use more precise distance information, control for seasonal eects, and also

23

control for census block-specic trends to reduce the variance in the estimates.

34

In Table 3, we estimate the eect of the renery closure on pollution. These results are interesting
in their own right  given the cost imposed by closing the renery, the success of the closure in
reducing pollution levels is an important outcome to measure. The results are also important, for
the purpose of this study, because they form the rst stage estimates of the subsequent instrumental
variables model. In Column 1, we present the estimate of

θ1

from Equation (8), where we replace

the distance variable with a dummy variable for whether the census block is located within ve
kilometers of the renery.

While this does not take full advantage of the variation in distance, it

provides a simple interpretation of the eect of the closure. In Column 2, we present the estimate
of

θ1

from Equation (8). Column 3 replicates the analysis in Column 2, but additionally includes

demographic controls  an indicator variable each for gender and age, a set of indicator variables
for educational attainment, and a set of indicator variables for marital status.

Finally, Column 4

reports on a specication that additionally controls for year trends in each census block (Equation
11). Note that all specications include both week and census block xed eects and are clustered
by census block.
The renery closure substantially reduced pollution. As shown in Column 1, after the renery
closed, areas located within ve kilometers of the renery experienced a 8.28 percent decrease in mean

SO2

(signicant at the one percent level). We observe relatively higher

SO2

within a census block

after the closure for those located farther away (Column 2). The estimated eect is not driven by
standard demographic characteristics (Column 3) nor by neighborhood-specic trends (Column 4).
For example, controlling for census block-specic year trends, the magnitude of the eect increases
from 0.65 percent to 0.94 percent increase in relative pollution per km and the estimate remains
signicant at the one percent level (Column 4).

5.3 Policy Impact Evaluation (Reduced Form Estimation)
We begin by estimating the reduced form impact of the closure on work decisions. This is important
because it allows us to easily interpret the benets of the closure, which also imposed signicant

34 Note that pollution falls over time. This is due in part to other environmental regulations that occurred in this
time period. However, this should not aect our estimates as the policies were city-wide and we are controlling for
week xed eects.

24

economic costs in the form of lost prots and wages. We estimate the direct eect of the policy on
the log of hours worked, with (Equation 16) and without (Equation 15) census block-specic year
trends:

ln(Yint ) = π0 + αt−1 + δn + π1 (P ost(t−1) × Din ) + in(t−1)

(15)

ln(Yint ) = π0 + αt−1 + δn + π1 (P ost(t−1) × Din ) + (δn × T(t−1) ) + in(t−1)

(16)

We present these results in Panel A of Table 4. In Columns 1 - 4, the outcome variable of interest is
the natural log of hours worked. The number of hours worked is zero for those who are unemployed,
and thus this measure captures both the intensive and extensive margins of work.
we present the estimate of

π1

35

In Column 1,

from Equation (15), where we replace the distance variable with an

indicator variable for whether the census block is located within ve kilometers of the renery. In
Column 2, we present the coecient estimate of

π1

from Equation 15. Column 3 adds controls for

demographic characteristics, while Column 4 adds year-specic trends in each census block (Equation
16). All specications are clustered at the census block level, and include both week and census block
xed eects. Columns 5  8 replicate the analysis in Columns 1 - 4 with unemployment status as the
dependent variable.
On average, after the closure, we observe a 5.5 percent increase in hours worked for individuals
who lived within ve kilometers of the renery (Column 1). After the renery closed, hours of work
were 0.32 percent relatively lower per each km from the renery (Column 2). Adding demographic
controls (Column 3) slightly reduces the magnitude of the estimated coecient (0.32 to 0.29 percent).
As shown in Column 4, the eect is larger in magnitude when controlling for census block-specic
year trends, but we cannot reject that it is signicantly dierent from the earlier estimates.
After the renery closed, the unemployment rate fell by about 1 percentage point in the area surrounding the renery (Column 5). This has two important implications, as we discussed in Section
4.

First, the renery closure may have generated a negative demand shock.

In this case, if labor

supply is upward-sloping, we would expect a spurious negative correlation between unemployment

35 We take the natural log of hours worked plus one to account for zeros in hours worked.

25

and distance, which would cause us to underestimate the eect of pollution on hours worked. Second,
30 percent of the employed are variable earnings workers. Some of the variable earning workers may
have short term contracts (i.e. by the day or by the hour) and, if they become ill due to respiratory
disease, it is possible that they do not nd work the following week and are counted as unemployed.
The estimated eects are positive and thus more consistent with the latter story. However, it is important to note that when we control for census block-specic trends in unemployment (our preferred
specication), the reduced form estimate is not statistically signicant (Column 8).

5.4 Estimated Eects of Pollution on Labor Outcomes
Panel B of Table 4 presents the IV estimates of the elasticity of hours worked with respect to
Specically, we present coecient estimates of

β1 from Equation (9).

SO2 .

In the rst four columns, the log

of hours worked is the outcome of interest. The hours worked is zero for those who are unemployed,
and thus this measure captures both the intensive and extensive margins of work.

36

The rst stage

estimates for each of these columns correspond to those presented in Table 3. In Columns 5  8, we
replicate the analysis in Columns 1  4, but we now have an indicator variable for being unemployed as

37

the outcome variable.

For these models, unemployment is divided by 100 for ease of interpretation

(as it is a level-log model). All specications include both week and census block xed eects and
are clustered at the census block level.
Higher

SO2

leads to reduced hours worked in the following week (Panel B, Columns 1-4).

(P ost(t−1) × Din )

as the instrument for

SO2

(Column 2), a one percent increase in

a 0.48 percent fall in hours worked (signicant at the 5 percent level).

39

SO2

38

Using

leads to

The coecient estimates

36 We take the natural log of hours worked plus one to account for zeros in hours worked. In these models, we have
a censored dependent variable (one cannot work less than zero hours per week). Due to our xed eects approach,
a tobit model is subject to the incidental parameter problem.

As a robustness check, we have estimated Equation

9 using a two-stage Tobit model (equivalent to Table 4, Panel B, Column 2). The coecient remains negative and
signicant.

37 Despite an indicator variable as the outcome variable, we present the estimates of a linear probability model.

Given the xed eects approach, a logit or probit model is subject to an incidental parameter problem , especially
when trends are included. Nonetheless, we estimated the two-stage probit model for Equation 9 (equivalent to Table
4, Panel B, Column 6). The coecient remains positive and signicant.

38 As discussed in the data section,

in this setting, such as

P M , N Ox

SO2 may be a proxy for other renery-generated pollutants that are not collected
CO. It is possible that other pollutants are correlated with SO2 and work hours,

and

and are also moved by the renery closure. In this case, the estimated elasticity would additionally capture the eect
of other renery-generated pollutants.

39 Note that this eect size falls within the range of eect sizes of smoking on absenteeism: Leigh (1995) observed a

40 minute to 3 hour increase in work hours for non-smokers, while we observe a 2 two hour total eect of the closure.

26

are similar in magnitude and signicance when controlling for demographic characteristics (Column
3). The estimated eect is not due to dierential trends: controlling for census block-specic yearly
trends, a one percent increase in

SO2

results in a 0.61 percent fall in hours worked (Column 4).

40

We next explore the eect of pollution on unemployment. In the basic xed eects model using
distance as an instrument (Column 6, Panel B of Table 4), we observe that a one percent increase
in mean

SO2

leads to a 0.10 percent increase in unemployment (signicant at the 5 percent level).

Controlling for census block-specic year trends, the eect size falls to 0.07 percent and is no longer
signicant at conventional levels (Column 8). Thus, while we observe a substantial eect of pollution
on hours worked per week, we observe only a small increase or no eect on overall unemployment
levels.

Ruling Out the Direct Eect of the Closure on the Labor Market

As outlined in Section 4,

the closure itself could mechanically lower hours of work in the short-run (through lay-os of renery
workers). While the renery itself did not comprise a large share of the labor market surrounding
the renery, it may also have had eects on local businesses.

If labor markets are localized by

neighborhood (i.e. individuals work in the same neighborhoods that they live), the resulting change
in labor demand would likely result in an underestimate of the estimated elasticity. While the existing
qualitative evidence (discussed in Section 4) suggests that the labor market in Mexico City is fairly
integrated, we formally test for this eect in two ways.
We rst estimate the reduced form eect of the renery closure on the natural log of wages (Table
5). The table format is similar to Table 3. All models are estimated using OLS, with standard errors
clustered at the census block level. Across all four specications, we cannot reject that the eect of
the renery on the log of wages is dierent from zero. In addition, the magnitudes of the estimated
coecients are very small across all four models.

However, given that the theoretically predicted

change in wages is ambiguous (the demand shock could have lowered equilibrium wages, but the
Van Ours (2004) also nds large productivity eects for smokers, with a 10 percent reduction in wage for male smokers.

40 Due to the nature of the rotating panel, only about 10 percent of our sample is present both before and after

the renery closure.

As such, we lack statistical power to include individual xed eects.

We also experimented

with further restricting the sample to the period to a narrower period around the renery closure, but again run into
problems with statistical power. If we restrict only to the years 1990 and 1991 (only 56, 137 observations), the eects
are negative (-0.36) and marginally signicant (p=0.10) using post times the distance variables as the instrument (this
compares to -0.48 in Table 4, Panel B, Column 2). If we restrict further to only those present before and after the
closure (only 13, 145 observations), the estimated eect is negative, but cannot be distinguished from zero.

27

productivity shock could have raised them), this test in itself does not fully rule out the direct eect
of the closure on the labor market.
Instead, we exploit additional within-neighborhood variation in pollution to isolate the health
channel from other localized eects of the renery closure. As explained in Section 4, we use information on wind patterns and altitude to conduct a triple-dierence approach. The IV strategy used
in these specications requires substantial variation in the altitude and wind measurements within
groups of census blocks that are located at a similar distance to the renery. Altitude has moderate
variation close to the renery: the mean altitude is 2,256 m and the standard deviation is 15 m
across census blocks within 5 km of the renery, while the standard deviation is 63 m across census
blocks that are further than 5 km. Wind patterns have considerably greater variation across census
blocks and across weeks. The average wind direction in degrees is 60 with a standard deviation of 40
degrees in census blocks close to the renery and 43 degrees in census blocks further than 5 km to the
renery, where 0 degrees corresponds to a position directly upwind from the renery and a maximum
of 180 degrees corresponds to a position directly downwind.

Similarly, the standard deviation for

wind speed is between 10 and 50 percent of the mean.
The results of this strategy are presented in Table 6. Panel A reports the estimated coecient
vector

θ1

from Equation (13), along with F-tests for joint signicance when multiple instruments are

used. Panels B - D present the IV estimates of

β1

for the natural log of hours worked, unemployment,

and wages respectively (Equation 14). Column 1 reports on specications that include both week
and census block xed eects, Column 2 reports on specications that add demographic controls,
and Column 3 reports on specications that add census block specic year trends.
Panel A of Table 6 conrms that altitude and wind patterns provide additional variation in
the change in pollution exposure that is generated from the renery closure.

In particular, after

the closure, individuals that live downwind from the renery and farther away from it experience
relatively higher levels of pollution than individuals that live downwind and closer to the renery
(there is a a positive and signicant coecient on the triple interaction of Post, Distance and Wind
Direction).

Wind speed and elevation do not seem to have a dierential impact on pollution for

individuals that live far away from the renery.
Despite having fewer observations because of missing wind information for ve of our monitoring

28

stations (which forces us to drop 25 of the 265 census blocks), the IV results on hours of work
from Columns 1 and 2 (Panel B) are remarkably similar to the results from the simple dierence-indierence model that is presented in Column 2 and 3 of Table 4. Given the restrictiveness of this
model, we check whether weak instruments might be a source of concern. The models in Columns 1
and 2 perform well under a weak instruments test (the Kleibergen-Paap weak instrument F statistic is
above the most stringent Stock-Yogo critical value,or have a maximum of 10% of the OLS bias). Note
that when we try to introduce census block-specic year trends, the coecient falls both in magnitude
and signicance (Column 3), which is not surprising given the weak instrument test results.
The IV results on unemployment rates (Panel C) follow a similar pattern to the dierence-indierence approach. Once again, there is no eect on wages for any of the specications we consider
(Panel D).
In summary, our results are robust to what we believe is a very strict test of endogeneity. This is
all the more remarkable giving that this model gives up substantial variation in the instruments used
compared to the model dened by Equations (11) and (12). As such, these ndings indicate that the
estimated elasticities do not appear to be driven by local labor demand shocks from the closure.

Ruling Out Selective Migration/Sorting

The renery closure may have induced dierential

migration into the areas that saw the sharpest reductions in pollution. For example, wealthier or
more educated individuals may have chosen to move into the newly clean neighborhoods. The fact
that our estimates are robust to the inclusion of demographic controls is at least suggestive that
selection is not an important source of bias in our estimates. Nonetheless, we test for selection bias
in two ways.
First, we test whether migration rates changed dierentially by distance after the closure. Figure
5 graphs out the propensity to migrate by quarter-year for households that live within 5 kilometers
of the renery versus those who live farther away. The migration rate is low: only 3.5 percent of
households migrated during the 5 quarter period they remained in our sample. The rates are fairly
constant before and after the closure for both groups (the rates are more volatile for those closer
to the renery, but this may be due to the smaller sample size of this group). In Table 7, we more
formally test whether migration is correlated with the instrument. To do so, we organize the data

29

at the level of a household-quarter-year. We then create an indicator variable that equals 1 if the
household was replaced in the survey in that quarter-year due to migration, and zero otherwise. We
then estimate the reduced form equation of the closure on migration (controlling for week and census
block xed eects). The results are presented in Column 1 of Panel A of Table 7. The coecient
estimate is small in magnitude and not signicantly dierent from zero.

Including census block

specic-year trends (Column 1 of Panel B) does not change the estimates.
Second, we test whether key demographic characteristics dierentially change after the closure.
We consider gender, age, marital status and education level. The results are presented in Columns
2- 6 of Panel A of Table 7. Of the ve variables considered, only one is signicant at the 10 percent
level: after the renery closed, individuals were relatively less likely to be married the farther they
lived from the renery. We conducted a joint test of the instrument across all ve variables, and we
fail to reject the null hypothesis that the instrument had no eect on any of the variables (p=0.27)
cannot be rejected. Controlling for census block specic year trends (Panel B), none of the variables
are signicant at conventional levels and the joint test fails to reject the null hypothesis that there is
no eect (p=0.77). Taken together, this evidence suggests that dierential migration is not driving
the estimated elasticities.

41

5.5 Heterogeneous Treatment Eects
The extent to which workers miss work due to high pollution levels may vary by demographics and
job types. In Table 8, we test for heterogeneous treatment eects. All specications include census
block xed eects, week xed eects, census block specic year trends, and demographic controls.
All specications are estimated using a two-stage least squares model, with standard errors clustered
at the census block.

Whose Health?

The elasticity may dier for men and women, especially if a household has young

children. For example, women may be more likely to stay home if a young child is sick, and thus
lower pollution levels could lead to increased hours worked if the children are healthier. Therefore,

41 We also estimated the specications in Table 4 restricting the sample to those families that do not move during
the 5 quarter period that they remain in our sample. The results are virtually identical to those in Table 4 and are
available upon request.

30

we test whether men and women exhibit dierent elasticities (Column 1 of Table 8), whether having
a young child in the household increases the eect of pollution on hours worked (Column 2), and
whether the eect of having a young child diers for men and women (Column 3).

Note that we

now have multiple endogenous variables. For example, in Column 1, we now have two endogenous
variablesln
instrument

F emaleint ).

Pin(t−1)



and


ln Pin(t−1) ×F emaleint .

(P ost(t−1) × Din )

As such, we create two instruments: the original

and its interaction with an indicator for female ((P ost(t−1)

× Din ) ×

This strategy results in a weak instrument problem, therefore the results should be

considered only suggestive.
We nd suggestive evidence that high pollution levels reduce hours worked at least in part through
their eect on the health of workers' children, but the limited sample sizes (Column 2) preclude
conclusive ndings. Women have a smaller reaction to

SO2

than men (Column 1), but this eect is

not signicant at conventional levels. The elasticity is stronger for individuals with children under
ve (Column 2), but this is not signicant at conventional levels. We nd that having a child under
5 increases absolute value of the estimated elasticity (signicant at the 10 percent value), but we
cannot reject the null that the estimated eect is dierent for males with young children and females
with young children (Column 3).
In addition, we may expect that pollution dierentially aects the health of older workers. We
test whether the elasticity is larger (in absolute value terms) for workers over the age of 50 (Column
4). While the elasticity is larger for older workers, we cannot conclude that this dierence is greater
than zero.

Employment and Contract Type
Next, we explore the eect of being in a blue collar position and having a xed salary contract on
hours worked.

The theory on the eect of both of these characteristics on the elasticity of hours

worked with respect to pollution is ambiguous.

Blue collar positions may be more physical than

white collar jobs, making it harder to work when sick. On the other hand, blue collar workers tend
to be lower paid and perhaps have less power in their work relationships, making it hard to take days
o.
Similarly, xed salary workers may be more likely to receive the same pay whether or not they

31

attend work, while variable earnings workers will have reduced earnings if they stay home when sick.
However, individuals with variable earnings contracts are often paid by the day or by the task. If
their productivity is low due to illness, their potential wage per day may be quite low, and low
enough that it would not be worth it for them to attend work.
In Column 5 of Table 8, we test whether the elasticity diers for blue collar and white collar
workers. In Column 6, we test whether there is a dierence in the elasticity for xed salary workers
versus those with variable earnings. Note that we only have data on industry and contract type for
those who are employed that week. We observe no dierence in the elasticities for white and blue
collar workers (Column 5), although these results are also subject to a weak instrument problem. On
the other hand, much of the eect of
6).

6

SO2

on hours worked is driven by xed salary workers (Column

42

Discussion

Interpreting our Results

In this paper, we demonstrate that an improvement in air quality

substantially increases the amount of hours worked. The dollar value of hours worked is not by any
means a complete measure of the overall welfare eect of better air quality. As discussed in Section 2,
individuals may gain other benets from improved air quality. First, workers may value consumption
more when they and their families experience better health.

Second, their expenditures on some

goods (like gym memberships and medicines) may go down, releasing income for consumption of
other goods. Finally, they may simply enjoy cleaner air and good health. However, the fact that
we nd such an important eect on labor supply behavior suggests that this component of the total
welfare gains from cleaner air is large enough that it should not be ignored.
In addition to understanding welfare implications of environmental regulation, understanding
whether air pollution aects labor supplyand, if so, the magnitude of the eecthas important

42 Of course, this estimate may be biased upward as we only know the contract type for those who are employed. In
the extreme case, some variable earnings workers may choose to take an entire week o when sick, and therefore would
be classied as unemployed. In this case, we would underestimate the eect for those on incentive based contracts. To
test for this possibility, we conducted a simple bounding exercise. Specically, we estimated the eects of demographic
characteristics and location within the city on contract status for those who were employed, and then predicted contract
status for those who were unemployed. We then re-ran the regression including the predicted contract status for those
who were unemployed. The results remained the same, suggesting that those on incentive-based contracts were not
taking a full week o when sick. These result are available from the authors upon request.

32

implications for designing the optimal tax on pollution.

43

Pollution taxes are appealing relative to

other forms of environmental regulation because the revenue they generate can be used to lower other
distortionary taxes. However, there is a debate in the double dividend literature on how to set optimal
pollution taxes. On one hand, it has been argued that pollution taxes are likely to result in lower
labor supply (as a result of direct regulation or through substitution eects on leisure as the price of
regulated goods goes up). This general equilibrium eect, known as the  interaction eect, implies
that the optimal tax on pollution might be lower than the marginal damage of pollution and that
other distortionary taxes may be necessary to maintain a balanced budget (Parry, 1995; Goulder
and Bovenberg, 1997).

Importantly, most of the early papers in this literature implicitly assume

that air quality does not aect labor supply through health.

Recent theoretical work shows that

the interaction eect is mitigated when air quality independently increases labor supply (Schwartz
and Repetto, 2000; Williams, 2003). Therefore, the fact that we observe a large and positive eect
of pollution on labor supply implies that the optimal tax on pollution is therefore closer to (and
potentially above) the marginal damage of air pollution.

44

Finally, it is also important to note that the eect on labor supply that we measure is restricted
to the short-term impacts of a change in air quality. If health eects of air quality are cumulative, we
could expect even larger labor supply eects. Moreover, as discussed in Section 2, if better air quality
contributes to work productivity per hour, the value of hours worked may increase and eventually
translate into higher wages.

Although we do not observe changes in wages in the period that we

focus on, this may change over a longer time horizon.

Distribution of costs and benets

The closure was instigated to reduce pollution levels in

Mexico City. It came, however, at a substantial cost. First, there was a loss of employment for 2,400
workers, with an additional 2,600 workers forced into early retirement. Second, the closure may have
led to oil shortages in the short-run. The renery was not replaced by another facility. The rening
capacity of Pemex fell in 1990 from 3,466 to 3,331 thousand daily barrels. While the rening capacity

43 This result also has important implications for the optimal level of any environmental regulation when maximizing
welfare under a balanced budget constraint.

44 For example, West and Williams (2007) estimate a demand system and nd that the optimal tax on gasoline

should be above the marginal damage of gasoline emissions. Their calculation does not take into account the fact that
lower gasoline consumption may reduce emissions and increase labor supply. Such an eect would yield an even larger
optimal gasoline tax.

33

started a slow recovery in 1992, fuel consumption increased at a faster pace. In 1989, the imports
of rened oil products exceeded Pemex exports for the rst time since 1980 and the gap continued
growing through 2000. Most of the costs associated with short-term shortages were absorbed by the
government since gasoline prices did not increase more than ination between 1990 and 1993 (Pemex
Statistical Yearbooks 1990 and 2001).
Our estimates suggest the closure led to substantial benets in the form of labor income. Suppose
we assume that all gains were concentrated in the 5 kilometers near the renery. Then, our estimates
imply that the renery closure lead to about a 5-percent increase in hours worked for those who lived
near the renery. Given an average annual wage of 13,700 1993 Mexican Pesos (USD 3,600), there
was a 756 Peso (or USD 198) per worker gain over the course of a year.
Note that we are unable to estimate whether these gains accrued to the workers or to their
employers. If the renery closure led to fewer sick days for xed salary employees, and these employees
enjoyed paid sick leaves, the benets would have been accrued to the employer. However, if employees
had a limited number of paid sick days or were able to cash out unused sick days, employees would
have shared in the benets of increased work ability. At the time of the closure, the work regulations
in place did not specically stipulate that employers were responsible for providing paid sick days
to their employees, although some may have chosen to do so. The formally employed did enjoy an
extended sick absence benet paid through Social Security (IMSS), receiving 60 percent of forgone
salary starting on the fourth day of an absence due to a documented illness.

Thus, the nancial

benets from reduced absences due to poor air quality were likely split between employers, employees,
and the Social Security System.

7

Conclusion

Pollution is high in the developing world and increasing at a very fast rate. For example, with 2005
emissions estimated to be about 25 million tons, China is the world's largest polluter of sulfur dioxide.
China became the world's largest emitter of greenhouse gases in 2006, while India is predicted to
become the third largest emitter (after China and the United States) by 2030.

Improvements in

global environmental quality will therefore not occur without the cooperation of developing countries

34

to enforce stricter environmental regulations. However, many low income countries may be hesitant
to potentially sacrice economic growth for possible improvements in environmental quality. This
study suggests that gains in worker eort may help oset some of the economic losses that may result
from more stringent environmental regulation. Specically, we nd that a one percent increase in

SO2

results in a 0.43 to 0.67 percent decline in hours worked in the following week. Given an average

annual wage of 13,700 1993 Mexican Pesos (USD 3,600), this resulted in an estimated 756 (USD 198)
per-worker gain from reduced absenteeism over the course of a year.
These ndings contribute to the literature that documents the costs of pollution associated with
short-term eects on health, and are consistent with studies that have documented the eect of
pollution on school absenteeism and performance (Currie, Hanushek, Kahn, Neidell, and Rivkin,
2009; Ransom and Pope, 1992; Gilliland et al., 2001).
for future research.

Moreover, the ndings suggest pathways

First, they raise questions about the distribution of gains.

In the context of

Mexico City, labor regulations were such that the gains from lower air pollution were likely split
between workers, employers and the social securtiy sistem. More generally, it would be interesting
to explore how labor regulations aect the propensity to miss work due to pollution-related illness,
and how this then aects the distribution of benets. Second, while the empirical model documents
a substantial

short-run

eect of changes in pollution on labor market outcomes, there may be larger

long-run impacts if there are cumulative eects of pollution on health or if wages change in response
to pollution. Future research, thus, should address longer-run outcomes on employment capabilities
and changes in work productivity and wages.

References
[1] Arceo Gómez, Eva and Raymundo Campos Vázquez, Labor Supply of Married Women
in Mexico: 1990-2000, Working Paper, Centro de Estudios Economicos, COLMEX, No.
XVI, 2010.
[2] Basta, Samir S., Soekirman, Darwin Karyadi, and Nevin Scrimshaw,  Iron Deciency
Anemia and Productivity of Adult Males in Indonesia.

Nutrition,

American Journal of Clinical

32 (1979), 916925.

[3] Bazán, Lucía, Casa y familia. Los Recursos de los Desempleados de Pemex en la Ciudad
de México, Estudios Sociológicos, Colegio de México, XVII, 50, 1999.

35

[4] Bevilacqua, M., Braglia, M., Environmental Eciency Analysis for ENI Oil Reneries,

Journal of Cleaner Production,

10 (2002), 8592.

[5] Coey, Bentley,  A Reexamination of Air Pollution's Eects on Infant Health: Does
Mobility Matter? Duke University mimeo. Durham, North Carolina: Duke University,
2003.
[6] Chay, Kenneth, and Michael Greenstone,  The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession,

The Quarterly Journal of Economics,

118 (2003), 11211167.

[7] Crocker, Thomas D. and Robert L. Horst Jr.,  Hours of Work, Labor Productivity, and
Environmental Conditions: A Case Study,

The Review of Economics and Statistics,

63

(1981), 361368.
[8] Currie, Janet, Eric Hanushek, E. Megan Khan, Matthew Neidell, and Steven G. Rivken,
 Does Pollution Increase School Absences?

The Review of Economics and Statistics, 91

(2009), 682694.
[9] Currie, Janet and Matthew Neidell, "Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We
Learn From California's Recent Experience?"

The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120

(2005), 10031030.
[10] Davies, K.J., C.M. Donovan, C.J. Reno, G.A. Brooks, L. Packer, and P.R. Dallman,
 Distinguishing the Eects of Anemia and Muscle Iron Deciency on Exercise Bioenergetics in the Rat,

American Journal of Physiology  Endocrinology and Metabolism,

246 (1984), E535E543.
[11] Davis, Lucas,  The Eect of Driving Restrictions on Air Quality in Mexico City,

of Political Economy,

Journal

116 (2008), 38-81.

[12] Dietert RR; Etzel RA; Chen D; Halonen M; Holladay SD; Jarabek AM; Landreth K;
Peden DB; Pinkerton K; Smialowicz RJ; Zoetis T.. Workshop to Identify Critical Window of Exposure for Children's Health: Immune and Respiratory Systems Work Group
Summary,

Environ Health Perspect,

108 (2000), 483-490.

[13] EPA, Integrated Science Assessment for Sulfur Oxides - Health Criteria,

ISA:

EPA/600/R-08/047F, 2008.
[14] Fehr, Ernst and Lorenz Goette, Robustness and Real Consequences of Nominal Wage
Rigidity.

Journal of Monetary Economics,

52 (2005), 779-804.

[15] Frankenberg, Elizabeth, Douglas McKee, and Duncan Thomas,  Health Consequences
of Forest Fires in Indonesia.
[16] García Villanueva,

Demography,

Luis Antonio,

42 (2005), 109129.

Georgina Fernández Villagómez,

Rosario Iturbe

Argüelles and Ulises Ruiz Saucedo, "Caso de Estudio: Antecedentes Históricos de la
Ex-renería "18 de marzo," Ciudad de México, 2009.
[17] Gilliland et al.,  The Eects of Ambient Air Pollution on School Absenteeism Due to
Respiratory Illness,

Epidemiology,

12 (2001): 4354.

36

[18] Gorman, Christine, and Laura Lopez,  Mexico City's Menacing Air,

Time Magazine,

April 1, 1001.
[19] Goulder, L. H., and L. Bovenberg, Costs of Environmentally Motivated Taxes in the
Presence of other Taxes:

General Equilibrium Analyses,

National Tax Journal,

50

(1997), 59-87.
[20] Gra, Joshua S., and Matthew J. Neidell,  The Impact of Pollution on Worker Productivity, NBER Working Paper #17004, 2011.
[21] Haas, Jere D., and Thomas Brownlie IV,  Iron Deciency and Reduced Work Capacity:
A Critical Review of the Research to Determine a Causal Relationship,

Nutrition,

The Journal of

131 (2001), 676S-690S.

[22] Instituto Nacional de Estadistica y Geographia, National Mexico General Census of
Population and Housing, 1990.
[23] Ito, Kazuhiko, George D. Thurston and Robert A. Silverman,  Characterization of
PM2.5, Gaseous Pollutants, and Meteorological Interactions in the Context of TimeSeries Health Eects Models.

demiology,

Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epi-

17 (2007), 4560.

[24] Jayachandran, Seema, "Air Quality and Early-Life Mortality: Evidence from Indonesias
Wildres."

Journal of Human Resources,

44 (2009), 916-954.

[25] Leigh, J Paul, Smoking, Self-Selection and Absenteeism,

Economics,

The Quarterly Journal of

35 (1995), 365-386.

[26] Li, Ruowei, Xuecun Chen, Huaicheng Yan, P. Deurenberg, L. Garby, and J.G. Hautvast,
 Functional Consequences of Iron Supplementation in Iron-Decient Female Cotton Mill
Workers in Beijing, China,

American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 59 (1994), 908913.

[27] Lleras-Muney, Adriana,  The Relationship Between Education and Adult Mortality in
the United States,

The Review of Economic Studies,

72 (2005), 189-221.

[28] Linn WS; Venet TG; Shamoo DA; Valencia LM; Anzar UT; Spier CE; Hackney JD, Respiratory Eects of Sulfur Dioxide in Heavily Exercising Asthmatics. A Dose-Response
Study.

Am Rev Respir Dis,

127 (1983), 278-283.

[29] Linn WS; Avol EL; Peng RC; Shamoo DA; Hackney JD, Replicated Dose-Response
Study of Sulfur Dioxide Eects in Normal, Atopic, and Asthmatic Volunteers.

Respir Dis,

Am Rev

136 (1987), 1127- 1134.

[30] Milenio, Denuncian Emanación de Gases de Renería Madero, December 12, 2008.
[31] Neidell, Matt. Information, Avoidance Behavior, and Health: The Eect of Ozone on
Asthma Hospitalizations,

Journal of Human Resources,

44 (2009), 450-478.

[32] Park H; Lee B; Ha EH; Lee JT; Kim H; Hong YC. Association of Air Pollution with
School Absenteeism due to Illness.

Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med,

[33] Parry, Ian. Pollution Taxes and Revenue Recycling,

nomics and Management,

29 (1995), S64-S77.

37

156(2002), 1235-1239.

Journal of Environmental Eco-

[34] Pönka A., Absenteeism and Respiratory Disease Among Children and Adults in Helsinki
in Relation to Low-level Air Pollution and Temperature.

Environ Res, 52 (1990), 34-46.

[35] Peel, Jennifer L., Paige E. Tolbert, Mitchel Klein, Kristi Busico Metzger, W. Dana Flanders,Knox Todd, James A. Mulholland,P. Barry Ryan,and Howard Frumkin,  Ambient
Air Pollution and Respiratory Emergency Department Visits.

Epidemiology, 16 (2005),

16474.
[36] Ransom, Michael and C. Arden Pope,  Elementary School Absences and
in Utah Valley,

Environmental Research,

P M10 Pollution

58 (1992), 204-219.

[37] Schildcrout JS; Sheppard L; Lumley T; Slaughter JC; Koenig JQ; Shapiro GG., Ambient Air Pollution and Asthma Exacerbations in Children: An Eight-City Analysis,

J Epidemiol,

Am

164 (2006), 505- 517.

[38] Schlenker, Wolfram and Reed Walker, Air Pollution and Contemporaneous Health:
Evidence from Random Variation in Pollution Shocks from Airports. Mimeo, 2010.
[39] Schwartz et al.,  Acute Eects of Summer Air Pollution on Respiratory Symptom Reporting in Children.

American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine,

150

(1994), 12341242.
[40] Schwartz J; Spix C; Touloumi G; Bacharova L; Barumamdzadeh T; le Tertre A; Piekarksi
T; Ponce de Leon A; Pönka A; Rossi G; Saez M; Schouten JP, Methodological Issues
in Studies of Air Pollution and Daily Counts of Deaths or Hospital Admissions,

Epidemiol Community Health,

J

50 Suppl 1 (1996), S3-11.

[41] Schwartz, J., Repetto, R., Nonseparable Utility and the double dividend debate: reconsidering the tax-interaction eect,

Environmental and Resource Economics,

15 (2000),

149157.
[42] Thomas, Duncan et al. Iron Deciency and the Well-Being of Older Adults:

Early

Results from a Randomized Nutrition Intervention, Paper presented at the Population
Association of America Annual Meetings, Minneapolis, April 2003, and the International
Studies in Health and Economic Development Network meeting, San Francisco, May
2003.
[43] van Ours, Jan C., A Pint a Day Raises a Man's Pay; but Smoking Blows that Gain
Away,

The Journal of Health Economics,

23 (2004), 863886.

[44] Walker, Reed,  The Transitional Costs of Policy: Evidence From the Clean Air Act and
the Workforce. Mimeo, 2011.
[45] Williams, Roberton C., Health Eects and Optimal Environmental Taxes,

Public Economics,

Journal of

87 (2003), 323-335.

[46] Williams, Roberton and Sarah West. Optimal Taxation and Cross-Price Eects on
Labor Supply: Estimates of the Optimal Gas Tax.

Journal of Public Economics,

91

(2007), 593-317.
[47] Woodson, R.D., R.E. Wills, and C. Lenfant,  Eect of Acute and Established Anemia on

O2 Transport

at Rest, Submaximal and Maximal Work.

44 (1978), 3643.

38

Journal of Applied Physiology,

[48] Zhu Y. Isabel, and Jere D. Haas.  Altered Metabolic Response of Iron-Depleted NonAnemic Women During a 15-km Time Trial.
17681775.

39

Journal of Applied Physiology, 84, (1998),

Appendix
An expression for

dc
de
and
can be obtained from dierencing the rst order conditions of:
dα
dα

max u(c, e; α)

s.t.

we + y − pc = 0

(17)

The rst order conditions are:

where
for

uc (c, e; α) = λpt

(18)

−ue (c, e; α) = λw

(19)

w and p are the price of consumption and the wage rate.

dc
de
and
yields
dα
dα

dc
=
dα

∂λ
p
∂α

de
=
dα

∂λ
w
∂α

Dierencing (18) and (19) and solving

− ucα
ucc

(20)

+ ueα
−uee

(21)

We can obtain the third equation we need to obtain expressions for

dλ dc
de
,
and
by totally
dα dα
dα

dierentiating the budget constraint:

w
The sign of

∂λ/∂α

de
dc
−p
=0
dα
dα

(22)

can be inferred from substituting (20) and (3) in (25) and solving for

∂λ/∂α:

w ueα − p uucα
∂λ
cc
i
= huee 2
2
p
w
∂α
− uee + ucc
It is easy to check that
since

ucc < 0, uee < 0.

∂λ
∂α

< 0 holds if ucα ≤ 0.

Second, notice that

and air quality are complements if
later case,

∂λ
∂α

First notice that the denominator in (23) is positive,

ueα > 0,

ucα > 0

(23)

hence the numerator is negative. Consumption

and strong complements if

ucα >

w ueα
u
p uee cc

In the

> 0.

Finally, we consider the case in which leisure is complementary to air quality.

ueα < 0.

> 0.

So, given expression (23), it is easy to show that

40

∂λ
>0 if
∂α

ucα ≥ 0

and

∂λ
∂α

In this case,

≷0

if

ucα < 0.

The eect on hours of work,
be positive, dominates (
(ucα

<

w ueα
u
p uee cc

∂λ
w
∂α

de
, will then be negative unless the income eect, which would now
dα

> −ueα );

or unless consumption and leisure are strong substitutes

< 0).

Eect on hours of work with productivity eects

When productivity increases with air

quality, and this aects equilibrium wages, equations (21) and (25) become

w
and

∂λ/∂α

∂λ
w
∂α

+ ∂w
λ + ueα
∂α
−uee

(24)

de ∂w
dc
+
e−p
=0
dα ∂α
dα

(25)

de
=
dα

becomes

w uueα
ee

p uucα
cc

−
∂λ
= h 2
∂α
− uwee +
Expression (26) has two components.
be determined by the sign and size of

p2

i+

ucc

h

wλ
uee

i
−e

dw
h
dα − w2 +
uee

p2
ucc

The rst component is identical to (23), so its sign will

ucα .

The second component corresponds to the traditional

income eect from increased wages: higher earnings per hour worked (
additional hours worked (

(26)

i

dw
e) and higher earnings from
dα

dw wλ
) will reduce the marginal utility from income.
dα uee

The total eect of air quality on hours worked is given by Equation (24).

Higher wages will

increase the substitution eect on the labor supply , which can be seen from the additional positive
term in (26) compared to (23),

∂w
λ
∂α

> 0.

However, as discussed in the previous paragraph, the income

eect from higher wages will pull labor supply in the opposite direction. For high labor supply (high

e),

the income eect could even outweigh the substitution eect.

However, this would require a

negative labor supply elasticity, which has not been documented empirically (see Arceo and Campos
2010).

41

Sulfur Dioxide (SO2)

Hours Worked

Unemployed

Weekly Wage

Female

Age > 50

Indicator for Children Under 5

Blue Collar Work

Paid by Salary

Table 1: Sample Statistics
1989-1993
Pre-Closure
(1)
(2)
Panel A: Pollution Concentration
4.46
5.02
(2.13)
(1.49)
143311
61438
Panel B: Labor Outcomes
38.07
37.79
(18.94)
(18.62)
143311
61438
0.04
0.04
(0.20)
(0.20)
143311
61438
798.49
590.12
(695.45)
(516.85)
81246
35939
Panel C: Demographics
0.36
(0.48)
143311
0.15
(0.35)
143311
0.37
(0.48)
143311

Post-Closure
(3)
4.04
(2.42)
81873
38.27
(19.18)
81873
0.04
(0.20)
81873
963.77
(770.50)
45307

0.36
(0.48)
61438
0.15
(0.35)
61438
0.37
(0.48)
61438

0.37
(0.48)
81873
0.15
(0.35)
81873
0.36
(0.48)
81873

Panel D: Job Characteristics
0.83
0.83
(0.38)
(0.38)
137221
58745
0.69
0.69
(0.46)
(0.46)
130793
56058

0.83
(0.38)
78476
0.69
(0.46)
74735

Notes: This table provides means for the key variables in the regression analysis, as well as standard deviations (in
parenthesis) and number of non-missing observations listed below each mean. Column 1 provides the sample statistics
for the full sample, while Columns 2 and 3 provide sample statistics for the pre- and post-closure periods, respectively.
Pollution data comes from the Sistema de Monitoreo Atmosferico de la Ciudad de Mexico (www.sma.df.gob.mx). Labor
outcomes, job characteristics, and demographic data were obtained from the National Survey of Urban Employment
(ENEU) conducted by the Instituto Nacional de Estadistica y Geografia (INEGI). For those who are unemployed, hours
worked in the last week is defined as zero. Wage is defined as the weekly wage in pesos for salaried employees.

Table 2: Correlations Between Pollution and Labor Outcomes
ln(Hours Worked)
Unemployment
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
ln(Sulfur Dioxide)

Week FE
Census Block FE
Demographic Controls

-0.01278
(0.00776)

-0.02494*
(0.01341)

-0.02357*
(0.01305)

X
X

X
X
X

-0.00003***
(0.00001)

(6)

-0.00003
(0.00002)

-0.00003
(0.00002)

X
X

X
X
X

Notes: This table provides estimates of the association between sulfur dioxide and the labor market outcomes. All regressions are
estimated using OLS, with standard errors clustered at the census block level. Demographic controls include an indicator variable for
gender, age, a set of indicator variables for educational attainment, and a set of indicator variables for marital status. For those who
are unemployed, hours worked in the last week is defined as zero. The unemployment dummy is divided by 100 to account for the
level-log specification. All regressions have 143,311 observations. Statistical significance is denoted by: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.10.

Post * Close
Post * Distance

Week FE
Census Block FE
Demographic Controls
Census Block Specific Year Trends

Table 3: First Stage Regressions
Natural Log of Sulfur Dioxide
(1)
(2)
(3)
-0.0828***
(0.0227)
0.0067***
0.0067***
(0.0016)
(0.0016)
X
X

X
X

X
X
X

(4)

0.0096***
(0.0021)
X
X
X
X

Notes: This table provides the coefficient estimates of the effect of the refinery closure on sulfur dioxide. All
regressions are estimated using OLS, with standard errors clustered at the census block level. Demographic
controls include an indicator variable for gender, age, a set of indicator variables for educational attainment, and a
set of indicator variables for marital status. All regressions have 143,311 observations. Statistical significance is
denoted by: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.

(1)
Post * Close

0.0552***
(0.0178)

Post * Distance

ln(Sulfur Dioxide)

Table 4: Reduced Form and IV Regressions
ln(Hours Worked)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Reduced Form Equation

Instrument: Post * Close
Instrument: Post * Distance

X

Week FE
Census Block FE
Demographic Controls
Census Block Specific Year Trends

X
X

Unemployment
(6)
(7)

(8)

-0.0110***
(0.0035)
-0.0032**
(0.0015)

-0.6672***
(0.2466)

(5)

-0.0029*
(0.0015)

-0.0060**
(0.0024)

Panel B: Instrumental Variables Estimation
-0.4806**
-0.4275**
-0.6095**
(0.2231)
(0.2179)
(0.2632)

0.0013**
(0.0006)

0.0007***
(0.0002)

0.0006**
(0.0002)

0.0006
(0.0005)

0.0010**
(0.0004)

0.0009**
(0.0004)

0.0007
(0.0005)

X

X

X

X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X

X

X

X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X

Notes: Panel A presents the coefficient estimates of the reduced form estimate of the effect of the refinery closure on the labor market outcomes; Panel B presents the instrumental
variables estimates of the effect of sulfur dioxide on the labor market outcomes. The outcome of interest in Columns 1-4 is the natural log of hours worked in the last week (with
'0' included for the unemployed); the outcome of interest in Columns 5-8 is an indicator variable for unemployment. For the estimates in Panel B, the unemployment dummy is
divided by 100 to account for the level-log specification. Demographic controls include an indicator variable for gender, age, a set of indicator variables for educational attainment,
and a set of indicator variables for marital status. All regressions have 143,311 observations. Standard errors (listed below each estimate in parenthesis) are clustered at the census
block level. Statistical significance is denoted by: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.

Post * Close
Post * Distance

Week FE
Census Block FE
Demographic Controls
Census Block Specific Year Trends

Table 5: Effect on Wages
ln(Weekly Wage)
(1)
(2)
(3)
-0.0137
(0.0259)
-0.0014
-0.0005
(0.0015)
(0.0012)
X
X

X
X

X
X
X

(4)

-0.0019
(0.0015)
X
X
X
X

Notes: This table presents the coefficient estimates of the reduced form estimate of the effect of the refinery closure on
the natural log of weekly wages for salaried workers. Demographic controls include an indicator variable for gender, age,
a set of indicator variables for educational attainment, and a set of indicator variables for marital status. All regressions
have 81,246 observations. Standard errors (listed below each estimate in parenthesis) are clustered at the census block
level. Statistical significance is denoted by: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.

Table 6: IV Estimates Exploiting Wind Patterns and Altitude
(1)
(2)
Panel A: First Stage, ln(Sulfur Dioxide)
Post * Distance * Wind Speed
0.0064
0.0064
(0.0071)
(0.0071)
Post * Distance * Wind Direction
0.0001***
0.0001***
(0.0000)
(0.0000)
Post * Distance * Elevation
0.0343
0.0342
(0.0448)
(0.0448)

ln(Sulfur Dioxide)

Panel B: ln(Hours Worked)
-0.5472**
(0.2204)

(3)
-0.0160
(0.0108)
0.0002***
(0.0001)
-0.0396
(0.0493)

-0.5677**
(0.2212)

-0.0951
(0.2502)

8.27
6.46

5.36
6.46

ln(Sulfur Dioxide)

Panel C: Unemployment
0.0007*
(0.0004)

0.0008**
(0.0004)

0.0004
(0.0004)

ln(Sulfur Dioxide)

Panel D: ln(Weekly Wage)
0.1645
(0.1927)

0.1701
(0.1677)

-0.0901
(0.1328)

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic
Stock-Yogo weak ID test critical value 10%

Week FE
Census Block FE
Demographic Controls
Year Trends

8.263
6.46

X
X

Notes: Panel A presents the coefficient estimates of the differential effect of the refinery closure on Sulfur
Dioxide based on wind patterns and elevation. F-test and p-value for the joint test of the instruments is provided
below the coefficient estimates. Panels B-D presents the instrumental variables estimates of the effect of sulfur
dioxide on the labor market outcomes. The outcome of interest in Panel B is the natural log of hours worked in
the last week (with '0' included for the unemployed). The outcome of interest in Panel C is an indicator variable
for unemployment; the unemployment dummy is divided by 100 to account for the level-log specification. The
outcome of interest in Panel D is the log weekly wage of salaried employees. Observations for all regressions in
Panels A-C are 137,184, and for Panel D is 77,788. Demographic controls include an indicator variable for
gender, age, a set of indicator variables for educational attainment, and a set of indicator variables for marital
status. Standard errors (listed below each estimate in parenthesis) are clustered at the census block level.
Statistical significance is denoted by: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.

Table 7: Migration
Migrated
(1)
Post * Distance

0.0001
(0.0003)

Demographics
Female
Age
Married
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Week FE and Census Block FE
0.0011
-0.0200
-0.0017*
(0.0007)
(0.0199)
(0.0009)

Low Education
(5)

High Education
(6)

0.0001
(0.0008)

-0.0006
(0.0007)

Joint Test P-Value
Observations

Post * Distance

0.2747
51,518

143,311

143,311

143,302

143,292

143,292

Panel B: Week FE, Census Block FE, and Census Block Specific Year Trends
0.0002
0.0008
0.0101
-0.0017
-0.0003
(0.0005)
(0.0011)
(0.0290)
(0.0012)
(0.0010)

0.0002
(0.0009)

Joint Test P-Value
Observations

0.7868
51,518

143,311

143,311

143,302

143,292

143,292

Notes: This table provides the coefficient estimates of the changes of the refinery closure on a dummy for migration and several key demographic
characteristics. In Column 1, an observation is defined at the level of the household-quarter-year, and the outcome variable is an indicator for whether the
household moved in that quarter, zero otherwise. In Columns 2-6, an observation is defined at the level of individual-quarter-year. Married is an indicator
variable for being married or cohabitating with someone. Low education is defined as having completed at most junior high school level formal schooling.
High education is defined as having had some university or higher formal schooling. The p-value for the joint test of the treatment on all demographic
characteristics in Columns 2-6 is provided in Column 6. The estimates in Panel A are conditional on week and census block fixed effects; the estimates in
Panel B are additionally conditional on census block-specific year-trends. All regressions are estimated using OLS. Standard errors are clustered at the
census block level, and are reported in parentheses. Statistical significance is denoted by: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.

Table 8: Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
(1)
(2)
(3)
ln(Sulfur Dioxide)
ln(Sulfur Dioxide) * Female

-0.7746**
(0.3394)
-0.5141
(0.4839)

ln(Sulfur Dioxide) * Children Under 5

-0.3380
(0.3330)

-0.4714
(0.3815)

ln(Sulfur Dioxide) * Female * Children Under 5

-0.3985
(0.3787)
-0.2470
(0.4671)
-0.9423*
(0.4918)
-0.2470
(0.4671)

ln(Sulfur Dioxide) x Age>50

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.5902**
(0.2960)

-0.5716
(0.5744)

0.0241
(0.3101)

-0.6067
(0.5441)

ln(Sulfur Dioxide) x Blue Collar

0.1039
(0.4916)

ln(Sulfur Dioxide) x Salaried

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic
Stock-Yogo weak ID test critical value 10%

Observations

-0.6686*
(0.3747)
8.687
7.03

16.39
7.03

2.258
NA

8.826
7.03

4.642
7.03

19.20
7.03

143,311

143,311

143,311

143,311

137,221

130,793

Notes: This table explores the heterogeneity of the treatment effects. All regressions include week fixed effects, census block fixed effects, demographic controls,
and census block-specific year-trends. Standard errors are clustered at the census block level, and are reported in parenthesis. Statistical significance is denoted by:
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.

Figure 1: Maps of AGEBs and Refinery

Notes: An AGEB is a census block. The blue colored census blocks were included in the analysis.

Figure 2: SO2 by Hour of Day, Pre and Post Closure

Note: Data is averaged at the hourly level. Equal weight is given to each station.

Figure 3: Percent Employed in Oil Industry by Quarter

Notes: Close was defined as the centroid of the respective census block being within 5km of the refinery, and far was
correspondingly more than 5km from the refinery. Observations are at the quarter level, starting at Q1 1989.
Employment in the oil industry was defined as all workers whose job coding corresponded to the oil industry, except
for extraction.

Figure 4: Pollution over Time by Distance from the Refinery

Note: Data in the solid line represents monthly averages across AGEB's that fall within 5km of distance near
the refinery and data in the dashed line represents weekly averages of SO2 across AGEB's that are beyond
5km from the refinery.

Figure 5: Migration Rates over Time, By Distance from the Refinery

Total Census Blocks
Matched to Location
Within 8km of a Station

Appendix Table 1: Match Rate
Total
Distrito Federal
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Census Block Match Rate
481
242
389
80.9%
199
82.2%
265
55.1%
190
78.5%

Estado de Mexico
(5)
(6)
239
190
75

Panel B: Observations in Labor Supply Dataset Matched to Location
Number of Observations
385586
234813
150773
Number in Labor Force
209303
54.3%
129839
55.3%
79464
Within 8km of a Station
143311
37.2%
105545
44.9%
37766
Notes: Census Blocks matched to a location were defined as those that we were able to generate accurate centroid
coordinates.

79.5%
31.4%

52.7%
25.0%

Appendix Table 2: Comparing Included and Excluded Census Blocks
Unemployment
ln(Hours Worked)
Unemployment
(1)
(2)
(3)
Matched to Location
-0.0000
-0.0109
(0.0019)
(0.0312)
Matched and Within 8KM of a Station
0.0039***
(0.0012)
Year FE
Observations

ln(Hours Worked)
(4)

-0.0829***
(0.0162)

X

X

X

X

1,946

1,946

1,946

1,946

Notes: This table compares the unemployment rate and the mean natural log of hours worked for included and excluded census blocks. An observation is a census
block-year. In Columns 1 and 3, the variable of interest is an indicator for whether the census block was matched to GIS data; in Columns 2 and 4, the variable of
interest is an indicator for whether the census block was both matched to the GIS data and within 8 kilometers of a station. All regressions are estimated using OLS,
and include year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the census block level, and are reported in parentheses. Statistical significance is denoted by: ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.

Appendix Table 3: Employment in Oil Industry, by Quarter

Year
1989
1989
1989
1989
1990
1990
1990
1990
1991
1991
1991
1991
1992
1992
1992
1992
1993
1993
1993
1993

Quarter

Number in Labor
Force

1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4

(1)
6774
6783
7001
6982
6897
6600
6625
7053
6723
7276
7516
7447
7491
7470
7454
7140
7436
7563
7663
7417

Percent Employed
(2)
94.86%
95.18%
94.96%
95.75%
96.10%
95.42%
95.62%
96.37%
96.70%
96.95%
96.00%
96.17%
95.96%
95.96%
96.18%
96.13%
94.76%
95.74%
95.03%
95.81%

Percent Employed in
Oil Industry
(3)
0.48%
0.31%
0.42%
0.36%
0.36%
0.25%
0.30%
0.29%
0.29%
0.10%
0.06%
0.10%
0.06%
0.04%
0.04%
0.00%
0.03%
0.04%
0.01%
0.04%

Notes: This table provides the employment rates in the labor force as a whole, as well as in the oil industry specifically, at the
quarter level from 1989-1993. Employment in the oil industry was defined as all workers whose job coding corresponded to the
oil industry, except for extraction. The dotted line signifies the refinery closure.

