                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            A POLITICAL THEORY OF POPULISM

                                         Daron Acemoglu
                                          Georgy Egorov
                                         Konstantin Sonin

                                       Working Paper 17306
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17306


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2011




We thank Jon Eguia, Timothy Feddersen, John Hat…eld, Emir Kamenica, Alessandro Lizzeri, Jean
Tirole, Francesco Trebbi, participants of PIER Conference on Political Economy, the Political Economy
in the Chicago Area Conference, Non-Democratic Regimes Conference at Yale, Society for Economic
Dynamics Conference in Montreal, the Econometric Society World Congress in Shanghai, NBER
Summer Institute PEPF in 2011, and seminars at Harvard and the New Economic School for valuable
comments. Acemoglu gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Canadian Institute of Advanced
Research, the NSF and the AFOSR. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Daron Acemoglu, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Political Theory of Populism
Daron Acemoglu, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin
NBER Working Paper No. 17306
August 2011
JEL No. C71,D71,D74

                                             ABSTRACT

When voters fear that politicians may have a right-wing bias or that they may be influenced or corrupted
by the rich elite, signals of true left-wing conviction are valuable. As a consequence, even a moderate
politician seeking reelection chooses “populist’ policies - i.e., policies to the left of the median voter
- as a way of signaling that he is not from the right. Truly right-wing politicians respond by choosing
more moderate, or even left-of-center policies. This populist bias of policy is greater when the value
of remaining in office is higher for the politician; when there is greater polarization between the policy
preferences of the median voter and right-wing politicians; when politicians are indeed more likely
to have a hidden right-wing agenda; when there is an intermediate amount of noise in the information
that voters receive; when politicians are more forward-looking; and when there is greater uncertainty
about the type of the incumbent. We show that similar results apply when some politicians can be
corrupted or influenced through other non-electoral means by the rich elite. We also show that ‘soft
term limits’ may exacerbate, rather than reduce, the populist bias of policies.


Daron Acemoglu                                      Konstantin Sonin
Department of Economics                             New Economic School
MIT, E52-380B                                       47 Nakhimovsky prosp.
50 Memorial Drive                                   Moscow, 117418 RUSSIA
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                            ksonin@nes.ru
and CIFAR
and also NBER
daron@mit.edu

Georgy Egorov
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
g-egorov@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1        Introduction

There has recently been a resurgence of ‘populist’politicians in many developing countries, par-
ticularly in Latin America. Hugo Chávez in Venezuela, the Kirchners in Argentina, Evo Morales
in Bolivia, Alan García in Peru, and Rafael Correa in Ecuador are some of the examples. The
label ‘populist’is often used to emphasize that these politicians use the rhetoric of aggressively
defending the interests of the ‘common man’against the privileged elite.1 Hawkins (2003), for
example, describes the rise of Hugo Chávez in Venezuela in these terms, and writes:

             “If we de…ne populism in strictly political terms— as the presence of what some
          scholars call a charismatic mode of linkage between voters and politicians, and a
          democratic discourse that relies on the idea of a popular will and a struggle between
          ‘the people’and ‘the elite’— then Chavismo is clearly a populist phenomenon.”

        Given the high levels of inequality in many of these societies, political platforms built on
redistribution are not surprising. But populist rhetoric and policies frequently appear to be to
the left of the median voter’s preferences, and such policies arguably often harm rather than help
the majority of the population. In the context of macroeconomic policy, Rudiger Dornbush and
Sebastian Edwards (1991) emphasized this ‘left of the median’aspect of populism and wrote:

             “Populist regimes have historically tried to deal with income inequality problems
          through the use of overly expansive macroeconomic policies. These policies, which
          have relied on de…cit …nancing, generalized controls, and a disregard for basic eco-
          nomic equilibria, have almost unavoidably resulted in major macroeconomic crises
          that have ended up hurting the poorer segments of society.”

        We o¤er a simple model of ‘populism’de…ned, following Dornbusch and Edwards (1991), as
the implementation of policies receiving support from a signi…cant fraction of the population, but
ultimately hurting the economic interests of this majority.2 More formally, populist policies will
be those that are to the left of the political bliss point of the median voter but still receive support
    1
     The American Heritage Dictionary de…nes populism as “a political philosophy supporting the rights and
power of the people in their struggle against the privileged elite.” See http://www.answers.com/topic/populism.
   2
     We focus on left-wing populism which has been particularly prevalent in 20th century Latin America. In
the United States, in addition to left-wing populism of the Democratic presidential candidate William Jennings
Bryan or the Louisiana senator ‘King…sh’ Huey Long, a distinctive ‘right-wing populism’ has been prevalent
(e.g., Norris, 2005). Right-wing populism typically combines anti-elitism with some right-wing agenda (e.g.,
anti-communism in the case of Wisconsin Senator Joseph McCarthy or the state-rights agenda of the Alabama
governor and presidential candidate George Wallace, or small-government conservatism in the case of the Tea
Party these days). A model combining left- and right-wing extremists and di¤erent types of ‘populist policies’is
presented in Section 5.2.


                                                       1
from the median voter. The key challenge is therefore to understand why politicians adopt such
policies and receive electoral support after doing so. Our starting point is that, as the above
examples suggest, the economies in question feature high levels of inequality and su¢ ciently
weak political institutions which enable the rich elites to have a disproportionate in‡uence on
politics relative to their numbers. In fact, in many of these societies political corruption and
‘political betrayal,’where politicians using redistributive rhetoric end up choosing policies in line
with the interests of the rich elite, are quite common.3 This implies that voters often distrust
politicians and believe that they may adopt a rhetoric of redistribution, of leveling the playing
…eld, and of defending the interests of the ‘common man,’ but then will pursue policies in the
interests of the rich elite. This makes it valuable for politicians to signal to voters that they do
not secretly have a ‘right-wing agenda’and are not ‘in the pockets’of the rich elite.
       Formally, an incumbent politician chooses a policy x on the real line, and obtains utility
both from remaining in o¢ ce and also from the distance between the policy and his ‘political
bliss point’or ideal point (e.g., Wittman, 1973, Calvert, 1985, Besley and Coate, 1997, Osborne
and Slivinski, 1996). An incumbent politician can be of two types: (1) moderate, and (2) right-
wing. We also consider an extension where the preferences of the right-wing politicians are
endogenized in the sense that they are derived as a result of the bargaining between a moderate
but corruptible politician and the rich elite.4 We normalize the political bliss point of the median
voter to 0, and assume that this is also the bliss point of moderate politicians.5 The bliss point
of right-wing politicians is to the right of the median voter’s bliss point and we denote it by
b > 0 (for ‘bias’). Voters observe a noisy signal s of the policy x of the incumbent, and decide
whether to reelect him for a second term or replace him with a new politician. Re‡ecting our
discussion in the previous paragraph, the median voter’s main concern is that the politician may
in truth be a right-winger and will implement a right-wing policy in his second term (or that he
is dishonest and will be corrupted by the rich elite).
       Our main result is that in order to signal that he is not right-wing, moderate politicians will
choose ‘populist’policies to the left of the median voter’s bliss point, i.e., x < 0. Moreover, a
truly right-wing politician will also choose a policy to the left of his bliss point, i.e., x < b, and
may even choose a policy to the left of the median (i.e., x < 0) when the value of political o¢ ce
   3
      Examples of politicians and parties using populist rhetoric but then choosing policies in line with business and
elite interests include the PRI in Mexico, the policies of traditional parties in Venezuela and Ecuador, Fujimori
in Peru and Menem in Argentina.
    4
      Although this alternative might be a better representation of the fears of many voters in democracies with
weak institutions, we start with our baseline model without corruption because it illustrates the main ideas in a
more transparent manner.
    5
      Our results do not require the preferences of the moderate politician to coincide with those of the median
voter; it is su¢ cient for them to be closer to those of the median voter than the preferences of the right-wing
politician.


                                                          2
is su¢ ciently high. It is interesting that what produces the left-wing (populist) bias in politics
is precisely the strength of right-wing groups (in that either the incumbent politician may be
secretly aligned with these groups or they can bribe and in‡uence him). Because of their fear of
reelecting a politician who is a right-winger, voters support politicians choosing policies to the
left of their preferences, which can loosely be interpreted as policies that are not in their ‘best
interest’as in our de…nition of populism.6
    In addition to providing a novel explanation for the emergence of populist policies and leaders,
our model is tractable and leads to a range of intuitive comparative static results.7 First, policies
are more likely to be populist (or will have greater left-wing bias) when the value of reelection to
politicians is greater, since in this case both moderate and right-wing politicians will try to signal
to voters by choosing more left-wing policies. Second, populist policies are also more likely when
the probability that the politician is a right-winger is higher. Third, they are also more likely
when the probability that a politician can be corrupted is greater. Fourth, we also show that,
provided that the noise is su¢ ciently large, populist policies are also more likely when there
is greater ‘polarization’ in society, meaning a bigger gap between the political bliss points of
the moderate politician (and the median voter) and the right-wing politician. This is because,
with greater polarization, the bene…t from reelection to both types of politicians is greater,
encouraging more populist policies in the …rst period.8 Fifth, populist bias is greater when
voters receive an intermediate amount of information about policies; when voters receive too
little information, choosing populist policies has little signaling value for politicians, and when
there is little noise, voters are unlikely to confuse the two types of politicians, again dulling
the incentives to signal. Sixth, populist bias is also greater when there is greater uncertainty
about the type of incumbent politicians because both very secure politicians and those unlikely
to win reelection have less incentive to signal. Finally, politicians that are more forward-looking
    6
      In a model of right-wing populism, a similar logic would encourage policies biased to the right. In particular,
voters with right-wing views may support policies to the right of their bliss point because they may be afraid that
some politicians are secret left-wingers or even communists. See Section 5.2.
    7
      In applying these insights to the Latin American context one must confront the issue of ‘soft term limits’.
Most Latin American presidents of the postwar era have been term limited, but many have been able to use
constitutional referendums and other means to stand for a second term, and/or to signi…cantly increase their
powers.
   For example, recently, Colombian president Álvaro Uribe changed the constitution and was elected for a second
term in 2006. Bolivian president Evo Morales got approval of new constitution with relaxed term limits in
January 2009. In February 2009, a constitutional amendment allowing the Venezuelan president Hugo Chávez
to completely avoid term limits was approved. In Ecuador, Rafael Correa won approval to extend his term in
o¢ ce. In October 2009, the Nicaraguan constitutional court declared executive term limits to be unconstitutional,
allowing president Daniel Ortega to run for a second term. We discuss the implications of soft term limits in
greater detail in Section 5.3 ensure that these may exacerbate the populist bias of policies.
    8
      Counteracting this e¤ect is that greater polarization also makes it more costly for right-wing politicians to
adopt populist policies. We describe the conditions under which this second e¤ect is dominated.




                                                         3
(discount the future less) are more likely to be populists because they are more willing to adopt
policies away from their bliss point in order to gain electoral advantage.
       All these results continue to hold in the version of the model where right-wing bias of some
politician results because of corruption. Interestingly, in this version, we also …nd that the
rich elite may be worse o¤ precisely because of their ability to bribe politicians. In particular,
the anticipation of such bribes to dishonest politicians changes the political equilibrium towards
more left-wing policies in the initial period, which is costly to the elite. This again highlights that
the underlying problem leading to populist politics in this model is the weakness of democratic
institutions and the potential non-electoral power of the elite.
       Our paper is related to a number of literatures. First, there is now a sizable literature
on signaling in elections. Formal models that incorporate ‘the cost of betrayal’ and signaling
concerns into the platform choice by a politician seeking his …rst election date back to Banks
(1990) and Harrington (1993). In both models, voters learn about candidates’behavior through
repeated sampling. Callander and Wilkie (2007) consider signaling equilibria in elections in
which participating politicians have di¤erent propensities to misinform voters about their true
preferences. Kartik and McAfee (2007) study a spatial model of elections in which a candidate
might be of a type committed to ful…ll his campaign pledge. Thus, a political position is a signal
to the voters about the candidate’s ‘honesty’. As a result, a candidate who is perceived to be
more likely to stick to his positition might win on an unpopular platform over an opponent who
caters to the median voter’s preferences.
       Second, our paper is also related to several other works that use models in which politicians
or decision-makers have private information and are judged on the basis of performance or
messages that they send. Prendergast (1993) shows that workers have an incentive to conform
to the opinions and expectations of their superiors. Morris (2001) studies ‘political correctness’
using a model of communication incorporating related insights. Canes-Wrone, Herron, and
Shotts (2001) and Maskin and Tirole (2004) use similar ideas to show why leaders or elected
o¢ cials may ‘pander’ to the electorate. None of these papers discuss or derive populist bias
in politics. In addition, the framework we present is more tractable than many of the models
used in past work (because voters observe noisy signals rather than choices), and as a result, it
generates a unique equilibrium and a rich set of comparative statics.9
   9
    See also Alesina and Tabellini (2007) and Schultz (2008). Binswanger and Prufer (2009) use a similar model,
enriched with heterogeneous priors and level k reasoning, to discuss political pandering and the implications of
direct and indirect democracy. They show that indirect democracy can lead to “populism”de…ned very di¤erently
than here— meaning that politicians, conditional on their information, still put positive weight on the prior beliefs
of voters.




                                                         4
   Third, our paper is also related to various models of political agency. Austen-Smith and
Banks (1989), Besley (2005, 2006) and Persson and Tabellini (2000) present several di¤erent
approaches to political agency and the selection of politicians of di¤erent competences (see also
Caselli and Morelli, 2004, Messner and Polborn, 2004, Mattozzi and Merlo, 2007, and Acemoglu,
Egorov, and Sonin, 2010). Diermeier, Keane, and Merlo (2005) model and estimate the careers
of US congressmen.
   Fourth, our work is related to the emerging literature on the elite capture of democratic
politics. Acemoglu and Robinson (2008) and Acemoglu, Ticchi and Vindigni (2010) emphasize
how a rich elite may be able to capture democratic politics and prevent redistributive policies.
Bates and La Ferrara (2001), Lizzeri and Persico (2005) and Padro-i-Miquel (2007), among
others, construct models in which certain forms of democratic competition may be detrimental
to the interests of the majority. Acemoglu, Robinson and Torvik (2011) analyze a model of
endogenous checks and balances. They show that in weakly-institutionalized democracies, voters
may voluntarily dismantle checks and balances on presidents as a way of increasing their rents
and making them more expensive to bribe for a better organized rich elite lobby. None of these
papers note or analyze the possibility of populist (left of the median) policies.
   Finally, our paper is also related to a few papers investigating other aspects of populist
politics and the causes of ‘left-wing’politics in developing countries. Sachs (1989) discusses ‘the
populist cycle,’where high inequality leads to policies that make all groups worse o¤ (because
voters are shortsighted). Alesina (1989) emphasizes how redistributive policies are captured by
special interest groups. Di Tella and MacCulloch (2009) provide evidence that poorer countries
have more left-wing governments and link this to corruption. They suggest a model in which
corruption by bureaucrats signals to voters that the rich elite are not ‘fair,’and the voters, who
are assumed to directly care about fairness, react to this information by moving to the left. Di
Tella and MacCulloch’s focus is thus closely related, but their model and proposed explanation
are very di¤erent from ours.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces a basic model with
politicians di¤ering in their policy preferences. In Section 3 we analyze the equilibria of the model
and study the comparative statics. In Section 4, we supplement our analysis by studying the
case where some politicians can accept bribes from the elite. Section 5 discusses four extensions.
Section 6 concludes. Appendix A contains the main proofs, while Appendix B, which is available
online, contains the remaining proofs.




                                                 5
2         Model

There is a population consisting of two groups of citizens, a rich elite and a poor majority, and
a pool of politicians. Policy space is represented by R. There are two periods, t = 1; 2, and in
each period there is a politician in power who chooses policy xt 2 R. Citizens only care about
policy outcomes. In particular, we assume that the utility of citizen i is given by
                                                                         X2
                                                                                         r 2
                                    ui (x1 ; x2 ) = ur (x1 ; x2 ) =               (xt     )                           (1)
                                                                            t=1

if the citizen is rich, and by
                                                                         X2
                                                                                         m 2
                                   ui (x1 ; x2 ) = um (x1 ; x2 ) =                (xt      )                          (2)
                                                                            t=1

if he is poor. Throughout, the superscript r stands for ‘rich’or ‘right-wing,’and m for ‘moderate’
or ‘median voter’.10 These preferences imply that both types of citizens are averse to deviations
from their bliss policy. Without loss of generality, we set                    m   = 0, and    r   = b > 0. We interpret
this as the poor preferring more ‘left-wing’policies, such as creating a more level playing …eld,
redistribution or investment in public goods favoring the poor, whereas the rich prefer lower
redistribution. Policies corresponding to x < 0 are thus to the left of the preferences of the
poor. The assumption that there is no discounting is adopted to save on notation.11
         Since there are only two groups of voters, and the poor form the majority, the median voter
is a poor agent, and           m   = 0 corresponds to the political bliss point of the median voter.
         The politicians care about policy, o¢ ce, and potentially bribes. Their utility is given by
                            X2      n                                                                            o
           v (x1 ; x2 ) =                 (xt     )2 + W Ifin o¢      ce at tg + (Bt    C) Ifaccepted bribe at tg .   (3)
                              t=1

Here, xt is the policy implemented at time t (by this or another politician),                          is the politician’s
ideal policy, and           > 0 is the sensitivity to policy choice (relative to voters’sensitivity, which we
normalized to 1); W is the utility from being in o¢ ce, Bt is the bribe that he may receive at time
t, and C is the cost he has to incur if he accepts a bribe. We consider two possible alternative
assumptions about the politicians’type. First, we assume that there are two types of politician
that di¤er in their policy preferences (and do not allow bribes). A fraction                               of politicians
are ‘moderates’ and have a political bliss point identical to that of the median voter (a poor
    10
     Note that these preferences are single peaked. This ensures that all of our results generalize to an environment
where, instead of two groups, there is a distribution of preferences ( ’s), provided that the moderate politician is
closer to the median voter than is the right-wing politician. We chose the model with two groups to highlight that
populist policies are not adopted to cater to the preferences of some subgroup— in our model, they will always be
to the left of the preferences of all voters.
  11
     In Section 5.1, we show that all our results hold with any degree of discounting and less discounting by
politicians increases populism.


                                                              6
agent) with political bliss point       = 0. Motivated by the discussion of Latin American politics
in the Introduction, where voters may be concerned about politicians choosing more right-wing
policies than they would like, we assume that the remaining fraction 1                   are ‘right-wingers’
and have a political bliss point coinciding with that of the rich,            = b. Voters do not directly
observe the type of the politician (so this type may be interpreted as the ‘secret’leaning of the
politician). The assumption that these political bliss points coincide with those of poor and rich
voters again serves to reduce notation. The important feature is that poor voters should prefer
to have a moderate in o¢ ce in the second period. Second, in Section 4, we consider a variant
where all politicians have the same policy preferences but di¤er in their honesty/corruptability.
In this version of the model, a fraction         are ‘honest,’ while the remaining fraction 1              are
‘dishonest’ and thus can be bribed by the elite. This assumption endogenizes the policies of
right-wing politicians as an outcome of bargaining between politicians and the elite. The results
we obtain in these two variants are very similar.
    At the end of the …rst period, there is an election in which the median voter decides whether
to reelect the incumbent politician or appoint a new one from the pool of potential politicians.
In particular, we model this by assuming that at the end of the …rst period there is a challenger
of unknown type running against the incumbent. Prior to the elections, voters receive a noisy
(common) signal s = x1 + z about the policy x1 chosen by the incumbent in the …rst period,
where z is noise. Our interpretation for why voters observe a signal rather than the actual
policy is that both the exact nature and the (welfare) implications of policies take time to
be fully realized and understood, and also depend on (potentially unobserved) conditions. All
voters use this signal to update their priors about the politician’s type and vote on the reelection
of the incumbent politician. We assume that they do so in a forward-looking (‘rational’) manner
and vote to retain the incumbent only if their posterior that he is a moderate type (or honest
in the version in Section 4) is su¢ ciently high that they receive at least as high utility retaining
him as appointing a new politician.
    We will look for a pure-strategy perfect Bayesian equilibrium of the game (in undominated
strategies), which ensures that the incumbent politician will be kept in power if the expected
utility of poor voters is at least as high if he remains in power as if a new politician is appointed.12
    The timing of events can be summarized as follows:

   1. The politician in power at time t = 1 chooses policy x1 2 R.

   2. Voters obtain the signal s = x1 + z.
  12
     The requirement that the perfect Bayesian equilibrium should be in undominated strategies is for the usual
reason that in voting games, non-intuitive equilibria can be supported when voters use weakly dominated strate-
gies.


                                                      7
      3. Elections take place, and each voter either supports the incumbent or the contender.13

      4. The politician in power at time t = 2 (the incumbent or newly elected politician) chooses
              policy x2 2 R.

      5. All agents learn the realizations of x1 and x2 , and payo¤s are realized (according to (1) –
              (3)).

          We next impose the following two assumptions, which will be useful in establishing well-
de…ned unique best responses.

Assumption 1 The noise variable z has a distribution with support on ( 1; +1) with c.d.f.
F (z) and p.d.f. f (z). The p.d.f. f (z) is symmetric around 0 and everywhere di¤ erentiable, and
satis…es f 0 (z) < 0 for all z > 0 (and thus f 0 (z) > 0 for all z < 0).

          This assumption ensures that the density f is single-peaked. Naturally, any mean zero normal
distribution N 0;               2   as well as several other standard distributions satisfy this assumption.

Assumption 2 The p.d.f. of the noise variable z is su¢ ciently smooth in the sense that
                                                                      1
                                                     f 0 (z) <   b2       W
                                                                                                                 (4)
                                                                 2    +   2

for all z.

          Lemma 1 in Appendix A shows that this assumption implies that f (0) < 2b . In other words,
values close to zero are not too likely, and there is a su¢ cient probability that there will be large
                                                                                 b
(negative or positive) realizations of the noise, i.e., Pr jzj >                 4   > 41 . This feature ensures that
there is su¢ cient uncertainty, which will guarantee that the relevant second-order conditions
hold and thus the existence and uniqueness of equilibrium. It is straightforward to see that a
normal distribution would satisfy this assumption if its variance is su¢ ciently large, in particular,
                  b2
          2          +W
if            >    2
                   p 2
                   2 e
                          . One can also verify that until Section 4, it would be su¢ cient to impose (4) only
for jzj < b.


3             Analysis

We proceed by backward induction. At date t = 2, the politician in power solves the problem

                                                    max     (x2           )2 ,
                                                    x2 2R
     13
     For simplicity, we assume that whenever a voter is indi¤erent, she supports the incumbent. In equilibrium
this happens with zero probability.


                                                             8
and therefore chooses his bliss point x2 =                    (which equals          m   = 0 for a moderate politician and
 r   = b for a right-wing politician). This implies that the poor majority strictly prefers to have
a moderate politician to a right-wing politician in power at date t = 2. Since the contender is a
moderate with probability , the incumbent will win the elections only if the voters’posterior
that he is moderate is no less than .
      Let us denote the equilibrium policy that a moderate politician chooses at time t = 1 by
x1 = m, and the policy that a right-wing politician chooses by x1 = r. It is intuitive that m < r,
and this result is formally established in Proposition 1. Clearly, the probability density of signal
s when policy x is chosen is given by f (s                    x). Given the prior , Bayesian updating gives the
posterior that the incumbent is a moderate by
                                                            f (s m)
                                      ^=                                                      .                        (5)
                                                   f (s   m) + (1  ) f (s                r)

Inspection of (5) shows that the posterior ^ satis…es ^                              if and only if

                                                   f (s       m)       f (s   r) .                                     (6)

Intuitively, the right-hand side of (5) depends on m and r only through the likelihood ratio
     f (s m)
(1      )f (s r) ,   which must be at least    1      (the corresponding ratio for the contender) if the incum-
                                     f (s m)
bent is to be reelected; hence       f (s r)         1. By Assumption 1, f ( ) is symmetric and single-peaked,
and thus (6) is equivalent to
                                                                   m+r
                                                          s            .                                               (7)
                                                                    2
The incumbent will be reelected if and only if condition (7) is satis…ed. Therefore, the expected
probability of reelection for an incumbent as a function of his choice of policy x is
                                                                              m+r
                                          (x) = Pr x + z                                                               (8)
                                                                               2
                                                                   m+r
                                                     = F                      x .
                                                                    2
Note that this probability does not depend on the type of the incumbent, only on his choice
of policy (since his type is private and does not a¤ect the realization of the signal beyond his
choice of policy).
      We next establish that the policy choice of a moderate politician is always to the left of that
of the right-winger, i.e., m < r, and summarize the discussion about incumbent reelection.

Proposition 1 Denote the equilibrium policy of a moderate politician at t = 1 by x1 = m and
that of a right-wing politician by x1 = r. Then:


                                                                   9
   1. m < r, i.e., moderate politicians always choose a more left-wing policy than right-wing
         politicians;

                                                                               m+r
   2. the incumbent politician is reelected if and only if s                    2 .


Proof. See Appendix A.
       Let us next investigate choices at date t = 1 more closely. A moderate incumbent solves the
following problem at date t = 1:

                             max      x2 + W (x)           (1      ) b2 (1             (x)) .                    (9)
                              x2R

Here        x2 is this politician’s …rst period utility, W is his second period utility if he is reelected
(since in this case he will choose x2 = 0, i.e., equal to his political bliss point), and                (1    ) b2
is his expected second period utility if he is not reelected (with probability                     the contender is
a moderate and will choose x2 = 0, while with probability 1                            , a right-winger will come to
power and will choose x2 = b). The …rst-order condition for this problem is
                                                                   m+r
                              2 x     W + (1             ) b2 f                    x     = 0.                  (10)
                                                                    2
Similarly, a right-wing incumbent solves the problem


                              max     (x     b)2 + W (x)                  b2 (1        (x)) :                  (11)
                              x2R

The explanation for this expression is identical and relies on the fact that the right-wing in-
cumbent will incur utility cost        b2 only if he is not reelected and is replaced by a moderate
politician. The …rst-order condition for this problem is
                                                                   m+r
                              2 (x     b)        W+        b2 f                    x    = 0.                   (12)
                                                                    2
       In equilibrium, (10) must hold when x = m, and (12) must hold when x = r. The symmetry
of f implies
                        m+r                  r       m            m        r             m+r
                   f            m     =f                  =f                      =f             r ,
                         2                       2                    2                   2

so the equilibrium can be characterized in terms of the intersection of two reaction curves:14
                                                                      r        m
                              2 m      W + (1            ) b2 f                        = 0,                    (13)
                                                                           2
                                                                      r        m
                               2 (r     b)       W+         b2 f                       = 0.                    (14)
                                                                           2
  14
    Note, however, that these are not ‘best response maps’ as we have already substituted for the equilibrium
conditions that (10) must hold at x = m and (12) at x = r.


                                                          10
                                right-wing (r)     1.2


                                                   1.0

                                                   0.8


                                                   0.6


                                                   0.4


                                                   0.2



                  -0.7 -0.6 -0.5 -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1          0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7
                                                                                  moderate (m)
                                                  -0.2


                                                  -0.4



Figure 1: Reaction curves of moderate (red/thick) and right-wing (green/thin) politicians. The
distribution f is taken to be normal and the parameter choices are W =         =      = 12 and
b = = 1.


Mathematically, (10) depicts the equilibrium value of the policy of moderate politicians, m,
when right-wing politicians are choosing policy r. Conversely, (12) depicts the equilibrium value
of the policy of right-wingers when moderates are choosing m. Figure 1 plots these two curves
in the relevant region m < r.
   Conditions (13) and (14) immediately imply that m < 0 and r < b, i.e., both types of
politicians in equilibrium choose policies which lie to the left of their political bliss points. For a
moderate politician, this implies a populist policy choice— i.e., to the left of the median voter’s
political bliss point (we will also see that we might even have r < 0). This is for an intuitive
reason: for both types of politicians, a move to the left starting from their political bliss points
creates a second-order loss in the …rst period, but delivers a …rst-order increase in the probability
of reelection and thus a …rst-order expected gain.
   The result that there will be a left bias in policies does not rely on positive bene…ts from
holding o¢ ce (W > 0), though we will establish later that higher levels of W increase this bias.
This is because even when W = 0, each politician wants to be reelected because otherwise his
preferred policy will be implemented with probability less than one. This e¤ect alone is su¢ cient
for a left bias in policy choice of both types.
   Inspection of Figure 1 also provides a more detailed intuition for the results and the unique-


                                                         11
ness of equilibrium. The reaction curve of moderate politicians is upward-sloping, while the
reaction curve of right-wing politicians is downward-sloping. Formally, these statements follow
from di¤erentiating (10) and (12) with respect to m and r. The key observation is that the me-
                                                                                                 f (s m)
dian voter will decide whether to reelect the incumbent politician depending on whether          f (s r)
exceeds 1. A politician may ensure that he is reelected with an arbitrarily large probability if
he chooses an extreme left-wing policy, but this is clearly costly as the policy would be very far
away from his bliss point. The relevant trade-o¤ for both types of politicians is therefore be-
tween choosing a policy close to their bliss point on the one hand and deviating from their bliss
point and increasing their reelection probability on the other. But how much this deviation will
increase their reelection probability depends on the expectations of the median voter concerning
what types of policies both types of politicians will adopt. Formally, the question is whether a
                                         f (s m)
small change in policy will increase     f (s r)   from below 1 to above 1 (which thus requires that
f (s m)
f (s r)   is in some "-neighborhood of 1). Suppose, for example, that right-wing politicians are
expected to choose a more left-wing policy than before. This would make the policies of the two
types closer, and it becomes harder for voters to distinguish one type of politician from another
                 f (s m)
(equivalently,   f (s r)   is more likely to be in any given "-neighborhood of 1). In response, it
would be optimal for moderate politicians to choose an even more left-wing policy in order to
distinguish themselves and get reelected with a high probability. This is the reason why (13) is
upward-sloping.
   Why is (14) downward-sloping? Consider the situation in which moderate politicians are
expected to choose more left-wing policies. One might, at …rst, expect that the same reasoning
should push right-wing politicians to also choose more left-wing policies. But since m < r, a
further shift to the left by moderate politicians will make it more likely that the median voter
                                                                                       f (s m)
will be able to distinguish moderate than right-wing politicians (or more formally,    f (s r)   is now
less likely to be in any given "-neighborhood of 1, and thus a small shift to the left by right-wing
politicians is less likely to win them the election). This reduces the potential gains from choosing
further left-wing policies for right-wing politicians and encourages them to choose policies more
in line with their own policy preferences.
   The above discussion ensures the uniqueness of equilibrium. Then characterizing this equi-
librium is straightforward. Let us combine (13) and (14) to obtain
                                               W+         b2
                                      r=m                      + b.                                (15)
                                             W + (1       ) b2
Therefore, the equilibrium level of populist bias (of moderate politicians), p = jmj =            m, is
given by
                                                      p 2    1 2         b
                     2 p = W + (1         ) b2 f        b            2
                                                                       +         .                 (16)
                                                      2   W + (1 ) b     2

                                                     12
Proposition 2 There exists a unique (perfect Bayesian) equilibrium (in pure strategies). In
this equilibrium, politicians choose their preferred policy in the second period. In the …rst period,
politicians choose policies which lie to the left of their preferred policy. In particular, moderate
politicians necessarily choose a ‘populist’policy to the left of the political bliss point of the median
voter.

Proof. See Appendix A.
   Proposition 2 thus shows that a unique equilibrium always exists (given our assumptions),
and that this equilibrium will always feature leftist bias by both types of politicians, and populist
policies (to the left of the median voter) by moderate politicians. The intuition for this result
was already provided above.
   We next provide several comparative static results, …rst focusing on the populist bias of the
moderate politician, p = jmj.

Proposition 3 The populist bias of moderate politicians, p = jmj, is higher when:

  1. W is higher (i.e., politicians value being in o¢ ce more);

  2.       is lower (i.e., moderate politicians are rarer);

  3.       is lower, provided that W 6= 0 (i.e., changing political positions is relatively costless for
         politicians).

Proof. See Appendix A.
   These comparative static results are fairly intuitive. A higher utility from remaining in o¢ ce
increases the incentives for reelection and thus encourages greater signaling by choosing more
left-wing policies. Consequently, moderate politicians end up choosing more populist policies.
The comparative static result with respect to           has a similar intuition: when     is lower, this
utility from choosing a policy di¤erent from their bliss point is less important relative to the gain
of utility from remaining in o¢ ce, and this encourages more signaling and thus more left-wing
policies by both politicians.
   The comparative statics with respect to — the share of politicians that are moderate— is a
little more subtle. When        is lower, the probability that a new politician will be moderate is
lower. This makes it more costly for moderate politicians not to be reelected and induces them
to choose policies further to the left. There is a countervailing e¤ect, however, because the same
calculus implies that right-wing politicians have less to fear from not being reelected, which
makes them choose policies less to the left; because the reaction curve of moderate politicians


                                                   13
is upward-sloping, this e¤ect induces them to also choose policies less to the left and thus closer
to the preferences of the median voter. Nevertheless, when the density f is not too large (in
particular, when it satis…es Assumption 2), the latter e¤ect is dominated, and the populist bias
of moderate politicians increases.
   We next investigate the comparative statics of the policy choice of right-wing politicians. To
do this, let us substitute for m from (15) into (14). Denoting the “bias”of right-wing politicians
by q = jr    bj = b    r > 0 (the inequality follows from (14)), we obtain

                                                     q 2 (1 2 )    b
                             2 q= W+         b2 f      b       2
                                                                 +                                 (17)
                                                     2   W+ b      2

Notice the similarity between this expression and (16), which underlies the similar comparative
statics summarized in the next proposition.

Proposition 4 The populist bias of right-wing politicians, q = jr         bj, is higher when:

  1. W is higher (i.e., politicians value being in o¢ ce more);

  2.     is higher (i.e., moderate politicians are more frequent);

  3.     is lower, provided that W 6= 0 (i.e., changing political positions is relatively costless for
       politicians).

Proof. See Appendix A.
   These results for W and        are the same as for moderate politicians in Proposition 3, and the
intuition is similar: to get reelected, right-wing politicians need to pretend to be moderate ones;
higher W makes this even more important and lower              makes it less costly, hence their bias
of right-wing politicians is higher. The comparative statics with respect to           is the opposite:
a higher     now makes it less likely that following a loss in the elections the next politician in
power will be right-wing and implement the incumbent’s desired policy b.
   The question of whether the bias of right-wing politicians will be large enough so that they
actually choose populist policies r < 0 (i.e., whether q > b) is of particular interest. When this
is the case, not only moderate but also right-wing politicians will choose populist policies. The
next result gives an answer to this question.

Proposition 5          1. In the absense of direct bene…ts from holding o¢ ce (i.e., if W = 0), right-
       wing politicians never choose policies to the left of median voter’s political bliss point, i.e.,
       q < b and r > 0 > m.

  2. For W > 0 large enough, the equilibrium involves q > b, i.e., m < r < 0.

                                                    14
Proof. See Appendix A.
       When there are no direct bene…ts or rents from holding o¢ ce (i.e., W = 0), then right-wing
politicians will never bias their policies so much to the left as to end up to the left of the median.
This is because the cost of not getting reelected is to see the political bliss point of a moderate
politician, which is the same as the median voter’s bliss point, implemented.15 Higher bene…ts
from holding o¢ ce, on the other hand, increase the left bias of not only moderate politicians,
but also of right-wing politicians. Consequently, for su¢ ciently high values of W , remaining
in o¢ ce is so valuable for right-wing politicians that they may also end up choosing populist
policies.
       Our next result shows that under an additional assumption on the form of the noise, an
increase in polarization (corresponding to a bigger gap between the bliss points of moderate
and right-wing politicians) also increases populist bias, provided that the utility from holding
o¢ ce is not too large. To simplify the conditions needed for the results to hold, we will impose
that the distribution of the noise z is normal. The proof of the proposition suggests that this
assumption can be replaced by a stronger version of Assumption 2.

Proposition 6 Suppose that noise z is normally distributed. Then:

                                                                      b
   1. If W is su¢ ciently small (close to 0) and                  >   2,   then an increase in polarization b
         increases the populist bias of moderate politicians.

   2. As W increases, the e¤ ect of polarization on the populist bias diminishes.

Proof. See Appendix A.
       This proposition shows that, under additional assumptions as stated, populist policies are
more likely when there is greater ‘polarization’ in society, meaning a bigger gap between the
political bliss points of the median voter and the moderate politician on the one hand and that
of the right-wing politician on the other. There is a simple intuition underlying this result:
with greater polarization, the bene…t from reelection to both types of politicians is greater,
encouraging more populist policies in the …rst period. However, the result is not unambiguous
(hence the need for imposing the additional conditions) because there is also a countervailing
e¤ect: greater polarization also makes it more di¢ cult for right-wing politicians to masquerade
as moderate ones, which also decreases the need for moderate ones to choose populist policies.
If the signal is su¢ ciently noisy and if politicians do not care too much about the o¢ ce, the
  15
    This result continues to hold, a fortiori, if the future is discounted. But if the second period is more important
in politicians’uility than the …rst period, then there may be populist bias in right-wing politicians’choices even
with W = 0.


                                                         15
second e¤ect is dominated. As incumbents begin to care about the o¢ ce more, there will be
more populism for any degree of polarization (Proposition 3), and further polarization will not
have a major impact.
       We next investigate the relationship between the noisiness of signal z and the bias of moderate
and right-wing politicians. To do this in a tractable way, let us again assume that distribution
of z is normal, which enables us to measure noisiness of the signal z by its variance                    2.   The
next proposition summarizes our results.

Proposition 7 Suppose that noise z is normally distributed with variance                    2.   An increase in
 2    …rst increases and then decreases the left bias of both moderate and right-wing politicians, p
and q. Both of these biases are maximized when
                                      0    s                             r     1
                                    b@                                       8A
                             =          1 + 1 + (1                 2 )           .
                                    4                                        e

(If       is such that it does not satisfy Assumption 2, then populist bias is decreasing in variance
for all feasible values of ).

Proof. See Appendix A.
       The intuition behind this nonmonotonicity is simple. When there is little noise, politicians
only have limited incentives to bias policy as voters are unlikely to confuse the two types of
politicians. When there is too much noise, on the other hand, the resulting signal is often very
di¤erent from the policy and politicians’incentives to signal by biasing policy are again limited.
Proposition 7 thus highlights that populist bias (of both moderate and right-wing politicians) is
driven neither by very precise nor very imprecise information about politicians’policy choices,
but is in fact more likely to occur for ‘moderate’informativeness of policy signals.
       Finally, since the populist bias of politics in this model is driven by politicians’e¤orts to get
reelected, it is useful to consider whether term limits would improve welfare. Here we investigate
this question focusing on ‘hard term limits,’ returning to the issue of ‘soft term limits,’ which
can be violated by su¢ ciently popular politicians, in Section 5.3.
       It is straightforward to see that with (hard) term limits restricting politicians to a single
term, politicians will set policy equal to their bliss point. Let us focus on the e¤ects of term
limits on the welfare of poor voters as given by (2).16 Term limits will have three e¤ects on the
welfare of poor voters. First, the policy choice of moderate politicians in the …rst period will
be closer to their bliss point. Second, the policy choice of right-wing politicians will generally
  16
    We can also consider a utilitarian social welfare measure, which will be similar provided that poor voters are
su¢ ciently more numerous.


                                                       16
be further away from their bliss point (unless without term limits, they would have chosen
such extreme populist policies that they are further to the left of the median voter’s bliss point
than they would have been to the right with policies in line with their preferences). Third, the
likelihood of a moderate politician in the second period will be lower (since poor voters would
lose the ability to select only politicians who are likely to be moderate).
    The next proposition shows that the welfare of poor voters may be higher or lower under
term limits, and also characterizes the e¤ect of various parameters on whether term limits will
increase their welfare. It shows that despite the populist bias of policies in the absence of (strong)
term limits, term limits may make (poor) voters worse o¤— particularly when the populist bias
of policy is limited because of politicians’low bene…ts from holding o¢ ce (low W ) or because
of their strong policy concerns (high ).

Proposition 8 The welfare of poor voters (and the utalitarian welfare of the society as a whole)
can be higher or lower under term limits. Higher W and lower        make it more likely that welfare
is higher under terms limits. The absence of term limits is better for poor voters if politicians
are not o¢ ce-motivated (W is low), or if policy preferences, rather than reelection concerns,
determine their policy choices (    is high).

Proof. See Appendix A.


4    Corruption

We have so far assumed that politicians have policy preferences that are private information
and some politicians may (secretly) have right-wing preferences. Politicians then choose policies
to signal to the voters that they do not have such right-wing preferences. While such policy
preferences are plausible, a complementary and perhaps empirically more important reason why
some politicians may have more right-wing preferences than the median voter may be that they
are (unduly) in‡uenced or even captured by the elite. This is particularly relevant in weak
democracies, such as many in Latin America, where the elite have several non-electoral means
of in‡uencing politics (including lobbying or direct bribery) and may have a disproportionate
impact on policies. In this section, we investigate the implications of voters’ concern that
politicians may be unduly in‡uenced by the rich elite. In doing so, we endogenize the extent
of the right-wing preferences of some (corruptible) politicians, which will now depend on the
intensity of their preferences relative to the preferences of the elite.
    To focus on the role of political corruption in underpinning populism, we now assume that
politicians are identical in terms of their policy preferences and suppose, without any loss of


                                                 17
generality, that these coincide with the preferences of the median voter. But only a fraction      of
politicians are ‘honest’in the sense that they cannot or will not accept bribes; the remaining 1
share are ‘dishonest’ and thus corruptible. The bribing process is potentially ‘imperfect’. We
capture this by assuming that whenever there is such a transaction, the parties must incur cost
C     0 to avoid being detected. This introduces a parameter that will be useful for comparative
statics (and we could set C = 0). More precisely, let us assume that it is the politician who
incurs the cost C. The surplus of the transaction is split between the rich elite and the politician
in power, and the politician receives a share     (of the remaining surplus, i.e., the surplus minus
the cost C).
    In this new setup, the corruptible politicians will de facto become more right-wing, as their
policies will be the result of bargaining with the elite which favors policy b. Honest politicians,
on the other hand, will prefer policy 0, as did moderates in the previous setting. To simplify
the analysis, for the rest of this section we assume that the noise z is normally distributed, and
also that
                                              W
                                                  < b2 :                                        (18)

Under these assumptions, we can establish the existence and uniqueness of pure-strategy equi-
librium.
    The timing of the new game is therefore as follows.

    1. The politician in power at time t = 1 and the elite bargain over x1 (if the politician is
      dishonest), and the politician chooses policy x1 2 R.

    2. Voters obtain the signal s = x1 + z.

    3. Voters vote, and decide whether to replace the current incumbent with a random one
      drawn from the pool of potential politicians.

    4. The politician in power at time t = 2 (the incumbent or newly elected politician), if
      dishonest, bargains with the elite over x2 . The politician chooses policy x2 2 R.

    5. All agents learn the realizations of x1 and x2 , and payo¤s are realized according to (1) –
      (3).

    The timing and the structure of the game is very similar to that in Section 2, except for
the bargaining between the politician and the elite in stages 1 and 4. Note that parameter
 , which has so far captured the intensity of politicians’policy preferences, may now be given
di¤erent/complementary interpretations. First, a small          may also correspond to (or result


                                                  18
from) a large size of the elite, which would make bribing politicians relatively inexpensive for
the elite, so that the policy choice of the politician is easier to manipulate. Conversely, a large
could be interpreted as the elite constituting a relatively small group of the population. Second,
a large    can also be interpreted as the politician standing in for a large bureaucracy, thus
increasing the monetary and transactional costs of bribing.
   As before, we start our analysis with the second period. Then, an honest politician will
choose his bliss point, xh2 = 0. A corruptible politician, on the other hand, will bargain with the
elite, and the equilibrium policy is determined from the joint maximization of the sum of their
surpluses (as long as the surplus exceeds C). Namely, they maximize

                                   max            (xc2 )2     (xc2   b)2 ,
                                   xc2 2R

which yields
                                                 b
                                                 xc2 =
                                                     .                                       (19)
                                               1+
Naturally, a higher , which corresponds either to a greater weight on politician’s preferences or
smaller elite that will bene…t from biasing the policy, implies a policy closer to the politician’s
political bliss point. As a consequence, the second period joint utility of a dishonest politician
in power and the elite is
                                              b2
                                             W      C,
                                              +1
and the gain in utility, as compared to the status-quo W                     b2 (since without the bribe, the
                                       b2
politician would choose xc2 = 0), is   +1        C. This means that bribing in the second period will
occur only if
                                                b2
                                                 C< .                                                    (20)
                                                +1
In this case, we can simply determine the bribe B2 from the equation
                                                                     b2
                                 (xc2 )2 + B2        C=                      C ,
                                                                     +1
which implies
                                                       b2
                              B2 =          +               + (1     ) C.
                                              +1       +1
Interestingly, the e¤ect of the intensity of politician’s preferences on the bribe is nonmonotonic:
                                            1
the bribe reaches its maximum at       =    1+   ; for lower , the bribe is smaller because the politician
is very cheap to persuade, and for very large , the politician is too hard to bribe, hence in the
limit the bribe vanishes.
   The following proposition characterizes several useful features of the equilibrium.

Proposition 9 Suppose that z is normally distributed and (18) and (20) hold. Then:

                                                         19
  1. In the second period, honest politicians choose xh2 = 0, while corrupt politicians choose
               b
      xc2 =   1+   ;

  2. In the …rst period, honest and corrupt politicians choose policies xh1 = m and xc1 = r such
      that m < r;

  3. The median voter prefers to have an honest politician in the second period, and reelects
      the incumbent politician if and only if he receives a signal
                                                             m+r
                                                    s            .
                                                              2

Proof. See Appendix B.
   Part 1 of Proposition 9 was established earlier, while Parts 2 and 3 are similar to the results
established in Proposition 1 in the case without bribery.
   Let us next turn to the …rst-period problem. If the second period involves no bribing,
then in the …rst period politicians have no “reelection concerns” because in this case voters are
indi¤erent between the incumbent and the challenger (and we have assume that when indi¤erent,
they reelect the incumbent). As a consequence, politicians will solve an identical problem in the
…rst period, and thus the solution is the same and involves no corruption either. The interesting
case where dishonest politicians accept bribes in the second period (which is the case when
(20) holds) is the one studied in Proposition 9. In this case, the probability of reelection of
a politician who chooses policy x is again given by (8). An honest politician does not accept
bribes and thus solves the problem
                                                                              2
                                                                    b
                       max    x2 + W (x)           (1        )                    (1       (x)) .                 (21)
                       x2R                                         1+

Note that this problem is the same as (9), except that when the honest incumbent is replaced by
                                                        2
                                               b
a dishonest politician, his utility is        1+            instead of        b2 (since the second period policy
in this case will be given by (19)). This maximization problem gives the …rst-order condition

                                                       b2                m+r
                        2 x      W + (1        )                  f                    x   = 0.                   (22)
                                                   (1 + )2                2

   A dishonest politician bargains with the elite both in the …rst and second periods. In
the …rst period, bargaining— anticipating the second-period choices— gives the following joint
maximization problem
      8                                                                                                  9
      <                                                           b2                                     =
                                 x2      (x   b)2 + W             +1      C        (x)
 max                                                                                                          .   (23)
  x2R :              b2                       b2
           (1    ) +1   +         +      +1   +1   + (1          ) C (1           (x))       b2 (1   (x)) ;


                                                        20
The …rst two terms relate to the …rst period’s utilities of the incumbent and the elite, respectively.
If this (dishonest) politician is reelected, then together with the elite he jointly obtains second-
                               b2
period utility W               +1       C. If he is not reelected but another dishonest politician comes to
                                            b2
power, their joint utility is               +1     B2 (the same policy is implemented and the elite have to
pay the same second-period bribe, but the current incumbent receives neither the direct bene…ts
from holding o¢ ce nor the bribes, nor has he to pay the cost C). Finally, if an honest politician
is elected, the incumbent and the elite together obtain                   b2 . The …rst-order condition of their
maximization problem, after simpli…cation, gives:

                                                     b2                           b2                       m+r
 2 x        2 (x     b)        W + (1         )           +( +            )                C       f                  x    = 0.
                                                  ( + 1)2                         +1                        2
                                                                                                                           (24)
   Since …rst-order conditions (22) and (24) must be satis…ed in equilibrium for x = m and
x = r, respectively, the equilibrium is now characterized by the following two equations:

                                                        (1   ) b2         r       m
                                        2 m        W+                 f                =0                                  (25)
                                                         (1 + )2              2

and
                                          (1  ) b2                            b2                       r       m
      2 r     2 (r        b)    W+                 +( +               )                C       f                    = 0.   (26)
                                           ( + 1)2                            +1                           2

   From (25) and (26), we obtain
                                    0                   (1 ) b2
                                                                                                           1
                                                                                       b2
                               1 @            m W+       ( +1)2
                                                                  +( +             )   +1       C
                    r=            b+                                                                       A.
                               +1                                   (1 ) b2
                                                             W+      (1+ )2

Plugging this into (25) and denoting, as before, the populist bias (of honest politicians) by
p = jmj =          m, we have the following equilibrium condition for populist bias:
                                              0                     (1 ) b2
                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                               b2
                 (1   ) b2                        b      W+          (1+ )2
                                                                                      ( +              )       +1    C
  2 p=        W+                          f@          +p                                                                   A.
                  (1 + )2                    2 (1 + )                  2 (1 + ) W +            (1 ) b2
                                                                                                (1+ )2
                                                                                                                           (27)
   The next proposition follows from our analysis so far and from this expression.

Proposition 10 Suppose that z is normally distributed and (18) and (20) hold ((20) ensures
that there is corruption in the second period when the politician is dishonest). Then:

  1. There exists a unique equilibrium (in pure strategies). In this equilibrium, honest politicians
       choose populist policies in the …rst period (i.e., m < 0). Dishonest politicians accept a bribe.


                                                            21
  2. If W and       are su¢ ciently small, then dishonest politicians will not choose populist policies,
       i.e., r > 0. If, on the other hand, W is su¢ ciently high, dishonest politicians will choose
       populist policies, i.e., r < 0.

Proof. See Appendix B.
   The intuition for why honest politicians now choose populist policies is similar to before: a
small move to the left starting from their political bliss point has a second-order cost in terms
of …rst-period utility, and a …rst-order gain in terms of the probability of reelection and second-
period utility. The last part of the result suggests that if dishonest politicians do not value being
in power per se (obtaining neither direct bene…ts from being in o¢ ce nor positive rights), then
the equilibrium will never involve populist policies in the …rst period. This is because reelection
has limited bene…ts for dishonest politicians and this makes populist policies jointly too costly
for the elite and the politician. The converse case is more interesting. In this case, even though
dishonest politicians are e¤ectively representing the wishes of the elite (because of bribery), they
will still choose populist policies in the …rst period so as to increase their likelihood of coming
to power and obtaining higher utility (from the bene…t of holding o¢ ce, and perhaps from a
higher share of surplus from corruption) in the second period.
   The comparative static results of populist bias are again intuitive, but they also help us to
further clarify the nature of the results in this case.

Proposition 11 Suppose that z is normally distributed and (18) and (20) hold . Then, the
populist bias of honest politicians, p = jmj, is higher when:

  1. W is higher (greater direct utility from holding o¢ ce);

  2. C is lower (greater gains from the election for dishonest politicians because bribing is more
       e¢ cient);

  3.     is higher (dishonest politicians have higher bargaining power vis-à-vis the elite);

  4.     is lower (honest politicians are relatively rare).

Proof. See Appendix B.
   A higher W makes both politicians value reelection more; they thus engage in more signaling
(by choosing more populist policies). A lower C increases the joint utility of the elite and
the incumbent in case of reelection, and this makes dishonest politicians choose more left-wing
policies, which in turn enables honest politicians to do the same. A higher       makes holding o¢ ce
more valuable for dishonest politicians. This again makes them seek o¢ ce more aggressively by

                                                   22
choosing policies that are more left-wing, and honest politicians respond by also changing their
policies to the left. Since they were already to the left of the median voter, this increases the
populist bias of honest politicians. Finally, if honest politicians are rare, it makes them even
more willing to signal because the population’s prior is that dishonest politicians are the norm,
not the exception.
    Our discussion so far suggests that the potential corruption of politicians empowers the elite
to secure policies that are more favorable to their interest. However, as we emphasized in the
Introduction, there is a countervailing e¤ect: the fact that the elite will be able to in‡uence
politics leads to equilibrium signaling by choosing more left-wing policies. In fact, we have seen
that this always makes honest politicians choose populist policies to the left of the preferences
of the median voter. This raises the possibility that the elite’s ability to bribe politicians may
actually harm them (by creating a strong left-wing bias in the …rst period). The next proposition
shows that when W is su¢ ciently large, the elite may be worse o¤ when they are able to bribe— as
compared to a hypothetical world where they are never able to in‡uence politics via bribes.

Proposition 12 Suppose that z is normally distributed and (18) and (20) hold. There exists W
such that if W > W , the elite are better o¤ when (20) does not hold (i.e., if C is high enough)
as compared to the case in which it holds (or in the extreme, where C = 0).

Proof. See Appendix B.
    Intuitively, when politicians receive su¢ cient rents from holding o¢ ce, policy choices by both
honest and dishonest politicians will be more to the left, and as a result, despite their ability
to bribe dishonest politicians, the elite will end up with …rst-period policies that are very far
from their preferences. In this case, they may have lower utility than in a situation without the
possibility of bribery (which would have led to the implementation of the median voter’s bliss
point in both periods). This result thus shows that weak institutions, which normally empower
the elite, may in the end create su¢ cient policy distortions so as to make them worse o¤, because
of the endogenous response of democratic policies, even if democracy works only imperfectly.


5     Extensions

In this section, we consider several extensions of the baseline model of Section 3.

5.1    Discounting

We have so far suppressed discounting. Suppose now that politicians discount the future with
discount factor   2 (0; 1]. It is straightforward to see that discounting by voters has no e¤ect


                                                23
on the equilibrium and that all of our results hold for any                  > 0. More interestingly, the next
proposition shows that populism is increasing in .

Proposition 13 The populist biases of both moderate and right-wing politicians, p = jmj and
q = jr    bj, are increasing in .

Proof. See Appendix B.
     The intuition for this result is simple: adopting populist policies is costly for both types
of politicians but they are willing to do this to increase their chances of reelection. The more
‘forward-looking’they are (i.e., the less they discount the future) the more willing they will be
to adopt populist policies. This result is also interesting in part because it shows that populism
does not arise because voters or politicians are short-sighted or do not care about the future.
On the contrary, it is politicians’concerns about future reelection that fuels populism.

5.2      Right-Wing and Left-Wing Extremism

Motivated by Latin American politics, we have so far focused on a model in which the possibility
that politicians may be secretly right-wing (or in‡uenced by the rich elite) creates a populist
bias in policies. In practice, fear of left leanings of politicians may also induce a bias to the right
in their policies in an e¤ort to signal that they are not secretly left-wing. In this subsection, we
brie‡y characterize the structure of equilibria when political extremists may be either left-wing
or right-wing. We will show that voters will not reelect any incumbent that generates a signal
that is extreme to either side, and we will also show that policy will be endogenously biased in
the opposite direction from the preferences of the extremist that is more likely.
     Suppose that, as before, with probability              the politician is a moderate and has bliss point
 m   = 0. With complementary probability 1                  , the politician is an extremist; he is right-wing
with probability        r   2 (0; 1        ) with bliss point   r   = b > 0, and left-wing with probability
 l   with bliss point        l   =   b. The assumption that the absolute value of the biases of the two
extremists are the same is adopted to simplify notation and algebra, and ensures that the median
voter is equally averse to either type of extremist. Throughout this subsection, we hold                        …xed
and vary     l   and   r    so that    l   +   r   =1   . This enables us to study how the likelihood of the
two classes of extremists a¤ects the equilibrium policy biases. We also simplify the analysis by
assuming that z is normally distributed with variance                 2   and that   2   is su¢ ciently high.
     Clearly, in the second period, each politician is going to choose his ideal policy x2 2 f b; 0; bg,
and thus the median voter will reelect the incumbent only if the posterior that the incumbent
is moderate, ^ , is at least . To characterize the …rst period strategies x1 of the three types of
politicians, let us denote the policy choices of left-wing, moderate, and right-wing politicians by

                                                           24
l, m, and r, respectively. In Appendix B, we prove that in equilibrium we must have l < m < r.
We simplify the analysis here by imposing this property. When the median voter observes signal
s, then his posterior that the politician is moderate will be
                                                         f (s m)
                                     ^=                                                                 .                            (28)
                                           f (s     m) + l f (s l) +               rf    (s        r)
The condition ^              simpli…es to

                         l                                       r
                             (f (s    m)     f (s       l)) +        (f (s     m)        f (s           r))      0,                  (29)

which, given the normal distribution, is equivalent to

  l                1                        l+m                  r                       1                              r+m
       1   exp       2
                         (m        l) s                     +          1      exp         2
                                                                                              (r        m) s                          0.
                                             2                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                     (30)
In Appendix B, we show that the set of signals s for which (30) is satis…ed is an interval [sl ; sh ],
where these thresholds are given by sl = sl (l; m; r) and sh = sh (l; m; r) as functions of the policy
                                                                                              l+m              m+r
choices of the three types of politicians. Moreover,                       1 < sl <             2   and         2     < sh < +1. This
implies that a politician is perceived to be moderate and is reelected if the realized policy (signal)
is not too extreme in either direction.
      For a politician choosing policy x1 = x in the …rst period, the probability of reelection is
therefore given by

                             (x) = Pr (sl < x + z < sh ) = F (sh                    x)        F (sl           x) .

Thus, a moderate incumbent solves the problem

                                max        x2 + W (x)            (1          ) b2 (1           (x)) ,
                                x2R

which uses the fact that either type of extremist will choose the policy that is b away from his
bliss point, implying a disutility of b2 for the moderate type. The …rst-order condition for a
modern incumbent is therefore

                             2 x      W + (1            ) b2 (f (sh           x)     f (sl          x)) = 0:                         (31)

Our focus on su¢ ciently high variance              2   ensures that the second-order condition is also satis…ed.
      The problem of a left-wing incumbent also factors in the probability                                            r   of a right-wing
extremist coming to power in the next period and choosing a policy 2b away from his bliss point,
as well as the probability           that a moderate will come to power and choose a policy b away from
his bliss point. This problem can thus be written as

                   max             (x + b)2 + W (x)                   b2 +     r
                                                                                    (2b)2 (1                   (x)) ,
                    x2R


                                                                25
and has …rst-order condition
                                                          r
                        2 (x + b)       W +( +4               ) b2 (f (sh       x)      f (sl    x)) = 0.           (32)

Similarly, for a right-wing incument, the problem is

                        max        (x   b)2 + W (x)                 b2 +    l
                                                                                (2b)2 (1         (x)) ,
                        x2R

with the …rst-order condition
                                                          l
                    2 (x       b)       W+       +4             b2 (f (sh        x)     f (sl    x)) = 0.           (33)

    In equilibrium, (31), (32), and (33) must hold for x = m; l; r, respectively. This implies that
the following three conditions characterize an equilibrium
                                                          r
                        2 (l + b)       W +( +4               ) b2 (f (sh       l)     f (sl    l)) = 0,            (34)
                              2 m       W + (1     ) b2 (f (sh              m)        f (sl     m)) = 0,            (35)
                                                      l
                   2 (r       b)        W+    +4               b2 (f (sh        r)     f (sl    r)) = 0.            (36)

    The next proposition establishes the existence of a unique equilibrium. To prove this result,
we use the fact that the thresholds are given by sl = sl (l; m; r) and sh = sh (l; m; r) as functions
of policies, and write (34) –(36) as a mapping from the space of policies (l; m; r) into itself, and
show that this mapping is (locally) a contraction.

Proposition 14 Suppose that z is normally distributed and                              is su¢ ciently large. Then there
exists a unique (perfect Bayesian) equilibrium in pure strategies. In this equilibrium, politicians
choose their preferred policy in the second period. In the …rst period, the left-wing, moderate and
right-wing politicians choose policies l, m and r, respectively, and we have l < m < r, jmj < jrj
and jmj < jlj (i.e., the moderate politician chooses a policy closer to the median voter’s bliss
point 0 than either of the extremist politician types). The incumbent is reelected if the signal s
is within a certain interval [sl ; sh ].

Proof. See Appendix B.
    The next proposition characterizes a number of comparative statics results of the policy
choices of the three types of politicians.

Proposition 15 Suppose that z is normally distributed and                             is su¢ ciently large. Then:

   1. If   l   =   r,   then moderate politicians choose their ideal policy m = 0 in the …rst period,
      while both extremist types choose policies more moderate than their true preferences, i.e.,
      the left-wing politician chooses l 2 ( b; 0) and the right-wing politician chooses r 2 (0; b).
      Moreover, jlj = jrj.

                                                               26
  2. As        l   decreases or         r        increases (keeping            l   +   r   =1        constant), the policy of moderate
      politician m decreases. Similarly, an increase in                                     l   (and a decrease in                     r)       leads to an
      increase in m. In other words, moderate politicians bias their …rst-period policy choice in
      the direction of the type of extremist that is less likely.

  3. There exist              0   and       00   where 0 <        0   <   00   <1           and          0   +   00   =1             such that: (a) if
       l   <       0   (and thus        r    >      00 ),   then a further decrease in               l       leads to a lower l and a higher
      r (i.e., both extremists choose even more extreme policies); (b) likewise, if                                                         l   >   00   (and
      thus         r   <   0 ),   then a further decrease in                   r   leads to a higher r and a lower l (again, both
      extremist types choose more extreme policies); (c) if                                     l;   r       2 ( 0;   00 ),   then l and r increase
      as     r     increases, and decrease as                    l    increases (i.e., extremists adjust their policies in the
      direction of the type that becomes more likely).

Proof. See Appendix B.
   This proposition establishes several important results. First, when their likelihoods are the
same, the two types of extremists choose symmetric policies and moderate politicians choose
their ideal policy m = 0. Because both extremists would like to masquerade as a moderate, their
policies are closer to the median’s bliss point. Second, as one type of extremist becomes less
likely, we approach the results from the baseline model. In particular, as                                                    l   becomes su¢ ciently
low, i.e., a left-wing extremist is very unlikely, the policy of a moderate politician m becomes
more populist, and the policy of right-wing extremist becomes closer to his bliss point (increases).
The intuition is that, as                   l    decreases, a moderate politician has a higher chance of reelection
if he persuades the voters that he is not right-wing, whereas a right-wing politician has less to
fear from defeat and thus less incentive to signal by choosing a more moderate policy (for a
left-wing extremist has now become less likely). Third, a decline in the likelihood of a left-wing
extremist (from the symmetric case) has a nonmonotonic e¤ect on the policy choices of left-wing
extremist politicians. This is because the probability that a politician is a right-wing extremist
is now higher and left-wing politicians are thus more afraid of losing power click calendar; this
induces them to choose more moderate policies to masquerate as a moderate. However, once this
likelihood is su¢ ciently small, voters become tolerant of left-wing signals (because they are not
afraid of left-wing extremists) and this encourages left-wing politicians to adopt more extremist
left-wing policies.
   These results imply that more extremist policies are more likely to emerge in asymmetric
situations where the probability that the incumbent is one type of extremist is (signi…cantly)
higher than the other type. In such situations, moderate politicians will attempt to signal their
type by choosing policies with the opposite bias. If this asymmetry is very pronounced, the

                                                                          27
most extreme policies will be chosen by the rarer type of extremist (though these policies will
also occur more rarely since these types are rare).

5.3     Soft Term Limits

The examples discussed in Footnote 7 in the Introduction show that many politicians, particu-
larly in Latin America, are subject to ‘soft term limits,’meaning that they are limited to a single
term of o¢ ce but this is often violated if the politician is su¢ ciently popular. Here we discuss
the implications of this type of soft term limits and show that, under certain circumstances,
they may increase rather than reduce the populist bias of policy.
   Recall that in our baseline model the incumbent politician is reelected if the posterior that
he is moderate was at least . Suppose now that the incumbent is reelected if this posterior is
at least . Soft term limits can be modeled by assuming that                           . In this interpretation, a
value of   equal to      means no term limits, a value of 1 designates hard term limits as already
discussed in Proposition 8, and intermediate values correspond to soft term limits which can be
overcome by su¢ ciently popular politicians. As             declines, term limits become softer. In what
follows, we also allow     < , which can be interpreted as a form of ‘incumbency advantage’.
   We again simplify the analysis by assuming that z is normally distributed and                   is su¢ ciently
large. Once again, in any equilibrium, m < r, and we use this fact and the expressions that
follow. The citizens’posterior that the incumbent is moderate equals ^ given by (5). Therefore,
the incumbent is reelected when
                                            f (s m)
                                                                                 ,                          (37)
                                  f (s    m) + (1  ) f (s            r)
or equivalently when
                                            f (s      m)
                                                              h,                                            (38)
                                            f (s      r)
where
                                                     = (1     )
                                           h                    .                                           (39)
                                                     = (1     )
Clearly, h is an increasing function of    for all     2 (0; 1). As            increases from 0 to 1, h goes from
0 to +1. Given the assumption that z is normally distributed, this implies that the incumbent
will be reelected if
                                                m+r               2 ln h
                                     s    s =                              ,                                (40)
                                                 2            r      m
which immediately implies that a higher         makes reelection less likely for any given m and r.
   The maximization problems of the two types of politicians are similar to the ones before and




                                                     28
imply the following two …rst-order conditions:

                                     2 m       W+     (1    ) b2 f (s      m) = 0;
                                        2 (r    b)    W+         b2 f (s    r) = 0.

Again as in the baseline model, we obtain that there will be a populist bias for moderate
politicians’ policies (i.e., m < 0), and right-wing politicians will choose policies to the left of
their true preferences (i.e., r < b). Our main result in this subsection is summarized in the next
proposition.

Proposition 16 Suppose that z is normally distributed and                        is su¢ ciently high. Then there
exists a unique (perfect Bayesian) equilibrium. There exists                     >   such that the populist bias
of moderate politicians, p = jmj, is increasing in               if    <   , and it is decreasing in   if   <    .
There also exists                <     such that the populist bias of right-wing politicians, q = jr        bj, is
increasing in       if       <       , and it is decreasing in    if   <     .

Proof. See Appendix B.
     This proposition establishes an inverse U-shaped relationship between populist biases and
 . For moderate politicians, as              increases starting from , populist bias increases. This means,
somewhat paradoxically, that soft term limits may lead to more populist policies. Intuitively,
soft term limits increase the incumbent’s incentives to become popular (to overcome these term
limits) and this encourages populist policies. The same reasoning also applies to right-wing
incumbents, though their populist bias starts increasing already after                  exceeds    . Ultimately,
however, these term limits also make it more di¢ cult for the incumbent to get reelected and
this tends to reduce the populist biases of both types of incumbents. In particular, populist bias
disappears as       tends to 1 and term limits become hard (thus verifying the results discussed in
the context of Proposition 8).
     The following pattern is also interesting: because the populist bias of right-wing politicians
peaks at        <        <       , soft term limits at …rst create polarization, in the sense that an increase
in    starting from              induces moderate politicians to choose policies further to the left and
right-wing politicians to opt for populist further to the right.

5.4    Asymmetric Priors

We have so far limited attention to environments where the prior that the incumbent politician
is moderate, , is the same as the likelihood that a newly elected politician will be moderate. In
practice, these two probabilities may di¤er, for example because voters have received additional


                                                           29
information about the incumbent. This information may come in the form of news, say, that
the incumbent spends time with members of the elite and/or enjoys a lavish lifestyle. It may
also come in the form of some observable characteristics of the incumbent which are (or at least
are believed to be) correlated with political preferences. For instance, a politician born in a rich
or aristocratic family may be thought to have pro-elite (right-wing) preferences, while one who
spent a decade in jail for anti-government protests may be viewed as less likely to be pro-elite.
We now investigate how such factors a¤ect the likelihood of populist policies.
   Let us denote the prior that the incumbent is moderate by . Once again, as m < r, we
have that the incumbent will be reelected when
                                            f (s m)
                                                                         ,                         (41)
                                 f (s     m) + (1  ) f (s     r)
or, equivalently when
                                   f (s      m)   ~    = (1        )
                                                  h                  .                             (42)
                                   f (s      r)        = (1        )
This is similar to the case of soft term limits, and as in that case, it implies that the populist
                                                               ~ The following proposition can
bias of moderate politicians is inverse U-shaped in the ratio h.
then be established using a similar argument (proof omitted).

Proposition 17 Suppose that z is normally distributed and                is su¢ ciently high. Then there
exists a unique (perfect Bayesian) equilibrium. In this equilibrium, moderate politicians choose
populist policies m < 0, and right-wing politicians bias their policies left, so r < b. Moreover,
there exists   <    such that the populist bias of moderate politicians, p = jmj, is increasing in
  if   <   , and it is decreasing in    if    >   .

   The results in this proposition are intuitive. If     is either close to 0 or to 1, the populist
bias tends to 0 because there is little uncertainty about the incumbent politician’s type and
consequently, about his chances of reelection. This result also highlights that it is uncertainty
about the incumbent’s type that encourages populist policies, and as a result, populist bias is
greatest when there is little additional information is known about incumbents (beyond the prior
that he is a moderate with probability ).
   Another important implication of Proposition 17 is that populist bias is greatest when the
incumbent is believed to be somewhat less likely to be moderate than average (i.e., at            < ).
This is also intuitive: a politician suspected of having a right-wing agenda has more to gain
by signaling that he is moderate (particularly if his chances to get reelected are not too small).
This result also suggests that politicians potentially associated with the elite (because of their
family or educational background) may have particularly strong incentives to adopt populist


                                                  30
policies. It further suggests that additional information about an incumbent may make him
more or less likely to pursue populist policies. For example, if the prior about the incumbent is
around    , any additional information will reduce populist bias, whereas starting from a prior
of , news suggesting that the incumbent politician has right-wing associations or views will at
…rst increase populist bias.


6    Conclusion

In this paper, we presented a simple theory of populist politics. Populist politics is interpreted
as (some) politicians adopting policies that are harmful to the rich elite but are not in the best
interest of the poor majority or the median voter. Such policies, which may, at least on the
surface, involve defending the rights of the poor against the elite, establishing redistributive
programs and leveling the playing …eld, are to the left of the bliss point of the median voter,
but still receive support from the median because they signal that the politician does not have
a secret right-wing agenda and is not unduly in‡uenced by the rich elite. The driving force
of populist politics is the weakness of democratic institutions, which makes voters believe that
politicians, despite their rhetoric, might have a right-wing agenda or may be corruptible or
unduly in‡uenced by the elite. Populist policies thus emerge as a way for politicians to signal
that they will choose future policies in line with the interests of the median voter.
    We show that moderate politicians will necessarily choose policies to the left of the median
voter’s preferences, and even right-wing politicians (or those that are captured and bribed by
the elite) may end up choosing policies to the left of the median voter. This populist (leftist)
bias of policy is greater when the value of remaining in o¢ ce is higher for the politician; when
there is greater polarization between the policy preferences of the median voter and right-wing
politicians; when politicians are indeed likely to have a hidden right-wing agenda; and when
there is an intermediate amount of noise in the information that voters receive.
    When (some) politicians can be bribed, we also …nd that the e¢ ciency of the process of
bribery and the share of the surplus that politicians can capture also encourage populism (be-
cause they make politicians more eager to get reelected). Interestingly, in this case, the elite may
be worse o¤ than in a situation in which institutions are stronger and bribery is not possible
(because the equilibrium populist bias of …rst-period policies is more pronounced).
    Our paper and model have been partly motivated by Latin American politics, where populist
policies and rhetoric as well as fears of politicians reneging on their redistributive agenda and
being excessively in‡uenced by rich and powerful elites have been commonplace. Nevertheless,
the ideas here can be applied to other contexts. Our analysis in Section 5.2 shows that when


                                                31
voters are afraid of a secret left-wing agenda, the equilibrium may lead to ‘right-wing populist’
policies. Similarly, if bureaucrats are expected to show a bias in favor of a particular group or a
particular type of policy, they may have incentives to be biased in the opposite direction to dispel
these notions and guarantee good performance evaluation. Finally, our model has focused on a
two-period economy to communicate the basic ideas in the clearest fashion. In a multi-period
setup, politicians may choose biased policies for several periods. Despite the tractability of our
basic model, the in…nite-horizon extension turns out to be challenging and is an open area for
future research.


References

Acemoglu, Daron (2003) “Why Not a Political Coase Theorem? Social Con‡ict, Commitment,
and Politics,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 31, 620-652.
Acemoglu, Daron, Egorov, Georgy, and Konstantin Sonin (2010) “Political Selection and Per-
sistence of Bad Governments”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125: 1511-1576.
Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson (2008) “Persistence of Elites, Power and Institutions,”
American Economic Review, 98: 267-293.
Acemoglu, Daron, Davide Ticchi, and Andrea Vindigni (2010) “Emergence and Persistence of
Ine¢ cient States,” Journal of European Economic Association, forthcoming.
Alesina, Alberto (1989) “The Political Economy of Macroeconomic Stabilization: Myths and
Reality,”in Income Distribution and High-Quality Growth, edited by Vito Tanzi and Ke Young
Chu, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Alesina, Alberto and Guido Tabellini (2007) “Bureaucrats or Politicians? Part I: A Single Policy
Task,” American Economic Review, 97: 169-179.
Austen-Smith, David and Je¤rey Banks (1989) “Electoral Accountability and Incumbency,” in
Models of Strategic Choice in Politics, edited by Peter Ordeshook, Ann Arbor MI: University of
Michigan Press.
Banks, Je¤rey (1990) “A Model of Electoral Competition with Incomplete Information,”Journal
of Economic Theory, 50: 309-325.
Bates, Robert and Eliana La Ferrara (2001) “Political Competition in Weak States”Economics
and Politics, 13: 159–184.
Besley, Timothy (2005) “Political Selection” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19: 43-60.
Besley, Timothy (2006) Principled Agents? Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate (1997) “An Economic Model of Representative Democracy,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112: 85-114.


                                                32
Binswanger, Johannes and Jens Prufer (2009) “Imperfect Information, Democracy and Pop-
ulism,” Tilburg University Discussion Paper No. 2009-10.
Callander, Steven and Simon Wilkie (2007) “Lies, Damned Lies, and Political Campaigns,”
Games and Economic Behavior 60: 262-286.
Calvert, Randall (1985) “The Value of Biased Information. A Rational Model of Policy Advice”,
Journal of Politics, 47: 530-555.
Canes-Wrone, Brandice, Michael Herron, and Kenneth Shotts (2001) “Leadership and Pander-
ing: A Theory of Executive Policymaking.” American Journal of Political Science 45:532-550.
Caselli, Francesco and Massimo Morelli (2004) “Bad Politicians” Journal of Public Economics,
88(3-4): 759-782
De la Torre, Carlos (2000) Populist Seduction in Latin America. The Ecuadorian Experience.
Ohio: Ohio University Press.
Di Tella, Rafael and Robert MacCulloch (2009) “Why Doesn’t Capital In‡ow to Poor Coun-
tries,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2009.1: 285-321.
Diermeier, Daniel, Michael Keane, and Antonio Merlo (2005) “A Political Economy Model of
Congressional Careers” American Economic Review. 95(1): 347-373.
Drake, Paul W. (1978) Socialism and Populism in Chile, 1932-52. Urbana: University of Illinois
Press.
Dornbush, Rudiger and Sebastian Edwards, eds. (1991) The Macroeconomics of Populism in
Latin America, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ferejohn, John (1986) “Incumbent Performance and Electral Control,” Public Choice 50, 5-26.
Harrington, Joseph (1993) “The Impact of Re-election Pressures on the Ful…llment of Campaign
Promises,” Games and Economic Behavior 5, 71-97.
Hawkins, Kirk (2003) “Populism in Venezuela: the Rise of Chavismo,” Third World Quarterly,
24:1137-1160.
Kartik, Navin and Preston McAfee (2007) “Signaling Character in Electoral Competition”,
American Economic Review 97, 852-870.
Lizzeri, Alessandro and Nicola Persico (2005) “A Drawback f Electoral Competition” Journal
of the European Economic Association, 3(6): 1318-1348
Maskin, Eric and Jean Tirole (2004) “The Politician and the Judge: Accountability in Govern-
ment” American Economic Review, 94(4), 034-1054
Mattozzi, Andrea and Antonio Merlo (2007) “Mediocracy,” CEPR Discussion Papers 6163.
Messner, Matthias and Mattias Polborn (2004) “Paying Politicians,” Journal of Public Eco-
nomics, 88(12), 2423-2445
Morris, Stephen (2001) Political Correctness, Journal of Political Economy, 109 (2): 231–265.

                                              33
Norris, Pippa (2005) Radical Right: Voters and Parties in the Electoral Market. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Osborne, Martin J. and Al Slivinski (1996) “A Model of Political Competition with Citizen
Candidates” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111:65-96.
Padro-i-Miguel, Gerard (2007) “The Control of Politicians in Divided Societies: The Politics of
Fear”, Review of Economic Studies 74(4): 1259-1274.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2000) Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Prendergast, Canice (1993) “A Theory of ‘Yes Men’,” American Economic Review , 83 (4):
757–770.
Rodrik, Dani (1996) “Understanding Economic Policy Reform”Journal of Economic Literature,
34 (1): 9-41
Sachs, Je¤rey (1989) “Social Con‡ict and Populist Policies in Latin America,” NBER Working
Paper No. 2897.
Schoultz, Lars (1983) The Populist Challenge: Argentine Electoral Behavior in the Postwar Era.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Schultz, Christian (2008) “Information, Polarization and Term Length in Democracy,” Journal
of Public Economics, 92: 1078-1091.
Wittman, Donald (1973) “Parties as Utility Maximizers,” American Political Science Review
67: 490-498.


Appendix A: Proofs

The following Lemma clari…es the role and consequences of Assumption 2.

Lemma 1 Suppose that Assumption 2 holds. Then:

               2                    3
  1. f (0) <   b   (even f (0) <    2b );

                   b
  2. Pr jzj >      4   > 14 .

                                                                                     2
Proof of Lemma 1.               Part 1. Assumption 2 implies that jf 0 (x)j <        b2
                                                                                          if jxj < b. Hence,
                                                     2                                       2
whenever jxj < b, we have jf (x)            f (0)j   b2
                                                          jxj. This implies f (x)   f (0)    b2
                                                                                                  jxj. We then




                                                          34
have
                                Z   +1                        Z    +b=2
                      1 =                 f (x) dx >                      f (x) dx
                                    1                              b=2
                                Z   +b=2                                                             Z        +b=2
                                                              2                                                      2
                                              f (0)              jxj dx = bf (0)                 2                      xdx
                                    b=2                       b2                                          0          b2
                                                               2
                                              4 1         b                        1
                        = bf (0)                                   = bf (0)          .
                                              b2 2        2                        2

This immediately implies bf (0) < 32 , and thus f (0) <                           3
                                                                                  2b    < 2b .
   Part 2. We have
                                              Z   +b=4                      Z    +b=4
                           b                                                                                    b 3   3
                  Pr jzj <                =               f (x) dx <                    f (0) dx <                   = .
                           4                       b=4                           b=4                            2 2b  4
                  b
Hence, Pr jzj >   4    > 14 .

Proof of Proposition 1.
   Part 1. Consider three cases: m < r, m > r, and m = r. By Bayes rule, the median voter’s
posterior that the politician is moderate
                                                                 f (s m)
                                         ^=                                                           .
                                                   f (s        m) + (1  ) f (s                   r)
If m = r, then ^ = , and thus, by assumption, the incumbent is necessarily reelected. The
moderate and right-wing incumbents then choose their bliss points, so m = 0 < b = r, which
contradicts m = r.
   If m 6= r, then ^            if and only if

                                                   f (s        m)         f (s     r) ,

which simpli…es to s        (m + r) =2 if m < r and to s                           (m + r) =2 if m > r. But if m > r, the
likelihood of reelection is given by

           (x) = Pr (x + z           (m + r) =2) = 1                 F ((m + r) =2               x) = F (x               (m + r) =2)

(the last equality follows from the symmetry of distribution). Hence, moderate and right-wing
incumbents solve problems

                                    max        x2 + W (x)                  (1      ) b2 (1                     (x)) ,
                                     x
                                    max           (x      b)2 + W (x)                     b2 (1                (x)) ,
                                     x

respectively.

                                                                     35
   We have
                m       r                                   r        m                                        r       m                          m       r
   m2 + W F                         (1         ) b2 F                                    r2 + W F                                 (1   ) b2 F                ,
                    2                                            2                                                2                                  2
                            r       m                       m         r                                                   m        r             r       m
      (r   b)2 + W F                                b2 F                                  (m           b)2 + W F                          b2 F                   .
                                2                                2                                                            2                      2
Adding these inequalities, dividing by                      and simplifying, we get
                                                                                          m            r
                m2      (r          b)2         r2         (m    b)2 + b2 2F                                  1 (2            1)
                                                                                               2
   Further simpli…cation yields
                                                     1               m        r
                                    m      r           b 2F                             1 (1           2 ).
                                                     2                    2
If m > r, then this condition implies 1                     2 > 0. However, then we have
                                           m         r      b              m        r     1
                                                                  F                                .
                                                2           2                  2          2
Due to concavity of F for positive arguments (see Assumption 1), this is only possible if
                                                                              2
                                                                f (0)           .
                                                                              b
However, in that case Assumption 2 is violated.
   Part 2. By part 1, the only remaining possibility is m < r. The statement for this case is
proved in the text.

Proof of Proposition 2. The second derivatives for (9) and (11) are
                                                                                        m+r
                                    2 + W + (1                   ) b2 f 0                          x       <0
                                                                                         2
and
                                                                               m+r
                                          2 + W+                 b2 f 0                    x           < 0,
                                                                                2
respectively. Assumption 2 ensures that both are satis…ed. Once this is true, we …nd that (13)
implies an increasing m as a function of r whenever m < r, whereas (14) implies a decreasing r
as a function of m whenever m < r. Consequently, if an equilibrium exists, it is unique, since
these “best-response”curves may intersect only once. The existence result trivially follows from
(16): clearly, the left-hand side and the right-hand side have an intersection at some positive p.



Proof of Proposition 3. Part 1. Let us rewrite (16) as

                                                         G (p; W; ; ) = 0,                                                                (A1)

                                                                      36
where
                                                                         p 2    1 2         b
            G (p; W; ; ) = W + (1                      ) b2 f              b            2
                                                                                          +                              2 p.
                                                                         2   W + (1 ) b     2
Let us de…ne
                                     r       m         p 2    1 2      b
                               y                  =      b            + > 0;                                                           (A2)
                                         2             2   W + (1 ) b2 2
                                                                                            r m
where the second equality follows from (13) and (14), and                                    2 is   positive from Proposition 1).
                2
Since f (x) <   b   for any x, we have

                                                                                           1
                                             p < W + (1                       ) b2           ,
                                                                                          b
and thus
                                   p 2      1 2            b
                       y =            b               2
                                                         +
                                   2     W + (1   ) b      2
                                   1                    1            1                                           b
                           <          W + (1    ) b2       b2                                                +
                                   2                  b       W + (1                                )   b2       2
                                   b    b
                           =         + = b.
                                   2 2
Consequently, by Assumption 2,
                                                                              1
                                                       f 0 (y) <         b2       W
                                                                                      .                                                (A3)
                                                                         2    +   2
In addition, (A1) implies
                                                      W + (1                 ) b2
                                             p=                                     f (y) .                                            (A4)
                                                            2
   Now di¤erentiating G with respect to p and W :
                           @G                     1        2
                                    =        b2                f 0 (y)        2
                           @p                          2
                                                  1        1
                                    <        b2       b2       W
                                                                         2 =               W
                                                                                                 2 < 0.
                                                  2        +                      1+       b2
                                                      2        2

Di¤erentiating it with respect to W :
   @G                    p 2     1 2                                                         p 2         1                         1
           = f (y)         b                f 0 (y) > f (y)                                    b
   @W                    2   (W + (1 ) b2 )                                                  2   (W + (1             )   b2 ) b2   +   W
                                                                                                                              2        2
                         1             1                                 1
           = f (y)         f (y) b2 b2        W
                                                           f (y)           f (y) > 0,
                         4                                               2
                                    2 +       2

where we used (A3) and (A4). Combining these two expressions, we have

                                                  @p               @G=@W
                                                     =                   > 0,
                                                  @W               @G=@p
and thus p is increasing in W .

                                                                   37
   Part 2. Let us di¤erentiate G with respect to . We have

           @G                        p 2     b2 + 2W
                =        b2 f (y)      b                f 0 (y)
           @                         2    W + (1   ) b2
                                     p 2     b2 + 2W         1
                <         b2 f (y) +   b
                                     2    W + (1   ) b2 b2 + W
                                                         2      2
                                                   !
                                            2
                                         1 b + 2W                                             b2 + 2W
                =       b2 f (y)    1+               = b2 f (y)                       1+                         <0
                                       4 b2 + W                                             2 b2 + 2W
                                              2      2

(we again used (A3) and (A4)). This implies that

                                            @p           @G=@
                                               =               < 0,
                                            @            @G=@p
and hence p is decreasing in .
   Part 3. Observe that (A1) may be rewritten as
                                                                                 !
                           W                         p 2 1 2      b
                               + (1       ) b2 f       b W      +                         2p = 0.                      (A5)
                                                     2     + b2   2

Consequently, if W = 0, then equilibrium populist bias p does not depend on                                      . If W > 0,
                                                                   W
then, since (A5) only depends on W and               through           , an increase in         has the same e¤ect as
a decrease in W . In other words, p is decreasing in . This completes the proof.

Proof of Proposition 4.             Part 1. The proof closely follows that of Proposition 3. Let us
rewrite (17) as
                                             ~ (q; W; ; ) = 0,
                                             G                                                                         (A6)

where
                    ~ (q; W; ; ) = W +                        q 2 1 2      b
                    G                              b2 f         b      2
                                                                         +                          2 q.
                                                              2   W+ b     2
           r m
Take y =    2 ,   then y > 0 by Proposition 2, and thus

                                            q 2 1 2     b
                                       y=     b      2
                                                       + >0
                                            2   W+ b    2
                               2
Notice that, since f (x) <     b   for any x, then

                                                                    1
                                            q< W+             b2      ,
                                                                   b
and thus
                         q 2 1 2       b  1                                  1              1                b
                y =         b       2
                                      + <   W+                         b2            b2                  +
                         2     W+ b    2  2                                 b             W+        b2       2
                         b    b
                    =      + = b.
                         2 2

                                                         38
Consequently, by Assumption 2,
                                                                      1
                                              f 0 (y) <          b2       W
                                                                              .                                       (A7)
                                                                 2    +   2
In addition, (A6) implies
                                                      W+          b2
                                         q=                            f (y) .                                        (A8)
                                                       2
                       ~ with respect to q and W . We have
   We now di¤erentiate G
                         ~
                        @G               1        2
                              =     b2                 f 0 (y)        2
                        @q                    2
                                         1        1
                              <     b2       b2        W
                                                                 2 =              W
                                                                                         2 < 0.
                                         2        +                       1+      b2
                                             2         2

Di¤erentiating by W yields
          ~
         @G                  q 2 1 2                                                  q 2     1               1
                = f (y)        b           f 0 (y) > f (y)                              b
         @W                  2   (W + b2 )                                            2   (W +      b2 ) b2   +   W
                                                                                                         2        2
                             1             1                              1
                = f (y)        f (y) b2 b2        W
                                                             f (y)          f (y) > 0;
                             4                                            2
                                        2 +       2

here, we used (A7) and (A8). This implies that

                                          @q                  ~
                                                            @ G=@W
                                             =                      > 0,
                                         @W                    ~
                                                             @ G=@q

and thus q is increasing in W .
                               ~ with respect to . We have
   Part 2. Let us di¤erentiate G

                        @G~                       q 2    b2 + 2W
                            = b2 f (y)              b               f 0 (y) > 0
                        @                         2   W + (1   ) b2

(f 0 (y) < 0 since y > 0). This implies that

                                             @q               ~
                                                            @ G=@
                                                =                  > 0,
                                             @                ~
                                                            @ G=@q

and hence q is increasing in .
   Part 3. Observe that (A6) may be rewritten as
                                                                                  !
                             W                        q 2 1 2      b
                                 + b2 f                 b W      +                     2q = 0.                        (A9)
                                                      2     + b2   2

Consequently, if W = 0, then equilibrium bias q does not depend on                               . If W > 0, then, since
                                                      W
(A9) only depends on W and         through                , an increase in             has the same e¤ect as a decrease
in W . In other words, q is decreasing in . This completes the proof.


                                                            39
Proof of Proposition 5.              Part 1. If W = 0, an elite politician would never choose x1 <
0. Indeed, in this case he would get at most                     (b           x1 )2 <   b2 , even if his ideal policy is
implemented in the second period. At the same time, he can always guarantee getting                                    b2 by
choosing x1 = b (in that case, x2 will be either 0 or b, depending on the election result and new
politician’s type). Consequently, x1 = b would be a pro…table deviation, and thus x1 < 0 may
not be the case in an equilibrium if W = 0.
   Part 2. If W > 0 is su¢ ciently large, x1 < 0 is possible for both politicians. Indeed, r and
m are linked by
                                                   W+            b2
                                          r=m                         + b.
                                                 W + (1          ) b2
If W is su¢ ciently large, equilibrium populism p can be made arbitrarily large (otherwise in
(16), the argument of f would be bounded from below, and thus the right-hand side could be
arbitrarily large, which is incompatible with the left-hand side being bounded). But then m may
be arbitrarily large (in absolute value) negative number, and thus r will also become negative,
          W+      b2
since   W +(1     ) b2
                         has a limit as W ! 1. This completes the proof.

Proof of Proposition 6. Part 1. A normal distribution is characterized by density
                                                           1               x2
                                               f (x) = p          e       2 2   .
                                                           2
                                    @f
One can easily check that           @x   reaches its maximum at x =                      , and this maximum equals
p 1         . For Assumption 2 to hold, it would be su¢ cient to require that
 2 e    2


                                                           b2  W
                                                   2       2p+ 2
                                                       >                  .                                            (A10)
                                                                2 e
This inequality (A10) is obviously satis…ed if W = 0 and b < 2 .
   Now, di¤erentiate G with respect to b. We have

             @G                           W 2 + 2 b (p + b 2p     b )W +                    2 b4 (1   )2
                = 2 (1       ) bf (y) +                                                                    f 0 (y) .
             @b                                         2 (W + (1   ) b2 )
If W = 0, we have

                               @G                                   b2 (1     ) 0
                                     = 2 (1        ) bf (y) +                   f (y)
                               @b                                        2
                                          (1      ) bf (y)            f 0 (y)
                                     =                            4+b          .
                                                   2                  f (y)
For a normal distribution,
                                                  f 0 (y)         y
                                                          =           2
                                                                          ,
                                                  f (y)

                                                           40
and thus, using (A10), we get that if W = 0,

                                          @G   (1              ) bf (y)                     y
                                             =                          4               b   2
                                                                                                    >0
                                          @b                    2
whenever b2 < 4             2   (because 0 < y < b). Therefore, for b not too large (or if                        is su¢ ciently
large), then
                                                          @p       @G=@b
                                                             =           >0
                                                          @b       @G=@p
(it is worth noting that for this result, we would not need the assumption about normal distri-
bution).
                                          r m
   Part 2. Recall that y                   2 ,   and rewrite (A2) as

                                                        1 2         2y b
                                            2 p                 2
                                                                  =2 2 ;
                                                     W + (1 ) b       b

then (A1) implies
                                                                              2y b
                                              (1          2 ) f (y)       2        = 0,
                                                                                b2
which can be rewritten as
                                                 1        2                        b
                                                              f (y) b2        y+     = 0.                                (A11)
                                                      4                            2
From (A11), y does not depend on W or                             . As W varies, so does p, and in such a way that
        p                                                                                                @G
W +(1       ) b2
                   remains constant (this follows from (A1)). This implies that                          @p   = 0, and

                                                     d @G
                                                       @b         f 0 (y)
                                                          =               (b           4y) .
                                                     dW             2b
                                      b
Now, since f 0 (y) < 0, y >           4   implies that @G
                                                       @b < 0. To show that this is the case, we write

                                                                      1       2     b
                                                     y = f (y) b2                  + ,
                                                                          4         2
which we obtain from (A1), satis…es y > 4b . We can rewrite the equation as

                                             y   1 b               1 y 2 b2   1        2     1
                                               =p    e             2 b2 2                   + .
                                             b    2                                4         2
            y          b
Denote      b   = z,       = k; then this equation may be rewritten as g (z) = 12 , where

                                                                 1            1 2 2
                                                                                k z     1       2
                                            g (z) = z           p ke          2                     ;
                                                                 2                          4
obviously,
                                                              1                        1 2 2
                                                                                         k z
                                                 g (z) < z + p ke                      2        .
                                                            4 2



                                                                    41
                                                              1
                                                                                                             p
                                                                                                             4
Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that z <                  4.   Then on the interval 0 < k <                  8 e (which
                                                                                    1 2 2
                                      b                                               k z
captures all values of k =   that satisfy (A10), function ke                        2         is monotonically increasing,
                                           p
and thus does not exceed its value at k = 4 8 e. Therefore,
                                              p4
                                                 8 e p     2
                                  g (z) < z + p e 2 ez .
                                              4 2

One can easily check that the right-hand side is monotonically increasing in z on 0; 14 , and
therefore does not exceed                           p              p
                                                     4
                                                 1     8 e          2 e    1
                                                   + p e            16    < .
                                                 4 4 2                     2
                                                                                1
This leads us to a contradiction, meaning that for no z <                       4   it is possible that g (z) = 12 . This
completes the proof.

Proof of Proposition 7.                   Let us treat G as a function of              , too. To di¤erentiate G with
respect to         at points where (A1) holds, consider

                                          @ ( G ( ))   @G          @G
                                                     =    + G( ) =    .
                                              @        @           @
We have
                      @ ( G ( ))                                1 @            y2
                                     =     W + (1         ) b2 p        exp                            2 p
                          @                                      2 @          2 2
                                                                1 y2         y2
                                     =     W + (1         ) b2 p      exp                          2 p
                                                                 2 3        2 2
                                                               y2
                                     =     W + (1         ) b2 2 f (y) 2 p
                                                                           y2
                                     =     W + (1         ) b2 f (y)        2
                                                                                    1 ,

where we used (A4) to get the last inequality. We have

                                          @p         @G=@           1 @ ( G) =@
                                             =             =                    ,
                                          @          @G=@p              @G=@p
         @p                                  y                                            y
hence    @    > 0 (< 0) if and only if           > 1 (< 1). To study whether                  is greater than or less than
1 we will use (A11).
    As shown above, in the case with normal distribution, Assumption 2 is equivalent to (A10).
Hence, there are always feasible values of                such that        > b; since y < b as proved earlier in the
                                                 y
Proof of Proposition 3, in this case                 < 1, and p is decreasing in . At the same time, for some
                           y
parameter values               > 1 is possible. Take, for instance, W = 0, then (A10) is satis…ed whenever
          1
b   >   p
        4     ,   in particular if b = 1 and           = 0:4. If we let         = 12 , then (A11) implies y =        b
                                                                                                                     2   = 12 ,
          8 e
              y       5
and thus          =   4   > 1.

                                                             42
     Given that p is decreasing in             if       is large enough, in order to prove that p is …rst increasing
                                                                                                                                    y
in    and then decreasing, but never vice versa, it su¢ ces to prove that                                                                is decreasing in       in
               y                           y
points where       = 1. Denote x =                 and rewrite (A11) as
                              1        2    1                           x2                                           b
                                           p exp                                  b2              x        2
                                                                                                               +       = 0.                              (A12)
                                   4        2                           2                                            2
We have
                                                                                                       b
                              @x                                                  2x +                 2
                                       =
                              @                         x1      2
                                                                    b2 p12 exp                             x2
                                                                                                                     b2       2
                                                               4                                           2
                                                                                      b
                                                                    2x +              2
                                       =                                     b
                                                                                                       ,
                                                        x x         2                             2
                                                                             2

where we used (A12) in the last equality. If x = 1, then
                                               2        b               2                          2            b
                         @x                             2                                     2            +    2
                            =                                 b
                                                                            =                                   b
                                                                                                                         =        < 0.
                         @                         2 +        2                                   2 +           2
                    y
This proves that        may equal 1 for only one value of , and thus p is increasing in                                                             if      <
and decreasing in       if   >     .
     To …nd    , we plug x = 1 into the equation (A12) and get the equation for                                                                 :
                                                    2
                                                             1              1             2           1
                                                                                              p           = 0.
                                           b                 2 b                  4                   2 e
We thus have        as the larger root of this equation, so
                                         0      s           r 1
                                       b                     8A
                                    = @1 + 1 + (1 2 )
                                       4                      e

(this is a real number for any , since e > 8).
     Now, rewrite (15) as
                                             W + b2
                                                    q=p   .
                                           W + (1    ) b2
This equation is linear and does not involve . Hence, if increases, either both p and q increase
or both p and q decrease. In particular, the results above apply. Hence, the maximum of both
p and q is achieved at the same                , at this                ,y=                   , and the maximal biases equal

                                   p( =                 ) = k W + (1                                           ) b2 ,
                                   q( =                 ) = k W+                                  b2 ,

where                                          8        r                   q
                                               >
                                               <            1+(1 2 )             8
                                                                                          1
                                                                                  e                                  1
                                   k=                         2(1 2 ) b                           if           6 =   2    .
                                               >
                                               :                  p1                                                 1
                                                                 b 2 e
                                                                                                  if           =     2


                                                                        43
Proof of Proposition 8. Let us denote the probability of having a moderate politician in the
second period (without term limits) by . Notice that the equilibrium probability of reelection
                                             r m
of a moderate politician is F                 2        , and the probability of reelection of a right-wing politician
       m r                     r m
is F    2     =1       F        2      . Consequently,

                           r       m                                   r        m                                             r          m
             =     F                    +          1           F                        + (1          ) 1         1       F
                               2                                            2                                                        2
                                                       r           m
             =             + 2 (1            )F                             ,
                                                               2
                                                           r        m
   1         = (1          ) 1                2F                                1
                                                               2

Indeed, this happens if (a) moderate politician is reelected, (b) moderate politician is not re-
elected, but a moderate comes instead, and (c) right-wing politician is replaced by a moderate.
Therefore, without term limits poor voters obtain utility
                                                                                                      r       m
                 Vn =           m2       (1            ) r2            (1        ) 1             2F                   1       b2 ,
                                                                                                          2
and their utility with term limits is

                                                               Vt =         2 (1        ) b2 .

   We have
                                                                                                      r       m
         Vn      Vt =           m2       (1            ) r2 + (1                 ) 1+            2F                   1       b2 ,           (A13)
                                                                                                          2
and we need to …nd when it is positive or negative.
   Thus, recalling that p = jmj and rewriting (A13) as

                 Vn    Vt =             p2        (1               ) (2y        p)2 + (1         ) (1 + (2F (y)           1)) b2 ;           (A14)

it su¢ ces to prove that for …xed y, the right-hand side of (A14) is positive for small p < p and
negative for p > p (provided that p takes feasible values).
   Di¤erentiating the right-hand side of (A14) with respect to p yields

                                         4y        2p              4y =          2 (p      2y (1      )) .

Consequently, V n          V t is decreasing in p for p > 2y (1                                    ), and there is p > 2y (1                 ) such
that for p > p it is negative. It now su¢ ces to proof that for p < 2y (1                                             ) the right-hand side


                                                                                44
of (A14) is positive. But it is increasing for such values, and hence it su¢ ces to prove that the
value at the minimal feasible p is positive.
                                  1                                                         b
   Suppose …rst that              2.   Then (A11) implies y                                 2.   Take p = 0 (p cannot be negative),
then

                   Vn     Vt =               (1         ) (2y)2 + (1                    ) (1 + (2F (y)             1)) b2
                                             (1         ) b2 + (1           ) (1 + (2F (y)                     1)) b2
                                  = (1             ) b2 (2F (y)                 1) > 0.

                                  1                                                         b
   Now suppose that           <   2;    then (A11) implies y >                              2.       Here, for p = 0, V n        V t may be
negative, but p = 0 is infeasible in this case. Indeed, we have r = 2y + m; now r < b implies
m<b      2y, and thus p =         m > 2y               b. We thus substitute p = 2y                            b to obtain

            Vn     Vt =                (2y        b)2     (1        ) b2 + (1                        ) (1 + (2F (y)     1)) b2
                         =             (2y        b)2 + (1          ) (2F (y)                        1) b2 .

Notice that (A11) implies
                                                                                1           2
                                                  2y      b = f (y) b2                           ,
                                                                                        2
and we also have
                                                                        Z   y
                2F (y)       1 = 2 (F (y)              F (0)) = 2               f (x) dx > 2yf (y) > bf (y) ,
                                                                        0

since f (x) is decreasing for x > 0. Consequently,
                                                                                    2
                                                               1        2
                         Vn     Vt >                f (y) b2                            + (1            ) b3 f (y) .
                                                                    2

Then, using f (y) < 2b , we obtain
                                                                                        2
                                                                   1        2
                        Vn     Vt >                     f (y) b2                            + (1           ) b3 f (y)
                                                                        2
                                                               1                            1 3
                                                  f (y)          f (y) b4 +                   b
                                                               4                            2
                                                               1 3 1 3
                                       >          f (y)          b + b                      = 0.
                                                               2       2
   In both cases, we have shown that V n                       V t > 0 at the minimal value of p, and therefore for
all p < 2y (1    ). Consequently, V n                   V t < 0 if and only if p exceeds some threshold p . By
Proposition 3, this is more likely if W is larger or                            is smaller, and the opposite is more likely
if W is smaller and      is larger.



                                                                   45
Appendix B: Omitted Proofs— Not For Publication

Proof of Proposition 9.
    Part 1. Proved in the text.
    Part 2. We …rst prove that when (20) is satis…ed, pure-strategy Perfect Bayesian equilibria
necessarily have bribes in the …rst period. First suppose that m = r. This would mean that the
probability of reelection is the same for all policy realizations. If so, honest politicians would
choose m = 0, and dishonest ones must choose r = 0 as m = r. But since (20) is satis…ed, the
                                                                  b
elite and the dishonest incumbent would bargain to r =            +1 ,        which violates m = r.
    Second, suppose that m < r. Then the honest politicians solve problem (21), whereas corrupt
politicians solve

                                        b2                                           b2
           max      x2 + W +                   C         (x)     (1           )           (1           (x)) ;
            x2R                         +1                                        ( + 1)2
                                                                                                 b2
indeed, he gets W plus some part of surplus if he is reelected, but loses                     ( +1)2
                                                                                                       if he is replaced
by another dishonest politician. The equilibrium choices of the honest and dishonest politicians
are thus given by

                                                                  b2                  r       m
                                  2 m        W + (1       )                       f                = 0,
                                                               ( + 1)2                    2
                                          b2              b2                          r       m
              2 r        W + (1    )           +                      C           f                = 0,
                                       ( + 1)2            +1                              2

implying, from (20), that r < m. This yields a contradiction. The argument leading to a
contradiction to m > r is similar. Consequently, pure-strategy Perfect Bayesian equilibria
always include bribes.
    Now focus on equilibria bribes in the …rst period and condition. We next establish that
m    r. Suppose, again to obtain a contradiction, that m > r. Then, similarly to the proof of
                                                                                                               m+r
Proposition 1, we can show that the incumbent must be reelected if and only if s                                2 ,   so the
probability of reelection, given policy choice x, is
                                  m+r                     m+r                                     m+r
              (x) = Pr x + z                 =1     F                     x       =F      x                .
                                   2                       2                                       2

Honest politicians would solve (21) and dishonest politicians (with the elite) would solve (23);




                                                   B-1
since honest ones choose m over r and dishonest do the opposite, we have

                                              b2                             m           r
         m2 + W + (1                      )                         F
                                           ( + 1)2                                  2
                                             b2                                          m        r
         r2 + W + (1                    )                               1       F                             ;
                                          ( + 1)2                                            2
                                                                       b2                                                                b2                                     m       r
         r2     (r       b)2 + W + (1                         )             + ((1                         )        + )                                   C          1   F
                                                                   ( + 1)2                                                               +1                                         2
                                                                         b2                                                                 b2                          m       r
         m2       (m       b)2 + W + (1                            )         + ((1                            )        + )                                    C     F                   .
                                                                     ( + 1)2                                                                +1                              2

Adding these inequalities and simplifying, we obtain

                                                                                              b2                                         m           r
           (m        b)2       (r       b)2           ((1           )        + )                              C                2F                                 1 .
                                                                                              +1                                                2
This, together with m > r, implies m > b.
   The policy choice m satis…es the following …rst-order condition:

                                                                        (1  ) b2                              m        r
                                     2 m+ W +                                                         f                            = 0.
                                                                         ( + 1)2                                  2

If m > b, then
                                              m       r                             2b                                     b
                                    f                         >                                           >                             .
                                                  2                      W          (1 )b2                        W            b2
                                                                              +     ( +1)2                        2    +       2

                     m r                                           1
Since f (0) > f       2        and jf 0 (x)j <                W       2     , we must have that
                                                              2
                                                                   + b2

                           Z   +1                             Z    +b
              1 =                       f (x) dx >                          f (x) dx
                                1                                   b
                           Z                                                    !                                              Z
                               +b                                                                                                   +b
                                                               1                                                                                 1
                                        f (0)             W         b2
                                                                            jxj dx = 2bf (0)                               2                W            b2
                                                                                                                                                              xdx
                                b                         2    +        2                                                           0       2   +        2
                                                       1           1 2                                        b2
                     = 2bf (0)                  2W            b2
                                                                     b = 2bf (0)                          W           b2
                                                       +           2                                          +
                                                  2           2                                           2           2
                                    2b2                       b2                        b2
                     >                                 W            b2
                                                                            =   W            b2
                                                                                                  .
                               W          b2                  +                         +
                               2    +     2            2            2           2            2


                                W          b2
This is only possible if        2    +     2      > b2 , which contradicts (18).
   Finally, suppose that m                      r and there is bribing in the …rst period. Then the same line of
argument establishes that pure-strategy perfect Bayesian equilibria must involve m < r. The
existence and uniqueness of such equilibrium is proved in the proof of Part 1 of Proposition 10.
   Part 3. The proof is analagous to the proof of Proposition 1 and is omitted.


                                                                                B-2
Proof of Proposition 10. Part 1. Notice that under Assumption 2, problems (21) and (23)
are concave. Indeed, take (21); the second derivative with respect to x is

                                            (1   ) b2           m+r
                          2 + W+                           f0                 x   < 0,
                                             (1 + )2             2
                                       2
since 1+ > 1 and thus W + (1(1+ ) )2b < W +(1              ) b2 . For problem (23), the second derivative
with respect to x equals, after simpli…cations,

                                       b2                             b2                        m+r
       2     2 + W + (1         )           +( +                )                 C       f0            x .
                                    ( + 1)2                           +1                         2

For this to be negative, it su¢ ces to prove that

                                              b2                m+r
                        ( +            )              C f0                    x   < 2.
                                              +1                 2
Indeed, we have

                                    b2               m+r                   b2         1
               ( +          )               C f0                x     <           W        b2
                                                                                                < 2;
                                    +1                2                    +1         +
                                                                                  2        2

here, we used Assumption 2. As in the Proposition 2 we get that equilibrium is determined by
the intersection of m as an increasing function of r and of r as a decreasing function of m. This
ensures that equilibrium is unique if it exists. As the …rst-period policy of an honest politician
is given by (25), we obtain m < 0.
   To complete the proof of existence, notice …rst that the existence of solution to equations
(25)–(26) follows with a similar argument to Proposition 2. It now remains to prove that the
elite and the dishonest politician would indeed …nd it optimal to agree on a bribe in this case,
i.e., that the gain from bribing is su¢ ciently high. To do this, take m and r, and let l be the
policy that the dishonest politician would choose if he does not get a bribe; as we showed in the
                                                                                                       b
proof of Proposition 9, l < m, as his desire to get reelected is higher. Let n = l +                   +1 .   Denote
the joint expected utility of the elite and the dishonest politician if policy x is chosen by W (x).
We need to prove that W (r)         W (l) > C.
   Since r maximizes W (x), we have

                                    W (r)    W (l)     W (n)        W (l) .




                                                     B-3
Using the fact that         (l)       (n)     (n      l) supx2[l;n] f (x)              (n      l) f (0), we have

      W (n)         W (l)       C
  =        n2   (n b)2 + l2 + (l b)2
                          b2                                             b2
            W + (1   )         +( +                            )                      C       ( (l)     (n))     C
                       ( + 1)2                                           +1
          b                      b
  =            2b (1 + ) 2l +
          +1                     +1
                          b 2                                            b2
            W + (1   )         +( +                            )                      C       ( (l)     (n))     C
                       ( + 1)2                                           +1
            b2                                                                                                   b2     b
  =              C (1 ( +          ) ( (l)                          (n)))        2bl          W + (1      )                f (0)
            +1                                                                                                ( + 1)2   +1
                                             b2            b
  >       2bm        W + (1           )                       f (0)
                                          ( + 1)2          +1
      b                            b2                                               b2             b
  =        W + (1           )                f (y)          W + (1           )                        f (0) ,
                                ( + 1)2                                          ( + 1)2           +1
            r m
where y =    2 .     It thus su¢ ces to prove that

                                                          f (y)
                                                                >            .
                                                          f (0)         +1
Given that f is the c.d.f. of a normal distribution, this may be rewritten as

                                                    y2                       1
                                                      2
                                                          < 2 ln 1 +              .                                     (B-1)

   To show that this is true, we use the formula for y which we obtain in the proof of Proposition
11. We have
                            (1 ) b2                                     b2
                     W+      (1+ )2
                                              ( +              )        +1       C                 b         p
            y=p                                                                           +            <          .
                                                          (1 )     b2                         2 (1 + )   2 (1 + )
                                    2 ( + 1) W +           (1+ )2

Consequently,

                y               1    p       1     1                         b2         1
                      <                =                                W + (1  2 f (y)   )
                            2 (1 + )     2 (1 + ) 2                      ( + 1)
                                1     W   b2                     1     1        W   b2 1
                      <                 +                   f (0) = p             +       2
                            2 ( + 1) 2     2                       2 2 ( + 1) 2     2
                                p            p
                                  2 e          e
                             p          =          .
                            2 2 ( + 1)    2 ( + 1)

This implies
                                             y2       e   1         1
                                                  <             <         .
                                              2       4 ( + 1)2   ( + 1)2

                                                               B-4
                           1          1
However, since 2 ln 1 +         >   ( +1)2
                                             for all        , (B-1) holds. We thus have shown that W (r)
W (l) > C, and thus bribing follows.
   Part 2. We can apply the reasoning we used in the proof of Proposition 5. If W and                             are
both close to 0, then the dishonest incumbent has not reelection motives except for in‡uence
the policy choice. Consequently, the incumbent and the elite will jointly choose x1 > 0, since
                                                                         b
otherwise they would be better o¤ choosing policy                        +1      in the …rst period, and then playing
equilibrium strategies in the second. On the other hand, if W is su¢ ciently high, we can again
show that neither m nor r are bounded from below, and thus r < 0 follows.

Proof of Proposition 11. Part 1. Let us rewrite (27) as

                                             H (p; W; C; ; ) = 0,                                              (B-2)

where
                                                                (1   ) b2
                      H (p; W; C; ; ) =              W+                             f (y)    2 p,
                                                                 (1 + )2
where
                               (1 ) b2                                    b2
                     W+         (1+ )2
                                               ( +                   )    +1       C             b
               y=p                                                                      +            >0
                                                            (1 ) b2                         2 (1 + )
                                  2 ( + 1) W +               (1+ )2
                           r m
(y > 0 because it equals    2 ,     which is positive by Proposition 10). By Assumption 2,

                                                                     1
                                               f 0 (y) <        b2       W
                                                                             .                                 (B-3)
                                                                2    +   2

In addition, (B-2) implies
                                                            (1 ) b2
                                                   W+        (1+ )2
                                         p=                              f (y) .                               (B-4)
                                                            2
   We now di¤erentiate H with respect to p and W . We have
                                    (1 ) b2                                        b2
                @H           W+      (1+ )2
                                                        ( +                  )     +1   C
                     =                                                                       f 0 (y)   2
                @p                                   2 ( + 1)
                               (1 ) b2        b2
                                (1+ )2       1+                              b2    +
                     <                             f 0 (y)      2 =                     f 0 (y)        2
                                 2 (1 + )                                    2 (1 + )3
                               b2    1              1                     b2     1     2
                     <                                          2                            2
                               2 (1 + )2      b2
                                                   +    W                            2
                                                                           2 (1 + ) b2
                                               2        2
                                  2 <0




                                                            B-5
                      @H
(since f 0 (y) < 0,   @p   would achieve its maximum at W = 0,                   = 1, C = 0). Di¤erentiating with
respect to W yields

                                                               b2
            @H                    p ( + (1         ) )        1+         C
                      = f (y) +                                              f 0 (y)
            @W                                           (1 )       b2
                                    2 (1 + ) W +          (1+ )2
                                  ( + (1    ) ) b2             1                            b2 2
                      > f (y)                                           f (y) > f (y)            f (y) > 0.
                                     4 (1 + )2           b2
                                                         2    +     W
                                                                    2
                                                                                            4 b2

Hence,
                                         @p            @G=@W
                                            =                > 0,
                                         @W            @G=@p
and thus p is increasing in W .
    Part 2. Di¤erentiate H with respect to C. Clearly,
                                                   @H
                                                      < 0,
                                                   @C
and therefore
                                                   @p
                                                      < 0,
                                                   @C
so p is decreasing in C.
    Part 3. Di¤erentiate H with respect to . We have

                                                           b2
                                @H          (1     )      1+             C
                                   =    p                                    f 0 (y) > 0;
                                @                  2 (1 + )

we used the condition (20) that suggests that C is not high enough to prevent second-period
corruption. Therefore,
                                            @p         @G=@
                                               =             > 0,
                                            @          @G=@p
and thus p is increasing in .




                                                       B-6
   Part 4. Di¤erentiate H with respect to . We have

                                               b2
       @H              b2               p     1+        C W (1 + )2 (1             ) + b2
             =             f (y)                                                            f 0 (y)
       @           (1 + )2              2    (1 + )3                 W+      (1 ) b2
                                                                              (1+ )2
                                                 b  2
                        b2           f (y)     1+      C
             =                f (y)                          W (1 + )2 (1      ) + b2 f 0 (y)
                   (1 + )2            4       (1 + )3
                        b2           f (y)      b2               2
             <              2 f (y)                 4 W (1 + ) (1         ) + b2 f 0 (y)
                   (1 + )             4    (1 + )
                     b2                  1       1                 2
             =            2 f (y)   1                2 W (1 + ) (1         ) + b2 f 0 (y)
                 (1 + )                 4   (1 + )
                                                                             !
                     b 2                     1               b2         1
             <              f (y)   1+ W             +
                 (1 + )2                                4 (1 + )2 b2 + 2W
                                                                      2
                                                4
                                                                  !
                     b2                        1     b2       1
             <              f (y)   1+ W           +                 = 0.
                 (1 + )2                     2       2 b2 + W
                                                                 2       2

Consequently,
                                            @p      @G=@
                                               =          < 0,
                                            @       @G=@p
and thus p is decreasing in . This completes the proof.

Proof of Proposition 12.         If W is high enough, then for C = 0, both m and r can be
arbitrarily low in the …rst period. In that case, the utility of the elite may be arbitrarily low,
whereas for C su¢ ciently high, there is no corruption, and the utility of the elite is given by
 2b2 , as all politicians will choose x1 = x2 = 0. Consequently, there exists W such that for
W > W , the elite is worse o¤ under C = 0. This completes the proof.

Proof of Proposition 13. The maximization problems of moderate and right-wing politicians,
respectively, are now given by

                         max       x2 +       W (x)        (1        ) b2 (1       (x)) ,
                          x2R
                         max       (x       b)2 +   W (x)                b2 (1     (x)) .
                          x2R

The equilibrium is thus characterized by two …rst-order conditions
                                                                     r       m
                         2 m        W + (1              ) b2 f                   = 0,
                                                                         2
                                                                     r       m
                          2 (r     b)         W+          b2 f                   = 0.
                                                                         2



                                                    B-7
Therefore, p = jmj and q = jr                        bj satisfy

                                                                      p 2     1 2         b
                         2 p            W + (1           ) b2 f         b             2
                                                                                        +                         = 0,
                                                                      2   W + (1  ) b     2
                                                                          q 2 1 2         b
                                              2aq         W+         b2 f   b           +                         = 0.
                                                                          2    W + b2 2
As in the proofs of Propositions 3 and 4, the left-hand sides are increasing in p and q, and are
                                        @p               @q
decreasing in . Hence                   @    > 0 and     @    > 0.


Proof of Proposition 14. Let X                                 R3 be the (open) set de…ned by

                                                        (l; m; r) 2 X () l < m < r.

We will …rst prove that the set of signals s that satisfy (30) is a (closed) interval [sl ; sh ] such
                                 l+m           m+r
that             1 < sl <          2    and     2       < sh < +1 whenever (l; m; r) 2 X. Indeed, as s becomes
close to            1, the …rst term becomes negative, and arbitrarily large in absolute value (since
the exponent tends to +1), while the second term tends to 0, so the left-hand side of (30) is
negative. Likewise, as s becomes large and positive, the …rst term tends to 0 and the second
becomes large and negative, so the left-hand side is negative. At the same time, if we pick
             l+m             m+r
s=             2   or s =     2 ,      then one term is positive and the other is zero, so the left-hand side is
positive. It now su¢ ces to prove that the left-hand side of (30) is a concave function of s. This
follows by observing that the derivative with respect to s,

 l   1                             1                       l+m                r   1                      1                m+r
         2
             (m     l) exp          2
                                        (m      l) s                              2
                                                                                      (r     m) exp      2
                                                                                                             (r   m) s              ,
                                                            2                                                              2
is a decreasing function of s.
         We have thus shown that for all (l; m; r) 2 X, there are exactly two di¤erent solutions to
the equation

     l                       1                          l+m               r                    1                    m+r
             1     exp       2
                                 (m          l) s                    +            1    exp      2
                                                                                                    (r   m) s                = 0;
                                                         2                                                           2
                                                                                                                             (B-5)
we can denote the lesser of them as sl (l; m; r) and the greater as sh (l; m; r).
                                   @s s y                (s y)2
         Let us prove that         @x 3       exp          2 2
                                                                  , where s 2 fsl ; sh g, and x; y 2 fl; m; rg in all possible
combinations (18 totally) are each o (1) as                             ! 1, provided that (l; m; r) 2 X for                chosen
below. We choose                  in the following way. Consider the function
                                                                          b
                                                    1    exp      b s+    2                              b
                                  Q (b; s) =                              b
                                                                                       exp      b s+
                                                    1    exp      b s     2
                                                                                                         2


                                                                        B-8
          b                                                         b
for s 2   2; 1   . One can verify that for all s 2                  2; 1      ,
                                                                         p
                                                                    b2
                                         Q (b; s)          2e             eb2        1.                                                  (B-6)

                                                                                                                                         2
To see this, notice that lims! b +0 Q (b; s) = +1 and lims!+1 Q (b; s) = 1. In addition, if eb < 2,
                                2
                  1 b2 p
            ln e  2      1 e b2
                                                                                       2
                                                                                         p
then s0 =              b          is a local minimum on 2b ; +1 , and Q (b; s0 ) = 2e b eb2 1.
           2
             p                                                      2
Since 2e b eb2 1           1 for all b (with equality achieved if eb = 2), we have that Q (b; s) is
                                2
                                  p
bounded from below by 2e b eb2 1 for all b, so (B-6) holds.
   Consider now the function
                                                                                                     b(1 2 )
                                        1 2 1             exp             b (1       2 ) s+             2
                     Q (b; s; ) =
                                        1+2 1             exp             b (1 + 2 ) s               b(1 2 )
                                                                                                        2
                                                                                     b (1          2 )
                                          exp            b (1        2 ) s+                                  .
                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                             b(1 2 )
By continuity, we can choose           > 0 such that for all                      2 [0;       ] and for all s >                 2    ,
                                                                          p
                                                                     b2
                                         Q (b; s; )             e             eb2    1.

   Next, for     2 [0;   ] and         1 consider the function

                                                                                          1                                b(1 2 )
          ^ (b; s; ; ) = Q        b s               1 2 1                  exp            2   b (1       2 ) s+               2
          Q                        ; ;            =
                                                    1+2 1                  exp            1
                                                                                              b (1 + 2 ) s                 b(1 2 )
                                                                                          2                                   2
                                           1                                  b (1        2 )
                                 exp          2
                                                  b (1    2 ) s+                                     .
                                                                                     2

Applying the previous result, we immediately get that for s > 2b ,
                                       q                    s
                                                                                                     2
                                     2
                 ^ (b; s; ; ) e ( b ) e( b )
                                            2           b 2      b                                                     b
                Q                               1 e ( )                                                      e    b2



(where we used the fact that ex > 1 + x for all x > 0 and that                                       1).
   Consider now the following function:
                                          1                               l+m
                       1         exp              (m     l) s
~ (l; m; r; s; ) = r m
Q
                                           2                                2
                                                                                          exp
                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                             (m        l) s
                                                                                                                                     l+m
                                                                                                                                             ,
                   m l1                   1                               m+r                            2                            2
                                 exp       2   (r        m) s               2

                         m+r
de…ned on X \ s >         2    . For each 2 0; 13 , let                   X          R3 be the compact set given by
                                            8
                                            < b                            b        l  b+ b
                           (l; m; r) 2 X ()                                b        m   b   .
                                            :
                                                   b                       b        r b+ b

                                                           B-9
Now observe that if (l; m; r) 2 X , then the four values, m                                                                            l;       (l + m) ; r                    m; m + r lie on
[b (1    2 ) ; b (1 + 2 )], which implies

                                                         ~ (l; m; r; s; )                         ^ (b; s; ; )                         b2   b
                                                         Q                                        Q                            e                .

                                                                          @s s y                        (s y)2
    We are now ready to estimate                                          @x 3     exp                    2 2
                                                                                                                      . Suppose, for example, that s = sh .
Since sh is the larger root of (B-5), consider the function

              l                                 1                               l+m                               r                                 1                               m+r
L (s) =           1           exp               2
                                                    (m            l) s                                   +            1        exp                   2
                                                                                                                                                         (r        m) s                          ;
                                                                                 2                                                                                                   2
we then have
                                                                                @s                     @L=@x
                                                                                   =                         .
                                                                                @x                     @L=@s
As argued above, @L=@s is negative at s = sh , so consider

 @L           r   1                                      1                                m+r                         l   1                                             1                      l+m
    =             2
                      (r        m) exp                   2
                                                             (r       m) s                                                 2
                                                                                                                               (m               l) exp                     2
                                                                                                                                                                               (m      l) s              .
 @s                                                                                        2                                                                                                    2
Consider the following two possibilities separately.
          r           l             r           6                             l           1                                                                   m+r              l+m
    If            6       (so                   7   (1            ) and                   7   (1          )), then (since sh >                                 2       >         2 )

                                                     @L                     1             r                           l
                                                                     >       2
                                                                                              (r        m)                (m            l)
                                                     @s
                                                                            1             rb             l 5b                 b 1
                                                                     >       2                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                              3               3                         21
                          r             l            l           1                                                                              r= l
Otherwise, if                 <6            (so              >   7   (1       )), then, substituting for                                                     from (B-5), we get
                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                     r                                1                                   m+r
 @L               l   1                                  (r          m) exp           (r m) s
                                                                                      2                                    2                                       1                          l+m
         =                2
                              (m        l)                                        l (m
                                                                                                                                                    exp             2
                                                                                                                                                                           (m       l) s
 @s                                                                                      l)                                                                                                    2
                                                                                          1                                m+r                                          1                      l+m
                  l   1                                      (r       m) exp              2(r m) s                          2                   1        exp               2   (m      l) s      2
         =                2
                              (m        l)                                                                                                                          1                         r+m
                                                                                          (m l)                                                 1            exp       2    (r      m) s        2
                                        1                                   l+m
                      exp                   2
                                                (m           l) s
                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                          1                                l+m
                  l   1                             r m1                  exp                 2   (m      l) s               2                                         1                      l+m
         =                2
                              (m        l)                                                1                                m+r                          exp             2
                                                                                                                                                                               (m      l) s
                                                    m l1                  exp             2       (r     m) s                2
                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                  l   1                    ~ (l; m; r; s; ) .
         =                2
                              (m        l) Q

Consequently, if (l; m; r) 2 X , then

                                                    @L               1                    1 1            b2   b           1                         b2
                                                                       (1         )        23
                                                                                              be                                   3
                                                                                                                                       b2 e              .
                                                    @s               7                                                    21


                                                                                              B-10
This implies that, given              1 and b2 e                b2      1, that in both cases
                                                            @L              1                     b2
                                                                                 3
                                                                                     b2 e                 .                                               (B-7)
                                                            @s              21

It is straightforward to check (or invoke the symmetry argument) that inequality (B-7) would
hold for s = sl as well.
   Consider now the derivatives
@L           l   1                            1
                                             l+m
      =          2
                     (s   l) exp              2
                                                   (m
                                                    ,           l) s
 @l                                            2
@L         1             l        1           l+m                                                                     r             1                   m+r
      =     2
              (s m)        exp     2
                                     (m l) s          +                                                                   exp           2
                                                                                                                                            (r   m) s             ,
@m                                               2                                                                                                       2
@L            r 1              1             m+r
      =          2
                   (s r) exp    2
                                  (r m) s          .
 @r                                           2
We have
                                                   1                                  l+m
                                    exp                2
                                                           (m         l) sh                                           < 1,
                                                                                       2
                                                   1                                  m+r
                                      exp              2
                                                           (r        m) sl                                            < 1,
                                                                                       2

and from (B-5) we also have

                                              1                              l+m                                          l   +     r
                               exp            2
                                                   (m           l) sl                                             <             l
                                                                                                                                        ,                 (B-8)
                                                                              2
                                          1                                  m+r                                          l   +     r
                                exp       2
                                                  (r       m) sh                                                  <            r
                                                                                                                                        .                 (B-9)
                                                                              2

Consequently, for any s 2 fsl ; sh g and x 2 fl; m; rg, we have

                                                   @L                                    1
                                                                     2 (1        )       2
                                                                                                 js           xj .                                       (B-10)
                                                   @x

   To proceed, consider the term js                             xj. Notice that (B-8) and (B-9) imply that for                                            large
enough
                                                                             2               l   +            r
                                                       sl >              2       ln                   l
                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                             b
                                                                             2               l   +            r
                                                       sh <              2       ln                   r
                                                                                                                  .
                                                                             b
                           sl                                   sh
Let us de…ne kl ( )            2   and kh ( )                    2   , which are bounded functions. From (B-5) we obtain
that as   ! 1, kl ( ) and kh ( ) tend to the two solutions of the equation

                           l                                                         r
                               (1     exp ( (m                       l) k)) +            (1               exp ((r             m) k)) ,


                                                                         B-11
which are also bounded away from 0 for (l; m; r) 2 X for                                                  < ^ for some ^ small enough. Let
  = min ( ; ^). Therefore, there exist positive constants K1 and K2 such that whenever                                                                                        is
large enough,
                                                                    jsl j jsh j
                                                       K1 <           2
                                                                         ; 2 < K2 .                                                                                     (B-11)
                                                                                                                                                  jsj
   It is now straightforward to see that for                               large enough, we have js                                        yj >    2 ,    and thus the
following holds:
                                                                !
                                              (s        y)2                                     s2
                                exp                     2
                                                                                exp
                                                   2                                           4 2
                                                                                                    2K                  1
                                                                                                         1
                                                                                exp                               <        3
                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                    4
Hence, for large :
                                                !                                                                                           !
           @s s       y         (s        y)2                           @L=@x js                   yj                 (s           y)2
                  3
                          exp             2
                                                            =                                 3
                                                                                                        exp                        2
           @x                         2                                 @L=@s                                               2
                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                      1
                                                                    2 (1          )       2   js        xj js         yj                     (s       y)2
                                                                                 1                                          exp                       2
                                                                                          b2 e      b2 3                                          2
                                                                                 21   3

                                                                           42       s2 1
                                                                    b2 e    b2    2 4 3
                                                                           42                                 1         K
                                                                                          (K2 )2         4
                                                                                                                    <
                                                                    4b2 e b2 2                                  3

for some constant K. Remember that this has been proved for (l; m; r) 2 X .
   Now consider                                         0
                                                      1 0               1
                                                   Zl      l (sl ; sh )
                                              Z = @Zm A = @m (sl ; sh )A
                                                   Zr      r (sl ; sh )
de…ned as the functions introduced in (34)–(36). We will prove that there exists                                                                          2 0; 13 such
that for    large enough, mapping A given by

                      A (l; m; r) = Z (l (sl (l; m; r)) ; m ((sl (l; m; r))) ; r (sl (l; m; r)))

maps X into X and is a contraction on X . First, clearly X is mapped into X . Consider
                                                                                                                                   @Zx (x(sl (l;m;r)))
next the Jacobian of mapping A. It consists of derivatives of the kind                                                                    @y                    for x; y 2
fl; m; rg. Consider, for example, x = y = l. The function Zl is obtained from (34). Denote

                                                                    r
  Yl (l; Zl ) =   2 (Zl + b) + W + ( + 4                                ) b2 (f (sh (l; m; r)                         Zl )             f (sl (l; m; r)              Zl )) .

We have
                                                                                                             !                                                              !!
@Yl                                                    sh       Zl                    (sh           Zl )2             s            Zl                     (sl       Zl )2
    =      2 + W +( +4            r
                                      ) b2             p                exp                         2
                                                                                                                      pl                   exp                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
@Zl                                                         2   3                             2                             2          3                        2

                                                                         B-12
                           @Yl
so for large ,             @Zl   > . Likewise,
                                                                                                  !                                                    !!
@Yl                                   r         2        @sh sh Zl              (sh       Zl )2          @sl sl Zl               (sl         Zl )2
    =                W +( +4              ) b                p     exp                    2
                                                                                                             p     exp                       2
                                                                                                                                                            ;
@l                                                        @l 2 3                      2                  @l 2 3                          2

                                           @Yl                                                    @Zl
if        is large enough, then             @l          < 2 . This already implies that            @l   < 12 ; the same may be proved
in a similar way for the other derivatives. This implies that mapping A is a contraction on X
for          large enough.
          We have thus proved that for                     large enough, there exists a unique equilibrium (l; m; r) 2 X .
However, for               large enough, A maps any element of X into X , so for large , there may be
no other …xed points of mapping A, and therefore no other monotonic equilibria. It remains to
prove that there are no non-monotonic equilibria. However, it is quite easy to see that for                                                  high
enough, politicians’ best responses will lie arbitrarily close to                                       b; 0; b for left-wing, moderate,
and right-wing types, respectively, so there will be no non-monotonic equilibria. This completes
the proof.

Proof of Proposition 15.                                 Part 1. If     l   =   r,   then mapping A maps symmetric triples
( x; 0; x) to similar triples. As any such sequence converges to the equilibrium because A is a
contraction for                large enough, this property holds in the equilibrium as well. This also implies
sl + sh = 0. Now, inequalities l >                             b and r < b follow from (34) and (36).
          Part 2. The equilibrium values of l; m; r are given by the equation
                               0 1 0                                      1
                                 l       Zl (sl (l; m; r) ; sh (l; m; r))
                               @mA @Zm (sl (l; m; r) ; sh (l; m; r))A = 0.
                                 r       Zr (sl (l; m; r) ; sh (l; m; r))
                           l                               r                                                             r           1
Suppose that                   decreases (and                  increases accordingly); we can parametrize                        =       2         ,
     l       1
         =       2   + . To di¤erentiate the implicit function, notice …rst that if                           is su¢ ciently large, then
the derivatives of Z with respect to any of l; m; r are arbitrarily close to 0, and thus the matrix
of derivatives of the left-hand side with respect to l; m; r is close to unit matrix. To determine
the signs, it therefore su¢ ces to di¤erentiate Zl , Zm , Zr with respect to . If                                      is large enough,
then the derivatives of f (s                        x) for s 2 fsl ; sh g and x 2 fl; m; rg with respect to                  l   and         r   are
negligible. Now, both sl and sh are increasing in , as follows from (B-5). More precisely, we
need to write the equations for the equilibrium values of sl and sh , notice that the Zx (sl ; sh )
has an arbitrarily small derivative with respect to , and therefore only the direct inclusion of
         in (B-5) through         l   and           r   should matter. This, together with sl < m < sh , implies that
m decreases in . This implies that for all , f (sh                                    r)      f (sl        r) > 0, and therefore r is
increasing in . As for l, f (sh                           l)    f (sl   l) < 0 in the neighborhood of               = 0, and therefore

                                                                        B-13
l is increasing in that neighborhood. However, as                        increases enough so that             l   is su¢ ciently
close to 0, then sl will tend to        1 whereas sh will remain …nite. This means that for such ,
f (sh     l)   f (sl    l) > 0, and l will increase in .
    Part 3. The proof is similar to the proof of Part 2 and is omitted.

Proof of Proposition 16.
    The policy choice of a right-wing politician can be written as
                                                       W + b2      1     k
                                 r =b+m                              =b+m ,
                                                     W + (1   ) b2 h     h
where the second equality de…nes
                                                          W + b2
                                                 k
                                                        W + (1   ) b2
This implies
                                                                     k
                                             r       m=b+m                  1 .
                                                                     h
The populist bias of moderate politicians, p = jmj, is given by the equation
                                                     0                      1
                                                           r m     2 ln h 2
                                            1        B      2  +  r m       C
               2 p    W + (1        ) b2 p      exp @             2         A = 0.                                        (B-12)
                                            2                  2

Denoting       = h1 , we can rewrite this as

                                                        A (p; ) = 0,

where
                                                                     0                                    2
                                                                                                              1
                                                                             b p(k    1)         2 ln
                                                          1         B            2         +   b p(k 1)       C
        A (p; ) = 2 p         W+   (1            ) b2 p         exp @                          2              A.          (B-13)
                                                          2                                2

    Notice …rst that p ! 0 as        ! 1 uniformly in ; indeed, (B-12) implies
                                                      W + (1             ) b2 1
                                             p<           p                       .
                                                         2 2
We can similarly prove that r ! b as                  ! 1 uniformly in , which implies that b                      p (k        1) =
r   m ! b, and hence p (k            1) ! 0 uniformly in                   . In what follows, we can assume that
                       b 3b                                                                                                @A
b   p( k       1) 2    2; 2   . Now, observe that A (p; ) is increasing in p and, moreover,                                @p    is
bounded away from 0 if          is large enough, again uniformly by . Indeed,
                                                                          0                                                           2
                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                     b p( k 1)             2ln
@A                                       1              k            2  k ln               B             2          +   b p( k 1)         C
   =2 + W +            (1      ) b2 p                     +                            exp @                                              A.
@p                                      2        3      2   (b       p ( k 1))2                                     2   2




                                                              B-14
                     2 k ln                                                                                          2 k ln
                    k                   4 2 ek                                                                 k                       2
We see that         2    + (b
                     p( k 1))2
                               > ek 2     b2
                                               if                                          e and               2   + (b
                                                                                                                    p( k 1))2
                                                                                                                                > k 49b2   1
                                                                                                                                           2 >0
                                                                                                 k            2 k ln
if > e, provided that 2 > 98 b2 . In both cases, 12                                              2    +    (b p( k 1))2
                                                                                                                            is bounded from below
uniformly in , and thus @A@p tends to 2 uniformly                                          in         as        ! 1.
     Let us now di¤erentiate A with respect to . We have
               @A                                                       1              b      p (k              1)                   2 ln
                         =      W+             (1        ) b2 p                                                      +
               @                                                       2      3                  2                         b        p (k          1)
                                           0                                                   2
                                                                                                 1
                                                    b p(k       1)             ln 2                                b p(k       1)            2
                                                                                                                                             ln
                                      B                 2             +    b p(k 1)               Cd                   2            +    b p(k 1)
                                  exp @                                    2                      A                                                       .           (B-14)
                                                                     2                                                           d

The last expression is positive for                         large enough (again uniformly in ). Thus:
          b p(k     1)          2 ln
      d       2          +   b p(k 1)                      pk                                1                                      pk ln
                                                                       2
                                                 =            +                                                     +                                         .       (B-15)
                        d                                   2                     (b       p (k            1))          (b          p (k          1))2
                                                         pk           2 4pk
If    > e, (B-15) is greater than                         2   +         9b2
                                                                               > 0 (for                2   > 98 b2 ). If                 2 [1; e], then (B-15) is
                                  pk          3
at least as large as               2   + 2 2be       > 0 for large                     (because p ! 0 uniformly). Finally, if                                          < 1,
                                        jln j         pk          p
notice that pk jln j = pk                              e      <   e    + 2b , since we established earlier that p (k                                               1) ! 0
uniformly in ; this implies that for                            large the right-hand side of (B-15) is positive for large
for all values of .
                                                                                             b p(k         1)              2 ln                               b p(k     1)
                    @A
     The sign of    @ ,      therefore, depends on the sign of                                   2              +b        p(k 1) .         Note that              2          =
r m
 2    > 0, and thus if                 1 (i.e., h             1), then it is strictly positive. Moreover, as                                             ! 0, it tends
to    1, i.e., becomes negative for                         su¢ ciently close to 0. For                                   < 1, we need to study how it
                                                                                                                                           @A
varies with , keeping in mind that p is a function of . Let us prove that                                                                  @     = 0 at exactly one
                                                                           b p(k        1)           ln2
                     @A
point. Clearly,      @       = 0 can only be true if                           2             +   b p(k 1)               = 0, and on the other hand, it
          dp
implies   d    = 0. Di¤erentiating with respect to , we get

d     b    p ( ) (k          1)                     2 ln                                     pk                                  1                                pk ln
                                                                                                           2
                                  +                                           =                 +                                                  +
d               2                      b       p ( ) (k           1)                          2                      (b        p (k          1))         (b       p (k       1))2
                                                                                                  k                        2k       ln                 dp
                                                                                       +            +
                                                                                                  2   (b                  p (k             1))2        d
                                                                                             pk            2                     1                                pk ln
                                                                              =                 +                                                  +                                .
                                                                                              2                      (b        p (k          1))         (b       p (k       1))2
                                                                                                                      @A
If now su¢ ces to prove that it is necessarily positive whenever                                                      @        = 0 (this would imply that
                                                                  b p(k           1)              2
                                                                                                 ln
@A
@    = 0 may hold at just one , because                               2                +     b p(k 1)              then can change it sign only from
negative to positive). But we already established that this is true for                                                              large enough and for all
                             @A                                          @A
 . This shows that           @     < 0 for           <         and       @    > 0 for             >            , where              < 1. Since
                                                                  dp                  @A=@
                                                                     =                      ,
                                                                  d                   @A=@p

                                                                              B-15
                    dp                                                            dp
this implies that   d    > 0 if and only if     >     , which is equivalent to    dh   > 0 if and only if
          1                           dp                                                   h
h<h =         > 1. This proves that   d    > 0 if and only if       <   , where    =   1    +h     > .
   The proof that q = jr        bj is increasing in    for      <       and increasing in        for   >   ,
where     < , is similar and is omitted.




                                                    B-16
