                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          OPTIMAL FISCAL POLICY WITH ENDOGENOUS PRODUCT VARIETY

                                          Sanjay K. Chugh
                                           Fabio Ghironi

                                        Working Paper 17319
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17319


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




We thank Roc Armenter, Marco Bassetto, Susanto Basu, Florin Bilbiie, Jeffrey Campbell, Ippei Fujiwara,
Andre Kurmann, Marc Melitz, and Henning Weber for helpful discussions, as well as participants
in presentations at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Bilkent
University, the IMF, the University of Zurich, the 2010 SED Annual Meeting, and the 2010 EEA Annual
Conference. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not reflect those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, or Federal Reserve policy.
 Work on this paper was done while we held Visiting Scholar appointments at the Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston, which we thank for hospitality and support. Ghironi also gratefully acknowledges
support from the National Science Foundation through a grant to the NBER.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Sanjay K. Chugh and Fabio Ghironi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Optimal Fiscal Policy with Endogenous Product Variety
Sanjay K. Chugh and Fabio Ghironi
NBER Working Paper No. 17319
August 2011
JEL No. E32,E62,H21

                                                ABSTRACT

We study Ramsey-optimal fiscal policy in an economy in which product varieties are the result of
forward-looking investment decisions by firms. There are two main results. First, depending on the
particular form of variety aggregation in preferences, firms' dividend payments may be either subsidized
or taxed in the long run. This policy balances monopoly incentives for product creation with consumers'
welfare benefit of product variety. In the most empirically relevant form of variety aggregation, socially
efficient outcomes entail a substantial tax on dividend income, removing the incentive for over-accumulation
of capital, which takes the form of variety. Second, optimal policy induces dramatically smaller, but
efficient, fluctuations of both capital and labor markets than in a calibrated exogenous policy. Decentralization
requires zero intertemporal distortions and constant static distortions over the cycle. The results relate
to Ramsey theory, which we show by developing welfare-relevant concepts of efficiency that take
into account product creation.


Sanjay K. Chugh
University of Maryland
Department of Economics
College Park, MD 20742
and Kiel Institute in Germany
chughs@econ.umd.edu

Fabio Ghironi
Boston College
Department of Economics
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3859
and NBER
fabio.ghironi@bc.edu
1        Introduction

A growing literature studies the importance of product creation and turnover for welfare and
macroeconomic dynamics. This research program has recently received impetus from the availabil-
ity of micro-level data sets and the development of macroeconomic frameworks that incorporate
richer micro-level product dynamics than in standard macro models.1 Thus far, however, there
has been little work on developing the implications of endogenous product variety for optimal
macroeconomic policy. This paper is an early step toward that goal.2
        We characterize the long-run and short-run properties of optimal fiscal policy in an economy
in which monopolistically-competitive firms make forward-looking decisions regarding developing
differentiated products based on the prospect of earning long-lived streams of monopoly profits.
Product development is thus an investment activity. The starting point of the analysis is the
general equilibrium model of Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2007), who study the business-cycle
implications of an endogenous, time-varying stock of differentiated product varieties. The Bilbiie,
Ghironi, and Melitz (2007) framework — hereafter, BGM — generates many empirically relevant
features of fluctuations, including the ability to match well the cyclical dynamics of profits, net
product creation, and goods market markups. Taken together, the BGM framework portrays well
the microeconomic underpinnings of product turnover and has become the basis for models studying
a growing number of macro questions.3 We first extend the BGM framework to incorporate realistic
aspects of long-run and short-run fiscal policy assuming that policy is set exogenously, which itself
contributes to the development of the BGM class of models as a positive description of U.S. business
cycles. We then endogenize tax policy using the standard Ramsey, or second-best, approach.4
        There are two main results from the Ramsey analysis. First, in the long run, optimal dividend-
income taxation can be zero, positive, or negative, depending on the form of variety aggregation
in preferences. However, in the most empirically relevant and intuitively appealing version of the
model, socially efficient outcomes entail a positive dividend income tax rate in the long run —
50 percent, if the model is taken literally. Dividend taxation, which is a form of capital income
taxation, discourages inefficiently high product development.5 Second, in the short run, the optimal
    1
        Notable contributions to the recent empirical literature include Bernard, Redding, and Schott (2010) and Broda
and Weinstein (2010). A more complete list of references is in Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2007).
   2
     Other early steps are Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2008a), Bilbiie, Fujiwara, and Ghironi (2009), Faia (2009) and
Lewis (2009a), which are monetary policy applications, and Lewis (2009b), which is a fiscal policy application.
  3
    In addition to those noted above, other recent studies that have built on the BGM framework include Stebunovs
(2008), Shao and Silos (2009), and Colciago and Etro (2011).
   4
     This distinguishes our approach from the pure Pigovian, or first-best, fiscal policy analysis of Bilbiie, Ghironi,
and Melitz (2008b).
   5
     Our analysis of long-run optimal policy abstracts from product creation as an engine of growth. Inclusion of
long-run, endogenous growth in the BGM framework with general preferences that we use presents challenges that



                                                            1
labor income tax rate is constant (or, depending on how product varieties aggregate, very nearly
so) at all points along the business cycle. The cornerstone Ramsey insight of the optimality of tax
smoothing thus remains intact when product dynamics are modeled in a way consistent with micro
evidence. The Ramsey government uses tax smoothing to implement sharply smaller fluctuations of
capital markets and labor markets than in the benchmark exogenous policy equilibrium. Moreover,
low volatility of tax rates keeps distortions constant over the business cycle.
    While the goal of optimal policy is to “smooth wedges” in equilibrium conditions just as in
standard Ramsey models, the very nature of “wedges” does depend on the nature of product
dynamics. Another contribution of our work is thus to develop a welfare-relevant notion of efficiency
for models based on the BGM framework. Efficiency concerns lie at the heart of any model studying
policy. The welfare-relevant concept of efficiency we develop is based on only the primitives of the
environment, independent of any optimization problem. This concept of efficiency is grounded
in the elementary concepts of marginal rates of substitution and corresponding, model-consistent,
marginal rates of transformation, and it makes transparent the basic Ramsey forces at work. This
clear characterization of efficiency should be helpful in interpreting other results in the literature.
It also allows us to connect easily the optimal policy results to the classic Chamley (1986) and Judd
(1985) results on capital income taxation.6
    While it turns out that the basic Ramsey principles of wedge-smoothing and zero intertemporal
distortions apply in this framework, it is not obvious that they must. Albanesi and Armenter
(2007) recently provided a unified framework with which to think about capital taxation in a
variety of environments. Their central result, a set of sufficient conditions for the optimality of zero
intertemporal distortions, unfortunately does not apply to our model. The failure of the Albanesi-
Armenter sufficient conditions is due to the equilibrium increasing returns to scale in product
varieties that are inherent in standard models of product differentiation with endogenous varieties.
Application of the Albanesi-Armenter sufficient conditions requires constant returns in production
both at the level of the firm and in the aggregate. As a contribution to Ramsey theory, then,
it is important to know that empirically-appealing dynamic macro frameworks richer than “first-
generation” constant-returns, complete-markets Ramsey models also prescribe zero intertemporal
distortions as part of optimal policy.7
are beyond the scope of this paper. In a model with growth, optimal long-run policy would balance the forces at work
in this paper against the externalities at the heart of variety-driven growth. See Croce, Nguyen, and Schmid (2011)
for an early Ramsey analysis of optimal labor income taxation in a stochastic model with endogenous, variety-driven
growth and recursive Epstein-Zin (1989) preferences.
   6
     We also discuss below the relation between the optimality of taxing capital in our environment with Judd’s (1997,
2002) result that it is optimal to subsidize capital accumulation when firms have monopoly power.
   7
     Our paper is also related to the complete-markets Ramsey literature that began with Lucas and Stokey (1983)
and Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe (1991). We do not consider incomplete markets, a distinct branch of the Ramsey



                                                          2
    Related to this broadening of the scope of Ramsey principles, our work also contributes to a
recent branch of the optimal policy literature, examples of which are the monetary policy studies
in frictional labor markets by Faia (2008), Thomas (2007), and Arseneau and Chugh (2008), in
frictional monetary markets by Aruoba and Chugh (2010), and the study of labor income taxation
in frictional labor markets by Arseneau and Chugh (2010). The unifying idea of these “second-
generation” complete-markets Ramsey models is forward-looking private-sector behavior in markets
richer in detail than portrayed in standard real business cycle (RBC) or New Keynesian models.
This literature has shown that forward-looking behavior richer in micro detail than tangible capital
accumulation and pricing decisions can offer new insights on some classic questions about optimal
policy.
    Finally, by placing the spotlight on fiscal policy, our paper contributes to the literature on
efficiency in product creation.8 Regulatory policy is the tool often thought to be most natural
to address inefficiencies in product development.9 However, historical evidence suggests that reg-
ulators are usually concerned only with product-development inefficiencies caused by very large
companies. By applying to the entire universe of firms regardless of size, fiscal policy can be a very
effective tool to address distortions in new product development.10
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the economic environment.
Section 3 calibrates a non-Ramsey version of the model to document its basic cyclical properties.
Section 4 studies the Ramsey equilibrium using the calibrated model. Section 5 formalizes static
and intertemporal notions of marginal rates of transformation and efficiency to parse the optimal-
policy results. Section 6 shows which features of the decentralized economy disrupt efficiency.
Section 7 uses these concepts of efficiency and distortions to inspect several aspects of the model
and results. Section 8 concludes.


2     The Model

The model features an endogenously evolving stock of differentiated product varieties that are
costly to develop and bring to market. As described above, the model is based on BGM, into which
we incorporate several realistic aspects of fiscal policy.
literature, prominent examples of which are Aiyagari, Marcet, Sargent, and Seppala (2002) and Fahri (2009).
    8
      An incomplete list of references is Benassy (1996), Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2008b), Chamberlin (1950), Dixit
and Stiglitz (1977), Grossman and Helpman (1991), Judd (1985), Mankiw and Whinston (1986), and Spence (1976).
   9
     A standrd reference on regulation policy is Laffont and Tirole (1993).
  10
     We thank Jeffrey Campbell for suggesting this point. See also Auerbach and Hines (2002) on optimal taxation
and producer entry.




                                                           3
2.1       Product Turnover

To introduce some basic notation of the model, suppose that a pre-determined measure Nt of a
continuum of product varieties exists at the beginning of period t. These Nt varieties are produced
and sold on monopolistically competitive consumer markets during period t. Firms also develop new
product varieties during period t, of which there is an aggregate measure NEt . Because innovation
takes time, newly-developed varieties can only be brought to market in the subsequent period.
There is thus a time-to-build aspect of product development. Before period t + 1 begins, a fraction
δ ∈ (0, 1) of both pre-existing and newly-developed varieties are hit by an exogenous exit shock.11
Thus, because not all newly-developed products actually make it to the consumer market, the
total measure of product varieties available in period t + 1 is Nt+1 = (1 − δ)(Nt + NEt ). Figure 1
summarizes the timing of the model.
       The representative household obtains utility from consuming a symmetric, homothetic variety
aggregator Ct . The aggregate Ct is defined over the set Ω of all the varieties to which the household
would like to have access. Costly product entry implies that, in equilibrium, only the subset Ωt ⊂ Ω
is available for purchase in period t; Nt is the mass of the subset Ωt .12


2.2       Households

For periods t = 0, 1, ..., the representative household chooses state-contingent decision rules for
consumption Ct , hours worked Ht , end-of-period holdings of a complete set of state-contingent
                  j
government bonds Bt+1 (j indexes the possible states in period t + 1), and end-of-period holdings
xt+1 of a mutual fund that finances firm activity in order to maximize expected lifetime discounted
utility:
                                                       ∞
                                                       X
                                                  E0         β t u(Ct , Ht ),                                    (1)
                                                       t=0

subject to a sequence of flow budget constraints:
                                        X 1      j
                                                                                  h                  i
                                                             H                          D
           Ct + vt xt+1 (Nt + NEt ) +         j Bt+1 = (1 − τt )wt Ht + Bt + vt + (1 − τt )dt xt Nt .            (2)
                                         j   Rt
  11
       Specifically, the probability that a given product is hit by the exit shock is assumed to be δ, independent of
whether the product is a newly-developed or an incumbent one, or, in the case of incumbent products, how long the
product has been in the market. Exit shocks are thus a Poisson process. The simplifying assumption of exogenous
exit captures in a parsimonious, aggregative way the idea of product life cycles and is consistent with the relative
acycliacality of product destruction in Broda and Weinstein (2010) and plant exit rates in Lee and Mukoyama (2007).
  12
     Bundling in household preferences is the formalism we use. Alternatively, one could think of a “final goods”
sector in which perfectly competitive firms bundle differentiated products into a homogenous final good, which is
then sold to consumers. In this alternative formalism, differentiated products would be labeled “intermediate goods,”
but the equilibrium of the model would be identical. We follow the consumption aggregator approach only to make
interpretation of results as similar as possible to BGM and the literature that has used the same approach.


                                                               4
The household’s subjective discount factor is β ∈ (0, 1), and u(.) is a standard within-period utility
function that is strictly increasing and strictly concave in Ct , strictly decreasing and strictly convex
in Ht , and satisfies standard Inada conditions. The notation uCt and uHt will be used to denote
the marginal utility functions, evaluated at time-t arguments.
       At the start of period t, the household owns xt shares of a mutual fund of the Nt product
lines that produce in period t, each of which pays a dividend dt . The period-t market value of
the household’s start-of-period share holdings is thus vt xt Nt , with vt denoting the per-share price.
During period t, the household purchases xt+1 shares in a fund of these Nt product lines as well
as the NEt new product lines created during period t, to be carried into period t + 1. Total stock-
market purchases are thus vt xt+1 (Nt + NEt ). By the time period t + 1 begins, a fraction δ of
these varieties (Nt + NEt ) disappears from the market. Due to the Poisson nature of exit shocks,
the household does not know which product lines will disappear from the market, so it finances
continued operations of all incumbent products as well as entry of all new products.
       Following production and sales of the Nt varieties in the monopolistically competitive goods
markets, firms remit the dividend dt required by the terms of stock ownership. The household’s
total dividend income is thus Dt ≡ dt xt Nt , which is taxed at the rate τtD .
       The rest of the notation is standard: wt is the market real wage, which is taxed at the rate τtH ;
the household’s holdings of the state-contingent one-period real government bond that pays off in
                       j
period t are Bt ; and Bt+1 are end-of-period holdings of government bonds that pay off in state j in
period t + 1, which has purchase price 1/Rtj in period t. Finally, because this is a Ramsey taxation
model, there are no lump-sum taxes or transfers between the government and the private sector.13


2.2.1       Household Optimality Conditions

A standard labor supply condition
                                                  uHt
                                              −       = (1 − τtH )wt                                          (3)
                                                  uCt
and standard bond Euler conditions

                                              uCt = βRtj uC j , ∀j                                            (4)
                                                                t+1


result from household optimization. As usual, the complete set of bond Euler conditions (4) defines
the one-period-ahead stochastic discount factor, Et Ξt+1|t ≡ βEt uCt+1 /uCt . The other household
optimality condition is the stock demand equation:
                                               n        h                       io
                                                           D
                               vt = (1 − δ)Et Ξt+1|t (1 − τt+1 )dt+1 + vt+1          .                        (5)
  13
       When we consider how the model economy responds to exogenous fiscal policy in Section 3, we do temporarily
allow for lump-sum taxation because there we are not studying government financing issues. For the Ramsey analysis
in Section 4, lump-sum taxes are again fixed to zero.


                                                            5
Forward iteration implies that the share price is equal to the expected present discounted value of
after-tax dividend payments, adjusted for the risk of exit.
       Having optimally chosen the consumption index Ct , the household then chooses a quantity
ct (ω) of each product variety ω to minimize the total cost of purchasing Ct . With a symmetric and
homothetic aggregator over a continuum of varieties, the demand function for each variety ω is

                                                                      ∂Pt
                                                  ct (ω) dω =                Ct .                                  (6)
                                                                     ∂pt (ω)
The specifications for the variety aggregator are described below. The nominal price of the con-
sumption index is Pt , and pt (ω) is the nominal price of symmetric variety ω. From here on, we
cast things in terms of the relative price, ρt ≡ pt /Pt , of a variety, and, anticipating the symmetry
of the equilibrium, we drop the argument ω; ρt is denominated in units of the consumption index
Ct .14


2.3       Firms

There is a continuum of identical firms that produce and sell output, so we can restrict attention
to a representative firm. The representative firm is modeled as being a “large firm” that pro-
duces “many” varieties.15 This formulation facilitates interpretation of results and yields identical
equilibrium conditions as the formulation of BGM, who do not use the large firm approach.16
       Expressed in real terms (that is, in units of the consumption index Ct ), the intertemporal profit
function of the representative firm is:
                              ∞
                                                                                         wt
                              X                                                                    
                         E0         Ξt|0 (1 −   τtD ) (ρt   − mct ) qt Nt − (1 −    τtS ) fEt NEt       .          (7)
                              t=0
                                                                                         Zt
  14
       The assumption of complete asset markets in government bonds allows us to focus only on real variables below,
with no concern for nominal prices — in particular, Pt .
  15
     The firm is “large” in the sense that it produces multiple varieties, but the assumption of a continuum of firms
ensures that each is small relative to the overall economy, and hence does not internalize the effects of its decisions
on the economy’s price index Pt . With a representative firm, Pt turns out to represent also the firm’s price index in
equilibrium. Thus, we are assuming that the firm’s product creation decisions do not internalize the profit destruction
externality of new products on any existing ones within the firm. This can be rationalized by assuming that new
products are introduced by independent product line managers who communicate little with each other or are even
encouraged to compete with each other. See Stebunovs (2008) for a model in which a discrete number of financial
intermediaries can be reinterpreted as headquarters of multi-product firms that internalize the profit destruction
externality of new product introduction.
  16
     One can view our large-firm approach as analogous to many recent general equilibrium macro models that
feature search and matching frictions in various markets. In such models, the “large firm” assumption (for example,
a representative firm that has to search individually for the “many” employees it seeks to hire) also facilitates
aggregation and ignores across- and within-firm strategic considerations.




                                                                 6
Because households are the ultimate owners of firms, the intertemporal discount factor the firm
applies to its profits is Ξt|0 , the period-zero value to the representative household of period-t goods.17
The profit function is written in such a way that it anticipates an equilibrium that is symmetric
across all product varieties.18 We now describe the rest of the components of the profit function (7).
       There is an unbounded set of potential products. Developing a new product in period t entails
a sunk cost fEt , which is denominated in effective labor units and is identical across product
varieties.19 Measured in consumption units, the cost of developing a new product is wt fEt /Zt , with
Zt denoting the effectiveness of labor in the economy. Like fEt , Zt is independent of any particular
variety ω. The total number of new varieties developed in period t is NEt .
       Product development costs are subsidized by the government at the proportional rate τtS . From
a positive perspective, product development subsidies — for example, in the form of subsidies for
research and development — are often elements of cyclical fiscal policy legislation — for example,
to combat recessions. From a model-based perspective, allowing product development subsidies
makes it easy to ensure that the tax system is complete, in the Ramsey sense that there is at least
one independent tax instrument along each unique equilibrium margin of the model — this point
is discussed further in Sections 4 and 7.
       Sales of each product variety occur in a monopolistically competitive market. The demand
for each symmetric variety is denoted qt .20 The flow profit that each variety generates is thus
(ρt − mct ) qt , in which mct denotes the marginal cost of producing an existing variety, also assumed
independent of any particular variety ω. As described below, the production technology of each
variety (given that the development cost wt fEt /Zt is sunk) is constant returns, hence marginal
and average costs of production coincide.21 In equilibrium, (ρt − mct ) qt is the dividend, dt , that
households receive on their stock holdings. Because households receive only the after-tax share
(1 − τtD ) and because there is no principal-agent problem between firms and households, the firm
discounts the dividends it disburses by the same after-tax rate (1 − τtD ).
       The profit maximization problem is analyzed in three steps. We first characterize the new
  17                    β s uCs                                                                         Ξt+1|0                βuCt+1
       Because Ξs|0 ≡    uC0
                                ,   we have that the one-period stochastic discount factor is            Ξt|0
                                                                                                                 = Ξt+1|t =    uCt
                                                                                                                                     ,   which
will appear in the firm’s optimality conditions below.
                                           P∞           h             R                                                           i
  18
       A priori, the profit function is       t=0
                                                    Ξt|0 (1 − τtD )   Ωt
                                                                              (ρt (ω) − mct ) q(ρt (ω))dω − (1 − τtS ) wt
                                                                                                                          f N
                                                                                                                       Zt Et Et
                                                                                                                                .
  19
       To the extent that fEt contains a policy-determined component, regulatory policy, in BGM’s interpretation,
would operate through fEt .
  20
     We write qt to stand for total demand for a variety, rather than ct , because the model also features (exogenous)
government consumption. To facilitate aggregation, the bundle of differentiated varieties the government purchases
is identical to the private consumption bundle of households. Hence, qt subsumes both private and public demand
for a (symmetric) variety. The units of qt are physical units of differentiated variety.
  21
     The assumptions of symmetric costs and a symmetric aggregator formally justify that the equilibrium will be
symmetric across product varieties.



                                                                          7
product creation decision, then derive the firm’s optimal pricing function, and finally describe the
production process and characterize the firm’s choice of inputs.


2.3.1    Creation of New Varieties

The representative firm takes as constraint the sequence of laws of motion for the total number of
varieties it produces and sells,
                                           Nt+1 = (1 − δ)(Nt + NEt ).                                            (8)

Optimization of (7), subject to the sequence of constraints (8), with respect to NEt and Nt+1 yields:
               wt                                                                     wt+1
                                                                                                        
  (1 − τtS )                                   D
                  fEt = (1 − δ)Et Ξt+1|t (1 − τt+1                              S
                                                   )(ρt+1 − mct+1 )qt+1 + (1 − τt+1 )      fEt+1               , (9)
               Zt                                                                     Zt+1
which we refer to as the product creation condition. Combining the product creation condition (9)
with the stock demand equation (5), and recalling that all flow profits are distributed as dividends
— i.e., dt = (ρt − mct )qt — yields the equilibrium free entry condition
                                                                  wt
                                                vt = (1 − τtS )      fEt                                        (10)
                                                                  Zt
assumed in BGM and the related literature (adjusted for the product creation subsidy). Thus,
firms raise (on a per-variety basis) (1 − τtS ) w
                                                Zt fEt on the stock market for product development
                                                 t


activities. Combined with the per-variety subsidy τtS w
                                                      Zt fEt , the entirety of product creation costs
                                                       t


are financed.


2.3.2    Optimal Pricing

Given a number of product varieties Nt , the first-order condition for profit maximization with
respect to the relative price ρt of any given variety (see Appendix A) is:
                                                       ∂qt       ∂qt
                                            q t + ρt       − mct     = 0.                                       (11)
                                                       ∂ρt       ∂ρt
                   ρt ∂qt
Defining ζt ≡      qt ∂ρt   as the price elasticity of demand for a symmetric variety, the optimal pricing
rule can be expressed in the familiar form:
                                                              ζt
                                                                 
                                                ρt =               mct ,                                        (12)
                                                            1 + ζt
which shows that the relative price of a variety is in general an endogenously time-varying markup
                                                                            ζt
over real marginal cost. Denoting the gross markup by µt ≡                 1+ζt ,   the optimal pricing rule can be
expressed more compactly as:
                                                       ρt = µt mct .                                            (13)

The precise expression for the markup µt depends on the specific form of the variety aggregator
that we will use below.

                                                              8
2.3.3       Production, Choice of Inputs, and Labor Market Clearing

Production of each existing variety occurs using a linear-in-labor technology. Letting ht denote
labor used to produce yt units of a particular variety, the existing-goods-producing technology is
yt = Zt ht , where Zt is the exogenous level of labor productivity that is common across varieties.22
Given unit production cost for an existing variety, mct = wt /Zt , the market clearing condition
yt = qt determines the quantity of labor hired for production of each variety.
       Given the exogenous cost of product creation (in units of effective labor) fEt , the technology
for creation of new products is also linear and such that hEt = fEt /Zt units of labor are required
for the development of each new product. With hEt units of labor required to develop each new
variety and ht units of labor required to produce each existing variety, the total quantity of labor
hired by the representative firm is ht Nt + hEt NEt , which, in equilibrium, must be equal to the
quantity Ht supplied by the representative household.


2.4       Government

The government finances an exogenous stream of spending {Gt }∞
                                                             t=0 by collecting labor income taxes,
dividend income taxes, and issuing real state-contingent debt. As described above, it also provides
product development subsidies. The period-t government budget constraint is
                                                    X 1         j                       wt
                       τtH wt Ht + τtD dt xt Nt +            j Bt+1   = Gt + Bt + τtS      fEt NEt .         (14)
                                                        j   Rt                          Zt

Government absorption Gt is of the same bundle of varieties as private consumption Ct , which
facilitates aggregation.23 The fact that the government is able to issue fully state-contingent real
debt means that none of the optimal policy results is driven by incompleteness of debt markets or
ad-hoc limits on government assets.


2.5       Competitive Equilibrium

Now that we are at the stage of constructing the equilibrium, we make explicit the equilibrium
dependence of the markup and the relative price of a given product on the total stock of products
in the economy — thus, we now explicitly write µ(Nt ) and ρ(Nt ) instead of µt and ρt . The analytic
forms of these functions depend on the form of the variety aggregator when we make specific
assumptions below.
       As shown in Appendix B, the definition of a symmetric competitive equilibrium can be expressed
quite compactly. Specifically, a symmetric competitive equilibrium is a set of endogenous state-
  22
       Following BGM, we assume the same exogenous productivity for labor used in production of existing varieties
and creation of new ones.
  23                                         ∂Pt
     Thus, for each variety ω, gt (ω)∂ω =          G.
                                            ∂pt (ω) t



                                                               9
contingent processes {Ct , Ht , Nt+1 , NEt , vt , Bt+1 }∞
                                                        t=0 that satisfy six sequences of conditions: the
labor optimality condition
                                                         uHt   (1 − τtH )
                                                     −       =            Zt ρ(Nt ),                                                     (15)
                                                         uCt     µ(Nt )
the intertemporal product creation condition
                                                                   µ(Nt )         Ct+1 + Gt+1                        µ(Nt )
                              n        h                                                                                              io
(1−τtS )ρ(Nt )fEt = (1−δ)Et                  D
                                Ξt+1|t (1 − τt+1 ) µ(Nt ) −                                                 S
                                                                                                    + (1 − τt+1 )            ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1    ,
                                                                  µ(Nt+1 )           Nt+1                           µ(Nt+1 )
                                                                                                                                         (16)

the equilibrium entry condition
                                                                         ρ(Nt )
                                                       vt = (1 − τtS )          fEt ,                                                    (17)
                                                                         µ(Nt )
the law of motion for the number of product varieties

                                                     Nt+1 = (1 − δ)(Nt + NEt ),                                                          (18)

the flow government budget constraint (14),24 and the consumption resource constraint

                                           Ct + Gt + ρ(Nt )fEt NEt = ρ(Nt )Zt Ht .                                                       (19)

       The consumption resource constraint (19) is obtained by summing the flow household budget
constraint (2) (after imposing the equilibrium condition xt+1 = xt = 1 ∀t) and the flow government
budget constraint (14), and then substituting several equilibrium conditions; a complete derivation
appears in Appendix B. An important feature to note about this frontier is the appearance of ρ(Nt ),
which represents a relative price in the decentralized economy. As is well understood in models
of monopolistic competition with endogenous variety, the relative price ρ(Nt ) captures the welfare
benefit of variety embedded in household preferences; as such, it is a primitive of the economy,
which can be interpreted as a measure of increasing returns to variety.25


2.6       Welfare-Consistent versus Data-Consistent Concepts

The concepts of consumption, government expenditures, investment (in new product development),
and GDP that appear in the model description are the welfare-relevant ones; however, they are not
data-consistent concepts. As discussed in BGM, achieving comparability between the model and
the data requires measuring consumption, government expenditures, investment, and GDP in the
               Ct       Gt      vt NEt           wt Ht +dt Nt
model as      ρ(Nt ) , ρ(Nt ) , ρ(Nt ) ,   and      ρ(Nt )    ,   respectively, which adjusts for the benefit of variety
  24
       Which can be expressed in terms of only the processes listed aboveby substituting
                                                                                         the equilibrium expressions
                                       Zt ρ(Nt )                                              1          Ct +Gt
                                                                                                                  
for the real wage, wt = Zt mct =        µ(Nt )
                                                 ,   and dividend payments, dt = 1 −        µ(Nt )         Nt
                                                                                                                    .
  25
       As noted above, an alternative formalism of the model casts product varieties as intermediate goods in production
of a homogenous final good. In this alternative setup, ρ(Nt ) captures equilibrium increasing returns to variety in
production of the final good.



                                                                    10
(required because the data do not adjust for it).26 Thus, all results reported below are for these
data-consistent measures; we indicate these data-consistent measures with a subscript “R,” which
denotes division by ρ(Nt ) to remove the variety effect.27 Being precise about welfare-consistent
versus data-consistent measures requires that the exogenous purchases component of fiscal policy
                              Gt
is taken to be GRt ≡         ρ(Nt ) ,    as described below.


3         Exogenous Fiscal Policy

Before studying the model’s implications for optimal tax policy, we study its cyclical properties
conditional on exogenous fiscal policy. Incorporating realistic features of fiscal policy adds to the
literature’s understanding of the BGM framework. The model’s dynamics conditional on exogenous
policy also provide a benchmark for understanding the optimal policy results in Section 4. In the
exogenous policy experiments here, the product development subsidy, and the dividend tax are set
to τtS = 0 ∀t and τtD = τ D > 0 ∀t, respectively. To enhance comparability with the results of BGM,
parameter values and/or calibration targets are taken from their study where possible.


3.1         Calibration

For utility, we adopt a standard functional form:
                                                                          ζ     1+1/ν
                                               u(Ct , Ht ) = ln Ct −          H       .                                       (20)
                                                                       1 + 1/ν t
Following BGM, the Frisch elasticity of labor supply is set to ν = 4, and the scale parameter is set
to deliver a steady-state fraction of time spent working of H = 0.2 (the required value is ζ = 6.8,
given all other parameter values). The model frequency is quarterly, so the subjective discount
factor is set to β = 0.99, which delivers an annual real interest rate of approximately four percent.
         We consider the variety aggregators studied by BGM: Dixit-Stiglitz (1977) preferences and the
translog expenditure function proposed by Feenstra (2003). The baseline calibration is for the case
of Dixit-Stiglitz aggregation because of its widespread use in macro models. In the Dixit-Stiglitz
case, the final consumption index Ct is composed of the underlying varieties ct (ω) according to
           hR                        i    θ
                        (θ−1)/θ          θ−1
Ct =         ω∈Ω ct (ω)         dω             . Dixit-Stiglitz aggregation implies a gross markup independent of
the number of product varieties, µ =                   θ
                                                      θ−1 ,   and a relative price ρt = Ntµ−1 of a symmetric variety.
As in BGM, we set θ = 3.8 as a benchmark, which implies a 35-percent average net markup.
    26
         Note that we use the NIPA definition of GDP as total income, wt Ht + dt Nt , which equals the sum of private
                                                                                                              wt
consumption expenditure, government expenditure, and total investment expenditure, Ct + Gt +                     f N .
                                                                                                              Zt Et Et
                                                                                                                             In our
exercises, we focus on the private portion of investment, vt NEt , which differs from the economy’s total investment
because of the product development subsidy (when it differs from zero).
                                                                                                                             vt NEt
  27
     Thus, we write GDPRt to indicate wt Hρ(N
                                           t +dt Nt
                                              t)
                                                                       Ct
                                                    , CRt to indicate ρ(Nt)
                                                                            , GRt to indicate    Gt
                                                                                                ρ(Nt )
                                                                                                       ,   IRt to indicate   ρ(Nt )
                                                                                                                                    ,
and so on.


                                                                  11
       The sunk cost of creating a new product is fixed at fEt = 1 and is assumed invariant along the
business cycle. As noted in the Introduction, we focus on the efficiency implications of fiscal policy
(in both the short run and the long run), rather than regulation policy, which justifies fixing fEt .
While regulation is likely to affect entry costs (for example, by reducing bureaucratic costs), it is
unlikely to do so over the cycle. Furthermore, regulation policy is likely applied heterogeneously
(as a long-run tool) across firms of different sizes, an issue beyond the scope of this paper.28 The
rate of destruction of product varieties is set to δ = 0.025, following the calibration of BGM. Given
the quarterly frequency of the model, this means roughly 10 percent of product varieties disappear
from the market every year, independent of product age.
       The three exogenous processes are productivity, government spending (which, as noted above, is
measured in data-consistent units), and the labor income tax rate, each of which follows an AR(1)
process in logs:
                                              ln Zt = ρZ ln Zt−1 + Z
                                                                    t ,                                          (21)

                                ln GRt = (1 − ρGR ) ln ḠR + ρGR ln GRt−1 + G R
                                                                             t ,                                 (22)

and
                                                                                   H
                                  ln τtH = (1 − ρτ H ) ln τ̄ H + ρτ H ln τt−1
                                                                          H
                                                                              + τt .                            (23)
                      GR               H
The innovations Z             τ                        2            2                 2
                 t , t , and t are distributed N (0, σZ ), N (0, σGR ), and N (0, σ τ H ) respectively,
                                                                                                  
and are independent of each other. Persistence parameters are set to ρZ = 0.979, which matches
BGM and King and Rebelo (1999), and ρGR = 0.97, as in the benchmark quantitative Ramsey
models of Chari and Kehoe (1999). The magnitudes of innovations are set to σGR = 0.027, also
consistent with baseline Ramsey models, and σZ = 0.0072, which is the same value as in BGM
and enables the benchmark exogenous policy model to generate GDP volatility in line with its
magnitude in U.S. fluctuations. In the exogenous policy Dixit-Stiglitz benchmark, the steady-state
level of government spending ḠR is calibrated so that it absorbs 22 percent of steady-state GDP;
the resulting value is ḠR = 0.044. However, this value is reset (to ḠR = 0.074) when we study
the Ramsey equilibrium in order to keep the steady-state GDP share of government spending, and
hence the revenue requirements of the government, constant at 22 percent.
       The parameterization of the labor income tax process is taken from Arseneau and Chugh (2010),
who use the methodology of Jones (2002) to construct an empirical measure of the average U.S.
labor income tax rate from 1947:Q1-2009:Q4.29 The mean labor income tax rate over this period is
about 20 percent. In terms of its cyclical properties, the first-order autocorrelation is 0.66, and the
  28
       BGM discuss the consequences of “universal” deregulation (a permanent decline in fEt ). See also Cacciatore and
Fiori (2009).
  29
     The source data are the NIPA accounts of the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, and the methodology to
construct the tax rate series is described in detail in Appendix B of Jones (2002).



                                                           12
standard deviation of the cyclical component of the tax rate is 2.8 percent, which means that the
standard deviation of the level of the tax rate is about 0.70 percentage points around its mean of
20 percent. Matching the persistence and volatility of this empirical tax rate series requires setting
ρτ H = 0.87 and στ H = 0.037.
       Finally, the dividend income tax rate is assumed to be a constant τ D = 0.30 in every period,
which is representative of the average U.S. corporate (including both federal and state) tax rate.
For the exogenous policy experiments only, the government is assumed to have available a lump-
sum tax/transfer vis-a-vis households in order to balance its budget, which allows us to ignore
government financing issues. When we move to the Ramsey analysis, the lump-sum tax is dropped
and the government instead has one-period state-contingent debt as a policy tool (in addition
to its proportional tax instruments τ H , τ D , and τ S ).30 In the Ramsey analysis, the steady-state
government debt-to-GDP ratio (at an annual frequency) is calibrated to 0.5, in line with the average
U.S. post-war government debt.
       When we move to translog preferences, we adjust the calibration so that the model hits the
same long-run targets. Doing so requires appropriately setting one new parameter the translog
aggregator introduces and resetting only two parameters from above. The translog primitive is the
expenditure function across varieties. BGM and Feenstra (2003) provide detailed analysis; here,
                                                                           1
we simply note that in the translog case, the markup is given by µt = 1 + σN t
                                                                               , with σ > 0, and the
                                                                             
                                                              −Nt
relative price of a symmetric variety is ρ(Nt ) = exp − 12 Ñ
                                                           σ Ñ N
                                                                  , with the parameter Ñ interpreted
                                                                          t

as the mass of the potential set of varieties that ever could exist, Nt of which actually exist and
are produced in period t.31 As shown in BGM, it is possible to set σ so that the translog case
results in the same steady-state markup and number of products as the Dixit-Stiglitz case — given
our parameterization, this requires σ = 1.932 The long-run level of government absorption must be
reset (to ḠR = 0.035) to keep its share in GDP fixed at 22 percent in the translog case — and,
just as noted above for the Dixit-Stiglitz case, is reset again (to ḠR = 0.087) when we study the
  30
       In the exogenous policy experiments, the (endogenous and state-contingent) lump-sum tax allows us to ignore
the nature and dynamics of government debt in the data, i.e., is it state-contingent debt? what are the fiscal rules
by which debt is stabilized? etc. These are interesting questions, not only for our study but the broad fiscal policy
literature, but beyond the scope of our paper.
   31
      The translog specification has the intuitively appealing property that an increase in the number of varieties
available in the economy is associated with an increase in the degree of substitutability between any given pair of
varieties. This aspect of aggregation is absent in the most commonly used specification of the Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator,
which assumes a constant elasticity of substitution across varieties even if their number is endogenous.
 32
    The parameter Ñ is set very loosely, Ñ = 109 , which represents the idea that there is an unbounded number of
varieties in the potential product space. BGM show that Ñ drops out of a log-linear approximation of the model’s
dynamics. As noted below, we compute dynamics using a level-linear approximation, in which the parameter Ñ does
not drop out, hence our need to choose a numerical value; the value Ñ = 109 is orders of magnitude larger than
needed so that its precise setting does not affect the model’s steady state or dynamics.


                                                           13
translog Ramsey equilibrium.
       The deterministic steady-state equilibrium is computed using a nonlinear numerical solver. To
study dynamics, we compute a first-order approximation of the equilibrium conditions around the
deterministic steady state.33 We use the first-order accurate decision rules to simulate time paths
of the equilibrium in response to productivity, government spending, and labor tax realizations,
the shocks to which we draw according to the parameters of the laws of motion described above.
We conduct 500 simulations, each 200 periods long. For each simulation, we then HP filter (using
quarterly smoothing parameter 1,600), compute second moments of interest, and report the medians
of these moments across the 500 simulations.


3.2       Results

Figure 2 presents, for both Dixit-Stiglitz and translog preferences, impulse responses of GDP, prod-
uct creation, markups, and aggregate profits (which are four key measures whose cyclical dynamics
the baseline BGM model reproduces well) to one-time, one-standard-deviation positive shocks to
productivity (first row), government spending (second row), and the labor income tax rate (third
row). Conditional on productivity shocks, the impulse responses are similar to those in BGM. All
differences (in magnitudes and persistence) compared to BGM are due to the presence of long-run
distortions induced by fiscal policy, distortions that are absent in the BGM analysis.34 Differences
between the Dixit-Stiglitz and translog cases are due to the aggregator-specific behavior of product
substitutability and markups. While markups are constant with Dixit-Stiglitz preferences, translog
preferences generate procyclical substitutability and hence countercyclical markups. As a conse-
quence, ceteris paribus, the benefit to consumers of additional variety and the profit incentive for
firms to develop new products decrease (increase) over time during expansions (contractions). Thus,
fluctuations in product entry are dampened in the translog case compared to the Dixit-Stiglitz case.
       Regarding fiscal policy, the responses to a government spending shock (second row) are qualita-
tively similar to those to a productivity shock. Consumption (not shown) declines as it is crowded
out by increased government absorption, a standard counterfactual prediction due to Ricardian
consumer behavior.35 A one-time increase in the labor income tax rate (third row) leads to a rela-
tively large output contraction, due mainly to a sharp decline in new product development, which
  33
       Our numerical method is our own implementation of the perturbation algorithm described by Schmitt-Grohé and
Uribe (2004).
  34
     We have confirmed this result by also computing impulse responses to productivity for the parameter values
ḠR = τ H = τ D = 0, a point noted again below.
  35
     Recall that a lump sum tax is present for the exogenous policy experiments, which generates Ricardian equiv-
alence. This counterfactual prediction would be easily fixed by introducing a set of non-Ricardian consumers, as is
common in the literature, but this is beyond the scope of the paper.




                                                         14
falls roughly ten percent on impact under both forms of variety aggregation. A higher tax rate
causes a roughly two percent decline in aggregate hours (not shown) for both forms of preferences.
Because the setup cost fE of developing new products requires labor, hours worked in the product
development sector also fall sharply.
       To provide more quantitative detail on the model’s cyclical dynamics, especially those due to
shifts in taxes, Table 1 presents simulation results. The upper panels display results when all three
exogenous processes are active, and the lower panels display results conditional on shocks to only
productivity and government spending, holding constant the labor income tax rate at 20 percent.
Fluctuations in Z and G are the inputs to the dynamic Ramsey analysis in Section 4, hence the
lower panels of Table 1 provide a benchmark.
       Three main aspects of the simulation results are worth highlighting, each of which contributes
to the development of the BGM class of models as a positive description of U.S. business cycles.
First, regardless of the form of variety aggregation, the volatility of aggregate hours is virtually
identical to the volatility of output, in line with the relative volatility of hours in U.S. macro
data. However, if τ H is constant over the business cycle (the lower panels of Table 1), the relative
volatility of total hours is about 0.6, just as in the baseline BGM model without fiscal shocks. The
results in Table 1 show that incorporating realistic tax fluctuations is a step in the right direction
by substantially improving the model’s relative volatility of hours. Successfully reproducing the
dynamics of labor-market outcomes is a long-standing central issue in macroeconomic modeling.36
       Second, the volatility of investment in product creation is about six times the volatility of GDP
when fluctuations are driven by shocks to all three exogenous processes, which is roughly double
the relative volatility of investment in U.S. data. When it is only shocks to productivity and
government absorption that cause cycles (the lower panels of Table 1), this relative volatility falls
to between four to five. However, note that overall volatility, as measured by the volatility of GDP,
also falls quite sharply when τ H is constant — from about 2.5 percent to less than 1.5 percent.
Fluctuations in tax rates thus contribute quantitatively significantly to the magnitude of overall
fluctuations, in both absolute and relative terms.
       Third, volatility falls further if it is only productivity shocks that are active, as Table 2 shows.
The model’s GDP volatility conditional on shocks to only Z is smaller than found in BGM, which is
due to the long-run distortionary effects of fiscal policy. Indeed, if we assume no distortions what-
soever by setting ḠR = τ̄ H = τ D = 0, the dynamics of the model conditional on only productivity
shocks (shown in the lower panels of Table 2) are identical to those in BGM.
       Overall, Tables 1 and 2 document that the business cycle properties of the BGM model are
  36
       BGM show that inclusion of physical capital as a factor of production also improves the model’s performance
along this dimension. Shao and Silos (2009) and Cacciatore and Fiori (2009) introduce unemployment in the BGM
framework by incorporating matching frictions in the labor market.


                                                         15
noticeably different once realistic features of fiscal policy are incorporated. At the center of the
mechanism is the dynamic behavior of the within-period deviation, or “wedge,” between the house-
hold’s marginal rate of substitution between consumption and labor and the “effective” marginal
product of labor in producing consumption, ρ(Nt )Zt , that appears in the consumption resource
frontier (19). Figure 3 illustrates this point with an impulse response of the within-period wedge
                                                                        −uHt /uCt
(defined from the labor optimality condition (15) as 1 −                 Zt ρ(Nt ) )   to a positive shock to the labor
tax rate. The wedge fluctuates sharply and, together with the results shown in (the third row of)
Figure 2, is clearly countercyclical. The dynamics of the wedge conditional on exogenous tax policy
are important for understanding the Ramsey equilibrium.37


4         Optimal Fiscal Policy

With the baseline calibration and dynamics established, we now discard the exogenous process (23)
for the labor income tax rate and instead endogenize tax policy (labor income taxes, dividend
taxes, and product development subsidies).38 While taxes are now optimally chosen by the Ramsey
government, government purchases continue to follow the exogenous process (22).39


4.1         Ramsey Problem

A standard approach in Ramsey models based on neoclassical markets is to capture in a single,
present-value implementability constraint (PVIC) all equilibrium conditions of the economy apart
from the resource frontier. The PVIC is the key constraint in any Ramsey problem because it
governs the welfare loss of using non-lump-sum taxes to finance government expenditures.40
         We can construct a PVIC starting from the household flow budget constraint (2) and using the
household optimality conditions (3), (4), and (5). However, because of the forward-looking aspects
of firm optimization, the PVIC does not capture all of the model’s equilibrium conditions.41 Derived
    37
         Table 1 reports also the properties of the model-generated, data-consistent price of capital in the model, which
will also be useful to understand the Ramsey equilibrium.
  38
     We also return to the case of zero lump-sum taxes, required for a Ramsey analysis.
  39
     Thus, we follow the standard convention in Ramsey analysis that spending is exogenous but the revenue side of
fiscal policy is determined optimally.
   40
      See, for example, Ljungqvist and Sargent (2004, p. 494) for more discussion. The PVIC is the household (equiv-
alently, government) budget constraint expressed in intertemporal form with all prices and policies substituted out
using equilibrium conditions. In relatively simple models, the PVIC encodes all the equilibrium conditions that must
be respected by Ramsey allocations in addition to feasibility. In complicated environments that deviate substantially
from neoclassical markets, however, such as Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2005), Chugh (2006), and Arseneau and Chugh
(2008), it is not always possible to construct such a single constraint.
  41
     A very similar, in form, construction of the Ramsey problem arises in Arseneau and Chugh (2010), who study
optimal fiscal policy in a model with labor market frictions.



                                                             16
in Appendix C is the PVIC:
                             ∞
                             X
                        E0         β t (uCt Ct + uHt Ht ) = uC0 [v0 + (1 − τ0D )d0 ]N0 + uC0 B0 .                 (24)
                             t=0

Because the number of product varieties is a state variable, the household’s ownership, via share
holdings, of the initial stock of varieties, N0 , is part of its time-zero assets, as the right-hand side
of (24) shows. In this sense, the initial stock of varieties acts like the initial stock of physical capital
in a Ramsey analysis of the baseline RBC model.
       However, unlike in a standard model, the PVIC (24) does not capture all equilibrium conditions,
so the Ramsey problem cannot be cast in the standard pure “primal” form. In particular, Ramsey
allocations must also respect the intertemporal product creation condition (16) and the entry
condition (17). The appearance of (expectations of) future tax rates in the product creation
condition prevents formulation in pure primal form because there is no way to eliminate the future
tax rates from the Ramsey problem. Hence, we directly compute Ramsey first-order conditions with
respect to the product creation subsidy and (with a caveat discussed next) the dividend income
tax to characterize their optimal settings.
       Two novel issues regarding the nature of available tax instruments and how they can be used
to decentralize Ramsey allocations require discussion. First, as just noted, Ramsey first-order
conditions with respect to the product creation subsidy and the dividend income tax directly must
be computed. However (considering the period-t competitive equilibrium), it is only the period-t+1
dividend tax that appears in the period-t equilibrium conditions. The realized period-t dividend
tax does not directly affect the period-t competitive equilibrium due to the forward-looking nature
of product development decisions.42 In principle, this requires computing a Ramsey first-order
                           D as part of the period-t Ramsey first-order conditions. This would pose
condition with respect to τt+1
                                                                              D is indeterminate
no problem if the environment were deterministic. However, with uncertainty, τt+1
with respect to the period-t information set of the economy. This indeterminacy requires setting
up the Ramsey problem in a novel way.
       We resolve the indeterminacy by assuming that the Ramsey government chooses a state-
contingent schedule of one-period-ahead dividend tax rates, one for each of the possible realized
                             D
states. We use the notation τt+1|t to denote this state-contingent schedule, which is in the private
                                                                                            D
sector’s period-t information set. Thus, in conducting the Ramsey optimization, we replace τt+1
      D
with τt+1|t in the product creation condition (16), along with the auxiliary assumption that the
Ramsey government always implements its one-period-ahead state-contingent “announcements” of
dividend taxes.43 That is, the Ramsey government optimally chooses the schedule τt+1|t
                                                                                 D     in period
  42                                          D
       Inspecting (14)-(19) shows that only τt+1 appears in the period-t equilibrium conditions.
  43
       Formally, this means that the period t + 1 dividend tax rate can be taken out of the expectation operator in the
product creation condition (16); note, however, that this does not make the product creation condition deterministic.


                                                             17
                                                               D
t, and then implements with certainty the particular value of τt+1|t that the schedule specificies as
            D in period t + 1. This is a novel type of “one-period commitment” on the part of
the actual τt+1
the Ramsey government, but we view it as compatible with (and weaker than) the maintained as-
sumption of commitment to policy functions from period zero onwards that is a defining feature of
Ramsey analysis. From here on, we use the phrase “optimal dividend income tax” when discussing
the Ramsey equilibrium, recognizing that, outside the deterministic steady state, what the Ramsey
government chooses is a state-contingent one-period-ahead schedule.44
       The second novel issue is also one of indeterminacy, although between tax instruments in a
given time period rather than for a given tax instrument across time periods. The product devel-
opment decision (16) is affected by both development subsidies and (the state-contingent schedule
of) dividend taxes. Because neither policy instrument appears in any other period-t private-sector
equilibrium condition, an infinite combination of pairs (τtS , τt+1|t
                                                                D ) induces identical product devel-

opment decisions. This is a standard form of Ramsey indeterminacy, and the Ramsey equilibrium
                                                                      D
can endogenously pin down only one, but not both, of the instruments τt+1|t and τtS ; this point is
elaborated further in Section 7 in the context of a broader discussion of the nature of the assumed
tax system. In the Ramsey results reported below, the indeterminacy is resolved by fixing, in turn,
one of the tax instruments to zero and optimizing with respect to the other; we refer to the former
as the “inactive” instrument and the latter as the “active” instrument.45
       The Ramsey problem is thus to choose state-contingent processes for {Ct , Ht , Nt+1 , NEt }∞
                                                                                                  t=0
and either {τtS }∞        D      ∞
                 t=0 or {τt+1|t }t=0 to maximize (1) subject to the PVIC (24), the product creation
condition (16), the entry condition (17), the law of motion for the measure of product varieties (18),
and the resource constraint (19). Finally, as is standard in Ramsey taxation problems and implicit
in the discussion above, the Ramsey government is assumed to fully commit to time-invariant policy
functions as of period zero. Thus, none of the results is driven by the use of a discretionary policy.46


4.2       The Timeless Perspective and Computational Issues

The first-order conditions of the Ramsey problem are assumed to be necessary and sufficient, and
all allocations are assumed to be interior. As in the exogenous policy baseline, a nonlinear numeri-
cal solution algorithm is used to compute the deterministic Ramsey steady-state equilibrium. As is
  44
       We thank Marco Bassetto for suggesting this approach. In the context of an incomplete-markets Ramsey model,
Fahri (2009) uses a similar approach in choosing the one-period-ahead (non-state-contingent) capital income tax rate;
doing so retains the incomplete-markets nature of his analysis. Analogously, allowing the choice of the one-period-
ahead state-contingent dividend income tax retains the complete-markets nature of our analysis.
  45
     Alternatively, we could fix the inactive instrument to any arbitrary value, both in the long run and along the
stochastic fluctuations of the Ramsey equilibrium, but there is little basis for preferring one decentralization over
another.
  46
     The stock nature of product varieties is what allows scope for use of a discretionary policy.


                                                          18
common in the Ramsey literature, when characterizing asymptotic policy dynamics (that is, the dy-
namics implied by the Ramsey t > 0 first-order conditions), we also make the auxiliary assumption
that the initial state of the economy is the asymptotic Ramsey steady state, which is tantamount
to adopting the “timeless perspective” common in Ramsey-based quantitative analysis.47
       More precisely, to study dynamics, we compute a first-order approximation of the Ramsey first-
order conditions for period t > 0 around the deterministic steady state of these conditions. We
then use the first-order accurate decision rules to simulate the Ramsey equilibrium in the face of
productivity and government spending realizations. The productivity and government spending
realizations used to conduct the Ramsey simulations are the same as those in the exogenous policy
experiments in Section 3, which means that any differences between the Ramsey equilibrium and
exogenous policy equilibrium are attributable entirely to the dynamics of tax policy.


4.3       Long-Run Optimal Policy

The first main result is that the long-run Ramsey equilibrium achieves efficiency along the product
creation margin. Efficiency can be decentralized by an appropriate dividend income tax or product
creation subsidy, depending on which instrument is active. Regardless of which instrument is active,
its precise setting depends on the particular form of variety aggregation in preferences.
       Before presenting results, it is useful to define the welfare benefit of variety in elasticity form:
                                                               Nt
                                            (Nt ) = ρ0 (Nt )        .                                  (25)
                                                              ρ(Nt )
As noted above, the relative price ρ(Nt ) measures the (welfare) return to product variety, to which
we refer as the “variety effect.”48 The elasticity (Nt ) turns out to be a convenient way of charac-
terizing the variety effect.49

4.3.1       Dividend Taxation

First suppose that dividend income taxes are active, and product development subsidies are inactive
(τ S ≡ 0).

Proposition 1. Optimal Long-Run Dividend Income Tax. In the deterministic steady state
of the Ramsey equilibrium in which only dividend income taxes are active, the optimal dividend
income tax rate is characterized by:
                                                                (N )
                                                  1 − τD =              ,                                             (26)
                                                              µ(N ) − 1
  47
       Among other references, see Khan, King, and Wolman (2003).
  48
       Symmetry across varieties implies Ct + Gt = ρ(Nt )Zt ht Nt (recall that ht is the labor used to produce yt units of
a particular variety). Abstracting from Gt , ρ(Nt ) captures the additional welfare gain of consuming the output Zt ht
of each of the Nt varieties. This role of ρ(Nt ) was also made apparent in the resource constraint (19).
  49
     The notation ρ0 (Nt ) recognizes that, for all preference specifications we use, ρt is indeed a function only of Nt .


                                                            19
and this tax supports long-run efficiency of product creation.

Proof. See Appendix D.

       For the BGM environment, the pure social planning allocations and the corrective Pigovian
taxes needed to support them were developed by Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2008b). Their
results provide the analytical basis for the results we obtain regarding long-run Ramsey taxation.
Of particular importance for our work here is that Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2008b) — hereafter,
BGM2 — determined the constellations of conditions for the markup incentives governing product
development and the variety effect on welfare that are important for efficiency. It is the tradeoff of
these two forces that shapes the long-run optimal dividend income tax.
       A striking aspect of the Ramsey-optimal long-run dividend income tax is that it is identical
to the Pigovian tax derived by BGM2. In particular, the goal of dividend taxation is to align the
beneficial effects of product variety with net monopoly markups. As (26) shows, this alignment is
accomplished with no need for taxation if and only if (N ) = µ(N ) − 1. The analysis in BGM2
is about efficiency (Pigovian) taxes because it abstracts from public finance considerations by
assuming the availability of lump-sum taxation. Proposition 1 shows that endogenizing public
finance considerations does not affect this normative result.
       Further discussion of the result that the Ramsey equilibrium achieves efficient product creation
is deferred until Section 7. In the rest of this section, we consider the implications of Proposition 1
for the precise value of τ D . Given the normalization τ S = 0 for the analysis here, the detail of the
economic environment that matters for the precise value of τ D is the form of variety aggregation. As
described above, we study the Dixit-Stiglitz and translog aggregators for the quantitative analysis.
For the analytical result here, however, we also consider the Benassy (1996) generalization of the
Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator, which disentangles the variety effect from the monopoly markup. Table 3
presents functional forms for markups and variety effects for each of the three aggregators; for the
intuitive discussion here of the Benassy aggregator, let κ govern the variety effect, and θ continue
to govern the markup as in the standard Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator.50
  50
       Formally, the Benassy aggregator is
                                                          Z                                θ
                                                                                          θ−1
                                                     θ
                                               κ+1− θ−1                   (θ−1)/θ
                                       Ct =   Nt                 ct (ω)             dω           ,                                   (27)
                                                           ω∈Ω

                                                                                                      θ
with κ ≥ 0. With Benassy aggregation, the markup of a symmetric variety is µ =                       θ−1
                                                                                                         ,   just as in the Dixit-Stiglitz
case, but the relative price of a symmetric variety is given by ρt =       Ntκ .    The Dixit-Stiglitz specification is recovered if
        θ
κ=     θ−1
             − 1. The Benassy case is omitted from the dynamic stochastic analysis below due to lack of reliable ways of
calibrating κ, and because the quantitative implications are very similar to the Dixit-Stiglitz case for all scenarious
we tried (results are available upon request). We discuss the Benassy case for the steady state, however, because it
yields qualitatively different results regarding optimal policy than Dixit-Stiglitz aggregation. Further details are in
BGM2 and Benassy (1996).


                                                               20
   With these three aggregators, the optimal dividend income tax can be positive, negative, or
zero. Specifically, based on the functional forms of (N ) and µ(N ) in Table 3, the optimal long-run
dividend income tax rate in the Dixit-Stiglitz aggregation is
                                                    θ
                                        D          θ−1   −1
                                       τDS   =1−    θ
                                                              = 0;                                  (28)
                                                   θ−1   −1

in the Benassy aggregation is

                              D                     κ
                             τBEN ASSY = 1 −      θ
                                                        = 1 − κ(θ − 1);                             (29)
                                                 θ−1 −1

and in the translog aggregation is
                                                          1
                                     τTDRAN SLOG = 1 −   2σN
                                                          1    = 0.5.                               (30)
                                                         σN

   The intuition for why the variety aggregator clearly matters for the optimal long-run dividend
income tax is that with zero dividend taxation and either translog aggregation or Benassy ag-
gregation featuring a sufficiently small variety effect, the monopoly incentives governing product
development are stronger than the beneficial effects of increased product variety on welfare. Too
many products are thus developed in equilibrium. A dividend income tax, which effectively taxes
monopoly profits, corrects this distortion by reducing household incentives to finance product cre-
ation. In the Dixit-Stiglitz case, the product development incentive of profits and the variety effect
exactly balance each other, which thus calls for a zero dividend tax. In the Benassy aggregation,
optimal dividend income taxes can be either positive or negative, depending on which of the two
effects is stronger. Taken together, the results suggest that the optimal dividend income tax in the
long run is not likely to be zero, unless one is committed to the Dixit-Stiglitz knife-edge case.
   Unless one believes literally in the translog aggregator, it is difficult to offer a precise numerical
target for the long-run dividend income tax because there is little empirical evidence about the
magnitude of the variety effect. Nonetheless, based on the success of the basic BGM model in
reproducing a number of business cycle facts with translog aggregation, one may lean toward that
as the most favored model with which also to consider optimal taxation. Furthermore, as shown
in Table 3, translog aggregation has a-priori appeal because it captures the idea that the larger
the mix of available products, the closer substitutes they are, an idea captured by neither the
Dixit-Stiglitz nor Benassy specification.


4.3.2     Product Development Subsidies

Suppose instead that dividend taxes are inactive (τ D ≡ 0), and product creation subsidies are
active.


                                                   21
Proposition 2. Optimal Long-Run Product Creation Subsidy. In the deterministic steady
state of the Ramsey equilibrium in which only product creation subsidies are active, the optimal
product creation subsidy is characterized by:
                                                   µ(N ) − 1
                                        1 − τS =             ,                                   (31)
                                                     (N )
and this tax supports long-run efficiency of product creation.

Proof. See Appendix D.

   This result is also identical to BGM2. With only τ S active, Dixit-Stiglitz aggregation requires
τ S = 0 in the long run, while translog aggregation requires τ S = −1 (a 100 percent tax on the entry
cost) in the long run. Intuitively, the optimal τ S achieves the same objective as the optimal τ D
of aligning the welfare benefit of variety (and the associated household incentive to finance entry)
with the markup (and the associated firm incentive to create products). With translog aggregation,
a dividend tax achieves the objective by cutting in half the dividends received by households, while
a tax on product creation does so by doubling firms’ creation costs. We comment further on the
redundancy of τ D and τ S with respect to each other in Section 7.


4.4   Short-Run Optimal Policy

For the rest of the analysis, we return to considering only the Dixit-Stiglitz and translog cases.
Table 4 presents short-run optimal policy results. As discussed above and further in Section 7,
                                  D
only one of the two instruments, τt+1|t or τtS , can be uniquely determined in the Ramsey equilib-
rium. Given this indeterminacy, Table 4 divides results for each form of variety aggregation into
those conditional on an optimally chosen time-varying dividend income tax or an optimally-chosen
product development subsidy. There are three main results to highlight regarding the Ramsey
dynamics.
   First, the volatility of optimal tax rates is very small. The labor income tax rate is constant
in the Dixit-Stiglitz case and very nearly constant in the translog case. Regardless of whether it
    D
is τt+1|t or τtS that is the active instrument, it also has zero volatility in the Dixit-Stiglitz case
and near-zero volatility in the translog case. Tax smoothing is thus the optimal policy, as in
baseline Ramsey models. Slightly different from baseline Ramsey models, however, is the “joint”
nature of tax smoothing, in which both the labor income tax and the instrument operating on the
                       D
intertemporal margin (τt+1|t or τtS ) have zero or near-zero volatility; in baseline Ramsey models,
“tax smoothing” entails only the former.
   Second, labor market fluctuations are much smaller in the Ramsey equilibrium than in the
exogenous policy equilibrium: The relative volatility of total hours is about one third smaller, as
comparison of Table 4 with the lower panels of Table 1 shows.

                                                 22
    Third, in the translog case, the relative volatility of the stock price vR is smaller in the Ramsey
equilibrium than in the exogenous policy equilibrium. For Dixit-Stiglitz aggregation, vR does
not fluctuate in any equilibrium, Ramsey or non-Ramsey, as implied by rearranging the entry
condition (17). Recall from Section 2 that vR is the data-consistent measure of the stock price. The
welfare-relevant stock price v (not shown), however, does fluctuate in equilibrium, and fluctuations
in v are much smaller in magnitude in the Ramsey equilibrium than in the non-Ramsey equilibrium.
Stock prices govern investment in new product development, and the Ramsey equilibrium also
displays smaller fluctuations in investment. At face value, an objective of the Ramsey government
appears to be to implement much more stable capital markets in terms of both prices and quantities.
    Achieving smaller (relative) fluctuations of both labor and capital markets are only reduced-
form “objectives,” however, not the primitive objective of the Ramsey equilibrium. A precise
explanation of the incentives that shape Ramsey outcomes, as well as how they are decentralized,
requires introducing several new concepts, which is done in Sections 5 and 6. Section 7 then uses
these concepts to explain the optimal policy results in a way that connects naturally to the Ramsey
literature.


5     Efficiency

Ramsey allocations trade off efficiency against market decentralization. Characterizing efficient
allocations is thus a necessary first step for understanding the optimal policy results. As proven
in Appendix E, efficient allocations {Ct , Ht , NEt , Nt+1 }∞
                                                            t=0 are characterized by four (sequences of)
conditions:
                                                   uHt
                                               −       = Zt ρ(Nt ),                                    (32)
                                                   uCt
                                          βuCt+1          Ct+1 + Gt+1
                                                                                          
              ρ(Nt )fEt = (1 − δ)Et              (Nt+1 )                   + ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1        ,   (33)
                                           uCt               Nt+1
                                 Ct + Gt + ρ(Nt )fEt NEt = ρ(Nt )Zt Ht ,                               (34)

and
                                           Nt+1 = (1 − δ)(Nt + NEt ).                                  (35)

The efficiency conditions (32) and (33) are obtained by maximizing household welfare, given
by (1), subject to the technological frontier defined by the sequence of consumption resource con-
straints (34) and laws of motion for variety (35).
    Condition (32) is a static dimension of efficiency and is analogous to static consumption-leisure
efficiency in the RBC model. Condition (33) is an intertemporal dimension of efficiency, and it
corresponds to the RBC model’s Euler equation for efficient capital accumulation. Even though
the model does not have “physical capital” in the strict RBC sense, the creation of new product


                                                        23
varieties is an investment activity that yields a long-lasting asset, as BGM emphasize. Taken
together, conditions (32) and (33) define the two “zero-wedge” benchmarks for Ramsey allocations.
       To highlight this “zero-wedges” aspect, it is useful to restate efficiency in terms of marginal
rates of substitution (MRS) and corresponding marginal rates of transformation (MRT).51 For the
intertemporal condition, this restatement is most straightforward for the non-stochastic case, which
allows an informative disentangling of the preference and technology terms inside the expectation
operator in (33).

Proposition 3. Efficient Allocations. The MRS and MRT for the pairs (Ct , Ht ) and (Ct , Ct+1 )
are defined by:
                               uHt
             M RSCt ,Ht ≡ −        ,      M RTCt ,Ht    ≡ Zt ρ(Nt ),
                               uCt
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                     Ct+1 +Gt+1
                        uCt                                   (1 − δ) (Nt+1 )          Nt+1          + ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1
 IM RSCt ,Ct+1 ≡              ,        IM RTCt ,Ct+1    ≡                                                                   .
                       βuCt+1                                                        ρ(Nt )fEt

Static efficiency (32) is characterized by M RSCt ,Ht = M RTCt ,Ht , and (for the non-stochastic case)
intertemporal efficiency (33) is characterized by IM RSCt ,Ct+1 = IM RTCt ,Ct+1 .

Proof. See Appendix E.

       Each MRS in Proposition 3 has the standard interpretation as a ratio of marginal utilities. By
analogy, each MRT has the interpretation as a ratio of the marginal products of an appropriately
defined transformation frontier.52 Elementary economic theory prescribes that efficient allocations
are characterized by an MRS = MRT condition along each of the static and intertemporal optimiza-
tion margins, implying zero distortion on each. These efficiency conditions are the welfare-relevant
ones for the Ramsey government. However, rather than taking the efficiency conditions as prima
facie justification that the expressions in Proposition 3 are properly to be understood as MRTs,
each can be described conceptually from first principles, independent of the characterization of
efficiency. Formal details of the following mostly intuitive discussion appear in Appendix E.


5.1       Static MRT

To understand the static MRT, M RTCt ,Ht , in Proposition 3, consider how the economy can trans-
form a unit of leisure in period t into a unit of output, and hence consumption, in period t. By
construction, this within-period transformation holds fixed all allocations beyond period t. The
  51
       This approach of casting efficiency and optimal-policy results in models with fundamental frictions in terms of
appropriately defined MRS and MRT concepts was first developed by Aruoba and Chugh (2010).
  52
     We have in mind a very general notion of transformation frontier as in Mas-Colell, Whinston, and Green (1995,
p. 129), in which every object in the economy can be viewed as either an input to or an output of the technology to
which it is associated. Appendix E provides formal details.


                                                            24
transformation is described in terms of leisure because leisure is a good (and hence gives positive
utility), while labor effort is a bad (and gives disutility); we proceed by describing transformation
as occurring between goods.
   A unit reduction in household leisure allows a unit increase in aggregate hours Ht , which
can be devoted to production of existing varieties (Nt ht ) or creation of new ones (NEt hEt ). The
technology frontier (34) implies that labor is transformed into consumption-unit resources at the
rate ρ(Nt )Zt , where ρ(Nt ) captures the return to variety. Hence, the overall within-period MRT
between leisure and consumption-unit output is ρ(Nt )Zt , as shown in Proposition 3, and efficiency
requires M RTCt ,Ht = ρ(Nt )Zt .


5.2    Intertemporal MRT

Now consider the intertemporal MRT (IMRT) in Proposition 3. The IMRT measures how many
additional units of Ct+1 the economy can achieve if one unit of Ct is foregone. By construction,
this transformation across periods t and t + 1 holds fixed all allocations beyond period t + 1.
                                        1
   If Ct is reduced by one unit,     ρ(Nt )fEt   additional new varieties can be produced, holding fixed
total consumption-unit output, as (34) shows. Due to product destruction, this addition to the
flow of period-t new product development increases the stock of existing varieties in period t + 1,
              1−δ
Nt+1 , by   ρ(Nt )fEt .
                                      1−δ
   In period t+1, the additional    ρ(Nt )fEt   varieties can be transformed into consumption-unit output
through two channels. First, they yield consumption units directly at the rate ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1 , as
shown by the technology frontier (34) (this is simply the inverse of the transformation that occurred
in period t).
                                       1−δ
   Second, each of the additional    ρ(Nt )fEt   varieties in period t+1 further increases period t+1 con-
sumption by a net ρ0 (Nt+1 ) (Zt+1 Ht+1 − fEt+1 NEt+1 ) units, based on the period t + 1 consumption
resource constraint. This expression can be rewritten in several steps,

            ρ0 (Nt+1 ) (Zt+1 Ht+1 − fEt+1 NEt+1 ) = ρ0 (Nt+1 ) (Zt+1 Ht+1 − Zt+1 hEt+1 NEt+1 )
                                                    = ρ0 (Nt+1 )Zt+1 ht+1 Nt+1
                                                    = ρ0 (Nt+1 )Nt+1 qt+1
                                                                        Ct+1 + Gt+1
                                                                                   
                                                    = ρ0 (Nt+1 )Nt+1
                                                                       ρ(Nt+1 )Nt+1
                                                                 Ct+1 + Gt+1
                                                                             
                                                    = (Nt+1 )                  ,                       (36)
                                                                     Nt+1
in which the first line uses the definition hEt = fEt /Zt ; the second line uses the labor market
equilibrium condition Ht = ht Nt +hEt NEt ; the third line uses the variety-level equilibrium condition
qt = Zt ht ; the fourth line uses the condition Ct +Gt = ρ(Nt )Nt qt ; and the fifth line uses the definition


                                                       25
               ρ0 (Nt )Nt
(Nt ) =         ρ(Nt )  . The   overall addition to period-t + 1 consumption through this second channel is
                                        
                           Ct+1 +Gt+1
           (1−δ)(Nt+1 )      Nt+1
thus                ρ(Nt )fEt               .
         Putting together this logic leads to the IMRT shown in Proposition 3. The fully stochastic
intertemporal efficiency condition can thus be represented as:
                                                                                              
                                                            Ct+1 +Gt+1
                            
                                 (1 − δ) (Nt+1 )                            + ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1
                                                                                                         (               )
                 βu
                      Ct+1                                     Nt+1
                                                                                                          IM RTCt ,Ct+1
     1 = Et                                                                                       = Et                   .
                    uCt                                    ρ(Nt )fEt                                     IM RSCt ,Ct+1
                                                                                                                          (37)
In the deterministic steady state, intertemporal efficiency is characterized by:
                                                                                             
                                                                          C+G
                                                1             (N )        N        + ρ(N )fE
                                                  = (1 − δ)                                    .                        (38)
                                                β                            ρ(N )fE


6         Equilibrium Wedges

With the model-appropriate characterizations of static and intertemporal efficiency just developed,
equilibrium wedges are defined as the deviations of MRS from MRT that arise in the decentralized
economy. These wedges measure inefficiencies. Understanding the determinants and consequences
of these inefficiencies provides the foundation for understanding optimal policy.


6.1         Static Distortion

Proposition 4. Static Wedge. In the decentralized economy, the within-period (static) equilib-
rium margin can be expressed as
                                                                               !
                                                       uHt        1 − τtH
                                                     −     =                       Zt ρ(Nt ).                             (39)
                                                       uCt         µ(Nt )
The term in parentheses measures the static distortion.

Proof. Compare the efficiency condition (32) with the equilibrium condition (15).

         From Proposition 4, it is clear that a sufficient condition for the decentralized economy to achieve
static efficiency is τtH = 1 − µ(Nt ). This is a standard result in models of monopolistic competition
with endogenous labor supply — efficiency requires a subsidy to labor income to offset markup
distortions.53 However, with government spending that requires financing and no lump-sum taxes,
as in our Ramsey analysis, static efficiency cannot be achieved.54
    53
         As discussed in BGM2, monopoly power implies no static distortion if labor supply is inelastic.
    54
         In a Ramsey taxation problem, τ H ≤ 0 can only occur if the initial assets of the government are so large, either
by assumption or via an effective initial lump-sum levy on existing private assets, that the government never needs
to impose distortionary taxes. As usual in the Ramsey literature, we rule out these possibilities because they assume
away the nature of the Ramsey problem.


                                                                     26
6.2         Intertemporal Distortion

Proposition 5. Intertemporal Wedge. In the decentralized economy, the intertemporal equilib-
rium margin can be expressed as
                                                                                                                         
                                                                µ(Nt )      Ct+1 +Gt+1           S ) µ(Nt ) ρ(N
                         
                                            D ) µ(N ) −
                              (1 − δ) (1 − τt+1|t                                      +   (1 − τt+1
              βu
                   Ct+1                            t           µ(Nt+1 )         Nt+1                 µ(Nt+1 )   t+1 )fEt+1      
1 = Et                    
                                                                            S
                                                                                                                               .
                 uCt                                                1−    τt ρ(Nt )fEt                                         
                                                                                                                  (40)
Comparing the term in square brackets with the term in square brackets in the intertemporal effi-
ciency condition (37) implicitly defines the intertemporal distortion.

Proof. Rewrite the equilibrium condition (16).

         Substituting the optimal long-run dividend tax (26) from Proposition 1 (along with τ S = 0)
in the deterministic steady-state version of (40) confirms that the Ramsey equilibrium achieves
long-run intertemporal efficiency.55
         Regarding stochastic fluctuations, however, we cannot prove analytically that the optimal trade-
off between static and dynamic distortions will result in intertemporal efficiency along the busi-
ness cycle. The numerical results presented next show that zero intertemporal wedges are indeed
achieved by the Ramsey equilibrium at all points along the business cycle.


7         Discussion

Based on the welfare-relevant concepts of efficiency and wedges developed in Sections 5 and 6, it
is now straightforward to explain the optimal policy results through the lens of Ramsey theory as
well as discuss a few other related points.


7.1         Short-Run Optimal Policy

7.1.1         Wedge Smoothing

A basic result in dynamic Ramsey analysis is that the least distortionary way for a government
to collect a present value of revenue through proportional taxes is to maintain low volatility of
distortions — “wedge smoothing” — across time periods. Keeping distortions constant (or nearly
constant) over time is the basic insight behind Barro’s (1979) partial equilibrium tax-smoothing
result, which carries over to quantitative general equilibrium models, as first shown by Chari,
Christiano, and Kehoe (1991) and recently by Werning (2007).
         This basic Ramsey insight also applies to our model. Table 5 compares the exogenous policy
case of Section 3 to optimal policy and shows that the latter maintains zero volatility of both
    55                                                                                               µ(N )−1
         The same result is also achieved by substituting τ D = 0 and τ S that satisfies 1 − τ S =    (N )
                                                                                                             .


                                                              27
static and intertemporal distortions. In the translog case especially, distortions are fairly volatile
under exogenous policy: the volatility of the intertemporal wedge conditional on exogenous policy
is 20 times larger than in the Dixit-Stiglitz case, which itself is non-zero.56 Whether in the long
run or in the short run, intertemporal distortions reduce welfare. We proved in Section 4 that
the Ramsey equilibrium eliminates long-run intertemporal distortions. Table 5 shows that even
seemingly “small” fluctuations of intertemporal distortions are completely eliminated in the Ramsey
equilibrium. Fluctuations of static wedges are simultaneously also completely eliminated. This
latter result connects back to the impulse responses presented in Figure 3 of the static wedge to a
labor income tax shock in the exogenous policy analysis; as we anticipated there, the heart of the
Ramsey equilibrium is in designing the behavior of wedges.
       Supporting perfect wedge stabilization along both the static and dynamic margins requires
no adjustment in tax rates at all in the Dixit-Stiglitz aggregation. With translog aggregation,
the dynamics of labor and dividend tax rates that support perfect wedge smoothing are shown
in Figure 4. In response to positive productivity and government spending shocks, the labor tax
rate displays a slow (albeit small) rise that mirrors the slow decline in the markup shown in
Figure 5. This dynamic response is intuitive: The only way for the wedge in the within-period
equilibrium condition (15) to remain constant following a shock is if the labor tax rate perfectly
offsets movements in the markup. Confirming this, the simulation-based correlation between the
Ramsey-optimal labor tax rate and the induced markup is indeed -1 with translog aggregation.


7.1.2       Dynamics of Product Development, Markups, and Profits

One of the most appealing features of the baseline BGM framework is its ability to reproduce
quantitatively the business cycle properties of not only standard macro quantities such as GDP,
consumption, and investment in response to productivity shocks, but also of procyclical product
entry, procyclical profits, and (in the translog case) countercyclical goods markups. Figure 2 showed
that the introduction of distortionary fiscal policy does not disrupt these central predictions of
the model. Figure 5 confirms that the Ramsey equilibrium also preserves these predictions: The
impulse responses in Figure 5 (which are plotted assuming the dividend tax is active and the
product creation subsidy is inactive, but the results are very similar for the opposite case) have
very similar profiles as those in Figure 2, but, as suggested by the discussion above, are smaller in
magnitude than in the non-Ramsey equilibrium.
  56
       The unit of measure in Table 5 is consumption because both the static and intertemporal MRSs and MRTs are
in units of consumption.




                                                        28
7.2       Long-Run Optimal Policy

7.2.1       Relation to Capital Taxation Literature

Proposition 1 stated that the long-run optimal dividend tax supports long-run efficiency in product
creation, which is the economy’s intertemporal margin. As noted in the Introduction, Albanesi
and Armenter (2007) recently generalized the well known zero-capital-taxation results of Chamley
(1986) and Judd (1985) by developing a set of sufficient conditions for a wide class of models that
guarantee the optimality of zero intertemporal distortions. Their sufficient conditions require con-
stant returns to scale in production. The aggregate production function of the BGM model displays
increasing returns to scale in product variety, thus the Albanesi-Armenter sufficient conditions do
not apply. Moreover, existing analytical results regarding zero intertemporal distortions apply only
to the steady state, as does our Proposition 1. The preceding numerical results showed, however,
that Ramsey optimal policy achieves intertemporal efficiency not only in the long run, but also at
all points along the business cycle.
       Our model does not include physical capital in the strict sense, but intertemporal efficiency
is nonetheless a primary concern of policy due to the asset nature of product varieties. In the
aggregate, variety is a form of capital. As Proposition 3 implies, product development is in fact
the means by which consumption is transformed across time and hence the means by which the
economy saves. The intertemporal efficiency insight of Ramsey analysis is thus not limited to a
narrow notion of physical capital, but instead applies to any accumulation decision.57 Thus, the
analogy offered by BGM and BGM2 that the stock of varieties is akin to the stock of capital in an
RBC economy is helpful not only for understanding positive business cycle analysis (as in BGM),
but also for understanding normative taxation analysis.


7.2.2       Relation to Optimal Investment in Monopolistic Models

With the preceding analogy, our results on long-run taxation of accumulation decisions in models of
monopolistic competition can be tightly related to the analysis of the optimal quantity of research
and development (R&D) by Benassy (1998) and the optimality of subsidizing capital accumulation
in Judd (1997, 2002). Benassy (1998) applied his own (Benassy, 1996) variety aggregator to the
Romer (1990) endogenous growth model to ask whether too much or too little R&D occurs in the
decentralized economy relative to the social optimum. The answer was that it depends on whether
the variety effect is stronger than or weaker than the markup effect, and he concluded that there
  57
       An early example of the generality of zero intertemporal distortions is Jones, Manuelli, and Rossi (1997), who
show that the insight also applies to human capital accumulation. Another recent example in which intertemporal
efficiency is a central goal of policy, despite the absence of physical capital, is the search-and-matching model of labor
markets in Arseneau and Chugh (2010).



                                                           29
is no basis for offering normative prescriptions due to lack of empirical evidence about the variety
effect. The BGM framework is based on the Romer (1990) endogenous growth environment, with
zero long-run growth. So, although Benassy (1998) does not go all the way to drawing policy
prescriptions and does not consider a business cycle analysis, our long-run results can be viewed as
a detrended version of his. If we were limited to the Benassy aggregation in forming our conclusions,
we would agree that there is no basis for recommending even a sign for the optimal dividend income
                         D
tax because the sign of τBEN ASSY = 1 − κ(θ − 1) depends on parameters. While plausible values
for θ can be pinned down by data, no such evidence exists for κ.
      Judd (1997, 2002) finds that it is optimal to subsidize capital accumulation when firms have
monopoly power. This prescription seems to conflict with our result that it is likely optimal to
tax accumulation of product varieties by monopolists. Judd’s finding is a consequence of the
familiar result that monopoly power implies a mark-down of the marginal q of capital relative
to the perfectly competitive outcome. A monopolistic firm has an incentive to underaccumulate
capital to reduce output supply and increase its price relative to perfect competition (Hayashi,
1982). In the BGM model, accumulation of products can exceed its welfare benefit, requiring a tax
to correct the distortion. Optimal policy may be turned in the direction of a subsidy if we assumed
a discrete set of firms that internalize the effect of their product creation on the price index (i.e., if
each firm internalized the profit destruction externality of new products). Much as in the capital
accumulation story, this would imply a mark-down in the valuation of additional products to the
firm (see Stebunovs, 2008). Because firms would, however, not also internalize the welfare benefit
of products, this would push results towards the optimality of a subsidy as in Judd (1997, 2002).58


7.2.3      Static Distortion

Much of our focus has been on the ability of the Ramsey government to implement intertemporal
efficiency, with particular emphasis on achieving efficient fluctuations. This does not mean that
Ramsey equilibria achieve the efficient level of activity. Figure 6 plots a few indicators of the long-
run inefficiency of Ramsey equilibria, which is unavoidable because the Ramsey government must
raise revenue using distortionary taxes. For brevity, results are shown only for the Dixit-Stiglitz
aggregation. The long-run outcomes in Figure 6 are traced out as the parameter θ varies between 3
and 20 (recall the benchmark setting was θ = 3.8), which achieves variation in the markup between
50 percent and 5 percent.
      Consistent with the preceding analysis, the upper left and upper middle panels of Figure 6 show
that long-run inefficiencies are loaded entirely on the static margin. This amounts to a distortion
in the long-run equilibrium quantity of labor; the inefficiently large quantity of labor in the Ramsey
 58
      For instance, a subsidy (rather than τ D = 0) would become optimal in the Dixit-Stiglitz case.



                                                          30
equilibrium (upper right panel) causes inefficient overproduction of varieties (lower middle panel).
However, the investment-to-GDP ratio (lower left panel) in the Ramsey equilibrium is efficient, and
this is the essence of maintaining zero distortions along the intertemporal product creation margin.
Finally, for completeness, the lower right panel of Figure 6 shows the Ramsey optimal labor income
tax as a function of θ.


7.3     Optimal Taxation Issues

7.3.1    Completeness of Tax System

An important issue in models of optimal taxation is whether or not the available tax instruments
constitute a complete tax system. The tax system is complete in our model. Establishing this
is important for two reasons. First, at a technical level, proving completeness reaffirms that the
Ramsey problem as formulated in Section 4 is indeed correct. As shown by Chari and Kehoe
(1999, p. 1680), Correia (1996), Armenter (2008), and many others, incompleteness of the tax
system requires imposing additional constraints that reflect the incompleteness. Second, it is well
understood in Ramsey theory that incomplete tax systems can lead to a wide range of “unnatural”
policy prescriptions in which the use of some instruments (in either the short run or the long
run) proxy for other, perhaps more natural, instruments. Demonstrating completeness therefore
establishes that none of our results is due to any policy instrument serving as an imperfect proxy
for other, unavailable, instruments.
   As Chari and Kehoe (1999, pp. 1679-1680) describe, an incomplete tax system is in place if,
for at least one pair of goods in the economy, the government has no policy instrument that, in
the decentralized economy, uniquely creates a wedge between the MRS of those goods and the
corresponding MRT. Based on the model-appropriate concepts of MRTs and wedges developed
                                                                               D , τ S ) constitutes a
in Sections 5 and 6, it is trivial to show that the set of instruments (τtH , τt+1|t t
complete tax system. Indeed, they constitute an “overcomplete” tax system.
   The argument is as follows: Proposition 3 proved that there are two margins of adjustment
in the economy. Completeness thus requires at least two policy instruments whose joint setting
induces a unique wedge in each of the two margins. The labor tax τtH coupled with either the state-
                                      D
contingent one-period-ahead schedule τt+1|t or τtS do exactly this. The labor tax appears only in
the static wedge (39), hence it uniquely creates a static distortion. Stated instead in terms of the
inverse mapping, τtH is uniquely determined given the Ramsey allocation. The two instruments
 D
τt+1|t and τtS both appear only in the intertemporal wedge (40), hence an infinite number of pairs
of values for the two create a given intertemporal distortion. Stated instead in terms of the inverse
mapping, one of the two must be fixed arbitrarily in order for the other to be uniquely determined
by the Ramsey allocation.


                                                 31
   A consequence of this “over-completeness” of the tax system is that the introduction of any
additional tax instruments into the environment necessarily implies (further) indeterminacy of the
decentralization of Ramsey allocations. From the point of view of theory, and putting aside positive
considerations, this may raise the question of why both the (state-contingent, one-period-ahead)
dividend tax and the development subsidy were both included in the first place. We allowed for
both as a check on the novel way in which we conducted the Ramsey optimization with respect to
                                               D
dividend taxes, in which the ex-ante schedule τt+1|t was technically the policy instrument, rather
than an ex-post value for τtD itself. As Table 4 showed, the Ramsey allocations were identical
in the Dixit-Stiglitz case. However, for translog preferences, even though the main insights carry
over from the Dixit-Stiglitz case, the Ramsey allocations were not identical under the two active
instruments. We discuss this point next.


7.3.2   Taxation of Initial Wealth and Dimensions of Transformation

Despite the completeness of the tax system, the fact that two distinct instruments are allowed to
tax (one at a time) the creation margin raises another subtle optimal taxation issue. As discussed in
Section 4, we adopted the timeless perspective, in which the deterministic Ramsey allocation before
period one (i.e., in periods zero and earlier) is assumed to be identical to the limiting (t → ∞)
Ramsey allocation. The practical consequence of this, which is standard when applying the timeless
concept, is that the initial wealth of households that appears in the PVIC (24) is endogenous to
the Ramsey solution,
   However, for the case of translog preferences, the long-run Ramsey allocation is not invariant
to which of the two instruments, τ D or τ S , is active. The two instruments affect the initial value of
wealth in different ways, which in turn leads to tax-specific values of the multiplier on (24) in the
Ramsey solution. If the dividend tax is active, it affects initial wealth by reducing the dividend flow
that households receive (provided τ D > 0, as we showed in Section 4.3 for the translog Ramsey
equilibrium). If the product creation instrument is active, it affects initial wealth by increasing
(ceteris paribus) the market value of stock (provided τ S < 0, as is the case in the translog Ramsey
                                    ρ(N )
equilibrium) because v = (1 − τ s ) µ(N ) fE .
   These two channels for affecting initial wealth are not isomorphic. Intuitively, one (τ S ) influ-
ences the value of owning a stock, whereas the other (τ D ) influences a one-time (period zero) flow
generated by the stock. These two channels by which the Ramsey government can influence initial
wealth imply different long-run Ramsey allocations, which is the reason why the results presented
in the lower panels of Table 4 depend on which instrument is active.
   An alternative to the timeless perspective would be to suppose that the government confiscates
ownership of the entire initial variety stock N0 . Such a one-time confiscation is indeed optimal from


                                                  32
the capital taxation perspective, the connections to which we emphasized above. If we use this as
the initial setting for policy (that is, effectively set N0 = 0 in the PVIC (24)), rather than the
timeless setting, the long-run allocations for the translog case are identical under either τ D or τ S
being active, and both Propositions 1 and 2 remain intact. Moreover, the fluctuations of Ramsey
allocations are then also identical under the two alternative active instruments in this case.
         This issue is not about an insufficiently rich set of tax instruments in a completeness sense. As
argued above, the tax system is complete in the usual sense understood in the Ramsey literature
that there is at least one unique tax instrument per independent margin of adjustment in the
private economy. Instead, the crux of the issue is that the initial wealth of the economy is not a
margin of adjustment for the private economy. However, initial wealth is a margin of adjustment
for the Ramsey government when it chooses the best equilibrium. Quantitatively, our main results
are affected very little by this issue. Nonetheless, a broader issue this observation raises for Ramsey
analysis of models that feature primitive frictions is that it may not be just whether an equilibrium
margin is affected uniquely by a given tax, but also how an equilibrium margin is affected by a
given tax that matters.
         Digging into this a bit based on the efficiency analysis in Section 5, it may be informative to think
                                                                                                          n        o
                                                                      D
in terms of “multidimensionality” in the IMRT. To see this, note how τt+1|t and τtS , τt+1
                                                                                       S                               affect
differently the components of the expression in square brackets in equation (40). This defines the
market-valued transformation of current consumption into future consumption. At market values,
                                                              (1−δ)µ(Nt )
foregoing one unit of consumption today yields              (1−τtS )ρ(Nt )fEt
                                                                                 new market-valued products, which
                                                                    S ) ρ(Nt+1 ) f
can be transformed directly back into consumption at the rate (1 − τt+1 µ(Nt+1 ) Et+1 in period
t + 1. Moreover, the monopoly market valuation of additional consumption in t + 1 generated
                                                                                           
                                        D ) 1−                      1            Ct+1 +Gt+1
by these products happens at rate (1 − τt+1|t                    µ(Nt+1 )           Nt+1          . These different ways in
which policy instruments affect different dimensions of the IMRT (the investment flow to create
the stock and the dividend generated by the stock) determine their different impacts on the PVIC.
Further exploration of the policy implications of “multidimensional” IMRTs is an interesting topic
for future research.59


8         Conclusion

In this paper, we studied optimal fiscal policy in an environment in which product varieties are the
result of purposeful, forward-looking investment decisions by firms. One main result is that the
long-run optimal dividend income tax rate is positive in the most empirically relevant and intuitively
appealing version of the model. Depending on the form of variety aggregation, it is also possible
    59
         Note that such “multidimensionality” does not arise in the basic RBC model, in which the only endogenous
component of intertemporal transformation is the marginal product of capital.


                                                         33
that a long-run dividend income subsidy is instead optimal; however, the optimality of a strictly
zero dividend tax is non-generic. In all cases, dividend taxes support zero intertemporal distortions.
The second main result is that keeping labor income tax rates constant (or virtually constant) at all
points along the business cycle is optimal. The Ramsey policy keeps static distortions completely
constant and intertemporal distortions exactly zero over time. Thus, the Ramsey principles of tax
and wedge smoothing apply, in ways that we established analytically and quantitatively. Together,
these results extend basic Ramsey principles beyond “first-generation” complete-markets Ramsey
models.
   A methodological contribution of the analysis was to develop precise characterizations of static
and intertemporal efficiency for models based on the framework in Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz
(2007). As this framework continues to be applied to a wider array of macro questions, especially
policy questions, the efficiency templates we developed should help guide understanding of the
results that emerge.




                                                 34
                                   Firms raise        Production occurs,
                                 funds for new        goods markets and
                                     product            labor markets
                                development on         (subject to labor
                                  stock market           taxes) clear        Number of varieties
              Nt                                                            available in period t+1: Nt+1
                                                                              Nt+1 = (1-δ)(Nt + NEt)




             Aggregate   Government    New product   Firms remit   Exit shock occurs:
                state      provides    development    dividends    δ(Nt +NEt) varieties
              realized     product                                     exit market
                         development
                          subsidies
Period t-1                                           Period t                                           Period t+1


                                         Figure 1: Timing of events.




                                                     35
            GDPR                     product creation                 markup                      profits
  1.5                           6                            0                         0.8

    1                                                   -0.05                          0.6
                                4
  0.5                                                      -0.1                        0.4
                                2
    0                                                   -0.15                          0.2

 -0.5                           0                          -0.2                          0
        0      20         40         0      20        40          0     20        40          0     20           40

  0.6                           2                            0                         0.8

  0.4                                                                                  0.6
                                1                       -0.02
  0.2                                                                                  0.4
                                0                       -0.04
    0                                                                                  0.2

 -0.2                           -1                      -0.06                            0
        0      20         40         0      20        40      0         20        40          0     20           40

    1                           5                           0.2                        0.2

                                0                          0.15                          0
    0
                                -5                          0.1                        -0.2
   -1
                               -10                         0.05                        -0.4

   -2                          -15                           0                         -0.6
        0      20         40         0      20        40          0     20        40          0     20           40


Figure 2: Impulse responses in exogenous policy model. First row: positive shock to productivity. Second
row: positive shock to government spending. Third row: positive shock to labor income tax rate. Dotted
lines denote Dixit-Stiglitz preferences, dashed lines denote translog preferences. Horizontal axes plot number
of quarters. Vertical axes plot percentage deviations from respective long-run allocation.




                                                     36
                                        τH    GDPR       CR      N      NE      vR       IR      H
                                               All shocks
                                       Dixit-Stiglitz aggregation
       Mean                           20%        0.19    0.13   1.20    0.03   0.74    0.02   0.20
       Volatility (SD%)             0.56%        2.44    1.00   1.12   16.09      0   16.09   2.63
       Relative Volatility              —           1    0.41   0.46    6.60      0    6.60   1.08
       Autocorrelation                0.65       0.63    0.74   0.93    0.61     —     0.61   0.60
       Correlation with GDPR          0.78          1    0.74   0.03    0.97     —     0.97   0.94
                                          Translog aggregation
       Mean                           20%        0.20    0.13   1.30    0.03   0.72    0.02   0.20
       Volatility (SD%)             0.56%        2.15    1.20   0.81   12.39   0.23   12.36   2.32
       Relative Volatility              —           1    0.56   0.38    5.76   0.11    5.74   1.08
       Autocorrelation                0.65       0.62    0.79   0.92    0.57   0.92    0.57   0.59
       Correlation with GDPR          0.77          1    0.70   0.14    0.93   0.14    0.94   0.92


                                         Shocks to Z and GR
                                       Dixit-Stiglitz aggregation
       Mean                           20%        0.19    0.13   1.20    0.03   0.74    0.02   0.20
       Volatility (SD%)                   0      1.41    0.82   0.53    6.89      0    6.89   0.93
       Relative Volatility                0         1    0.58   0.37    4.87      0    4.87   0.66
       Autocorrelation                  —        0.66    0.73   0.94    0.64     —     0.64   0.66
       Correlation with GDPR            —           1    0.72   0.11    0.96     —     0.96   0.88
                                          Translog aggregation
       Mean                           20%        0.20    0.13   1.30    0.03   0.72    0.02   0.20
       Volatility (SD%)                   0      1.30    0.92   0.37    5.19   0.11    5.18   0.86
       Relative Volatility                0         1    0.70   0.28    3.98   0.08    3.97   0.66
       Autocorrelation                  —        0.66    0.76   0.93    0.60   0.93    0.60   0.65
       Correlation with GDPR            —           1    0.66   0.24    0.92   0.24    0.93   0.82

Table 1: Business cycle dynamics in exogenous policy model. The “R” subscript denotes division by ρ to
remove the variety effect. Volatilities computed as standard deviation of cyclical components of HP-filtered
simulated data, except for tax rates, for which volatilities are reported in percentage points. Top panels:
shocks to productivity, government absorption, and labor income tax rate. Bottom panels: shocks only to
productivity and government absorption.



                                                    37
                                         τH     GDPR       CR       N     NE      vR      IR      H
                                            Shocks only to Z
                                         Dixit-Stiglitz aggregation
          Mean                          20%        0.19    0.13   1.20   0.03    0.74   0.02    0.20
          Volatility (SD%)                  0      1.26    0.80   0.51   6.62       0   6.62    0.61
          Relative Volatility               0         1    0.64   0.40   5.26       0   5.26    0.48
          Autocorrelation                 —        0.66    0.73   0.94   0.64      —    0.64    0.64
          Correlation with GDPR           —           1    0.95   0.11   0.98      —    0.98    0.93
                                           Translog aggregation
          Mean                          20%        0.19    0.13   1.30   0.03    0.72   0.02    0.20
          Volatility (SD%)                  0      1.10    0.90   0.34   4.77    0.10   4.77    0.42
          Relative Volatility               0         1    0.82   0.31   4.37    0.09   4.37    0.39
          Autocorrelation                 —        0.66    0.76   0.93   0.60    0.93   0.60    0.61
          Correlation with GDPR           —           1    0.94   0.24   0.94    0.24   0.95    0.84


                         Shocks only to Z, with ḠR = 0, τ H = 0, τ D = 0
                                         Dixit-Stiglitz aggregation
          Mean                              0      0.19    0.16   1.60   0.04    0.74   0.03    0.20
          Volatility (SD%)                  0      1.60    0.70   0.54   6.74       0   6.74    0.99
          Relative Volatility               0         1    0.44   0.33   4.21       0   4.21    0.62
          Autocorrelation                 —        0.67    0.74   0.95   0.66      —    0.66    0.66
          Correlation with GDPR           —           1    0.95   0.09   0.98      —    0.98    0.98
                                           Translog aggregation
          Mean                              0      0.19    0.16   1.53   0.04    0.75   0.03    0.20
          Volatility (SD%)                  0      1.42    0.82   0.40   5.40    0.10   5.39    0.73
          Relative Volatility               0         1    0.57   0.28   3.79    0.07   3.78    0.51
          Autocorrelation                 —        0.67    0.77   0.94   0.62    0.94   0.62    0.62
          Correlation with GDPR           —           1    0.93   0.22   0.95    0.22   0.95    0.95

Table 2: Business cycle dynamics in exogenous policy model conditional on shocks only to productivity.
The “R” subscript denotes division by ρ to remove the variety effect. Volatilities computed as standard
deviation of cyclical components of HP-filtered simulated data, except for tax rates, for which volatilities are
reported in percentage points. Top panels: ḠR , τ H , and τ D held constant at their long-run values. Bottom
panels: ḠR = τ H = τ D = 0.



                                                      38
                                                Static wedge
             1.4


                                                                        Dixit-Stiglitz
             1.2                                                        translog


              1



             0.8



             0.6



             0.4



             0.2



              0
               0         5        10       15        20        25           30        35       40

                                                             −uHt /uCt
Figure 3: Response of within-period wedge (defined as 1 −     Zt ρ(Nt ) )   to one-time, one-standard-deviation
positive shock to labor income tax rate. Dotted lines denote Dixit-Stiglitz preferences, dashed lines denote
translog preferences. Horizontal axes plot number of quarters. Vertical axes plot percentage deviations from
respective long-run allocation.




                                                    39
 Dixit-Stiglitz              Benassy               Translog

                  θ                          θ                        1
 µ(Nt ) = µ =   θ−1          µ(Nt ) = µ =   θ−1    µ(Nt ) = 1 +      σNt
                        1                                                       
 ρ(Nt ) =   Ntµ−1 =    θ−1
                      Nt     ρ(Nt ) = Ntκ          ρ(Nt ) = exp − 21 Ñ −Nt
                                                                     σ Ñ N
                                                                            , Ñ ≡ Mass(potential products)
                                                                             t
                                                                1
 (Nt ) = µ − 1              (Nt ) = κ            (Nt ) =   2σNt   = 12 (µ(Nt ) − 1)


Table 3: The markup, relative price of symmetric variety, and love of variety as functions of the number of
product varieties for the Dixit-Stiglitz, Benassy, and translog variety aggregators.




                                                      40
                                  τH        τD        τS   GDPR        CR       N     NE       vR     IR         H


                             Dixit-Stiglitz aggregation (τ D active, τ S inactive)


 Mean                          28.2%          0       —       0.34    0.21    2.87    0.07   0.74   0.05    0.36
 Volatility (SD%)                   0         0       —       0.99    0.38    0.15    3.57      0   3.57    0.34
 Relative Volatility                0         0       —          1    0.38    0.15    3.58      0   3.58    0.34
 Autocorrelation                   —        —         —       0.69    0.72    0.95    0.68     —    0.68    0.69
 Correlation with GDPR             —        —         —          1    0.79    0.06    0.96     —    0.96    0.82


                             Dixit-Stiglitz aggregation (τ S active, τ D inactive)
 Mean                          28.2%          0       —       0.34    0.21    2.87    0.07   0.74   0.05    0.36
 Volatility (SD%)                   0         0       —       0.99    0.38    0.15    3.57      0   3.57    0.34
 Relative Volatility                0         0       —          1    0.38    0.15    3.58      0   3.58    0.34
 Autocorrelation                   —        —         —       0.69    0.72    0.95    0.68     —    0.68    0.69
 Correlation with GDPR             —        —         —          1    0.79    0.06    0.96     —    0.96    0.82


                               Translog aggregation (τ D active, τ S inactive)


 Mean                          14.7%      50%         —       0.36    0.25    1.54    0.04   0.75   0.03    0.37
 Volatility (SD%)              0.43%    0.32%         —       0.93    0.48    0.15    3.76   0.04   3.76    0.42
 Relative Volatility               —        —         —          1    0.52    0.16    4.05   0.04   4.05    0.45
 Autocorrelation                 0.74     0.64        —       0.69    0.73    0.94    0.64   0.94   0.64    0.70
 Correlation with GDPR           0.58     0.82        —          1    0.58    0.21    0.86   0.21   0.86    0.57


                               Translog aggregation (τ S active, τ D inactive)
 Mean                          19.8%        —     -100%       0.35    0.24    1.52    0.04   1.50   0.06    0.36
 Volatility (SD%)              0.41%        —     0.14%       0.93    0.49    0.15    3.72   0.05   3.78    0.43
 Relative Volatility               —        —         —          1    0.52   0.156    4.00   0.06   4.06    0.46
 Autocorrelation                 0.74      —-       0.74      0.69    0.72    0.94    0.64   0.64   0.64    0.70
 Correlation with GDPR           0.56       —       0.49         1    0.56    0.21    0.85   0.79   0.85    0.57


Table 4: Optimal policy. The “R” subscript denotes division by ρ to remove the variety effect. Volatilities
computed as standard deviation of cyclical components of HP-filtered simulated data, except for tax rates, for
which volatilities are reported in percentage points. Shocks are to productivity and government purchases.


                                                     41
                     SD(%) of static wedge         SD(%) of intertemporal wedge              Optimal tax dynamics
 Aggregation      Exog. policy     Opt. policy     Exog. policy         Opt. policy     Vol. of τtH             D
                                                                                                       Vol. of τt+1|t (τtS )
 Dixit-Stiglitz             1.13               0           0.004                    0              0                  0 (0)
 Translog                   1.20               0           0.083                    0        0.41%        0.32% (0.14%)


Table 5: Volatility of static and intertemporal wedges in exogenous policy equilibria and Ramsey equilibria,
and volatility of taxes in Ramsey equilibria. Volatility of taxes reported in percentage points, volatility of
wedges reported as percentage deviation from long-run level. For exogenous policy results, shocks are to
productivity, government purchases, and labor income tax rate. For optimal policy results, shocks are to
productivity and government purchases.




                                                     42
                                labor tax rate                                dividend tax rate
             0.1                                            0.3

           0.08
                                                            0.2
           0.06

           0.04                                             0.1

           0.02
                                                              0
              0

           -0.02                                            -0.1
                0              10    20      30   40            0             10     20     30    40

                          -3                                             -3
                   x 10                                           x 10
              4                                              15


              3                                              10


              2                                               5


              1                                               0


              0                                              -5
               0               10    20      30   40           0              10     20     30    40


Figure 4: Impulse responses of Ramsey-optimal labor tax rate and dividend tax rate. First row: positive
shock to productivity. Second row: positive shock to government spending. Dotted lines denote Dixit-Stiglitz
preferences, crossed lines denote translog preferences. Horizontal axes plot number of quarters. Vertical axes
plot percentage point deviations from respective long-run policy rates.




                                                       43
                          GDPR                         product creation                         markup                    profits
                0.8                         3.5                                   0                           0.35

                0.7                           3                                                                0.3
                                                                               -0.01
                0.6                                                                                           0.25
                                            2.5
                0.5                                                                                            0.2
                                                                               -0.02
                                              2
                0.4                                                                                           0.15
                                            1.5
                                                                               -0.03
                0.3                                                                                            0.1
                                              1
                0.2                                                                                           0.05
                           DS                                                  -0.04
                0.1        translog         0.5                                                                  0

                 0                            0                                -0.05                          -0.05
                      0    20         40           0          20          40           0          20     40           0     20      40




                                                                                           -3
                                                                                       x 10
               0.35                         0.2                                   0                            0.6

                0.3                                                                                            0.5
                                           0.15                                 -0.5
               0.25                                                                                            0.4

                                            0.1                                   -1
                0.2                                                                                            0.3

               0.15                                                                                            0.2
                                           0.05                                 -1.5

                0.1                                                                                            0.1
                                              0                                   -2
               0.05                                                                                              0

                 0                         -0.05                                -2.5                           -0.1
                      0    20         40           0          20          40           0          20     40           0     20      40




Figure 5: Impulse responses in Ramsey equilibrium with dividend tax active and product creation subsidy
inactive. First row: positive shock to productivity. Second row: positive shock to government spending.
Dotted lines denote Dixit-Stiglitz preferences, crossed lines denote translog preferences. Horizontal axes plot
number of quarters. Vertical axes plot percentage deviations from respective long-run allocation.




                                                                44
             Static wedge                          -3
                                              x Intertemporal
                                                10            wedge                        h
   0.6                                   4                                  0.4
                           Efficient
   0.5                     Exog Policy
                           Ramsey      3                                   0.35
   0.4                                                 Efficient                            Efficient
                                                       Exog Policy                          Exog Policy
   0.3                                   2                                  0.3
                                                       Ramsey                               Ramsey
   0.2                                   1                                 0.25
   0.1
                                         0                                  0.2
     0

  -0.1                                   -1                                0.15
         0         10            20           0         10            20          0        10           20


                 I/GDP                                  N                             Optimal τh
   0.2                                   4                               0.24
                           Efficient                           Efficient
                           Exog Policy                         Exog Policy
                                                                         0.23
                           Ramsey                              Ramsey
  0.15                                   3
                                                                         0.22

                                                                           0.21
   0.1                                   2
                                                                            0.2

                                                                           0.19
  0.05                                   1
                                                                           0.18

     0                                   0                                 0.17
         0         10            20           0         10            20          0        10           20


Figure 6: Dixit-Stiglitz aggregation. Long-run outcomes as parameter θ varies in three different allocations:
efficient allocation, baseline exogenous policy model, and Ramsey equilibrium.




                                                      45
References

Aiyagari, S. Rao, Albert Marcet, Thomas J, Sargent, and Juha Seppala. 2002. “Op-
   timal Taxation without State-Contingent Debt.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 110, pp.
   1220-1254.
Armenter, Roc. 2008. “A Note on Incomplete Factor Taxation.” Journal of Public Economics,
   Vol. 92, pp. 2275-2281.
Arseneau, David M. and Sanjay K. Chugh. 2008.             “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy
   with Costly Wage Bargaining.” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 55, pp. 1401-1414.
Arseneau, David M. and Sanjay K. Chugh. 2010. “Tax Smoothing in Frictional Labor
   Markets.” University of Maryland.
Arseneau, David M., Sanjay K. Chugh, and Andre Kurmann. 2008. “Optimal Capital
   Taxation in an Economy with Capital Allocation Frictions.” University of Maryland.
Aruoba, S. Boragan and Sanjay K. Chugh. 2010.             “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy
   When Money is Essential.” Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 145, pp. 1618-1647.
Auerbach, Alan J. and J. R. Hines. 2002. “Taxation and Economic Efficiency. In Handbook
   of Public Economics, edited by Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, Vol. 3. Elsevier.
Barro, Robert J. 1979.       “On the Determination of the Public Debt.” Journal of Political
   Economy, Vol. 87, pp. 940-971.
Benassy, Jean-Pascal. 1996.         “Taste for Variety and Optimum Production Patterns in Mo-
   nopolistic Competition.” Economics Letters, Vol. 52, pp. 41-47.
Benassy, Jean-Pascal. 1998.         “Is There Always Too Little Research in Endogenous Growth
   With Expanding Product Variety?.” European Economic Review, Vol. 42, pp. 61-69.
Bernard, Andrew B., Stephen Redding, and Peter Schott. 2010. “Multi-Product Firms
   and Product Switching.” American Economic Review, Vol. 100, pp. 70-97.
Bilbiie, Florin O., Ippei Fujiwara, and Fabio Ghironi. 2009. “Optimal Monetary Policy
   with Endogenous Entry and Product Variety.” Mimeo, Paris School of Economics, Bank of
   Japan, and Boston College.
Bilbiie, Florin O., Fabio Ghironi, and Marc J. Melitz. 2007. “Endogenous Entry, Product
   Variety, and Business Cycles.” NBER Working Paper 13646.
Bilbiie, Florin O., Fabio Ghironi, and Marc J. Melitz. 2008a.           “Monetary Policy and
   Business Cycles with Endogenous Entry and Product Variety.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual
   2007.
Bilbiie, Florin O., Fabio Ghironi, and Marc J. Melitz. 2008b. “Monopoly Power and
   Endogenous Product Variety: Distortions and Remedies.” NBER Working Paper 14383.



                                               46
Broda, Christian and David E. Weinstein. 2010.              “Product Creation and Destruction:
   Evidence and Price Implications.” American Economic Review, Vol. 100, pp. 691-723.
Cacciatore, Matteo and Giuseppe Fiori. 2009. “Macroeconomic Effects of Product and La-
   bor Market (De)Regulation: The Long and Short of Reforming Europe.” Mimeo, HEC Montreal
   and Bank of Italy.
Chamley, Christophe. 1986.        “The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation in a Growing
   Economy.” Econometrica, Vol. 54, pp. 607-622.
Chari, V.V., Lawrence Christiano, and Patrick Kehoe. 1991.                 “Optimal Fiscal and
   Monetary Policy: Some Recent Results.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol. 23, pp.
   519-539.
Chari V. V., and Patrick J. Kehoe. 1999.             “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy.    In
   Handbook of Macroeconomics, edited by John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, Vol. 1C.
   Elsevier.
Chamberlin, Edward. 1950. “Product Heterogeneity and Public Policy.” American Economic
   Review, Vol. 40, pp. 85-92.
Croce, Max, T. Nguyen, and Lucas Schmid. 2011. “The Market Price of Fiscal Uncertainty.”
   Mimeo, North Carolina University and Duke University.
Dixit, Avinash K. and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1977. “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum
   Product Diversity.” American Economic Review, Vol. 67, pp. 297-308.
Epstein, Lawrence, and Stanley E. Zin. 1989.              “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the
   Temporal Behavior of Consumption Growth and Asset Returns I: A Theoretical Framework.”
   Econometrica, Vol. 57, pp. 937-969.
Etro, Federico and Andrea Colcago. 2011. “Endogenous Market Structures and Business
   Cycles.” The Economic Journal. Forthcoming.
Fahri, Emmanuel. 2009.       “Capital Taxation and Ownership when Markets are Incomplete..”
   Journal of Political Economy. Forthcoming.
Faia, Ester. 2009. “Oligopolistic Competition and Optimal Monetary Policy.” Goethe Univer-
   sity.
Feenstra, Robert C. 2003.        “A Homothetic Utility Function for Monopolistic Competition
   Models, Without Constant Price Elasticity.” Economics Letters, Vol. 78, pp. 79-86.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman. 1991. Innovation and Growth in the Global
   Economy. MIT Press.
Hayashi, Fumio. 1982.      “Tobin’s Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical Interpretation.”
   Econometrica, Vol. 50, pp. 213-224.
Jones, John B.. 2002. “Has Fiscal Policy Helped Stabilize the Postwar U.S. Economy?.” Journal



                                                47
   of Monetary Economics, Vol. 49, pp. 709-746.
Jones, Larry E., Rodolfo E. Manuelli, and Peter E. Rossi. 1997.               “On the Optimal
   Taxation of Capital Income.” Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 73, pp. 93-117.
Judd, Kenneth L. 1985. “Redistributive Taxation in a Simple Perfect Foresight Model.” Journal
   of Public Economics, Vol. 28, pp. 59-83.
Judd, Kenneth L. 1997. “The Optimal Tax Rate for Capital Income is Negative.” NBER Working
   Paper 6004.
Judd, Kenneth L. 2002.       “Capital Income Taxation with Imperfect Competition.” American
   Economic Review, Vol. 92, pp. 417-421.
Khan, Aubhik, Robert G. King and Alexander L. Wolman. 2003.                 “Optimal Monetary
   Policy.” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 70, pp. 825-860.
King, Robert G. and Sergio T. Rebelo. 1999.            “Resuscitating Real Business Cycles.   In
   Handbook of Macroeconomics, edited by John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, Vol. 1B.
   Elsevier.
Laffont, Jean-Jacques M. and Jean M. Tirole. 1993. A Theory of Incentives in Regulation
   and Procurement. MIT Press.
Lee, Yoonsee and Toshihiko Mukoyama. 2007. “Entry, Exit, and Plant-Level Dynamics over
   the Business Cycle.” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper 07-18.
Lewis, Vivien.    2009a.   “Optimal Monetary Policy and Firm Entry.” Mimeo, University of
   Ghent.
Lewis, Vivien. 2009b. “Product Diversity, Market Structure, and Optimal Taxation.” Mimeo,
   University of Ghent.
Lucas, Robert E. Jr. and Nancy L. Stokey. 1983.            “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy
   in an Economy Without Capital.” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 12, pp. 55-93.
Mankiw, Gregory N. and Michael D. Whinston. 1986.                 “Free Entry and Social Ineffi-
   ciency.” RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 17, pp. 48-58.
Mas-Colell, Andrew, Michael D. Whinston, and Jerry R. Green. 1995. Microeconomic
   Theory. Oxford University Press.
Romer, Paul M. 1990. “Endogenous Technological Change.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
   98, pp. S71-102.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie and Martin Uribe. 2004.            “Solving Dynamic General Equilib-
   rium Models Using a Second-Order Approximation to the Policy Function.” Journal of Eco-
   nomic Dynamics and Control, Vol. 28, pp. 755-775.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie and Martin Uribe. 2005. “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy
   in a Medium-Scale Macroeconomic Model.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005.



                                              48
Shao, Enchuan and Pedro Silos. 2009. “Firm Entry and Labor Market Dynamics.” Federal
   Reserve Bank of Atlanta.
Siu, Henry E. 2004.      “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy with Sticky Prices.” Journal of
   Monetary Economics, Vol. 51, pp. 576-607.
Spence, Michael. 1976.        “Product Selection, Fixed Costs, and Monopolistic Competition.”
   Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 43, pp. 217-235.
Stebunovs, Viktor. 2008. “Finance as a Barrier to Entry: U.S. Bank Deregulation and Business
   Cycles.” Mimeo, Federal Reserve Board. 13646.
Werning Ivan. 2007.     “Optimal Fiscal Policy with Redistribution.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
   nomics, Vol. 122, pp. 925-967.




                                               49
A     Derivation of Pricing Equation

Denominated in units of consumption, the representative firm’s profit function is:
                                      ∞
                                      X         h                                                     i
                     max         E0         Ξt|0 (1 − τtD )(ρt − mct )Nt qt − (1 − τtS )mct fEt NEt ,     (41)
                 ρt ,Nt+1 ,NEt
                                      t=0

in which ρt is the relative price of a symmetric variety, qt is the demand function, and we used
mct = wt /Zt . In period t, the firm faces the law of motion for the number of varieties it produces
and sells:
                                                Nt+1 = (1 − δ)(Nt + NEt ).                                (42)

    The first-order condition with respect to the relative price ρt of a symmetric variety is

                                                                    ∂qt                    ∂qt
                        (1 − τtD )Nt qt + ρt (1 − τtD )Nt               − mct (1 − τtD )Nt     = 0,       (43)
                                                                    ∂ρt                    ∂ρt
from which a simple representation of the optimal pricing condition for a symmetric variety can be
obtained. Canceling the (1 − τtD )Nt terms and rearranging gives

                                                         ∂qt       ∂qt
                                                    ρt       = mct     − qt .                             (44)
                                                         ∂ρt       ∂ρt
Isolating ρt ,
                                                                              1
                                                    ρt = mct −            1 ∂qt
                                                                                     .                    (45)
                                                                        q(ρt ) ∂ρt

Multiplying and dividing the denominator of the second term on the right hand side by ρt ,

                                                                              1
                                                    ρt = mct −         ρt ∂qt 1
                                                                                         .                (46)
                                                                      q(ρt ) ∂ρt ρt

Rewriting,
                                                                           ρt
                                                    ρt = mct −           ρt ∂qt
                                                                                     .                    (47)
                                                                        q(ρt ) ∂ρt
                  ρt ∂qt
Defining ζt ≡    q(ρt ) ∂ρt   as the price elasticity of demand for a symmetric variety, we have

                                                                 1
                                                                     
                                                     ρt       1+          = mct .                         (48)
                                                                 ζt
The optimal relative price of a symmetric variety is thus

                                                                    ζt
                                                                         
                                                     ρt =                mct ,                            (49)
                                                                  1 + ζt
which is in general an endogenously time-varying markup over real marginal cost. Denoting by µt
                                 ζt
the gross markup, µt ≡          1+ζt ,
                                                           ρt = µt mct .                                  (50)


                                                                   50
B      Competitive Equilibrium

The most straightforward definition of equilibrium is that it is a set of 15 endogenous equilib-
rium processes {Ct , Ht , hEt , ht , Nt+1 , NEt , wt , vt , µt , ρt , ξt , mct , qt , dt , Bt+1 }∞
                                                                                                 t=0 , for given processes
{Zt , Gt , τtH , τtD , τtS , fEt }, that satisfy the conditions listed below. The equilibrium conditions are
the consumption-leisure optimality condition:

                                                    uHt
                                                −       = (1 − τtH )wt ;                                                 (51)
                                                    uCt
the relation between the marginal cost of production and the real wage:

                                                                  wt
                                                       mct =         ;                                                   (52)
                                                                  Zt
the stock demand condition:
                                                 n         h                          io
                                                           D
                               vt = (1 − δ)Et Ξt+1|t (1 − τt+1 )dt+1 + vt+1                ,                             (53)

                   βuCt+1
where Ξt+1|t ≡      uCt ;   the optimal pricing condition for a symmetric variety:

                                                       ρt = µt mct ;                                                     (54)

the relation between the gross markup and the price elasticity of demand:

                                                                 ξt
                                                      µt =            ;                                                  (55)
                                                               1 + ξt
the product creation condition:

           wt                                                                                         wt+1
                                                                                                                 
 (1 − τtS ) fEt    = (1 − δ)Et Ξt+1|t (1 −            D
                                                     τt+1 ) (ρt+1   − mct+1 ) qt+1 + (1 −       S
                                                                                               τt+1 )      fEt+1        ; (56)
           Zt                                                                                         Zt+1
the law of motion for the number of product varieties:

                                            Nt+1 = (1 − δ)(Nt + NEt );                                                   (57)

total consumption output:
                                                  C t + G t = N t ρt q t ;                                               (58)

the aggregate consumption-units resource constraint:

                                          Ct + Gt + ρt NEt fEt = ρt Zt Ht ;                                              (59)

the condition that pins down hours worked in the product development sector:

                                                                  fEt
                                                       hEt =          ;                                                  (60)
                                                                  Zt


                                                             51
labor-market clearing:
                                                         Ht = hEt NEt + ht Nt ;                                                                (61)

per-variety dividends:
                                                             dt = (ρt − mct ) qt ;                                                             (62)

and the government budget constraint (in which the market clearing condition xt = 1 is substi-
tuted):
                                                                 wt
                              τtH wt Ht + τtD dt Nt + Bt+1 = Gt + Rt Bt + τtS
                                                                    fEt NEt .                (63)
                                                                 Zt
    Assumptions on exogenous processes were described in Section 3 in the text, and the parametric
forms adopted for the variety aggregator, which determine the functional relationship between Nt
and ρt and µt , appear in Section 4.3. From here on, we emphasize this relationship by writing
ρ(Nt ) and µ(Nt ).


B.1       Compact Representation of Equilibrium

To characterize the equilibrium in the compact form presented in Section 2.5, combine the above
conditions as follows. Conditions (53) and (56) imply vt = (1 − τts ) w
                                                                      Zt fEt , which from here on
                                                                       t


replaces (53) in our analysis; this justifies the inclusion of condition (17) as part of the definition
of competitive equilibrium in the text.
                                      Ct +Gt
    Next, substitute qt =             Nt ρ(Nt )   in the product creation condition to express it as:
             ρ(Nt )                                                          ρ(Nt+1 )        Ct+1 + Gt+1                          ρ(Nt+1 )
                                      n       h                                                                                                io
(1 − τtS )          fEt = (1 − δ)Et                 D
                                       Ξt+1|t (1 − τt+1 ) ρ(Nt+1 ) −                                                      S
                                                                                                                  + (1 − τt+1 )            fEt+1        ,
             µ(Nt )                                                          µ(Nt+1 )        Nt+1 ρ(Nt+1 )                        µ(Nt+1 )
                                                                                                                                                   (64)
                                                                               ρ(Nt )
in which we have also made the substitution mct =                              µ(Nt ) .   Canceling ρ(Nt+1 ) terms on the right-
hand side, we have
         ρ(Nt )                                                               1                   Ct+1 + Gt+1                                ρ(Nt+1 )
                                                                                                                                                        
(1−τtS )        fEt      = (1−δ)Et Ξt+1|t (1 −                  D
                                                               τt+1 )   1−                                                  + (1 −     S
                                                                                                                                      τt+1 )          fEt+1        .
         µ(Nt )                                                            µ(Nt+1 )                  Nt+1                                    µ(Nt+1 )
                                                                                                                                               (65)
Multiplying by µ(Nt ), we have a compact representation of the product creation condition
                                                                    µ(Nt )          Ct+1 + Gt+1                            µ(Nt )
                               n          h                                                                                                     io
(1−τtS )ρ(Nt )fEt = (1−δ)Et                   D
                                 Ξt+1|t (1 − τt+1 ) µ(Nt ) −                                                      S
                                                                                                          + (1 − τt+1 )            ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1    ,
                                                                   µ(Nt+1 )            Nt+1                               µ(Nt+1 )
                                                                                                                                               (66)

which is condition (16) in the text.
    To obtain the static equilibrium condition, use the relation wt = Zt mct in the consumption-
                                                                                             ρ(Nt )
leisure optimality condition, and then use the relation mct =                                µ(Nt )   to eliminate marginal cost. The
resulting expression for the equilibrium consumption-leisure margin is
                                                         uHt   (1 − τtH )
                                                    −        =            Zt ρ(Nt ),                                                           (67)
                                                         uCt     µ(Nt )
which is condition (15) in the text.

                                                                        52
B.2     Consumption Resource Constraint

To derive the representation of the aggregate consumption-units resource constraint above and
presented in (19), sum the flow household budget constraint and the flow government budget
constraint, which gives

                                              wt
                              Ct + Gt + τtS      fEt NEt + vt NEt = wt Ht + dt Nt .               (68)
                                              Zt
Substitute into this expression the equilibrium expression for (per-product) dividends, dt = (ρt −
mct )qt ,
                                       wt
                       Ct + Gt + τtS      fEt NEt + vt NEt = wt Ht + (ρt − mct )qt Nt .           (69)
                                       Zt
                 Ct +Gt
Next, use qt =    Nt ρt ;   canceling terms leaves

                                   wt                                        Ct + Gt
                                                                                           
                  Ct + Gt + τtS       fEt NEt + vt NEt = wt Ht + (ρt − mct )         .            (70)
                                   Zt                                           ρt

Next, using the condition vt = (1 − τtS ) w
                                          Zt fEt ,
                                           t



                                     wt                             Ct + Gt
                                                                                      
                            Ct + Gt + fEt NEt = wt Ht + (ρt − mct )         ;                     (71)
                                     Zt                                ρt
and substituting wt /Zt = mct = ρ(Nt )/µ(Nt ):

                                ρ(Nt )                            ρ(Nt )             Ct + G t
                                                                                         
                  Ct + Gt +            fEt NEt = wt Ht + ρ(Nt ) −                             .   (72)
                                µ(Nt )                            µ(Nt )              ρ(Nt )
Canceling terms on the right hand-side:

                                 ρ(Nt )                         1
                                                                            
                      Ct + G t +        fEt NEt = wt Ht + 1 −        (Ct + Gt ) ;                 (73)
                                 µ(Nt )                       µ(Nt )

and canceling the (Ct + Gt ) that appears on both sides:

                                    1                 ρ(Nt )
                                         (Ct + Gt ) +        NEt fEt = wt Ht .                    (74)
                                  µ(Nt )              µ(Nt )
                                      ρ(Nt )
Next, recognize that wt = Zt mct = Zt µ(N t)
                                             , which gives:

                                 1                 ρ(Nt )              ρ(Nt )
                                      (Ct + Gt ) +        NEt fEt = Zt        Ht .                (75)
                               µ(Nt )              µ(Nt )              µ(Nt )

Finally, multiplying by µ(Nt ) gives:

                                   Ct + Gt + ρ(Nt )NEt fEt = ρ(Nt )Zt Ht ,                        (76)

which emphasizes that ρ(Nt ) is a primitive of the economy.




                                                        53
C        Derivation of Present-Value Implementability Constraint

The derivation of the present-value implementability constraint (PVIC) follows that laid out in
Lucas and Stokey (1983) and Chari and Kehoe (1999). Start with the household flow budget
constraint:
                                                 X 1          j
        Ct + vt xt+1 (Nt + NEt ) +                           Bt+1 = (1 − τtH )wt Ht + Bt + [vt + (1 − τtD )dt ]xt Nt .                           (77)
                                                  j   Rtj

Multiply each term by β t uCt (which, in equilibrium, is the shadow value to the household at time
zero of a unit of period-t wealth) and, conditional on the information set at time zero, sum the
sequence of budget constraints from t = 0...∞ to arrive at:
           ∞                             ∞                                                 ∞ X
           X                             X                                                 X                     1   j
     E0          β t uCt Ct + E0               β t uCt vt xt+1 (Nt + NEt ) + E0                        β t uCt    j Bt+1
           t=0                           t=0                                               t=0 j                 Rt
                      ∞
                      X                                              ∞
                                                                     X                               ∞
                                                                                                     X
         = E0               β t uCt (1 − τtH )wt Ht + E0                   β t uCt Rt Bt + E0              β t uCt [vt + (1 − τtD )dt ]xt Nt .
                      t=0                                            t=0                             t=0

    Now begin to impose equilibrium conditions on this present-value budget constraint. For ease of
notation, drop the E0 term, but it is understood that all terms are conditional on the information
set at time zero. First impose the sequence of stock-market clearing conditions xs = 1 ∀s, which
gives:
                 ∞                        ∞                                       ∞ X
                 X                        X                                       X                    1  j
                       β t uCt Ct +             β t uCt vt (Nt + NEt ) +                   β t uCt     j Bt+1
                 t=0                      t=0                                     t=0 j               Rt
                            ∞
                            X                                         ∞
                                                                      X                    ∞
                                                                                           X
                      =            β t uCt (1 − τtH )wt Ht +                β t uCt Bt +         β t uCt [vt + (1 − τtD )dt ]Nt .
                            t=0                                       t=0                  t=0

Next, in the third summation on the left-hand side, substitute the sequence of state-contingent
bond Euler equations, uCs = βRsj uC j , ∀j, s:
                                                        s+1

                 ∞                        ∞                                       ∞ X
                                                                                                       j
                 X                        X                                       X
                       β t uCt Ct +             β t uCt vt (Nt + NEt ) +                   β t+1 uC j Bt+1
                                                                                                        t+1
                 t=0                      t=0                                     t=0 j
                            ∞
                            X                                         ∞
                                                                      X                    ∞
                                                                                           X
                      =            β t uCt (1 − τtH )wt Ht +                β t uCt Bt +         β t uCt [vt + (1 − τtD )dt ]Nt .
                            t=0                                       t=0                  t=0
              P             j
The term          j   uC j Bt+1 can be expressed as the payoff of a synthetic risk-free bond, uCt+1 Bt+1 ,
                          t+1
which then allows canceling terms in the third summation on the left-hand side with their counter-
part terms in the second summation on the right-hand side, leaving only the time-zero bond-return
term:
     ∞                    ∞                                  ∞                                 ∞
     X                    X                                  X                                 X
           β t uCt Ct +           β t uCt vt (Nt + NEt ) =         β t uCt (1 − τtH )wt Ht +         β t uCt [vt + (1 − τtD )dt ]Nt + uC0 B0 .   (78)
     t=0                    t=0                              t=0                               t=0



                                                                             54
Next, in the first summation on the right-hand side, use the sequence of consumption-leisure opti-
mality conditions, −uHs = uCs (1 − τsH )ws , ∀s, and move this summation to the left-hand side:
                ∞
                X                    ∞
                                     X                      ∞
                                                            X                                ∞
                                                                                             X
                      β t uCt Ct +          β t uHt Ht +          β t uCt vt (Nt + NEt ) =         β t uCt [vt + (1 − τtD )dt ]Nt + uC0 B0 .           (79)
                t=0                   t=0                   t=0                              t=0

                                                                                                                n            h                                 io
                                                                                                                    βuCs+1             D )d
      Next, use the sequence of stock demand conditions, vs = (1−δ)Es                                                uCs         (1 − τs+1 s+1 + vs+1           ,
∀s, to substitute out the uCs vs terms in the third summation on the left-hand side, which yields:
∞
X                      ∞
                       X
      β t uCt Ct +           β t uHt Ht
t=0                    t=0
                      ∞
                      X                      h                                  i                         ∞
                                                                                                          X
       +(1 − δ)             β t+1 uCt+1 vt+1 + (1 − τt+1
                                                     D
                                                         )dt+1 (Nt + NEt ) =                                    β t uCt [vt + (1 − τtD )dt ]Nt + uC0 B0 .
                      t=0                                                                                 t=0

                                                                                              Ns+1
Substituting the sequence of equilibrium laws of motion                                       1−δ      = Ns + NE,s , ∀s, in the third sum-
mation on the left-hand side gives:
∞
X                     ∞
                      X                    ∞
                                           X                                                            ∞
                                                                                                      X
       β t uCt Ct +         β t uHt Ht +          β t+1 uCt+1 vt+1 + (1 − τt+1
                                                                           D
                                                                               )dt+1 Nt+1 =                   β t uCt [vt + (1 − τtD )dt ]Nt + uC0 B0 . (80)
 t=0                  t=0                   t=0                                                         t=0


Canceling terms in the third summation on the left-hand side with their counterpart terms in the
summation on the right-hand side leaves only the time-zero stock-payoff term:
                              ∞
                              X                       ∞
                                                      X
                                    β t uCt Ct +            β t uHt Ht = uC0 [v0 + (1 − τ0D )d0 ]N0 + uC0 B0 .                                        (81)
                              t=0                     t=0

      Re-introducing the expectation E0 operator, the PVIC is:
                                    ∞
                                    X
                              E0          β t (uCt Ct + uHt Ht ) = uC0 [v0 + (1 − τ0D )d0 ]N0 + uC0 B0 ,                                              (82)
                                    t=0

which is condition (24) in the main text.




                                                                               55
D      Optimal Long-Run Policy

Here we prove Propositions 1 and 2. As stated in Section 4.1, the Ramsey problem is to maximize:
                                                           ∞
                                                           X
                                                      E0         β t u(Ct , Ht )                                                     (83)
                                                           t=0

subject to the sequence of consumption resource constraints:

                                         Ct + Gt + ρ(Nt )NEt fEt = ρ(Nt )Zt Ht ,                                                     (84)

laws of motion for the measure of product varieties:

                                              Nt+1 = (1 − δ)(Nt + NEt ),                                                             (85)

the sequence of equilibrium product creation conditions:
                                                                  µ(Nt )         Ct+1 + Gt+1                        µ(Nt )
                              n      h                                                                                               io
(1−τtS )ρ(Nt )fEt = (1−δ)Et                 D
                               Ξt+1|t (1 − τt+1|t ) µ(Nt ) −                                               S
                                                                                                   + (1 − τt+1 )            ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1   ,
                                                                 µ(Nt+1 )           Nt+1                           µ(Nt+1 )
                                                                                                                                       (86)

and the PVIC:
                         ∞
                         X
                    E0         β t (uCt Ct + uHt Ht ) = uC0 [v0 + (1 − τ0D )d0 ]N0 + uC0 R0 B0 .                                     (87)
                         t=0

                                                                   D
The Ramsey choice variables are Ct , Ht , Nt+1 , NEt , and either τt+1|t (refer to the discussion in
Section 4.1) or τtS for t > 1. Associate the sequences of multipliers λ1,t , λ2,t , λ3,t with the first
three sequences of constraints, and the multiplier ξ with the PVIC. Although we of course must
consider the fully dynamic Ramsey problem to consider any aspect of the Ramsey equilibrium, our
analytical results are only for the deterministic Ramsey steady state. Thus, here we can suppose
the environment is deterministic and drop all expectation operators.
                                                      D
    The first-order condition with respect to either τt+1|t or τtS (again recall that only one of these
two instruments can be active) immediately implies that λ3 = 0 in the deterministic Ramsey steady
state. This is a very useful result because it greatly simplifies the analysis of the rest of the Ramsey
steady state. Intuitively, the result λ3 = 0 says that in the Ramsey equilibrium (though, note,
not in any arbitrary equilibrium), the product creation condition does not constrain the allocation.
Stated another way, the Ramsey government ensures efficiency in the long run along the product
creation margin. We rely on the long run result that λ3 = 0 in what follows.
    To prove results for the long-run optimal dividend income tax and product creation subsidy,
we need to consider only the Ramsey first-order conditions with respect to Nt+1 and NEt . These
first-order conditions are, respectively:

                −λ2,t + β λ1,t+1 ρ0 (Nt+1 ) (Zt+1 Ht+1 − NEt+1 fEt+1 ) + (1 − δ)λ2,t+1 = 0
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                     (88)

                                                                  56
and:
                                   −λ1,t ρ(Nt )fEt + (1 − δ)λ2,t = 0.                                                (89)

We have ignored any derivatives through the product creation condition because, as just shown,
the Lagrange multiplier on this constraint is zero in the deterministic steady state. Then, using
exactly the same set of algebraic manipulations as in Appendix E, these two conditions can be
expressed as:

                                                            Ct+1 + Gt+1
                                                                                                        
             λ1,t ρ(Nt )fEt = β(1 − δ) λ1,t+1      (Nt+1 )                               + ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1        .   (90)
                                                               Nt+1
     In the deterministic steady state, we have that the Ramsey-optimal level of product creation is
characterized by:                                                                  
                                                            C+G
                                1             (N )          N        + ρ(N )fE
                                  = (1 − δ)                                          ,                             (91)
                                β                           ρ(N )fE

which is the long-run efficiency condition (38) that appears in the main text. Thus, the Ramsey
equilibrium achieves the Pareto optimum along the product creation margin in the long run.
     To decentralize this, refer to the deterministic steady-state version of the product creation
condition:                                                                               
                                                                            C+G
                            1                (1 − τ D )(µ(N ) − 1)           N
                              = (1 − δ)                                              + 1 .                         (92)
                            β                       (1 − τ S )ρ(N )fE

If the product creation subsidy is inactive (τ S = 0), comparison of these last two expressions implies
that the long-run optimal dividend income tax rate is characterized by

                                                          (N )
                                             1 − τD =             ,                                                  (93)
                                                        µ(N ) − 1
or
                                                          (N )
                                             τD = 1 −             .                                                  (94)
                                                        µ(N ) − 1
This proves Proposition 1.
     Alternatively, if the dividend tax is inactive (τ D = 0), comparison of the two expressions implies
that the long-run product creation subsidy rate is characterized by

                                                        µ(N ) − 1
                                             1 − τS =             ,                                                  (95)
                                                          (N )
or
                                                        µ(N ) − 1
                                             τS = 1 −             .                                                  (96)
                                                          (N )
This proves Proposition 2.




                                                       57
E       Efficient Allocations

The social planning problem is to choose state-contingent functions for {Ct , Ht , Nt+1 , NEt } to max-
imize
                                                 ∞
                                                 X
                                            E0         β t u(Ct , Ht )                                 (97)
                                                 t=0
subject to
                                  Ct + Gt + ρ(Nt )NEt fEt = ρ(Nt )Zt Ht                                (98)

and
                                       Nt+1 = (1 − δ)(Nt + NEt ).                                      (99)

The social planner internalizes the effect of the number of varieties on the relative price.
     Let φt denote the Lagrange multiplier on the consumption-units resource constraint and µt
denote the Lagrange multiplier on the law of motion for the number of product varieties. The
first-order conditions with respect to Ct , Ht , NEt , and Nt+1 are, respectively,

                                                uCt − φt = 0,                                      (100)

                                           uHt + φt ρ(Nt )Zt = 0,                                  (101)

                                     −φt ρ(Nt )fEt + (1 − δ)µt = 0,                                (102)

and
               −µt + βEt φt+1 ρ0 (Nt+1 ) [Zt+1 Ht+1 − NEt+1 fEt+1 ] + (1 − δ)µt+1 = 0.
                          
                                                                                                   (103)

     Conditions (100) and (101) imply
                                                uHt
                                            −       = Zt ρ(Nt ).                                   (104)
                                                uCt
This is the efficiency condition (32) that appears in the main text.
     Solving condition (102) for µt and substituting φt = uCt from condition (100), we have
                                                   uCt ρ(Nt )fEt
                                            µt =                 .                                 (105)
                                                       1−δ
Using the time-t and time-t + 1 versions of this expression in condition (103) gives

    uCt ρ(Nt )fEt = (1 − δ)βEt uCt+1 ρ0 (Nt+1 ) (Zt+1 Ht+1 − NEt+1 fEt+1 ) + ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1
                                                                                           
                                                                                                 . (106)

Next, apply several definitions and identities to simplify this expression. Using hEt = fEt /Zt , this
can be re-written as

    uCt ρ(Nt )fEt = (1 − δ)βEt uCt+1 ρ0 (Nt+1 ) (Zt+1 Ht+1 − NEt+1 Zt+1 hEt+1 ) + ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                   (107)

                                                        58
Next, by the condition Ht = ht Nt + hEt NEt , this can be re-written as

           uCt ρ(Nt )fEt = (1 − δ)βEt uCt+1 ρ0 (Nt+1 )Zt+1 Nt+1 ht+1 + ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                          .       (108)

in which, recall, ht is the labor hired per product in the goods producing sector. Next, use the
goods production technology and market clearing, qt = Zt ht , to express this as

              uCt ρ(Nt )fEt = (1 − δ)βEt uCt+1 ρ0 (Nt+1 )qt+1 Nt+1 + ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                  .               (109)

                                                          Ct +Gt
Next, using the per-variety relationship qt =             Nt ρ(Nt ) ,   the preceding can be expressed as

                                                                  Ct+1 + Gt+1
                                                                                                                  
    uCt ρ(Nt )fEt = (1 − δ)βEt uCt+1 ρ0 (Nt+1 )                                 Nt+1 + ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1                          .   (110)
                                                                  Nt+1 ρ(Nt+1 )

The variety effect expressed in elasticity form is (Nt ) ≡ ρ0 (Nt ) ρ(N
                                                                      Nt
                                                                         t)
                                                                            ; using this, we can again
re-express the preceding as

                                                           Ct+1 + Gt+1
                                                                                                           
       uCt ρ(Nt )fEt = (1 − δ)βEt uCt+1           (Nt+1 )                                   + ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1          .           (111)
                                                              Nt+1
Dividing by uCt , we have

                                       βuCt+1          Ct+1 + Gt+1
                                                                                                              
           ρ(Nt )fEt = (1 − δ)Et              (Nt+1 )                                        + ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1             .       (112)
                                        uCt               Nt+1
which is the intertemporal efficiency condition (33) that appears in the main text.


E.1    MRS-MRT Representation of Efficiency

The efficiency conditions (104) and (112) can be described in terms of appropriately defined concepts
of marginal rates of substitution (MRS) and corresponding marginal rates of transformation (MRT).
Defining MRS and MRT in a model-appropriate way allows us to describe efficiency in terms of
the basic principle that efficient allocations are characterized by MRS = MRT conditions along all
optimization margins.
   Consider the static efficiency condition (104). The left-hand side is clearly the within-period
MRS between consumption and labor (leisure) in any period t. The right-hand side is thus the
corresponding MRT between consumption and labor.
   We can similarly define MRS and MRT relevant for intertemporal efficiency. To do so, first
restrict attention to the non-stochastic case because it makes clearer the separation of components
of preferences from components of technology (due to endogenous covariance terms implied by the
expectation operator). The non-stochastic intertemporal efficiency condition can be expressed as
                                                                                                   
                                                                  Ct+1 +Gt+1
                      uCt     (1 − δ) (Nt+1 )                       Nt+1          + ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1
                            =                                                                             .                       (113)
                     βuCt+1                                       ρ(Nt )fEt

                                                              59
The left-hand side of (113) is clearly the intertemporal MRS (abbreviated IMRS) between Ct and
Ct+1 . We claim that the right-hand side is the corresponding intertemporal MRT (abbreviated
IMRT). Applying this definition to the fully stochastic condition (112), we can thus express in-
tertemporal efficiency as
                                                                                     
                                                    Ct+1 +Gt+1
                      
                           (1 − δ) (Nt+1 )                          + ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1
                                                                                                (               )
             βu
                Ct+1                                   Nt+1
                                                                                                 IM RTCt ,Ct+1
   1 = Et                                                                                = Et                   .
               uCt                                 ρ(Nt )fEt                                    IM RSCt ,Ct+1
                                                                                                                (114)
   Rather than take the efficiency conditions (104) and (113) as prima facie evidence that the
right-hand sides must be, respectively, the static MRT and intertemporal MRT, these MRTs can be
derived from the primitives of the environment (i.e., independent of the context of any optimiza-
tion), to which we now turn.


E.2    Proof of Proposition 3: Transformation Frontier and Derivation of MRTs

Based only on the primitives of the environment — that is, independent of the context of any
optimization — we now prove that the right-hand sides of (104) and (113) are, respectively, the
model-appropriate concepts of the static MRT and deterministic IMRT. Doing so thus proves
Proposition 3 in the main text.
   Consider the period-t consumption resource constraint and law of motion for variety: Ct + Gt +
ρ(Nt )fEt NEt = ρ(Nt )Zt Ht and Nt+1 = (1 − δ)(Nt + NEt ). Solving the former for the number of
                                      ρ(Nt )Zt Ht −Ct −Gt
new products created, NEt =                 ρ(Nt )fEt     ,   and substituting in the latter gives

                                                                     (1 − δ) (ρ(Nt )Zt Ht − Ct − Gt )
             Υ(Ct , Ht , Nt+1 ; .) ≡ Nt+1 − (1 − δ)Nt −                                               = 0,      (115)
                                                                                ρ(Nt )fEt

which is defined as the period-t transformation frontier. The function Υ(.) is a more general
notion of a transformation, or resource, frontier than either the goods resource constraint or the
law of motion for variety alone because Υ(.) jointly describes two technologies in the economy: the
technology that transfers variety over time and, conditional on the stock of varieties, the technology
that creates output, in the form of existing goods and new ones. The dependence of Υ(.) on (among
other arguments) Ct and Ht is highlighted because the period-t utility function is defined over Ct
and Ht .
   By the implicit function theorem, the static MRT between consumption and leisure is thus

                                                        ΥHt
                                                    −       = Zt ρ(Nt ),                                        (116)
                                                        ΥCt
which formalizes, independent of the social planning problem, the notion of the static MRT on the
right-hand side of the efficiency condition (104) and presented in Proposition 3.


                                                              60
       For use in deriving the IMRT below, note that the implicit function theorem also allows us to
              ∂Nt+1          Υ                                                    1−δ
compute        ∂Ct    = − ΥNCt . The partials are ΥCt =                         ρ(Nt )fEt    and ΥNt+1 = 1. Thus,
                                 t+1

                                                   ΥCt    ∂Nt+1
                                                                       = −
                                                   ΥNt     ∂Ct
                                                     1−δ
                                             = −             ,                                (117)
                                                   ρ(Nt )fEt
which gives the marginal effect on the period-t + 1 stock of varieties of a change in period-t con-
sumption. This effect has intertemporal consequences because Nt+1 is the stock of varieties entering
period t + 1; because (115) cannot be solved explicitly for Nt+1 , the effect must be accounted for
implicitly.
  Next, define the transformation frontier that links period t and period-t + 1
                                                      (1 − δ) (ρ(Nt+1 )Zt+1 Ht+1 − Ct+1 − Gt+1 )
Γ(Ct+1 , Nt+2 , Ct , Nt+1 ; .) = Nt+2 − (1 − δ)Nt+1 −                                            = 0.
                                                                    ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1
                                                                                                 (118)
In form, the function Γ(.) is the same as the function Υ(.), but, for the purpose at hand, it is useful
to view it as a generalization of Υ(.) in that Γ(.) is explicitly viewed as a function of period t and
period t + 1 allocations.60 The two-period transformation frontier Γ(.) has partials with respect to
Ct+1 and Ct
                                                                          1−δ
                                                           ΓCt+1 =                                                      (119)
                                                                       ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1
and
                       ∂Nt+1                  ρ0 (Nt+1 )Zt+1 Ht+1 ρ(Nt+1 )Zt+1 Ht+1 − Ct+1 − Gt+1 ρ0 (Nt+1 )fEt+1
                                                                                                                              
ΓCt      =    −(1 − δ)                 1+                          −
                        ∂Ct                       ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1               ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1            ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1
                       ∂Nt+1
                                                  0
                                                  ρ (Nt+1 )
                                                              
                                                                            ρ(Nt+1 )Zt+1 Ht+1 − Ct+1 − Gt+1
                                                                                                            
         =    −(1 − δ)                 1+                       Zt+1 Ht+1 −
                        ∂Ct                   ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1                             ρ(Nt+1 )
                       ∂Nt+1
                                                  0
                                                  ρ (Nt+1 )
                                                              
                                                                Ct+1 + Gt+1
                                                                            
         =    −(1 − δ)                 1+
                        ∂Ct                   ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1       ρ(Nt+1 )
                       ∂Nt+1
                                              0
                                              ρ (Nt+1 )Nt+1 Ct+1 + Gt+1
                                                                           
                                                                                    1
                                                                                            
         =    −(1 − δ)                 1+
                        ∂Ct                       ρ(Nt+1 )         Nt+1       ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1
                                                                            
                              (Nt+1 ) Ct+1 +Gt+1
                                       
                    ∂Nt+1                Nt+1
         = −(1 − δ)        1+                     
                     ∂Ct         ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1
                                                                      
                                                          Ct+1 +Gt+1
                                                                                                 
                           ∂Nt+1          (Nt+1 )          Nt+1          + ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1
         = −(1 − δ)                                                                               
                            ∂Ct                             ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1
                                                            
                                            (N ) Ct+1 +Gt+1 + ρ(N )f
                                                                           
                             1−δ
                       
                                                t+1   Nt+1         t+1 Et+1
         = (1 − δ)                                                         
                           ρ(Nt )fEt                            ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1
  60
       Rather than as a function of only period-t allocations, as we viewed Υ(.). Note also that, as must be the case, we
could use Γ(.), rather than Υ(.), to define the within-period MRT between consumption and labor. By the implicit
                                                                                      ΓH
function theorem, the within-period MRT (for period t + 1) is − ΓC t+1 = Zt+1 ρ(Nt+1 ), obviously identical to the
                                                                                            t+1
static MRT (116) derived above.


                                                                           61
the fifth line makes use of the definition of the variety effect expressed in elasticity form, (Nt ) ≡
ρ0 (Nt )Nt
  ρ(Nt ) ,   and the last line follows from substituting (117).
    By the implicit function theorem, the IMRT between Ct and Ct+1 is thus
                                                                                          
                                                          Ct+1 +Gt+1
                          ΓCt      (1 − δ) (Nt+1 )          Nt+1          + ρ(Nt+1 )fEt+1
                               =                                                                 ,   (120)
                         ΓCt+1                            ρ(Nt )fEt

which formalizes, independent of the social planning problem, the notion of the IMRT on the
right-hand side of the (deterministic) efficiency condition (113) and presented in Proposition 3.
    With the static MRT and IMRT defined from the primitives of the environment, the efficiency
conditions (104) and (113) are indeed interpretable as appropriately-defined MRS = MRT condi-
tions.




                                                          62
