                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               IS THERE A LINK BETWEEN FORECLOSURE AND HEALTH?

                                             Janet Currie
                                             Erdal Tekin

                                        Working Paper 17310
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17310


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




This paper was previously circulated as "Is the Foreclosure Crisis Making Us Sick?" We would like
to thank Peter Muennig, Yongheng Deng, Craig Garthwaite, Haruko Noguuchi, Hannes Schwandt
and the seminar participants at Arizona State University, George Mason University, Mathematica,
the Rockwool Foundation, the University of Hawaii, the University of South Carolina, the University
of North Carolina, Union College, Kansas State University, the University of Nevada at Las Vegas,
the University of Illinois at Chicago, Princeton University, Tilburg University, University of Toronto,
the Yale School of Public Health, the Federal Reserve Board, and the 22nd Annual East Asian Seminar
on Economics for helpful comments, and Tyler White of RealtyTrac for helping us to access the data.
We also thank Chandler McClellan, Jessica Van Parys, Dawn Koffman, and Thu Vu for excellent
research assistance. This research was supported by a NIH grant R21 AG 041404-01 and by the John
D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. The authors are solely responsible for any views expressed.
Neither author has any material financial relationships or conflicts of interest to disclose.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Janet Currie and Erdal Tekin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Is there a Link Between Foreclosure and Health?
Janet Currie and Erdal Tekin
NBER Working Paper No. 17310
August 2011, Revised November 2013
JEL No. I12

                                              ABSTRACT

We investigate the relationship between foreclosures and hospital visits using data on all foreclosures
and all hospital and emergency room visits from four states that were among the hardest hit by the
foreclosure crisis. We find that living in a neighborhood with a spike in foreclosures is associated with
significant increases in urgent unscheduled visits, including increases in visits for preventable conditions.
The estimated relationships cannot be accounted for by increasing unemployment, declines in housing
prices, migration, or by people switching from out-patient providers to hospitals.


Janet Currie
Princeton University
316 Wallace Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
jcurrie@princeton.edu

Erdal Tekin
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
tekin@gsu.edu
I. Introduction

           Foreclosure rates reached historically high levels in the United States during the recent

economic crisis. According to Realtytrac, a leading firm that monitors and markets foreclosed

homes, a record 2.82 million homes faced foreclosure in 2009, a 21 percent rise from 2008 and a

huge 120 percent jump from 2007.1 One in 45 homes (2.23 percent of all housing units in the

U.S.) received at least one foreclosure filing during 2010. As policymakers have debated

measures to stabilize the housing market and minimize the damage to the U.S. economy,

researchers have turned their attention to understanding the consequences of rising foreclosures.

           While a number of studies have investigated the effect of the foreclosure crisis on

outcomes such as home prices and sales, residential investment, and durable consumption (e.g.,

Immergluck and Smith, 2006; Calomiris, Longhofer, and Miles, 2008; Rogers and Winter, 2009;

Harding, Rosenblatt, and Yao, 2009; Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi, 2010), there has been no large-scale

investigation of the effect of the crisis on health. The foreclosure crisis represents a significant

shock to the financial well-being of many households, and thus provides a fresh opportunity to

examine the relationship between financial distress and health. Financial distress may have

direct effects on health, but can also cause changes in health behaviors, which in turn can have

negative health consequences.

           The goal of this paper is to investigate whether the foreclosure crisis had an adverse

effect on health. To accomplish this goal, we assemble quarterly data on all foreclosures, all

Emergency Room (ER) visits, and all hospitalizations from four states (Arizona, California,

Florida, and New Jersey) which are among the 10 states that have been hardest hit by the crisis.


1
    See http://www.realtytrac.com/content/foreclosure-market-report.


                                                           3
Unfortunately, there are no large individual-level longitudinal sources of data linking foreclosure

and health. In the absence of such data, we match data on foreclosures, hospitalizations, and ER

visits at the zip code level.

        Our main specifications control for zip code fixed effects, zip code specific linear time

trends, and county by quarter by year fixed effects so that our estimates are identified by changes

within zip codes (rather than comparisons of, for example, rich and poor neighborhoods). We

find strong evidence that increases in foreclosure are associated with increases in non-elective (i.e.

urgent and unscheduled) hospital and ER visits and with increases in visits that could be prevented

by appropriate preventive care. While it is difficult to identify the causal mechanism underlying

these relationships given the available data, we consider several possibilities.

        First, it is possible that for many people, ill health causes foreclosure. However, the huge

run-up in foreclosures over the period we examine was unlikely to be caused by an epidemic of

ill health among American homeowners. Thus, the foreclosure crisis offers a way to rule out this

hypothesis as a major explanation for our results, and allows us to focus on the question of

whether foreclosures affect health rather than vice versa.

        Second, given the previous literature linking unemployment and ill health, it might be the

case that the relationship we observe represents a response to unemployment rather than to

foreclosure per se. It is worth noting that while unemployment increased two to three times in

our study states, foreclosure rates increased by a factor of 10. We will also show below that the

beginning of the foreclosure crisis preceded the increase in unemployment, and that for the sub-

period from the second quarter of 2005 to the fourth quarter of 2007, foreclosures were rising

while unemployment was steady or falling. We show that the relationship between foreclosure

and hospital visits was as strong or stronger during this sub period. Also note that our baseline

                                                      4
models include interactions of county, quarter, and year in order to account for all time-varying

features of local labor markets including unemployment rates.

       A third possibility is that people in financial distress may stop going to outpatient

providers and visit emergency rooms instead. That is, the increases in visits that we see could

represent patients switching venues rather than an increase in actual health conditions that

warrant medical care. We address this concern by estimating models using a subset of serious

acute conditions that almost always result in emergency visits to the hospital, so that there is

little scope for venue switching. These conditions include: Heart attack, stroke, respiratory

failure, gastrointestinal hemorrhage, and kidney failure. We find that foreclosures are associated

with significant increases in hospitalizations for all of these conditions.

       A fourth possibility is that the composition of a zip code changes during a foreclosure

crisis, so that the people who remain in the zip code are less healthy than those who leave. In

order to deal with this possibility and given the available data on population, we examine

foreclosures and visits relative to the population of the zip code in 2000. Thus, it is not possible

for people exiting the zip code to increase the visit rate, even if the remaining people are less

healthy. We also directly examine the predicted change in hospitalization and ER visit rates

given changes in population characteristics between 2005 and 2010, and show that there was

little relationship between this predicted change and changes in foreclosure rates.

       Foreclosure represents a source of financial distress for many people including those who

were not themselves subject to foreclosure, but who saw the value of their housing fall. In order

to investigate this potential mechanism, we estimate models that control for housing prices as

well as vacancies. This specification change has little effect on the estimated impact of

foreclosure.

                                                   5
          Our findings indicate that a rise in foreclosures is associated with significant increases in

hospital and emergency room visits for conditions including mental health problems, heart

attack, and stroke, as well as for conditions such as hypertension, that could be prevented by

appropriate care. We find statistically significant effects for all age groups including children

and the elderly.

         The rest of the paper is laid out as follows. In Section II, we provide some background

information about the foreclosure crisis, and previous work on the relationship between economic

activity and health. We then discuss our data in Section III and methods in Section IV, followed

by the results in Section V and extensions in Section VI. We provide a brief conclusion in

Section VII.



II. Background

         Whatever the root causes, delinquencies and foreclosures soared starting in late 2006

(Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak, 2009; Calomiris, Longhofer, and Miles, 2008, Harding,

Rosenblatt, and Yao, 2009, Lin, Rosenblatt, and Yao, 2009; Immergluck and Smith, 2006).2 The

turmoil in the housing market spread to capital markets and helped to generate the current

continuing economic malaise (e.g., Green, 1997; Leamer, 2007; Gauger and Snyder, 2003).



a) How Could Foreclosures Affect Health?

         Before considering how foreclosure could affect health, we acknowledge the literature

2
  Explanations that have been offered for the foreclosure crisis include a relaxation in underwriting standards and the
expansion of mortgage credit to subprime borrowers (e.g., U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, 2009;
Dell’Ariccia, Igan, and Laeven, 2008; Demyanyk and Van Hemert, 2011), mortgage securitization having an adverse
effect on the screening practices of lenders (e.g., Keys et al., 2010), widespread negative equity caused by the
willingness of mortgage lenders to issue mortgage-debt on homes in which the owners had little or no equity (e.g.,
Gerardi, Ross, and Willen, 2009, 2011), and a rapid increase in interest rates after a period of historically low levels
that fueled a housing bubble (e.g., Mayer and Hubbard, 2008).
                                                            6
arguing that ill health is an important cause of foreclosure (e.g. Warren et al., 2007; Pollack and

Lynch, 2009).3 We argue however, that the foreclosure crisis represents an increase in financial

distress that has not been caused by a sudden epidemic of ill health among U.S. homeowners.

Moreover, while in hindsight many commentators have said that a crash was inevitable, the

timing and severity of it were certainly a surprise to almost all observers (Mian and Sufi, 2010;

Calomiris, Longhofer, and Miles, 2008; Demyanyk and Van Hemert, 2011). It is this feature of

the foreclosure crisis that presents a unique opportunity to explore the consequences of

foreclosure on health. While it is reasonable to suppose that there is always a baseline level of

foreclosures that is caused by misfortunes including ill health, there is no reason to suppose that

the spike in foreclosures was caused by the health problems of individual homeowners.

           High levels of foreclosure in a neighborhood may affect health because housing is the

major source of wealth for most people. Therefore, declines in housing prices represent a

significant negative shock to wealth and a potential source of financial distress, not just for those

who suffer foreclosure, but also for their neighbors. For example, Mian, Sufi and Trebbi (2011)

conclude that a one standard deviation increase in foreclosures in a zip code results in a growth

rate in housing prices that is two-thirds of a standard deviation lower.

           There is a very large literature on the relationship between income and health, too large to

be properly reviewed here (See Smith, 1999). This literature must confront the problem that low

income individuals may have other attributes besides low income that contribute to poor health,

and truly exogenous changes in wealth are hard to find. Two recent papers (Hoynes et al, 2012;

Evans and Garthwaite, 2010) examine large increases in the Earned Income Tax Credit and find

positive effects on the health of infants, and mothers respectively. The later also shows some


3
    See Deaton (2002) for a concise survey of the literature linking health and wealth.
                                                              7
evidence of improvements in biomarkers associated with stress.

       A second potential mechanism is through stress. Stress is thought to affect health both by

depressing the immune system and through the direct action of “stress hormones” on factors such

as blood pressure and cardiovascular health (McEwen, 1998a, 1998b). Stress can also have

harmful consequences through psychological responses such as depression. A growing literature

suggests that stressful life experiences are associated with both physical and mental illnesses

(Goldberger and Breznitz, 1993; McEwen, 1998a, 1998b; Cooper, 2005; Schneiderman, Ironson,

and Siegel, 2005). In related work, Deaton (2011) finds negative effects of the Lehman

Brother’s failure on self-reported stress and well-being.

       While the press has focused on reports of homeowners being victimized by unscrupulous

lenders, it is possible that others who were foreclosed were property speculators with little

money at stake, and who may not have found the process particularly stressful. Bajari, Chu, and

Park (2008) consider two broad categories of foreclosures: Those among homeowners who

rationally decide to “walk away” from a mortgage when it is no longer in their interest to pay;

and those who lose their homes due to short-term liquidity constraints caused by conditions such

as the credit freeze, interest rate “resets”, and balloon mortgages. Bajari et al. conclude that

short-term liquidity constraints were at least as important as the decline in housing prices in

explaining the increase in defaults. Furthermore, many homeowners might not be aware of their

option to strategically walk away from their mortgages or of the cost thereof (Goodstein et al.,

2011). There is evidence that the majority of defaults are not strategic. For example, Guiso,

Sapienza, and Zingales (2009) find the rate of strategic default to be 26%. Analyses of credit

bureau data conducted between 2009 and 2011 suggest that 12-19% of mortgage defaults may

have been strategic (Experian and Oliver Wyman, 2009, 2010, 2011; Morgan Stanley, 2010;

                                                   8
Fair Isaac, 2011, Riley (in press)). Hence, it is reasonable to believe that many homeowners

were “in over their heads” and likely to find the experience of foreclosure stressful.

       Reductions in wealth can also affect health through changing health behaviors. Several

studies have linked economic crisis to reductions in the utilization of medical care (e.g., Lusardi,

Schneider, and Tufano, 2010; Williams and Collins, 1995; Feinstein, 1993). As we will see

below, foreclosures are linked to increases in visits to hospitals and ERs for preventable

conditions, suggesting that some people are cutting back on preventive care and/or increasing

unhealthy behaviors in response to financial stress.

b) Effects of Unemployment on Health

       While the health effects of foreclosure have been ignored, there is an extensive and related

literature examining the effects of unemployment and job loss on health. Ruhm (2000, 2003, 2006),

Ruhm and Black (2002), Neumayer (2004), and Gerdtham and Ruhm (2006) find that higher

unemployment is associated with lower mortality rates, while Dehejia and Lleras-Muney (2004)

find that higher unemployment improves infant health. These patterns have been attributed to

recession-induced changes in health behaviors, though the evidence on this channel is mixed (see

Xu and Kaestner (2010) and Deb et al. (2011)). Miller et al. (2009) argue that cyclical changes

in mortality are concentrated in the young and the old and so are unlikely to represent changes in

health behaviors among working age adults. Their finding of age-related patterns in the health

effects of unemployment provides a further rationale for our examination of age-related patterns

in the effects of foreclosures below.

       Sullivan and Wachter (2009) follow a large sample of individuals subjected to mass layoffs

and find significantly higher death rates due to accidents and heart conditions. Eliason and

Storrie (2009a, b) examine data from plant closings in Sweden in 1987 and 1988 and find

                                                   9
increases in suicide, self harm, accidents, and alcohol-related causes in the 12 years following

job displacement. Browning and Heinesen (2012) report similar results for plant closings in

Denmark.

         While foreclosure and unemployment are both negative economic shocks, they differ in key

respects: Foreclosure does not entail increases in leisure and unemployment does not generally have

spillovers in terms of other peoples’ wealth (though a mass layoff might). Still, the literature suggests that

unemployment can have negative health effects. Since the foreclosure crisis was followed by the worst

recession since the Great Depression, it is reasonable to wonder whether the health effects that we find are

primarily due to unemployment rather than foreclosure.

        Figure 1A shows the unemployment rate and the proportion of foreclosures as a fraction of

outstanding mortgages in our four analysis states between the second quarter of 2005 and the second

quarter of 2009. In Figure 1B, we present the same information separately for each of these states. The

figures show that the rise in foreclosures preceded the increase in unemployment in all four states. One

way we will try to distinguish between the effects of unemployment and the effects of foreclosure is by

conducting a sub-analysis on the period from 2005 through fourth quarter 2007 when unemployment was

largely constant or falling and foreclosures were rising. However, it is important to note that our zip-code

level models include indicators for each combination of county and time period in our models, which

control for the effects of county unemployment rates and all other time-varying county-level

characteristics. Any effects of foreclosure that we find are net of these controls.

        Figure 1B suggests that while the unemployment rate evolved fairly similarly across the four

states, there were dramatic differences in the pattern of foreclosures. In Florida, foreclosures rose to 10

percent of mortgage filings, whereas in New Jersey, which experienced similar levels of unemployment in

2009, foreclosures hovered at slightly over 4 percent of mortgage filings. Figure 2 focuses on the variation

                                                        10
in foreclosure rates in states with similar levels of unemployment, bringing in data for all 50 states. More

specifically, we estimated a regression of foreclosures as a percentage of all mortgages in each state and

year on the unemployment rate for each state and year. In this regression, we use all U.S. states and data

on the foreclosure inventory and outstanding mortgages drawn from the National Delinquency Survey of

the Mortgage Bankers Association of America. As shown in Figure 2, there is considerable variation in

the rate of foreclosure across states (especially after 2008) even after accounting for the variation in

unemployment rates.



III. Data

a) Data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics

        One of the major difficulties to be overcome in a study of the relationship between

foreclosures and health is that there are no large longitudinal data sets that have information both

about foreclosure and health. The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) added questions

about foreclosure in 2009, but the sample size is small enough that only 327 had experienced a

foreclosure since 2001.4 A sample of this size is far too small to analyze the relationship

between foreclosure and health, though the PSID can be used to provide a portrait of what type

of households are most likely to suffer foreclosure.

        The PSID Housing Distress and Mortgages supplement in 2009 included questions about

the family's foreclosure history over the past decade5. The PSID also asks about general health




4
  The PSID is a biannual survey of American households conducted by the University of Michigan's Institute for
Social Research since 1968.
5
  Specifically, the four questions are: “Has your bank or lender started the process of foreclosing on your home?--
First/Second Mortgage”. “In what month and year did the foreclosure start? --First/Second Mortgage”. “During the
last 8 years, that is, since 2001, have you, or anyone in your family living there ever owned a home on which a
foreclosure was started?” and “In what month and year did the foreclosure start?”
                                                         11
questions (on a five point scale) and whether a doctor has ever told respondents that they have a

number of specific health conditions. The PSID had 8,682 respondents in 2009.

        Table 1 provides an interesting starting point for our analysis. The first two columns

divide the sample into those who ever experienced foreclosure (since 2001) and all others. The

questions pertain to the household head. Those who have suffered foreclosure are generally

younger, with relatively few elderly people in that group.6 Whites are under-represented in the

ever foreclosure group, while blacks and Hispanics are over-represented. Those who have been

foreclosed are somewhat less likely to be married, but more likely to have children under age 18

in the household. They are less likely than others to report excellent health, but only slightly

more likely to report that their health is poor. They are much more likely to smoke, but

somewhat less likely to drink than others.

        The next four columns of the table look at foreclosure status in 2009. A few points stand

out: First, one reason that the elderly respondents are less likely than others to be in foreclosure

is that they are more likely to own their homes free and clear. This finding suggests that while

elderly people might be impacted by falling housing prices, they would not be as likely as

younger households to suffer short-term credit constraints due to changes in the terms of a

mortgage. Second, while households with a head who is unemployed are disproportionately

more likely than others to be in foreclosure, only 16 percent of those households currently in

foreclosure have unemployed heads. Hence, many employed people are also experiencing




6
  This finding accords with other available evidence. See Cunningham and Capone (1990) and Anderson and
VanderHoff (1999). Shelton (2008) analyzed a random sample of 2.5 million persons from Experian, the credit
rating agency. She finds that three quarters of foreclosures in the second half of 2007 were among homeowners aged
less than 50. Other work suggests that financial decision making usually improves with age (e.g. Agarwal et al.,
2007) and that older people are less likely to borrow on the equity in their homes (e.g., Duca and Kumar, 2010).

                                                         12
foreclosure, or living with the threat of foreclosure. A third observation is that those who are

currently in foreclosure report worse health than others.

         These comparisons are suggestive of a negative relationship between foreclosure and

health and helpful for determining what demographic groups might be most affected by

foreclosure, but the small numbers of foreclosures in the PSID makes it difficult to analyze this

relationship in a multivariate model. Hence, we turn to administrative hospital records for that

analysis.

b) Foreclosures, Hospitalizations, and Emergency Room Visits

         We focus on the states of Arizona, California, Florida, and New Jersey for several reasons.

First, we wish to focus on states that have recently had high levels of foreclosures. Together

these four states comprised almost 50 percent of all the foreclosure filings in the U.S. in 2008

(RealtyTrac Press Release, January 15, 2009). They were all in the top 10 foreclosure states,

posting the third, first, second, and tenth largest totals of foreclosures in the country in 2010,

respectively. Second, we wish to use hospital discharge and emergency room data for entire

states, rather than from a sample of hospitals. 7 Thus, the data we have assembled from these

four states include every hospitalization and every emergency room visit. Third, we wish to

focus our analysis at the zip code level, because, as shown in Figure 3, there is a great deal of

variation in foreclosure rates within counties. The figure shows the number of foreclosures

divided by population in the zip code (from the 2000 Census) in Florida. The heavy black lines

show the county boundaries. Clearly, there is a good deal of variation between zip codes within

a county, and even within the boxed area showing central Florida, which was particularly hard


7
 For example, the National Inpatient Database has a 20 percent sample of hospitals and it is not possible to tell if
changes in hospitalizations or ER visits at hospitals in the sample might be counter-balanced by changes in these
outcomes at other hospitals outside the sample.
                                                            13
hit overall.

         It is important to include ER visits in addition to hospitalizations, because financial

constraints can affect whether the person first presents at the ER, as well as the probability that

someone on the margin is admitted to the hospital if they do appear at the ER. These four states

were the only high foreclosure Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP)8 states to both

make ER data available and to include the zip code of each patient’s residence over our period.

         Foreclosure data are available at the zip code level monthly between April 2005 through

December 2009 from RealtyTrac. RealtyTrac is a leading foreclosure monitoring and marketing

company, which collects data from public records at the local level, which is where legal

documents for foreclosures are recorded, posted, and published. With coverage that accounts for

more than 90 percent of the U.S. population, the RealtyTrac data have been widely used by the

media as well as researchers studying foreclosures (e.g., Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi, 2011; Pettit et

al., 2009; Gaffney, 2009).

         The foreclosure data include information about both a notice of trustee sale (NTS) and/or a

notice of foreclosure sale (NFS). A state generally has either NTS or NFS and this depends on

whether the state uses a judicial or a non-judicial process in foreclosures, so we construct

measures of foreclosures as NTS+NFS.9 A judicial process requires court action on a foreclosed

home, which usually takes longer. In general, NTS is available only for non-judicial states,


8
  Visit http://www.ahrq.gov/data/hcup/ for more information on HCUP databases. Data on ER visits comes form the
State Emergency Department Databases (SEDD), which capture discharge information on all emergency department
visits that do not result in an admission. Hospitalization data come from the State Inpatient Databases (SID), which
hold the universe of inpatient discharge abstracts. In order for a discharge record to exist, the patient must have
been admitted to the hospital; hence the SID contains records of patients who require more intensive treatment or for
whom treatment cannot be provided on an outpatient basis.
9
  Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi (2011) define foreclosures as NTS+NFS+REO using data from the RealtyTrac. However,
since we use quarterly data rather than monthly data (because Florida hospital data is not available monthly), there is
a possibility that the same property could be counted both as NTS or NFS and as REO. We have also estimated our
models including REO as a separate variable and obtained results very similar to those reported below.
                                                           14
while NFS is only available for judicial states. Among our sample states, FL and NJ are judicial

foreclosure states. For example, while the length of the foreclosure process in judicial states

depends on the court's caseload, the quickest foreclosure usually takes about 135 days in Florida

and 270 days in New Jersey. On the other hand, in our non-judicial states, Arizona and

California, the process can take about 90 and 117 days from notice to sale, respectively

(RealtyTrac, 2013). Zip code level data on housing prices in each quarter come from Zillow.

Zillow does not compile data for smaller zip codes so including this variable reduces our sample

size. Another limitation of Zillow compared to, for example, the Case-Shiller housing price indices

that are available for selected metropolitan statistical areas, is that Zillow does not adjust the index

to reflect changes in the properties being sold.

        Stress and financial losses associated with foreclosure may differ depending on whether

an individual loses a primary residence, vacation, home, or an investment property. Moreover,

the effects of foreclosure on owners of vacation or investment properties may be felt not in the

areas where the properties are located, but in the areas where the owners reside. Therefore,

including zip codes with a large concentration of vacation and investment properties in the

analysis sample may bias the estimates toward zero. To guard against such bias, we use Census

data on seasonal and occasional housing to identify zip codes with a high proportion of

investment properties.10 We exclude zip codes in the top 10 percent of the distribution of houses

for seasonal and occasional use in 2010. The excluded zip codes are illustrated in red in Figure

4. As shown in the figure, the excluded areas appear to match well with one’s expectations

regarding the location of seasonal and occasional properties in these states. For example, the

excluded zip codes in New Jersey are along the Jersey Shore and in the Delaware water gap,

10
  Census data on seasonal and occasional use can be accessed through the American FactFinder portal operated by
the Census Bureau. See http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml for more information.
                                                        15
while those in Florida are along the coasts and in the Orlando area. We also estimated all of our

models without excluding these zip codes (results are in Table 8). Confirming our expectations,

estimates are smaller and somewhat less precisely estimated when zip codes with many vacation

homes or investment properties are included, although they are qualitatively similar to the results

excluding vacation homes.

        Our health measures come from administrative state data bases. States collect information

about every hospital inpatient and ER visit, which they use to regulate hospitals. Participating states

make these data available to researchers through the HCUP, a Federal-State-Industry partnership.

These data consist of individual visit level records. They include detailed diagnostic and

procedure codes, and a few demographic characteristics (age, race, gender, and the patient’s zip

code of residence).11

        We combine ER visits that did not result in hospitalizations, plus all hospitalizations other

than those for childbirth, contraception, and abortion. We excluded these procedures because

fertility may itself respond to foreclosure. In what follows, we treat ER visits and hospital

admissions together, because wealth, demographic characteristics, or changes in health insurance

status might be correlated with the decision to admit a patient presenting at the ER, at the margin.

HCUP classifies diagnoses using a tool called Clinical Classification Software (CCS).12 The

CCS takes thousands of International Classification of Disease (ICD) codes and groups them into

clinically meaningful categories. We use the single level diagnosis codes, and group them into


11
   We actually use Zip Code Tabulation Areas (ZCTAs) rather than zip codes as these are the units reported by
the Census and remain consistent between Censuses. Zip codes are constructed by the postal service and
frequently change. Using ZCTAs allows us to merge population estimates from the 2000 Census to our data.
We drop about 10% of the sample that could not be matched to ZCTAs. The final number of ZCTAs in our
analysis sample is 3,525.
12
   More information is available at http://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/toolssoftware/ccs/ccs.jsp#download.


                                                         16
larger aggregates using information from the multi-level diagnosis codes. For example, single

codes for Pneumonia, Influenza, Tonsillitis, Bronchitis, and other respiratory infections are

grouped together in a category we call “Respiratory Infections”, while heart attacks, strokes,

chest pain, dysrhythmias and other heart problems are grouped together as “Heart Problems”.

More information about our aggregates is in the appendix.

       The proportion of total visits that are inpatient hospital visits is stable and very similar

over the analysis period among our analysis states with an average of about 28%. Accordingly,

emergency room visits comprise the remaining 72% of all visits. In terms of visits as a fraction

of state populations, the rates of inpatient hospital visits and emergency room visits in 2009 are

32% and 10% for AZ, 32% and 9% for CA, 42% and 12% for FL, and 41% and 11% for NJ.

       An additional hospitalization category that we consider is an index of “Prevention Quality

Indicators” (PQIs). These indicators are published by the U.S. Agency for Healthcare Research

and Quality (AHRQ) and are based on International Classification of Disease diagnosis codes

(ICD-9 CM). PQIs are index conditions for which good outpatient care can prevent the need for

hospitalizations or ER visits, or for which early intervention can prevent complications or more

severe diseases. Hospitalizations and ER visits for many other conditions may also be

preventable to some extent, but PQIs are those which can almost always be prevented with

appropriate care. To the extent that individuals who suffer foreclosure have fewer preventive doctor

visits, stop adhering to prescription medicine regimes, or otherwise stop looking after themselves,

underlying health problems may be exacerbated by foreclosure activity. Hence, it is particularly

interesting to look at PQIs because they reflect patient behavior. The PQI category includes

short and long-term complications of diabetes, amputations due to diabetes, and uncontrolled

diabetes, perforated appendix, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, hypertension, congestive

                                                   17
heart failure, dehydration, bacterial pneumonia, urinary tract infection, angina without procedure,

and adult asthma.

         In order to match the hospitalization data and the foreclosure data, we calculate the total

number of hospitalizations in each category for each zip code and quarter. Similarly, we calculate

the total number of foreclosures for each zip code and quarter. We impute zeros for zip codes

that appear in RealtyTrac but have no hospitalizations. The result is a balanced panel of 3,370 zip

codes with 19 time periods for a total of 64,030 observations.

         Table 2 shows means for all zip codes, as well as for those that were in the top and bottom

fifths of the distribution of foreclosures per capita in 2009. While the average zip code in our

sample had 43.35 foreclosures per quarter in 2009, zip codes in the top fifth of the distribution in

2009 had 115.45 foreclosures compared to 1.24 foreclosures per quarter in the least impacted zip

codes. The table shows that the number of foreclosures increased more than 15 fold in the most

highly impacted zip codes, but only tripled (from very low levels) in the least impacted zip codes

between 2005 and 2009. Housing prices also fell more precipitously in the most impacted zip

codes, from $350,000 to $204,000, compared to a decline from $495,000 to $437,000 in the least

impacted zip codes.

         The middle panel of Table 2 shows that high foreclosure zip codes are more densely

populated, have lower income, a slightly higher percentage of African-Americans, and much

higher percentages of Hispanics (21.73 vs. 9.72%) than low foreclosure zip codes. There is little

difference in the fraction of elderly people between zip codes with high and low foreclosure

rates.

         The ER and hospitalization data are explored in the last panel of Table 2. The first column

shows the overall rates, while the second and third columns of Table 2 show rates for people in zip

                                                    18
codes in the bottom and top fifths of foreclosure activity (as of 2009). Comparing high and low

foreclosure zip codes, we see that high foreclosure zip codes have a slightly greater rate of non-

elective visits and that this difference is largely accounted for by a higher rate of visits for respiratory

conditions.



IV. Research Design and Methods

           We estimate a series of models that relate the rate of hospital and ER visits at time t to the

rate of foreclosures in the past year. Specifically, we estimate models of the form:

           Hzqt = α0 + α1Fzqt-1 + α2F zqt-2 + α3F zqt-3 + α4F zqt-4 + µz + µz*t+ λcqt + εzqt,         (1)

where Hzqt is one of our outcome measures in zip code z in quarter q in year t. The variables of

interest in equation (1) are Fzqt-1… F zqt-4, the rates of foreclosures per 100,000 persons in the zip code in

the last four quarters. Within a particular quarter, a foreclosure may have taken place after a

hospitalization, which is why we focus on lagged values. We took an agnostic, practical approach to

determining lag length. Below we show models with one lag as well as models with four lags. We found

that adding more lags beyond the four we show here reduces the length of the time series available and adds

little explanatory power.

           The unit of analysis in equation (1) is a zip code, quarter, and year. The data is weighted

using the zip code population for the relevant demographic group from the 2000 Census.13

Indicators for each zip code, µz, are included to control for any time-invariant zip code level

factors that may be correlated with both foreclosures and health. The µz*t represents the vector

of zip code specific linear time trends, accounting for time varying characteristics of zip codes

that may be associated with foreclosures and health and are trending linearly during the analysis

13
     Unweighted regressions produced very similar results.
                                                             19
period. The vector λcqt includes an indicator for each possible combination of county, quarter, and

year.14 These indicators control for any time varying county level factors that are correlated with

both foreclosures and health. For example, the λcqt absorb the effects of county unemployment

in addition to all other characteristics of a county, year, and quarter. Finally, the vector εzqt

represents an idiosyncratic random error term. To adjust for correlations within a county,

standard errors are clustered at the county level.

         Note that we have specified equation (1) in terms of rates per 100,000 persons. It is

important to keep in mind that accurate data on population is only available at the zip code level

from the decennial Census. Therefore, the measure of population used to construct the rates

comes from the 2000 Census. Both foreclosures and hospitalizations might be increasing in zip

codes where the population has also been growing. While forcing the population to be constant

over time may fail to account for this correlation, the inclusion of zip code specific linear time

trends should address this concern to some extent. Moreover, including the zip code fixed effect

accounts for the fact that some zip codes are much larger than others. If, on the other hand, the

levels of population are fairly constant during our analysis period, then equation (1) is equivalent

to a model specified in levels. Estimating models using levels rather than rates did not change

the implications of results presented here.

         An important concern about (1) is that people who suffer foreclosure may leave the area. Since we

do not follow individuals over time, we have no way of determining if the individuals who go to the hospital

are the same individuals who suffered foreclosure (or their family members, or their neighbors). Equation

(1) captures the effect of the last year’s foreclosure auctions on those who remain in the neighborhood. The

existing literature suggests that while those who suffer foreclosure are more likely to move than others,

14
  In zip codes that covered more than one county, we assign the zip to the county that represented most of its
population.
                                                           20
many of them are likely to remain in the neighborhood for some time.

         Molloy and Shan (2011) find that half of those who begin foreclosure proceedings are still at the

same address two years after the process began.15 The process takes longer in judicial states than in non-

judicial states, so we estimate separate models for the two groups of states as a robustness check (in Table 8,

below). We also check the robustness of our results to using foreclosure starts (i.e. the number of

households being notified that the foreclosure process is beginning) rather than foreclosure auctions (also in

Table 8). If it is primarily foreclosure auctions that matter rather than foreclosure starts (many of which do

not end up in auctions), then the length of time it takes to get to the auction may be less relevant.

         If foreclosure does have negative effects on health and those who have suffered foreclosure are

more likely to leave, then estimating models at the zip code level is conservative and will tend to

underestimate the effects of foreclosure on health.

         A related concern is that the demographic profiles of zip codes might have changed differentially in

high foreclosure zip codes. While yearly demographic information at the zip code level does not exist, data

from 2000 and 2010 Censuses show that correlations in the demographic composition of zip codes over

time are large. The interesting question is whether these correlations are different for areas that experienced

high and low foreclosure rates? Appendix Table 1 shows correlations for the zip codes that were most and

least affected by foreclosures. The correlations are uniformly high, but are slightly higher for the high

foreclosure zip codes than for the low foreclosure zip codes, suggesting that a high foreclosure rate is not

normally associated with a wholesale change in the composition of the neighborhood.

         In another effort to assess whether the demographic composition of high foreclosure zip codes

changed over time in a way that would be predictive of different hospital and ER visit patterns, we regressed

the number of hospital visits in 2005 on a vector of average demographic characteristics at the zip code

15
  They do not know whether a foreclosure start pertains to a person’s residence so they limit their sample to people
with only one large mortgage.
                                                           21
level from the 2000 and 2005 Censuses, including: percentage white, black, and Hispanic; percentage of the

population aged 20-49, 50-64, and 65+; and percentage with less than high-school degree, high-school

degree, college, and a graduate degree. We then used the coefficient estimates from this equation (shown

in Appendix Table 3) to obtain a predicted rate of hospital visits in each zip code in 2005 and 2010, using

measures of demographics from the average of the 2005 and 2010 Censuses and from the 2010 Census,

respectively. Finally, we regressed the change in the predicted rate of hospital and ER visits between 2010

and 2005 on the change in foreclosure rates between 2009 and 2005. These results are presented in

Appendix Table 2. Interestingly, all of the coefficients are negative though only two of them are

statistically significant at the 90% level of confidence. These results suggest that demographics do not shift

greatly in high foreclosure neighborhoods, and that when they do shift, they shift in a way that would have

predicted fewer hospital visits. Appendix Table 4 presents the correlations between changes in

characteristics and changes in foreclosures. It suggests that areas with high foreclosure rates tended to be

come slightly less white and less elderly, which would be expected to lead to lower (not higher) visit rates.

        We estimate separate models by age group and by characteristics of the neighborhood

including race and ethnicity, and income. We disaggregate by age because people in different

age groups suffer from different health conditions and have differential access to public health

insurance. The age groups we use are: 0 to 19, 20 to 49, 50 to 64, and aged 65 plus.

        We estimate separate models for zip codes with high and low fractions of black and

Hispanic residents because minority and low-income groups are thought to have been particularly

hit hard by the foreclosure crisis (Rugh and Massey, 2010). It has been argued that lenders

targeted low-income minority neighborhoods for risky loans (Avery, Brevoort, and Canner, 2007;

Bocian, Ernst, and Li, 2008; Calem, Gillen, and Wachter, 2004; Mayer and Pence, 2008; Squires,

2008). Bowdler, Quercia, and Smith (2010) argue that Latinos have been particularly strongly

                                                        22
affected.

        Finally, in order to evaluate the possibility that our results are driven by people switching

providers, we estimate a set of models using visits for serious acute conditions that would almost

always result in a hospital or ER visit. For example, when people suffer a heart attack or

respiratory failure, they go to the hospital, not to their primary care physician. Hence, there is

little scope for “provider switching” for these diagnoses. We will show that foreclosure is

associated with significant increases in visits for these conditions.



V. Results

        Table 3 provides an overview of our main results. The first panel shows estimates of an

equation with one lag for all non-elective procedures, the subset of non-elective procedures that

are preventable, and four specific types of conditions. The estimates suggest that each

additional foreclosure per 100,000 persons in a zip code is associated with 1.500 additional non-

elective visits, including 0.135 preventable visits. In terms of types of visits, the effect is largest

for respiratory infections (with a coefficient of 0.225) and is statistically significant at the 99 %

level of confidence for all of the conditions listed in the table.

        The second panel of Table 3 shows estimates of (1), that is the model with four lags for

foreclosure. The point estimates suggest that the effect of foreclosure is positive at (t-1) and

typically increasing through (t-3). By (t-4), the effect has faded out considerably. The estimates

suggest that an additional foreclosure in a given quarter would lead to 0.631, 0.520, 0.03, and -

0.402 additional hospital or ER visits in the following four quarters, respectively, resulting in a

net increase of 0.783 additional visits during the course of a year.

        It seems clear that in models with only one lag, the coefficient on the one lag may be

                                                    23
picking up the effect of past foreclosures. Hence, in most of the remaining tables, we focus on

models with four lags and present the sum of the coefficients on four lags of foreclosure and the

P-value for whether this sum is significantly different than zero.

Effects of Housing Prices

         Table 4 shows alternative models that include housing prices.16 The first panel repeats

the main results from Table 3 for ease of comparison. The second panel shows estimates from a

model similar to (1) except that we use housing prices rather than foreclosure. The results in the

second panel show that this measure of housing price appears to matter very little for health,

which may be because there is relatively little variation left in the price measure after controlling

for all the time and area level fixed effects. Not surprisingly then, the third panel of Table 4

shows that controlling for housing prices does not cause appreciable changes in the estimated

effects of foreclosures. These results suggest that the estimated effects of foreclosure are

unlikely to reflect spillover effects through lower housing prices though it is possible that the

results might be different with a more sensitive measure of housing prices.17

Results by Age and Health Insurance Status

         Table 5 presents estimates of the effects of foreclosure by age and health insurance status.

Since the vast majority of the elderly have public health insurance through the Medicare

program, the analysis of health insurance coverage is confined to those less than 65. Table 5

suggests that there are increases in some types of non-elective hospital and ER visits in all four

age groups. For example, for individuals 50 to 64, an additional foreclosure is associated with


16
   Models using log (housing prices) produced similar results.
17
   Note that the housing price data from Zillow do not account for compositional changes in demographic
characteristics over time. To the extent that these compositional changes are important, decreasing housing prices
may not be indicative of decreasing wealth. Therefore, caution must be exercised in interpreting these results as a
strong indication of a lack of wealth effect on individuals who did not experience foreclosure themselves, but lived
in high foreclosure areas.
                                                           24
1.470 additional total visits over the next four quarters. There are also significant positive effects

on visits for preventable conditions, heart problems and mental health problems in all age

groups. The effect on heart problems is particularly large for the elderly, suggesting that an

additional foreclosure would be associated with an additional 0.310 visits for heart problems

over the course of the next four quarters.

       Turning to results by insurance status, a striking result is that most of the increase in

visits is accounted for by people with public health insurance. Although they are mostly not

statistically significant, the point estimates suggest there may even be declines in visit rates

among people with private health insurance. This could reflect switching from private to public

health insurance as a result of financial hardship. Finally, we see little impact on visits among

those without health insurance, although this is a relatively small group, and one that is

disproportionately composed of healthy prime aged individuals.

Estimates by characteristics of zip codes

       Table 6 shows estimates for subsets of zip codes defined by the fraction minority, or by

mean income. The first panel shows estimates for the subset of zip codes that were greater than

70% African-American or Hispanic in the 2000 Census. The estimates are generally similar to

those in the full sample, but are much less precisely estimated given the small sample size.

These results suggest that although minority areas may have been hit harder in terms of

foreclosure rates, the impact per foreclosure may be quite similar to that in other areas. The

second panel shows estimates for zip codes with few minority residents. Again, the estimates are

generally similar to those shown in Table 3, suggesting that the estimated effects of foreclosure

are similar across race and ethnic groups.

       The third and fourth panels of Table 6 compare zip codes with the lowest quartile of

                                                   25
mean income to those with the highest quartile. Except for cancer, the estimates are larger in

high income zip codes. It is possible that high income people are less vulnerable to a given

shock measured in dollars, but that the size of losses due to foreclosure was higher in higher

income neighborhoods.

Estimates for the Most Serious Acute Conditions

        Table 7 focuses on a set of serious acute conditions that would normally cause people to

seek hospital care: Heart attack and stroke; severe respiratory conditions; and gastrointestinal

hemorrhage and kidney failure. Table 7 shows that the sum of the four lags of foreclosure is

statistically significant in all three models. The fact that we find significant effects on visits for

these serious conditions suggests that our effects reflect underlying health effects rather than

changes in care-seeking behaviors such as patients switching away from other providers to

hospitals and emergency rooms.

Additional Estimates

        Because the “Great Recession” followed the foreclosure crisis, and because there is a

great deal of research linking unemployment and health, it may be tempting to conclude that the

estimated relationship between foreclosure and health only reflects a relationship between

unemployment and health. The first panel of Table 8 presents models estimated using data for

the second quarter of 2005 through the fourth quarter of 2007, so that data from the “Great

Recession” period when unemployment sky-rocketed has been excluded. The estimated effects

of foreclosure are, if anything, stronger than those presented above, suggesting that effects of

foreclosure were apparent even in the low unemployment environment that prevailed through the

end of 2007.

        Panels 2 and 3 of Table 8 present estimates for judicial and non-judicial states separately.

                                                    26
As discussed above, the literature suggests that people in judicial states are able to stay in their

homes longer after foreclosure so we might expect to see larger effects of foreclosure in those

states. Table 8 suggests that this is indeed the case. Moreover, the estimates are the largest on

the 4th lag for judicial states, while they appear to die out more rapidly in non-judicial states.

However, there are of course many other differences between the states in our sample that could

affect responses to the foreclosure crisis (for example, Florida and Arizona have large numbers

of retirees, and each state has different methods of financing indigent care); hence, with only two

states of each type, it is hard to conduct a definitive test of the effect of different foreclosure

mechanisms.

        Panel 4 of Table 8 presents models that use foreclosure starts rather than foreclosure

auctions. One difficulty with thinking about foreclosure as an event is that the process typically

takes a long time. A homeowner might begin to feel stress when he or she first becomes

delinquent on a mortgage (which we do not observe). This stress might escalate when

foreclosure is initiated, and reach a peak at the time of the foreclosure auction. There is little a

priori evidence to support this type of time line, although we do know that many foreclosure

starts do not lead to auctions because homeowners are able to save their homes. It is also

plausible that the stress associated with foreclosure is most severe at the beginning of the process

as individuals are shocked with the fear of losing their homes, but eventually develop

mechanisms to cope with this stress. Panel 4 shows that models estimated using foreclosure

starts produce estimates that are in line with our baseline model.

        Panel 5 of Table 8 shows results from a sample that includes all the zip codes in our four

analysis states, without excluding zip codes with a high proportion of vacation and investment

properties. The estimates in Panel 5 are qualitatively similar to those of Table 3 but uniformly

                                                    27
smaller in size, consistent with the idea that losing a vacation home may have less negative

effects than losing a primary residence. Panel 6 shows estimates using only zip codes with high

proportions of vacation and investment properties. We do not see any statistically significant

effects in these models, though this may be in part due to small sample size.



VI. Discussion and Conclusions

        This study examines the relationship between foreclosures and hospital and ER visits at a

neighborhood level. Our results suggest that individuals in communities that have suffered high

rates of foreclosure are more likely to seek treatment in hospitals and emergency rooms for a

variety of conditions such as mental health conditions, heart attack and stroke, as well as for

conditions that could be prevented by appropriate care such hypertension.

        Our results contribute to the growing literature documenting a relationship between wealth and

health, and between changes in wealth and changes in health. Given that both health and wealth are

generated by complex processes, and causality may run in either direction, it is generally difficult to

interpret the relationship as causal. However, to the extent that the reader is willing to believe that the

unprecedented run up in foreclosures that began in 2005 was not itself caused by changes in population

health, we believe our results suggest that the foreclosure crisis had negative effects on health.

        Our results raise obvious questions about mechanisms. It cannot be the case that the huge

increase in foreclosure in heavily affected neighborhoods was due to a wave of ill health among

homeowners in those neighborhoods. We also show that the effects cannot be explained by

unemployment alone. That is, showing a relationship between foreclosure and health is not merely

another way of measuring the relationship between unemployment and health. In fact, we see even

stronger effects of foreclosure in models estimated on data prior to the end of 2007, when

                                                      28
unemployment in our four states was relatively low and stable. Similarly, the estimates are not

explained solely by our measure of housing prices: Adding housing prices to the model has little

impact on the estimated effect of foreclosure.

         We have also considered the question of whether our results could be biased due to migration,

since we do not observe individual health before and after foreclosure. However, an examination of

Census data does not suggest large changes in the demographics of affected areas.

         An additional concern is that the results could be driven by patients who switch from seeing

providers outside of hospital settings to hospital and ER visits. We address this concern by examining

a subset of visits for the most serious illnesses, those which would almost always result in hospital

visits. There is little scope for provider switching with respect to these conditions, yet we still see

increases in visits for heart attacks and stroke, gastrointestinal hemorrhage and kidney failure, and acute

respiratory failure.

          Our estimates imply that an additional foreclosure in zip code results in 0.783 additional

non-elective hospital or ER visits over the following four quarters. Hence, the estimates imply

that 2.82 million foreclosures in 2009 resulted in an additional 2.21 million non-elective visits.

While the cost data available from HCUP is imperfect and covers only hospital costs, a crude

cost analysis suggests that non-elective visits impose a cost of an average of $2,521 (in 2009

dollars). Thus, taken literally our estimates imply that additional visits due to the foreclosure

crisis increased the costs of hospitalizations for non-elective conditions by more than $5.57

billion in 2009 alone. 18

           Our estimates imply that many distressed homeowners suffer disruptions in access to
18
  HCUP cost data do not include physician costs, which are usually billed separately. Other limitations are that cost
data are not available for ER visits in California, so that we had to exclude CA from our calculations of the average
cost of a visit. Also, data are presented in terms of “total charges,” essentially a list price which few people pay, and
“cost-to-charge” ratios (CCR) for the hospital or for groups of hospitals. One must multiply the total charge by the
CCR in order to approximate the actual cost of the visit.
                                                             29
preventive medical care so that maintaining access to such care could be a beneficial focus of

policy. To the extent that the cost of additional hospital visits is an externality that places costs

on the general public (either directly through the provision of indigent care, or indirectly through

higher insurance premiums) it may also provide an additional rationale for public interventions

into housing markets.




                                                    30
                                          References

Agarwal, S., Driscoll, J., Gabaix, X., & Laibson, D. (2007). The age of reason: Financial
decisions over the life-cycle with implications for regulation: NBER Working Paper 13191.

Anderson, R., & VanderHoff, J. (1999). Mortgage default rates and borrower race. Journal of
Real Estate Research, 18(2), 279-289.

Avery, R.B., Brevoort, K.P., & Canner, G.B. (2007). The 2006 HMDA Data Fed. Res. Bull. A73,
93.

Bajari, Patrick, Chenghuan Sean Chu, Minjung Park. (2008). An Empirical Model of Subprime
Mortgage Default from 2000 to 2007, NBER Working Paper #14625, Dec.

Bocian, D.G., Ernst, K.S., & Li, W. (2008). Race, ethnicity and subprime home loan pricing.
Journal of Economics and Business, 60(1-2), 110-124.

Bowdler, J., R., Quercia, & Smith, D.A. (2010). The foreclosure generation: The long-term
impact of the housing crisis on Latino children and families. National Council of La Raza and
the UNC Center for Community.

Browning, Martin, and Eskil Heinesen. (2012). Effect of Job Loss Due to Plant closure on
Mortality and Hospitalizaiton, Journal of Health Economics, 31, 599-616.

Calem, Paul, Kevin Gillen, and Susan Wachter. (2004). The Neighborhood Distribution of
Subprime Lending, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 29 #4, 393-410.

Calomiris, Charles W., Longhofer, Stanley D. , & Miles, William. (2008). The Foreclosure-
House Price Nexus: Lessons from the 2007-2009 Housing Turmoil.

Campbell, J.Y., Giglio, S., & Pathak, P. (2009). Forced sales and house prices: National Bureau
of Economic Research Cambridge, Mass., USA.

Cooper, C.L. (2005). Handbook of stress medicine and health: CRC.

Cunningham, D.F., & Capone Jr, C.A. (1990). The relative termination experience of adjustable
to fixed-rate mortgages. Journal of Finance, 1687-1703.

Currie, J. (2009). Healthy, wealthy, and wise: Socioeconomic status, poor health in childhood,
and human capital development. Journal of Economic Literature, 47(1), 87-122.

Currie, J., & Lin, W. (2007). Chipping away at health: more on the relationship between income
and child health. Health Affairs, 26(2), 331.

Deaton, Angus. (2002) Policy Implications of the Gradient of Health and Wealth, Health Affairs,
21 #2: 13-30.
                                                31
Deaton, Angus. “The Financial Crisis and the Well-Being of America,” NBER Working Paper
#17128, June 2011.

Dehejia, R., & Lleras-Muney, A. (2004). Booms, Busts, and Babies' Health. Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 119(3), 1091-1130.

Dell'Ariccia, G., Igan, D., & Laeven, L. (2008). Credit booms and lending standards: Evidence
from the subprime mortgage market (Vol. Working Paper No. 2008-2106): International
Monetary Fund.

Demyanyk, Y., & Van Hemert, O. (2011). Understanding the subprime mortgage crisis. Review
of Financial Studies, 24(6), 1848.

Deb, Partha, Gallo, William T., P. Ayyagari, Jason Fletcher, Jody Sindelar. (2011).
The effect of job loss on overweight and drinking. Journal of Health Economics.30(2):317-327.

Dooley, D., Fielding, J., & Levi, L. (1996). Health and unemployment. Annual review of public
health, 17(1), 449-465.

Duca, J.V., & Kumar, A. (2010). Financial Literacy and Mortgage Equity Withdrawals: Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas.

Eliason, M. and Storrie. (2009a). Does Job Loss Shorten Life? Journal of Human Resources,
44(2), 277-302.

Eliason. M. and Storrie. (2009b). Job Loss is Bad for Your Health: Swedish Evidence on Cause-
Specific Hospitalization Following Involuntary Job Loss, Social Science and Medicine, 68(8),
1396-1406.

Evans, William and Craig Garthwaite. “Giving Mom a Break: The Impact of Higher EITC
Payments on Maternal Health,” NBER Working Paper #16296, August 2010.

Experian and Oliver Wyman (2009) Understanding Strategic Default in Mortgages, Part I.
Experian and Oliver Wyman Market Intelligence Report.

Experian and Oliver Wyman (2010) Understanding Strategic Default in Mortgages: Q2 2010
Update. Experian and Oliver Wyman Market Intelligence Report.

Experian and Oliver Wyman (2011) Strategic Default in Mortgages: Q2 2011 Update. Experian
and Oliver Wyman Market Intelligence Report.

Fair Isaac (2011) Predicting Strategic Default. Fair Isaac Corporation White Paper.

Feinstein, J.S. (1993). The relationship between socioeconomic status and health: a review of the
literature. The Milbank Quarterly, 71(2), 279-322.
                                                 32
Gaffney, M. (2009). Money, Credit, and Crisis. American Journal of Economics and Sociology,
68(4), 983-1038.

Gallo, W.T., Bradley, E.H., Siegel, M., & Kasl, S.V. (2000). Health effects of involuntary job
loss among older workers. The Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and
Social Sciences, 55(3), S131.

Gauger, J., & Coxwell Snyder, T. (2003). Residential Fixed Investment and the Macroeconomy:
Has Deregulation Altered Key Relationships? The Journal of Real Estate Finance and
Economics, 27(3), 335-354.

Gerardi, K., Ross, S.L., & Willen, P. (2011). Decoding misperceptions: The role of underwriting
and appropriate policy responses. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 30(2), 396-398.

Gerardi, K., & Willen, P. (2009). Subprime mortgages, foreclosures, and urban neighborhoods.
The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 9(3), 12.

Gerdtham, U.G., & Ruhm, C.J. (2006). Deaths rise in good economic times: evidence from the
OECD. Economics & Human Biology, 4(3), 298-316.

Goldberger, L., & Breznitz (Eds.), S.. (1993). Handbook of stress: Theoretical and clinical
aspects. New York: Free Press.

Goodstein, R., P. Hanouna, C. Ramirez, and C. Stahel (2011), “Are Foreclosures Contagious?,”
working paper, FDIC, Center for Financial Research.

Government Accountability Office. (2004). Consumer Protection: Federal and State Agencies
Face Challenges in Combating Predatory Lending. Washington DC: Government
Accountability Office.

Green, R.K. (1997). Follow the Leader: How Changes in Residential and Non residential
Investment Predict Changes in GDP. Real Estate Economics, 25(2), 253-270.

Harding, J.P., Rosenblatt, E., & Yao, V.W. (2009). The contagion effect of foreclosed properties.
Journal of Urban Economics, 66(3), 164-178.

Hoynes, Hilary, Douglas Miller and David Simon. “Income, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and
Infant Health,” NBER Working Paper #18206, July 2012.

Immergluck, D., & Smith, G. (2006). The external costs of foreclosure: The impact of single
family mortgage foreclosures on property values. Housing Policy Debate, 17(1), 57-79.

Keys, B.J., Mukherjee, T., Seru, A., & Vig, V. (2010). Did Securitization Lead to Lax
Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(1), 307-362.

                                                 33
Leamer, E.E. (2007). Housing is the business cycle: National Bureau of Economic Research
Cambridge, Mass., USA.

Lin, Z., Rosenblatt, E., & Yao, V.W. (2009). Spillover effects of foreclosures on neighborhood
property values. The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 38(4), 387-407.

Lusardi, A., Schneider, D.J., & Tufano, P. (2010). The economic crisis and medical care usage:
National Bureau of Economic Research Cambridge, Mass., USA.

Mallach, A. (2009). Stabilizing communities: a federal response to the secondary impacts of the
foreclosure crisis. Washington: Brookings Institution.

Mayer, Christopher and Karen Pence. (2008). Subprime Mortgages: What, Where, and to
Whom? NBER Working Paper #14083, June.

Mayer, C., & Hubbard, R.G. (2008). House prices, interest rates, and the mortgage market
meltdown. Unpublished Manuscript, Columbia Business School.

McEwen, B.S. (1998a). Stress, adaptation, and disease: Allostasis and allostatic load. Annals of
the New York Academy of Sciences, 840(1), 33-44.

McEwen, B.S. (1998b). Protective and Damaging Effects of Stress Mediators, New England
Journal of Medicine, Jan. 15, 1998: 171-179.

Mian, A.R., & Sufi, A. (2010). Household Leverage and the Recession of 2007 to 2009. IMF
Economic Review, 58, 74-117.

Mian, Atif, Sufi, Amir, & Trebbi, Francesco. (2010). The Political Economy of the US Mortgage
Default Crisis. American Economic Review, 100(5), 1967-1998.

Mian, Atif, Sufi, Amir, & Trebbi, Francesco. (2011). Foreclosures, House Prices, and the Real
Economy, NBER Working Paper #16685, Jan.

Miller, D.L., Page, M., Stevens, A.H., & Filipski, M. (2009). Are Recessions Really Good for
your Health? Understanding Procyclical Mortality. American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings, May 99(2), 122-127.

Molloy, Raven and Hui Shan. (2011). The Post-Foreclosure Experience of U.S. Households.
Federal Reserve Board of Governors Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2011-32.

Morgan Stanley (2010) Understanding Strategic Defaults. Morgan Stanley ABS Market Insights
Report.

Nettleton, S., & Burrows, R. (1998). Mortgage debt, insecure home ownership and health: an
exploratory analysis. Sociology of health & Illness, 20(5), 731-753.

                                                 34
Nettleton, S., & Burrows, R. (2000). An Investment in Capital and an Emotional Loss: The
Health Effects of Mortgage Repossession. Housing Studies, 15(3).

Neumayer, E. (2004). Recessions lower (some) mortality rates::Evidence from Germany. Social
Science & Medicine, 58(6), 1037-1047.

Pettit, Kathryn LS, Cunningham, Mary K., Kingsley, G. Thomas, Hendey, Leah, Comey,
Jennifer, Getsinger, Liza, & Grosz, Michel. (2009). Foreclosures in the Nation's Capital: Urban
Institute.

Pollack, C.E., & Lynch, J. (2009). Health status of people undergoing foreclosure in the
Philadelphia region. American journal of public health, 99(10), 1833.

RealtyTrac Press Release. (2009). Foreclosure Activity Rises 81 percent in 2008 Retrieved July
25, 2011, from http://www.realtytrac.com/content/press-releases/foreclosure-activity-increases-
81-percent-in-2008-4551.

RealtyTrac (2013). Foreclosure Laws and Procedures by State.
http://www.realtytrac.com/foreclosure-laws/foreclosure-laws-comparison.asp

Riley, S.F. (in press). “Strategic Default Behavior and Attitudes among Low-Income
Homeowners.” Real Estate Finance.

Rogers, W.H., & Winter, W. (2009). The impact of foreclosures on neighboring housing sales.
Journal of Real Estate Research, 31(4), 455-479.

Ruhm, C.J. (2000). Are Recessions Good for Your Health? Quarterly Journal of Economics,
115(2), 617-650.

Ruhm, C.J. (2003). Good times make you sick. Journal of Health Economics, 22(4), 637-658.

Ruhm, C.J. (2006). Macroeconomic conditions, health and government policy. In Robert F.
Schoeni, James S. House, George A. Kaplan & Harold Pollack (Eds.), Making Americans
Healthier: Social and Economic Policy as Health Policy. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Ruhm, C.J., & Black, W.E. (2002). Does drinking really decrease in bad times? Journal of
Health Economics, 21(4), 659-678.

Schneiderman, N., Ironson, G., & Siegel, S.D. (2005). Stress and health: Psychological,
behavioral, and biological determinants. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 1, 607.

Shelton, A. (2008). A First Look at Older Americans and the Mortgage Crisis. Insight on the
Issues. AARP Public Policy Institute: Washington D.C.

Smith, J.P. (1999). “Healthy bodies and thick wallets: The dual relation between health and
economic status,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 13: 145-166.
                                                 35
Squires, GD. (2008). Do subprime loans create subprime cities? Surging inequality and the rise
in predatory lending. Economic Policy Institute, Briefing Paper, 197.

Strully, K.W. (2009). Job loss and health in the US labor market. Demography, 46(2), 221-246.

Sullivan, D., & Wachter, T. (2009). Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis Using
Administrative Data. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3), 1265-1306.

Rugh, Jacob and Douglas Massey. “Racial Segregation and the American Foreclosure Crisis,”
American Sociological Review, 75 #5, October 2010.

Taylor, M.P., Pevalin, D.J., & Todd, J. (2007). The psychological costs of unsustainable housing
commitments. Psychological medicine, 37(7), 1027-1036.

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. (2009). Interim Report to Congress on the
Root Causes of the Foreclosure Crisis. Office of Policy Development and Research.

Warren, Elizabeth, David U. Himmelstein MD, Deborah Thorne & Steffie Woolhandler MD
MPH. "Medical Bankruptcy in the United States, 2007: Results of a National Study," American
Journal of Medicine, August.

Williams, D.R., & Collins, C. (1995). US socioeconomic and racial differences in health:
patterns and explanations. Annual review of sociology, 349-386.

Xu, X., & Kaestner, R. (2010). The business cycle and health behaviors (Vol. Working Paper
No. 15737): National Bureau of Economic Research Cambridge, Mass., USA.




                                                36
Appendix: Aggregating CCS Single‐Diagnosis Codes into Broader Aggregates

   We exclude induced abortion (178), normal pregnancy and delivery (196), live born (218),
   and contraception, complications of pregnancy/abortion (codes 176‐195). We have
   examined all of the categories below, but focus on the categories that are bolded (Cancer,
   mental health problems, heart problems, and respiratory problems). We found positive
   effects of foreclosure on visits for most other categories. Note that hypertension, diabetes,
   and asthma are included in the PQI (preventable) category. The more specific conditions
   we examine correspond to smaller groups of codes, as described in the text.

   1) Infectious Disease – codes 1‐10
   2) Cancer and Benign Neoplasms– codes 11‐45, 46‐47
   3) Diabetes‐codes 49,50
   4) Other Endocrine/Metabolic disorders – codes 48, 51‐58
   5) Hematologic Disorders, disorders of veins ‐‐ codes 59‐64, 188‐121
   6) Anxiety related Mental Health‐codes 651, 657, 660‐661
   7) Suicide‐code 662
   8) All other mental health‐codes 650, 652‐656, 658, 659, 663, 670
   9) Headache‐code 84
   10) Other Central Nervous System‐codes 76‐83, 85, 95
   11) Eye and Ear‐codes 86‐94
   12) Heart Attack and Stroke‐codes 97, 100, 101, 103, 104, 107‐117
   13) Heart valve disorders, Nonspecific Chest Pain, Conduction Disorders,
     Dysrhthmias– codes 96, 102, 105, 106
   14) Hypertension – code 98, 99
   15) Upper Resp. Infection (Pneumonia, Influenza, Tonsillitis, Bronchitis, Other)‐codes
   122‐126
   16) Other Resp. excluding Asthma‐codes 127, 129‐134
   17) Asthma‐code 128
   18) Gastrointestinal including appendicitis‐codes 135‐155
   19) Kidney and Urinary Tract (including urinary tract infections) ‐codes 156‐163
   20) Genital disorders (including inflammation and menstrual disorders) ‐codes 164‐175
   21) Skin infections, inflammatory conditions, ulcers, other skin‐codes 197‐200
   22) Bone disease and musculoskeletal disease (including arthritis, lupus) ‐codes 201‐212
   23) Injuries‐codes 225‐244
   24) Malaise (Miscellaneous symptoms including Fever of unknown origin,
       lymphadenitis, nausea, abdominal pain, malaise, allergic reactions) ‐codes 245‐253
   25) Other (including rehabilitation care, social admissions, medical evaluation, unclassified)
      ‐codes 254‐259

See http://www.hcup‐us.ahrq.gov/toolssoftware/ccs/AppendixASingleDX.txt for a complete list
of CCS codes and their mapping into ICD codes.




                                                37
Figure 1A: Average of Unemployment and Foreclosure Rates for Analysis States
                                2005‐2009
                      8                                                                     12


                      7
                                                                                            10

                      6

                                                                                            8




                                                                                                 Unemployment Rate
                      5
   Foreclosure Rate




                      4                                                                     6


                      3
                                                                                            4

                      2

                                                                                            2
                      1


                      0                                                                     0




                                Foreclosure Rate    Unemployment Rate


Source: Foreclosure rates are drawn from the National Delinquency Survey of the Mortgage Bankers
Association. Unemployment rate come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                                   38
Figure 1B: Unemployment and Foreclosure Rates Separately for Four States
                                2005‐2009
                                                         Arizona                                                                                                                                      Florida
                      14                                                                                    12                                               14                                                                                    12




                                                                                                                 Unemployment Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Unemployment Rate
                      12                                                                                    10                                               12                                                                                    10
   Foreclosure Rate




                                                                                                                                          Foreclosure Rate
                      10                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                            8                                                                                                                                      8
                      8                                                                                                                                      8
                                                                                                            6                                                                                                                                      6
                      6                                                                                                                                      6
                      4                                                                                     4                                                4                                                                                     4

                      2                                                                                     2                                                2                                                                                     2
                      0                                                                                     0                                                0                                                                                     0
                           2005q2
                                    2005q4
                                             2006q2
                                                      2006q4
                                                               2007q2
                                                                        2007q4
                                                                                 2008q2
                                                                                          2008q4
                                                                                                   2009q2




                                                                                                                                                                  2005q2
                                                                                                                                                                           2005q4
                                                                                                                                                                                    2006q2
                                                                                                                                                                                             2006q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2007q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2007q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2008q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2008q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2009q2
                                                       California                                                                                                                              New Jersey
                      14                                                                                    12                                               14                                                                                    12
                      12                                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                 Unemployment Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Unemployment Rate
                                                                                                            10                                                                                                                                     10
   Foreclosure Rate




                                                                                                                                          Foreclosure Rate
                      10                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                            8                                                                                                                                      8
                      8                                                                                                                                      8
                                                                                                            6                                                                                                                                      6
                      6                                                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                            4                                                                                                                                      4
                      4                                                                                                                                      4
                      2                                                                                     2                                                2                                                                                     2
                      0                                                                                     0                                                0                                                                                     0
                           2005q2
                                    2005q4
                                             2006q2
                                                      2006q4
                                                               2007q2
                                                                        2007q4
                                                                                 2008q2
                                                                                          2008q4
                                                                                                   2009q2




                                                                                                                                                                  2005q2
                                                                                                                                                                           2005q4
                                                                                                                                                                                    2006q2
                                                                                                                                                                                             2006q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2007q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2007q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2008q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2008q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2009q2

                                                                                 Foreclosure Rate                                     Unemployment Rate

Source: Foreclosure rates are drawn from the National Delinquency Survey of the Mortgage Bankers
Association. Unemployment rate come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                                                                                                                     39
Figure 2: Residual Foreclosure Rates after Controlling for Unemployment




Source: Foreclosure rates are drawn from the National Delinquency Survey of the Mortgage Bankers
Association. Unemployment rate come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                                  40
Figure 3: Foreclosures by Zip Code Within Counties, Florida 2009




Source: RealtyTrac.




                                      41
Figure 4: Concentration of Seasonal and Occasional Houses Based on 2010
Census Data

                  Arizona                                           Florida




                 California                                      New Jersey




Note: Red areas represent ZCTAs that rank in the top 10% of zips for seasonal housing units.
Grey areas are places that are not covered by a ZCTA, and include places such as large bodies of
water or national/state parks. Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

                                                42
Table 1: Characteristics of Those With and Without Foreclosure (PSID)

                                                         2009        2009             2009
                             Never           Ever         No       Current           Own, No          2009
                           Foreclosure    Foreclosure Foreclosure Foreclosure        Mortgage         Rent
Age 20-49                     0.490          0.648       0.515       0.489            0.140           0.668
Age 50-64                     0.285          0.277       0.358       0.422            0.314           0.188
65 and over                   0.222          0.075       0.127       0.090            0.546           0.138
Non-Hispanic White            0.744          0.651       0.788       0.693            0.849           0.620
African American              0.145          0.197       0.094       0.171            0.072           0.252
Hispanic                      0.086          0.129       0.087       0.136            0.058           0.108
Head Unemployed               0.070          0.107       0.045       0.159            0.028           0.105
Married                       0.473          0.431       0.675       0.470            0.564           0.203
Children Under 18             0.287          0.506       0.396       0.463            0.128           0.279
Health is Excellent           0.178          0.095       0.214       0.059            0.131           0.159
Health is Poor                0.052          0.073       0.025       0.109            0.082           0.058
Head Smokes                   0.197          0.315       0.147       0.218            0.134           0.285
Head Drinks                   0.650          0.609       0.710       0.631            0.561           0.637
Number of Observations        8,355           327        3445          41             1,204           3,273

Notes: Means are weighted using the 2009 PSID sample weights. Sample in the first two columns includes people
for whom the date of foreclosure is missing.
Table 2: Zipcode Means by Rate of Foreclosure in 2009
                                                              Zips in Bottom 5th   Zips in Top 5th
                                               All Zipcodes      Foreclosures       Foreclosures
Quarterly # of foreclosures 2009               43.35            1.24         115.45
Quarterly # of foreclosures 2005                3.75            0.45           7.52
Housing Prices 2005 ($1000s)                    417             495            350
Housing Prices 2009 ($1000s)                    308             437            204
Characteristics of Zip Codes in 2000
Mean population                               17983             7308          20119
Mean Household Income                         62504            65476          57132
Percent Black                                   7.14            5.72           7.06
Percent Hispanic                               18.22            9.72          21.73
Percent Over 65                                14.48           13.57          14.16
(Hospitalizations and ER Visits by Type/Population in 2000) * 100
Total Non-Elective                             10.92           13.31          13.54
Selected Categories of Non-Elective Visits
Preventable Visits                              1.01            1.21           1.24
Cancer                                          0.09            0.10           0.10
Any Heart/Stroke                                0.98            1.21           1.16
Mental Health                                   0.45            0.53           0.52
Respiratory Infection                           1.42            1.69           1.81
Notes: Characteristics of zip codes come from the 2000 Census.
N=3,370 zip codes (ZCTAs). For hospitalizations, N=3370*19 quarters = 64030 zip code
level observations. Standard deviations are in parentheses.
Table 3: Effects of Foreclosures by Zip Code
                                              Non-                                                            Respiratory
                                           Elective Preventable         Cancer       Heart        Mental        Infection
Zip Code Level , N=56,088, Mean Population=19,750
Foreclosure Rates (t-1)                   1.4996*** 0.1347*** 0.0064*** 0.1136*** 0.0651*** 0.2252***
                                           (0.1378)      (0.0137)       (0.0017)    (0.0118)     (0.0076)        (0.0539)
Number Visits per 100k per Quarter           10580          972             85         935          438             1385
Model with Four Lags, N=46,740
Foreclosures Rates (t-1)                  0.6309*** 0.0714***            -0.0002   0.0459*** 0.0293***          0.0932**
                                           (0.1910)      (0.0097)       (0.0027)    (0.0168)     (0.0082)        (0.0441)
Foreclosures Rates (t-2)                  0.5200*** 0.0637***            0.0066    0.0387***      0.0027       0.2062***
                                           (0.1393)      (0.0085)       (0.0080)    (0.0084)     (0.0079)        (0.0621)
Foreclosures Rates (t-3)                     0.0340     -0.0180** -0.0034***         0.0005     0.0139***         -0.0846
                                           (0.1609)      (0.0082)       (0.0012)    (0.0059)     (0.0048)        (0.0679)
Foreclosures Rates (t-4)                    -0.4019       -0.0265         0.0004     0.0059      0.0135**         -0.1935
                                           (0.5145)      (0.0257)       (0.0052)    (0.0104)     (0.0058)        (0.2188)
Sum of lags                                  0.7831        0.0906         0.0034     0.0909       0.0594           0.0213
P value for all lags=0                       0.0826        0.0009         0.3332     0.0000       0.0000           0.9224
# Visits per 100k per Year                   42817          3911            334       3764         1794             5581
Notes: Regressions of hospitalization plus ER rates on foreclosure rates also included zip code fixed, effects, county*quarter*year
effects and time trends for clusters of zip codes. Standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate that the estimate is
statistically significant at the 99th, 95th, and 90th percent level of confidence. Bold face indicates that the sum of lags is
significantly different than zero.
Table 4: Zip-Code Level Estimates of Effects of Foreclosures, Housing Prices, and Vacancies
                                 Non-                                                       Respiratory
                               Elective Preventable Cancer              Heart      Mental    Infection
Number Visits in Year            42817         3911          334        3764         1794      5581
Baseline Zip Code Level Model, N=46,740, Mean Population=19,750
Sum of 4 Lags Foreclosure       0.7831        0.0906       0.0034      0.0909       0.0594    0.0213
P value for sum=0               0.0826        0.0009       0.3332      0.0000       0.0000    0.9224
Zip Code Level Model Including House Prices Rather than Foreclosures, N = 37,635, Mean Population =23,454
Sum of 4 Lags House Prices      -0.0032       -0.0004      0.0000      -0.0002     -0.0001    -0.0013
P value for sum=0               0.0000        0.0000       0.0305      0.0000       0.1589    0.0000
Zip Code Level Model Including Both Foreclosures and House Prices, N = 37,635, Mean Population =23,454
Sum of 4 Lags Foreclosure       0.7683        0.0703       0.0027      0.0762       0.0531    0.0363
P value for sum=0               0.0672        0.0003       0.3692      0.0000       0.0000    0.8714
Sum of 4 Lags House Prices      -0.0024       -0.0003      0.0000      -0.0001      0.0000    -0.0012
P value for sum=0               0.0000        0.0000       0.0774      0.0007       0.4972    0.0000
Notes: See Table 3.
Table 5: Zip-Code Level Estimates of Effects of Foreclosures by Age and Insurance Status

                                Non-                                                       Respiratory
                               Elective   Preventable   Cancer       Heart       Mental     Infection
Age: 65+, N=46,740
Sum of 4 Lags Foreclosure        2.0393      0.2992     0.0264       0.3099      0.0490      0.1771
P value for sum=0                0.0000      0.0000     0.0018       0.0000      0.0361      0.0000
# Visits per 100k per Year        7905        1292       151          1625        160         978
Age: 50-64, N=46,740
Sum of 4 Lags Foreclosure        1.4701      0.1499     -0.0006      0.2731      0.0762      0.0919
P value for sum=0                0.0001      0.0011      0.9151      0.0000      0.0003      0.3952
# Visits per 100k per Year        6512        665          87         928         326         651
Age: 20-49, N=46,740
Sum of 4 Lags Foreclosure        0.5736      0.0632     0.0063       0.0586      0.0628      -0.0867
P value for sum=0                0.1412      0.0167     0.0000       0.0031      0.0000       0.6221
# Visits per 100k per Year       16145        1057        63          950         956          1611
Age: 0-19, N=46,740
Sum of 4 Lags Foreclosure        0.4288      0.0497     -0.0081      0.0141      0.0456      0.0576
P value for sum=0                0.5233      0.0268      0.1651      0.0005      0.0000      0.8654
# Visits per 100k per Year       10215         718         15          92         219         2116
Public Health Insurance, All < 65, N=46,740
Sum of 4 Lags Foreclosure        0.9492      0.0824     0.0018       0.0465      0.0310      0.1844
P value for sum=0                0.0000      0.0000     0.0166       0.0000      0.0000      0.0000
# Visits per 100k per Year       12016        1044        62          648         621         1960
Private Health Insurance, All < 65, N=46,740
Sum of 4 Lags Foreclosure       -0.4331     -0.0244     -0.0014      0.0151      0.0181      -0.2042
P value for sum=0                0.3171      0.4323      0.4954      0.3752      0.0000       0.2391
# Visits per 100k per Year       14042         945         83         972         468          1614
No Health Insurance, All < 65, N=46,740
Sum of 4 Lags Foreclosure        0.1421      0.0093     0.0009       0.0093      0.0106      0.0269
P value for sum=0                0.0644      0.1081     0.0003       0.0044      0.0175      0.2761
# Visits per 100k per Year        6669        439         20          338         404         788
Notes: See Table 3.
Table 6: Effects of Foreclosures by High and Low Minority, and Low, Medium, and High Income Zip Codes
                                  Non-                                                     Respiratory
                                Elective Preventable Cancer          Heart      Mental      Infection
Zip Codes with >70% African-American or Hispanic Residents, N= 4,365, Mean Population= 30,840
Sum of 4 Lags Foreclosure        1.2591      0.1584      0.0062      0.0745      0.0769      0.2093
P value for sum=0                0.2533      0.0934      0.3852      0.5214      0.0928      0.5301
# Visits per 100k per Year       45338        4566         344        3494        2015        6884
Zip Codes with <10% African-American or Hispanic Residents, N=15,075, Mean Population=11,359
Sum of 4 Lags Foreclosure        1.1771      0.1124      0.0042      0.0729      0.0529      0.3732
P value for sum=0                0.0000      0.0000      0.3712      0.0000      0.0501      0.0000
# Visits per 100k per Year       42999        3773         362        4077        1786        5067
Zip Codes in the Lowest Quartile of Income, 2000 Census, N=11,445, Mean Population=20,148
Sum of 4 Lags Foreclosure        0.8782      0.0895      0.0039      0.0601      0.0316      0.2732
P value for sum=0                0.1754      0.1012      0.3263      0.2464      0.0134      0.1451
# Visits per 100k per Year       49218        4711         334        3894        1905        7215
Zip Codes in the Highest Quartile of Income, 2000 Census, N=11,670, Mean Population=18,580
Sum of 4 Lags Foreclosure        1.2561      0.1022      0.0036      0.0950      0.0782      0.3104
P value for sum=0                0.0000      0.0000      0.5932      0.0000      0.0000      0.0004
# Visits per 100k per Year       32921        2773         313        3187        1573        3560
Notes: See Table 3.
Table 7: Effects of Foreclosures on Severe Conditions
                               Heart Attack      Acute    Acute Gastro
                                  & Stroke    Respiratory  & Kidney
Zip Code Level , N=46,740, Mean Population=18,988
Foreclosures (t-1)                 0.0014       0.0012     0.0077***
                                  (0.0027)     (0.0011)     (0.0019)
Foreclosures (t-2)                0.0056**      -0.0004      0.0021
                                  (0.0024)     (0.0026)     (0.0024)
Foreclosures (t-3)                 0.0007       0.0038       -0.0002
                                  (0.0048)     (0.0045)     (0.0017)
Foreclosures (t-4)                 0.0060       0.0019       -0.0017
                                  (0.0039)     (0.0015)     (0.0033)
Sum of lags                        0.0137       0.0065       0.0078
P value for all lags=0             0.0000       0.0005       0.0004
# Visits per 100k per Year           648          231          386
Notes: See Table 3.
Table 8: Alternative Zip-Code Level Estimates of Effects of Foreclosures
                                Non-                                               Respiratory
                             Elective Preventable Cancer          Heart    Mental   Infection
Second Quarter 2005 through Fourth Quarter 2007, N=21,812
Sum of 4 Lags Foreclosure     3.9707     0.2657      0.0012      0.0378     0.1143    0.7726
P value for sum=0             0.0000     0.0000      0.9122      0.5356     0.0001    0.0000
# Visits per 100k per Year     41784       3840        331         3696      1712       5419
Judicial States Only (NJ and FL), N=20,340
Foreclosures Rates (t-1)      0.1889   0.0388***     0.0043    0.0289**    -0.0008    0.0109
                             (0.1586)   (0.0073)    (0.0033)    (0.0134)  (0.0057)   (0.0225)
Foreclosures Rates (t-2)      0.2124   0.0371*** -0.0014 0.0418*** 0.0197*            0.1019
                             (0.2265)   (0.0136)    (0.0040)    (0.0156)  (0.0104)   (0.0739)
Foreclosures Rates (t-3)      0.1151     -0.0179     -0.0061     -0.0039    0.0050    0.0406
                             (0.1200)   (0.0341)    (0.0046)    (0.0163)  (0.0097)   (0.0927)
Foreclosures Rates (t-4)   0.7490***     0.0469    0.0141*** 0.0378*        0.0063  0.2928***
                             (0.1539)   (0.0282)    (0.0027)    (0.0206)  (0.0102)   (0.0659)
Sum of 4 Lags Foreclosure     1.2654     0.1049      0.0110      0.1046     0.0302     0.4462
P value for sum=0             0.0164     0.0058      0.0150      0.0139     0.0574     0.0015
# Visits per 100k per Year     45732       4062        368         4244      1874       5850
Non-Judicial States Only (AZ and CA), N=26,400
Foreclosures Rates (t-1)   0.8579*** 0.0864*** -0.0008          0.0523** 0.0393*** 0.1583***
                             (0.0900)   (0.0054)    (0.0030)    (0.0211)  (0.0079)   (0.0204)
Foreclosures Rates (t-2)   0.6184*** 0.0712***       0.0086    0.0386*** -0.0019 0.2358***
                             (0.1505)   (0.0090)    (0.0098)    (0.0093)  (0.0076)   (0.0772)
Foreclosures Rates (t-3)      0.0396    -0.0154* -0.0026**       0.0040   0.0176**    -0.1086
                             (0.2377)   (0.0092)    (0.0013)    (0.0057)  (0.0067)   (0.0977)
Foreclosures Rates (t-4)   -0.8935** -0.0575*** -0.0036          -0.0079  0.0115* -0.3867**
                             (0.4194)   (0.0161)    (0.0066)    (0.0118)  (0.0066)   (0.1605)
Sum of 4 Lags Foreclosure     0.6224     0.0847      0.0016      0.0870     0.0665    -0.1012
P value for sum=0              0.1703    0.0042      0.6244      0.0000     0.0000    0.5731
# Visits per 100k per Year     38549       3620         310        3265      1683       5016
Using Foreclosure Starts vs. Foreclosure Auctions, N=46,740
Sum of 4 Lags Starts           1.1182     0.1151      0.0063      0.0955    0.0480     0.2384
P value for sum=0              0.0000     0.0000      0.0043      0.0000    0.0000     0.0000
# Visits per 100k per Year     42817       3911         334        3764      1794       5581
Including High Vacation Home Zip Codes, N=52,875
Sum of lags                    0.6230     0.0752      0.0028      0.0745    0.0534     0.0135
P value for all lags=0         0.1710     0.0071      0.4570      0.0000    0.0000     0.9490
# Visits per 100k per Year     42074       3847         334        3738      1766       5445
High Vacation Home Zip Codes Only, N=5,205
Sum of lags                   -0.1302    -0.0280     -0.0012     -0.0598    0.0119    0.0612
P value for all lags=0         0.7371     0.5254      0.9412      0.4411    0.7232     0.6663
# Visits per 100k per Year     34956       3237         331        3472      1499       4128
Notes: See Table 3.
Appendix Table 1: Correlations between 2000 and 2010 Zip Code Demographics

                                               Income   %White   %Black %Hispanic %Dropout %College
Less than 20th Percentile 2009 Foreclosures    0.8614   0.9501   0.9321  0.9521    0.7083   0.7189
Greater than 80th Percentile 2009 Foreclosures 0.8423   0.9367   0.8712  0.9191    0.8511   0.8475

Less than 20th Percentile Foreclosure Change 0.8519     0.9471   0.9249   0.9476   0.6887   0.6960
Greater than 80th Percentile Foreclosure Chan 0.9237    0.9699   0.9719   0.9726   0.8974   0.9346
Appendix Table 2: Correlation Between Change in Predicted Visit Rates and Change in Foreclosures
                                                                                                    Change in
                          Change in Non- Change in       Change in     Change in     Change in      Respiratory
VARIABLES                   Elective     Preventable      Cancer        Heart       Mental Health    Infection
Change in Foreclosure        -0.0258        -0.0029      -0.0004*       -0.0043*       -0.0006       -0.0025
                             (0.0199)      (0.0023)       (0.0002)      (0.0024)      (0.0009)       (0.0030)


Observations                  3,091          3,091         3,091         3,091         3,091          3,091
Notes: These estimates were derived in three steps. In the first step, hospitalization rates in 2005 were
regressed on the demographic characteristics of the zipcode in 2005 (measured by taking averages of the
2000 and 2010 characteristics in the respective Censuses). In the second step, coefficient estimates from
the first step were used to predict the hospitalization rate in each zipcode in 2010 and 2005, using
demographic information from 2010 or from the average of the Censuses. The change in predicted
hospitalization rates was then calculated as the difference between the 2010 and the 2005 predicted rates.
In the third step, the change in the predicted hospitalization rate is regressed on the change in foreclosures
between 2009 and 2005. The demographic variables included were %black, white, hispanic; %20-49, 50-
Appendix Table 3: Regression of Hospitalization & ER Rates in 2005 on Census Tract Characteristic
                                                                                                            Respiratory
                              Non-Elective     Preventable      Cancer          Heart       Mental Health    Infection
White                         249.3916***       11.7857*        -0.1263      18.4967***          -2.7781    27.3032***
                                (73.2312)        (6.5994)      (0.8224)        (6.7940)         (2.5941)      (9.5945)
Black                         418.8893***      39.8882***      1.7927*       31.6486***        14.0216***   62.3734***
                                (89.8534)        (8.0973)      (1.0091)        (8.3361)         (3.1829)     (11.7723)
Hispanic                        -64.3462         6.6495       2.4954***         1.3130           -3.7465      0.7246
                                (71.1406)        (6.4110)      (0.7989)        (6.6000)         (2.5201)      (9.3206)
0 to 19                        691.6471**       67.7887**       1.0675       81.8017***        -26.7543**   136.5971***
                               (307.5060)       (27.7115)      (3.4533)       (28.5286)         (10.8930)    (40.2886)
20-49                         925.2823***      84.8386***      6.3100**     117.4058***        30.3877***   119.3286***
                               (275.5851)       (24.8349)      (3.0948)       (25.5672)         (9.7623)     (36.1064)
50-64                        1,035.1007*** 129.1728*** 13.5541***           202.0951***         13.6235     156.2463***
                               (335.3912)       (30.2245)      (3.7665)       (31.1157)         (11.8808)    (43.9420)
Less than high school          -208.6894        -18.3290      -6.0807***       -17.4018          -3.0874     -18.2604
                               (184.4640)       (16.6233)      (2.0715)       (17.1135)         (6.5344)     (24.1679)
Highschool                     404.5997*       66.2063***     9.2884***      91.7581***          -2.6362     63.7602**
                               (218.9826)       (19.7341)      (2.4592)       (20.3160)         (7.7572)     (28.6905)
College                      -1,357.7829*** -131.1541*** -10.6263*** -106.0406***              -34.8658*** -178.8389***
                               (248.4575)       (22.3902)      (2.7902)       (23.0505)         (8.8013)     (32.5522)
Graduate Degree               707.7379***     106.1527*** 13.7691***        125.4178***          4.0367     101.9507***
                               (207.1331)       (18.6662)      (2.3261)       (19.2166)         (7.3374)     (27.1380)
Constant                      -33,653.0973    -4,193.3930*    -206.1705 -8,774.6146*** 1,915.0245** -6,531.2238*
                             (27,128.2240)    (2,444.7146) (304.6522)       (2,516.8018)       (960.9842)   (3,554.2627)
Observations                      3,091           3,091          3,091          3,091            3,091         3,091
R-squared                        0.0643           0.0888        0.0533          0.0996           0.0562       0.0788
Notes: These are regressions of hospitalizations in 2005 on the average census tract characteristics
from the 2005 and 2010 Censuses. The coefficients show change in the number of visits per 1,000
with a one pp change in the indicated characteristics. These coefficient estimates were used
to create the predicted change in hospitalization rates used in Appendix Table 2.
For race, the omitted categories are Asian, Other and Native American. For Hispanic, the
omitted category is non-Hispanic.
Appendix Table 4: Correlations between Changes in Demographic Characteristics and Changes in Foreclosure Rates
                     (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)         (7)       (8)           (9)          (10)            (11)         (12)
Change in:         White         Black       Hispanic        0-19         20-49           50-64      65 plus    < HS      High School Some Coll.           College   Grad. Degree
Per capita      -10.2725*** 5.9819***         5.4094       5.7910*       5.7791      -6.3009*** -5.2691***     -3.4613*   -11.2405***      2.6315      6.3601**       5.6924***
foreclosure       (3.2201)      (2.1734)     (3.9524)      (3.2135)      (5.0040)        (2.3748)   (1.8848)   (1.9011)     (2.4865)      (2.2724)     (2.7381)        (1.8798)
Constant         0.2442**      1.1992***    6.0603*** -2.3154*** -3.1469*** 4.5199***               0.9425*** -4.9994*** 0.7179***      -0.6010*** 3.3909***          1.4922***
                  (0.1179)      (0.0668)     (0.1035)      (0.0642)      (0.0878)        (0.0581)   (0.0703)   (0.1214)     (0.1373)      (0.1243)     (0.1152)        (0.0861)


Observations       3,094         3,094         3,094        3,094         3,094           3,094      3,094      3,106        3,106         3,106           3,106        3,106
R-squared          0.0076       0.0082        0.0028        0.0097       0.0056          0.0132      0.0057     0.0008       0.0066        0.0005          0.0033      0.0041
Robust standard errors in parentheses. The estimates indicate that an increase of one foreclosure per capita was associated with a 10.3pp decline in the
fraction of white residents and an increase of 6pp in the fraction of black residents.
