                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  HOW THE WEST 'INVENTED' FERTILITY RESTRICTION

                                          Nico Voigtländer
                                         Hans-Joachim Voth

                                        Working Paper 17314
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17314


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




We would like to thank Stefania Albanesi, Quamrul Ashraf, Francesco Caselli, Matteo Cervellati,
Hal Cole, David de la Croix, Matthias Doepke, Ruben Durante, Raquel Fernández, Alessandra Fogli,
Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, Oded Galor, Jeremy Greenwood, Avner Greif, Nezih Guner, Sebnem
Kalemli-Ozcan, Dirk Krueger, Naomi Lamoreaux, Oksana Leukhina, Kiminori Matsuyama, Joel Mokyr,
Nathan Nunn, Víctor Ríos-Rull, David Stromberg, Michèle Tertilt, Jaume Ventura, Dietrich Vollrath,
David Weil, and Fabrizio Zilibotti for helpful comments and suggestions. Seminar audiences at EEA-ESEM,
NYU, Sciences Po, Stanford SITE, UCLA, UC Louvain, UPF, U Houston, U Penn, U Washington,
and Warwick offered helpful advice. This paper is produced as part of the project Historical Patterns
of Development and Underdevelopment: Origins and Persistence of the Great Divergence (HI-POD),
a Collaborative Project funded by the European Commission’s Seventh Research Framework Programme,
Contract number 225342. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Nico Voigtländer and Hans-Joachim Voth. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
How the West 'Invented' Fertility Restriction
Nico Voigtländer and Hans-Joachim Voth
NBER Working Paper No. 17314
August 2011, Revised August 2012
JEL No. E20,N13,N33,O14,O41

                                               ABSTRACT

Europeans restricted their fertility long before the Demographic Transition. By raising the marriage
age of women and ensuring that a substantial proportion remained celibate, the "European Marriage
Pattern" (EMP) reduced childbirths by up to one third between the 14th and 18th century. In a Malthusian
environment, this translated into lower population pressure, raising average wages significantly, which
in turn facilitated industrialization. We analyze the rise of this first socio-economic institution in history
that limited fertility through delayed marriage. Our model emphasizes changes in agricultural production
following the Black Death in 1348-50. The land-intensive production of pastoral products increased
in relative importance. Using detailed data from England after 1290, we show that women had a comparative
advantage in livestock farming. They often worked as servants in husbandry, where they remained
unmarried until their mid-twenties. Where pastoral agriculture dominated, marriage occurred markedly
later. Overall, we estimate that pastoral farming raised female age at first marriage by more than 4
years.


Nico Voigtländer
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
C513 Entrepreneurs Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
nico.v@anderson.ucla.edu

Hans-Joachim Voth
Economics Department
UPF & CREI
Ramon Trias Fargas 25-27
E-08005 Barcelona
and CREI
jvoth@crei.cat
1        Introduction
Technology advanced for millennia before economic growth became rapid and per capita incomes increased
significantly. Fertility control allowed a transition from "Malthus to Solow" to occur. In many models of
long-run growth, the demographic transition is a necessary ingredient for self-sustaining growth. It allows
productivity increases to translate into higher incomes instead of a larger population (Kremer, 1993; Galor
and Weil, 2000). Historically, European incomes per capita only began to grow once fertility had fallen
significantly. The same is true in the 20th century: No developing country (except for oil producers) has
attained medium income levels without going through a fertility transition beforehand (Chesnais, 1993;
Chenery, Syrquin, and Elkington, 1975).
        In contrast to the rest of the world, Europeans began to limit their fertility long before the onset of
modern growth. As early as the 14th century, a "European Marriage Pattern" (Hajnal, 1965) had emerged
which combined late marriage for women with a significant share of women never marrying. In the absence
of effective contraception, and with illegitimacy rates as low as 1%, delayed marriage was the only feasible
fertility control. West of a line from St Petersburg to Trieste, where the European Marriage Pattern (EMP)
was prevalent, Europeans avoided 25-40% of all possible births. The average female age at first marriage
was 25 and 26.4 in England and Germany, respectively, in the 17th century. Similarly late marriages have
only been registered again from the 1990s onwards, when the respective figures were 25.1 and 26.5 (UK-
ONS, 2011; Flinn, 1981).
        How did such a unique, early, and strong form of fertility limitation arise? The demographic history
literature has focused mainly on documenting EMP’s key features – the age at first marriage, the percentage
not marrying – and the areas where it came to dominate (Hajnal, 1965).1 Much less attention has been
paid to the reasons why Europeans "invented" fertility limitation. Earlier contributions have emphasized
the importance of "girl power" (the ability of women to work outside the household and to decide whom
to marry). This originated in the Catholic doctrine of mutual consent that evolved from the 9th century
onwards (de Moor and van Zanden, 2010).2 However, despite earlier antecedents (Hallam, 1985), there is a
consensus that EMP only became fully developed after the Black Death in 1348-50 (Herlihy, 1997; Hajnal,
1965). Christian religious doctrine is therefore necessary but not sufficient to explain the timing and scale
of the rise of EMP.
        In this paper, we argue that changes in factor prices after the Black Death fostered fertility restriction on
a large scale. Our model explains the rise of EMP in a simple Malthusian two-sector model with endogenous
marriage decisions. There are two types of output, "horn" (pastoral) and "grain" (arable). Both are produced
with Cobb-Douglas technology using land and labor as inputs. The only difference is in the factor intensity
of production: Horn uses land more intensively, while grain is more labor-intensive. Land abundance after
the Black Death favors the land-intensive horn sector. This effect is reinforced by increased spending shares
    1
     For example, EMP was more common in cultures where newly married couples set up their own households ("neo-locality").
This is in contrast to the tendency of newly-weds elsewhere to live with the parents of the groom (Hajnal, 1982).
   2
     De Moor and van Zanden also emphasize limited parental authority, neolocality, and the importance of urban labor markets.
We discuss related literature in more detail below.


                                                              2
on ’luxury’ goods produced in the horn sector (e.g., meat, dairy, and wool). Land is owned by the lord, and
either rented out to farmers (for grain production) or operated directly (for livestock farming). All relevant
decisions in the model are made by women. Women trade off financial gain (as a result of working for a
wage in horn for the landlord) against having children and working on the family farm in grain production.
However, because of the great strength required for arable production (such as in ploughing and threshing;
Alesina, Giuliano, and Nunn, 2011), they are typically better at livestock farming, at least in relative terms.
When hiring female workers for horn production, in line with historical evidence, the lord requires them to
be unmarried. Women themselves differ in physical strength. The stronger ones will be more inclined to get
married early and work in arable farming; weaker ones are more readily employed in pastoral production.
       Land is in fixed supply; as population increases, incomes decline. Before the Black Death, land-labor
ratios are low; land is relatively dear, and labor is cheap. Grain cultivation provides most of the food.
Women marry early and work alongside men in family-operated arable agriculture. This changes after the
plague, when land-labor ratios increase. Land abundance favors the land-intensive livestock sector; female
employment in pastoral production increases. Marriages are postponed, and childbearing is curtailed. Low
fertility in turn keeps land-labor ratios relatively high. In a Malthusian economy, this will ceteris paribus
raise incomes. Thus, as an indirect consequence of the Black Death, Europeans find themselves in a new
steady state with greater female employment, late marriage, lower fertility, and higher per capita incomes.
The model also creates an economic "shock absorber" mechanism. When incomes are low, the relative
appeal of financial rewards is greater – marriages are postponed. Nuptiality thus fluctuates in response to
economic conditions: Hard times spell late marriages.3 This helps to stabilize incomes.
       In the empirical section, we confront the model’s predictions with data, using 14C-19C England as a
case study. Our theoretical setup implies that where women were employed in large numbers in agricul-
ture, milking cows and tending sheep, marriage should occur late; and where arable agriculture dominated,
marriage ages should be markedly lower. This is what the data show across different counties in England,
as early as the 14th century. Also, where cultivation switched from grain to pasture during the middle ages
(and after the Black Death), women on average married later. Finally, we demonstrate that pastoral marriage
patterns are a reliable predictor of late marriage. The estimated effects allow us to quantify the contribution
of pastoralism to late marriage. We estimate that without pastoral production, marriages in early modern
England would have occurred more than 4 years earlier. Thus, pastoralism and greater labor demand for
female servants after the plague can approximately account for half of the delay in marriages in England
compared to the High Middle Ages.
       Our model has implications for intra-European differences. Where horn could be produced with female
labor, such as in Northern Europe, fertility limitation was effective, and incomes were higher; in Eastern
Europe, where grain production was highly efficient and the Black Death had a smaller impact, EMP did not
emerge.4 Finally, our model has implications for the "First Divergence" – Europe’s precocious rise to riches
in the centuries before technological change became rapid. European per capita incomes increased to levels
   3
       Jones and Schoonbroodt (2011) provide a dynastic model that explains pro-cyclical fertility in the 20th century.
   4
       In principle, any kind of demand for female labor will have the same effect as long as it is incompatible with child-bearing.



                                                                   3
far above subsistence (and ahead of other regions of the world) long before the Industrial Revolution. While
several other factors – high European death rates, the rise of Atlantic trade, and accelerating technological
progress – probably played a role (Voigtländer and Voth, 2013; Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2005;
Mokyr, 1990), fertility limitation was arguably one powerful contributor to greater riches in a Malthusian
setting (Wrigley, 1988; Ashraf and Galor, 2011). Figure 1 illustrates how income and fertility interact in
a Malthusian economy. Death rates decline in p.c. income. Fertility depends on the demographic regime.
Without EMP (rest of the world – ROW), fertility is constant and high. In Europe, it is lower on average
and responds to economic conditions. The intersection of birth and death schedules defines the steady
state(s), where population and income are constant. In the absence of fertility restriction, the economy is in
a low-income steady state (S ROW ). EMP helped Europe to transition to a more benign steady state(S Europe ),
combining high incomes with low fertility.5

                                                      [Insert Figure 1 here]

       Areas with traditional fertility regimes (such as China) have only one steady state, combining high fer-
tility and low per capita incomes. A natural implication of our model is that land and labor productivity
differences are key for explaining when fertility limitation will emerge. In areas where grain sector produc-
tivity is high, EMP will not emerge. This is true even in the presence of large mortality shocks reducing
population size.
       Related work on the origins of EMP includes Devolder (1999), who emphasizes the introduction of
short-term leaseholds as a factor behind the rise of EMP. Foreman-Peck (2009) builds a model in which
European fertility restriction follows from changes in mortality patterns. De Moor and van Zanden (2010)
emphasize the role of Christianity because it requires an act of the will for marriage to be valid. They also
argue that neolocality – the formation of a new household set up away from the parental home – and the
rise of a landless proletariat, combined with access to urban labor markets, encouraged women to ’take time
to choose’ their marriage partners. Finally, Mitterauer (2003) argues that feudal land holding patterns were
crucial for the emergence of EMP, favoring inheritance systems that went hand in hand with the formation
of nuclear households.
       Our paper forms part of a broader body of work on the causes of fertility change. The Princeton Euro-
pean Fertility Project (Coale and Watkins, 1986) argued that culture was crucial for the diffusion of fertility
limitation in the 19th century.6 Much of the work on fertility restriction after 1850 has emphasized rising
returns to investments in child quality (Barro and Becker, 1989). Attention has also focused on the chang-
ing cost of children as a result of nineteenth-century compulsory schooling laws and factory acts restricting
child labor (Doepke, 2004; Doepke and Zilibotti, 2008). An alternative strand in the literature focuses on the
opportunity cost of female labor (Becker, 1960; Mincer, 1963). Butz and Ward (1979) as well as Heckman
and Walker (1990) find evidence that higher male wages raise fertility, while higher female wages lower
   5
      Other factors, in particular increasing death rates due to epidemics and warfare, had a similar effect as low birth rates (Voigtlän-
der and Voth, 2013). This reinforced the transition to a high-income Malthusian steady state.
    6
      Recent work using disaggregated data for Bavaria and for France has questioned this conclusion (Brown and Guinnane, 2001).


                                                                    4
them. Schultz (1985) shows that fertility decline in 19th century Sweden was driven by world demand
increasing the price of butter. Doepke, Hazan, and Maoz (2007) argue that one-off negative shocks to the
value of female labor can lead to large increases in fertility.7 Greenwood, Seshadri, and Vandenbroucke
(2005) argue that technological advances in the household sector can explain the baby boom because they
lowered the cost of children.8
       Relative to this literature, we make several contributions. We present the first rigorous model explaining
the rise of EMP as a result of utility-maximizing behavior, following a large positive shock to income. In our
model, fertility restriction arises without a role for human capital, in contrast to models in the spirit of Barro
and Becker (1989). Also, heterogeneity in wages or tastes (Jones, Schoonbroodt, and Tertilt, 2010) plays
no role. Our approach emphasizes women’s opportunity cost, as determined by changes in the structure of
agricultural production following the Black Death. In effect, we argue that a new socioeconomic institution
emerges in response to a sharp change in factor prices. We also provide empirical support for each step of
the proposed mechanism, using detailed county-level data for England during the late medieval and early
modern period. In addition, we assess the quantitative contribution of pastoralism to delayed marriage.
       Several papers in the unified growth tradition relate to our work. Galor and Weil (1996) provide a model
where female labor is more complementary to capital than male labor; capital accumulation raises female
wages and lowers fertility. In our model, land plays a similar role. Because women have a comparative
advantage in the land-intensive horn sector, their wages rise with the abundance of land, and fertility falls.
Vollrath (2011) also builds a two-sector model in which lower labor intensity can lead to greater riches in the
long run.9 Unified Growth Theory seeks a single explanation of the transition from ’Malthusian stagnation’
to self-sustaining, rapid growth (Galor, 2005; Hansen and Prescott, 2002; Galor and Weil, 2000). Papers
in this literature typically assume that as growth takes off, the return to human capital rises, which then
lowers fertility (Becker, Murphy, and Tamura, 1990; Lucas, 2002; Jones, 2001).10 The unit of analysis is the
world as a whole. Instead, we focus on cross-sectional differences, examining factors that led to Europe’s
precocious rise to riches. We emphasize the potential for fertility to change substantially prior to the "take-
off," and without changes in the return to human capital. Finally, two other features distinguish our model
from existing ones. First, for very low land-labor ratios, the horn technology is not economically viable
because women’s wages in horn are below their counterpart in grain production. Thus, the mechanism
leading to fertility decline does not operate in a land-scarce economy. Second, married couples cannot
control their fertility. Instead, the number of children results from a tradeoff between female work time
away from home and married life with home production. This reflects the historical fact that effective
   7
      They argue that the use of women in US wartime production during 1940-45 generated a negative externality for younger
cohorts, who then had more children.
    8
      In a similar vein, relatively high pastoral productivity (compared to grain) favors the emergence of fertility restriction in our
setup, by raising the opportunity cost of family life and childbearing. However, in contrast to Greenwood et al., our mechanism
works without sector-biased changes in productivity.
    9
      Vollrath shows that high labor intensity in agriculture can lead to higher fertility and therefore lower p.c. income. This is
compatible with our argument, where pastoral agriculture (with low labor intensity) was central for Europe’s fertility restriction.
   10
      Fernandez-Villaverde (2001) presents a model in which the declining relative price of capital during the Industrial Revolution
raises skill premia, and thus generates incentives to trade child quality for quantity.



                                                                  5
contraception was unavailable in early modern times; delayed marriage (and fewer women marrying) was
the only way to reduce fertility.
         We are not the first to argue that the Black Death caused important changes in the European economy.
Van Zanden (2002) concluded that the rapid rise of the Netherlands during the early modern period owed
much to the economy’s transformation after 1350. Epstein (2000) argued that institutional constraints on
growth were removed by the plague. Herlihy (1997) speculated that the emergence of fertility restriction
may have been linked to the effects of population losses after the plague, and Smith (1981) suggested that
the rise of farm service may have been one of the reasons for greater fertility control. Finally, Pamuk
(2007) surveys the evidence that the Black Death ushered in a transformation of the European economy,
reducing and then reversing the income gap between Southern and Northwestern Europe. The nature of the
Malthusian world before 1800 is examined inter alia in Ashraf and Galor (2010), Clark (2007) and Wrigley,
Davies, Oeppen, and Schofield (1997).11
         We proceed as follows: Section 2 discusses the historical background. Section 3 presents our model,
and section 4 presents our empirical analysis. In section 5, we focus on several international comparisons.
Section 6 concludes.


2         Historical Background
In this section, we summarize the existing state of historical knowledge about the rise and fall of fertility
restriction in early modern Europe.
         Two main factors curtailed fertility under EMP – late female marriage, and a high percentage of women
never marrying. In the Roman Empire, age at first marriage was 12-15 for pagan girls, and somewhat
higher for Christian girls. Herlihy (1985) estimates that by 500 AD, the average marriage age for women
in Western Europe was 18-19 years. During the Middle Ages, this number may have been slightly higher
than in Roman times. For a group of medieval Lincolnshire villages, Hallam (1985) estimated ages at first
marriage for women of around 20.12 Among the English nobility, marriage at age 17 was common in the
12th century. Numbers for fourteenth-century Tuscany are similar (Herlihy, 1985). Central features of EMP
– a marriage age above the biological age of fertility, and some women never marrying – probably originated
in some areas before the 14th century (Laslett and Wall, 1972). However, the European Marriage Pattern,
with the age at first marriage postponed to 25 or beyond, only emerged after the Black Death, and the pattern
was strongest in Northwestern Europe (Hajnal, 1965, 1982). For English women, the age at first marriage
in the early modern period was 25 years; 17.5% never married. Scandinavians married even later. Table 1
    11
      The extent to which negative shocks raised death rates and lowered fertility rates is discussed by Anderson and Lee (2002),
Galloway (1988), Crafts and Mills (2008), and Kelly and Ó Grada (2008).
   12
      The percentage of females never married needs to be established through family reconstitutions, which track cohorts over the
entire life cycle. For the period before1500, these are not available. Instead, one can look at the proportion of women unmarried
at a particular point in time. Because some women will eventually find husbands and have children, this constitutes a strict upper
bound on the percentage never marrying. In St Germain-des-Prés in 801-20, for example, some 16% of adults were unmarried. The
proportion of unmarried women was probably much less. In the 9th century, in Villeneuve-Saint-Georges, up to 12% of adults had
never married (Hallam, 1985).


                                                                6
gives an overview:

                                                   [Insert Table 1 here]

       Within marriage, fertility was largely unconstrained. To show this, Clark (2007) compares Western Eu-
ropean marital fertility with contemporaneous levels of Hutterites (a modern-day Canadian sect that rejects
birth control). He finds that both are very similar, implying that fertility within marriage in early modern
Europe was probably close to the biological maximum (see Appendix B.4 for more detail).
       Northwestern Europe in particular evolved a ’low pressure demographic regime’ (Wrigley et al., 1997).
Negative economic shocks were largely absorbed through Malthus’s preventive check (lower nuptiality),
rather than the positive check (death rates surging). As economic conditions worsened, fertility declined.
As life expectancy fell and conditions became less favorable, partly under the influence of declining land-
labor ratios in England after 1600, the age at marriage increased, and gross reproduction rates fell (Wrigley
and Schofield, 1981; Wrigley et al., 1997). This helped to reduce the downward pressure on living standards.
       Late marriage was arguably voluntary: Children were often independent from their parents by their
teenage years, and became fully legally independent at age 21 – several years before the average age at first
marriage. The law did not ban early marriages. In England, the legal age for marriage was 12 for women,
14 for men (Clark, 2007). While the authorities hoped to raise age at marriage – through apprenticeships,
for example – there were many ways to ignore or circumvent restrictions, especially in the larger towns
(Ingram, 1985; Clark, 2007). Nor is there evidence that the "passion between the sexes" (as Malthus called
it) was any less acute in early modern Europe than elsewhere. One out of seven marriages in 17th century
England was followed by the bride giving birth within 8 months; the proportion could be as high as 40%
(Wrigley and Schofield, 1981).
       Apprenticeships and service in agriculture played an important role in postponing marriage. A signif-
icant part of young men and women were thus employed, especially in Northwestern Europe; in England,
up to half of all boys and girls aged 15-25 worked as servants (Kussmaul, 1981).13 After 1349, landlords
increasingly hired agricultural servants to work on the larger farms (Kussmaul, 1981). The Museum Rus-
ticum, an 18th century periodical on rural affairs, called service "a covenanted state of celibacy." Marriage
typically implied an immediate termination of service. Kussmaul (1981) calculates that 65% of servants
married immediately before or after the end of their contracts. Celibacy was both a convention and a tech-
nological requirement. Pastoralism has fairly steady labor requirements throughout the year. This makes it
attractive to employ servants year-round, instead of hiring agricultural laborers on daily wages. Marriage
and childbearing reduces female labor supply, and makes it more variable. As such, it would have been
incompatible with the labor requirements in pastoral agriculture. As the English philosopher David Hume
put it in 1742: "All masters ... admit not by any means the marrying of the female, who are then supposed
altogether incapacitated for their service" (Hume, 1854, p. 430). Servants were entitled to room and board
in exchange for labor services. Housing married maids and their offspring would have involved a heavy
  13
    For example, Hajnal (1982) gives the share of women aged 20-24 working as servants in the early modern period as 51 percent
in Denmark, 44 in Iceland, 36 in Holland, 40 in England, and 33 (both sexes) in Norway


                                                              7
additional expense. The system also had advantages for the servants. As Macfarlane (1970) observed, "the
system of farming out the children, which permitted them a moderate freedom without forcing them to resort
to marriage, allowed them to marry late."
    EMP in England declined in the second half of the eighteenth century. After the 1730s, mean ages at
first marriage trended down for both men and women. A number of factors reduced female employment
opportunities in husbandry. As grain prices rose in the 18th century relative to the price of meat and dairy
products, pastoral production declined (Snell, 1981). In addition, economic change undermined the institu-
tion of farm service for young women. Cottage shop manufacturing offered a chance to earn a living while
having children. Female earnings opportunities outside of animal husbandry improved; thus women could
marry earlier, and still earn the same. By the 1830s, age at marriage had fallen from 26 for women (and 27
for men) in 1700 to 23 (and 25, respectively). Population growth accelerated from zero to 1.75% per annum
(Wrigley et al., 1997). Using Kussmaul’s (1990) marriage seasonality measure as a proxy for farm service,
Schellekens (1997, 2001) shows that the decline of service in husbandry is a major explanation for the rise
in nuptiality. The decline of England’s low fertility regime was thus brought on by the same factors that led
to its rise during the early modern period – changes in the opportunity cost of female labor, as determined
by demand conditions in husbandry.


3     Model
This section presents a simple Malthusian model with endogenous labor supply and marriage decisions. The
economy is composed of a mass of N female and N male peasants who work, consume, and procreate.14
People live for two periods, childhood and adulthood. Children do not work or consume. For simplicity,
we assume that adulthood and childhood are of equal length and that wages are the only source of income
for peasants. There are two agricultural sectors of production, grain and horn (e.g., meat, milk, and wool).
All men are equal; they rent land on which they operate small grain farms. Women differ with respect to
physical strength, and thus in terms of their productivity in the strenuous grain sector.15 Physical strength
matters less for pastoral production, so that all women are equally suited for the horn sector. Only unmarried
women can work in horn.
    When they become adults, women decide when to marry, maximizing their expected utility. Before
marriage, they do not have children. During marriage, there is no birth control and children arrive with
frequency π. Delaying marriage is thus the only ’contraceptive technology.’ Women can earn a wage
premium in pastoral production as long as they are unmarried. This implies a tradeoff between income and
marriage, which endogenously determines the age at marriage and thus fertility. We define the European
   14
      We call all economic agents that are not large landowners ’peasants’ (landholders subsisting by working a small plot). Note
that in England, there were no peasants in the strict sense of the word. Instead, most tenant farms were relatively large (as we
discuss in section 2), and were often operated with hired labor. We use the ’peasant’ terminology for simplicity. In our model, it
merely implies that large landowners have an advantage producing pastoral products compared to ’peasants.’
   15
      In our model, female strength differences have very similar effects to other forms of heterogeneity (such as TFP differences in
arable farming, or region-specific advantages in pastoral land suitability).



                                                                 8
Marriage Pattern as follows:

Definition 1. Let b be the birth rate when women spend all their adult life married. Then EMP is a demo-
graphic regime that involves (i) b < b because women remain unmarried throughout a part of adulthood,
and (ii) b increases in p.c. income.

      The economy is Malthusian – a steady state is determined by the intersection of the mortality and fertility
schedules. The former declines in consumption, while the latter depends on the demographic regime. In
the absence of EMP, the fertility schedule is flat, as shown in Figure 1. Without EMP, the economy is in
a steady state with high, constant birth rates and low per-capita income (S ROW in Figure 1). With EMP,
the birth schedule shifts downward due to delayed marriage (property (i) of EMP). In addition, an income
effect causes birth rates to increase with wages (property (ii)). The new steady state has lower birth rates,
combined with higher per capita incomes. We argue that the Black Death contributed to the transition from
a low- to a high-income steady state in Western Europe after the Black Death. Our mechanism can explain
the slow rise of population levels after 1349, and the persistence of higher output per capita in Europe. We
also discuss productivity characteristics that favor the emergence of EMP in Europe as compared to China.
      In the following, we describe the central components of the model. We first build the intuition for the
mechanism by focusing on the labor supply side, and then derive the Malthusian equilibria, accounting for
the fact that livestock products were "luxury goods."

3.1    Peasant Families: Preferences, Labor Supply, and Fertility

Adult peasants live for one period. All men are equal, while women differ in their physical strength. Female
strength relative to men ρ ∈ (0, 1) is randomly distributed, as given by the probability density function f (·).
Hereafter, we use the subscript i to refer to a particular strength draw, ρi , and thus to the different ’types’ of
women. Because EMP is closely associated with women deciding when to marry (de Moor and van Zanden,
2010), we focus on the female optimization problem. In the spirit of Galor and Weil (1996), women draw
utility from consumption and children:

                                    u(Ci , bi ) = (1 − µ)v(Ci ) + µ ln(bi − b),                                (1)

where v (Ci ) denotes utility from a consumption composite throughout adult life, bi is the number of children
(with a lower bound b), and µ represents the relative importance of children vs. consumption in women’s
utility. There are no investments or bequests to children – all income is spent on consumption during adult
life. We assume that male strength is homogeneous, and that men’s consumption preferences are identical to
those of women. When women decide to marry, they all receive the same (random) match as a husband. All
relevant decisions in the model are thus made by women. Consumption utility throughout the adult period




                                                        9
is given by:16                                   
                                                 
                                                  ln(Ci − c + ϵ)                    if Ci > c
                                      v(Ci ) =                                                                                       (2)
                                                 
                                                 
                                                      (Ci − c) /ϵ + ln(ϵ)            if Ci ≤ c

where ϵ is a positive number close to zero. This specification ensures that v and v ′ are continuous and that
the marginal utility is a large positive number.17 Whether or not income is above the reference level c plays
a central role in our model. We think of c as the per-capita consumption that fulfills basic needs, but does
not yet include any luxury items (such as meat products). Below c, the marginal utility of consumption is
high, and it falls rapidly as consumption exceeds c.18 This setup delivers an income effect: Fertility rises
when consumption grows beyond c.19 Consumption utility is drawn from two goods: Grain (ci,g ) and horn
products (ci,h ). We use grain as the numeraire; the price of horn goods is denoted by ph . To focus on the
main mechanism, we take ph as given, only assuming that horn is not an inferior good so that ph is non-
decreasing in income. In section 3.6 below we introduce non-homothetic preferences where the expenditure
share for horn products rises with income above the reference level c.
       Male and female peasants each provide one unit of labor during adulthood. Men earn the uniform male
wage rate in grain production, wM g . Women split their labor supply between the horn and the grain sector.
In line with the historical evidence on animal husbandry (section 2), marriage is not allowed for women
working as servants in the horn sector. Women spend a share li,h of their adult life in horn production, being
unmarried and earning wh . The remainder 1 − li,h is married life with work in grain production on the
peasant farm.20 A woman’s marginal product in peasant grain production depends on her physical strength
(relative to men) and is given by wi,F g = ρi wM g , with ρi < 1. Female income throughout the adult period
is thus
                                               Ii = wh li,h + ρi wM g (1 − li,h ) .                                                  (3)

       Female labor supply is determined by the trade-off between earnings in horn production (i.e., if wh >
wi,F g ) and child rearing during marriage. While single, the probability of childbearing is zero. After
marrying, husband and wife form a new household, and women work in grain production on the peasant
farm. The share of adult lifetime married thus corresponds to female labor supply in the grain sector,
  16
      Consumption utility is derived from total income throughout adult life. This implicitly assumes that i) women do not discount
within the adult period and ii) consumption at different points throughout adult life is perfectly substitutable. One could split the
adult period into an unmarried and a married part with different consumption levels. This would add realism (and complexity), but
not change our qualitative results.
   17
      We use c = 1, so that limCi →c v(Ci ) = ln(ϵ) and limCi →c v ′ (Ci ) = 1/ϵ for convergence to c from above and below.
   18
      The reference level c is thus similar to subsistence consumption, with one important difference: People do not starve below this
level; they merely value consumption more because their basic material needs are unmet. This allows us to include the consumption
range below c as an integral part of the model.
   19
      The income effect is stronger the closer Ci is to c. It is thus similar to the ’subsistence effect’ that Jones (2001) integrates in
the standard fertility framework (Barro and Becker, 1989). For very high income levels (Ci >> c), our preferences behave as in
the standard log-case (c.f. Galor and Weil, 1996) – further increases in income have no effect on birth rates.
   20
      Because only women work in horn production, we do not need extra subscripts for male or female peasants; the subscript h
is sufficient. Historically, men also worked in pastoral farming. Here we make the simplifying assumption that they only work in
grain production on their rented farm land. What is important for our mechanism is that women work relatively more in horn.



                                                                  10
li,F g = 1 − li,h .21 There is no contraception, and married couples produce π births per unit of time.22
Consequently, the number of offspring for woman i is given by

                                                        bi = π(1 − li,h )                                                        (4)

       Given ρi , wM g , and wh , women maximize (1) subject to the consumption utility given by (2), their
income (3), and the birth rate given by (4). In the absence of bequests and investments, the budget constraint
holds with equality, i.e., Ci = Ii . The female optimization problem is then

                                  max {(1 − µ) v (Ii (li,h )) + µ ln [π(1 − li,h ) − b]}                                         (5)
                                   li,h

                                                                           s.t.    0 ≤ li,h ≤ 1

This applies whenever wh > wi,F g . Otherwise, labor in horn is not attractive for women of strength ρi . The
solution to the female optimization problem is described in more detail below.
       Finally, we describe mortality in our model. Death rates among adults are zero until a given period is
over. Overall mortality is thus driven exclusively by child mortality.23 The survival of children depends on
average consumption. The death rate is given by

                                                      d = d0 (c̄p /c)φd ,                                                        (6)

where φd < 0 is the elasticity of child mortality with respect to average per-capita consumption of peasants
(c̄p ), and d0 is the death rate at the reference consumption level c.24 Consequently, mortality falls as p.c.
income rises. Despite the fact that individuals cannot satisfy all their material needs below c, there is no
spike in mortality – the death rate increases continuously as c̄p falls below c. At the end of each period,
parents die and surviving offspring form the next adult generation.
       The optimization problem is static, which simplifies our analysis. This is similar to Jones (2001) and can
be derived from a more general dynamic optimization problem under two assumptions that we make. First,
utility depends on the flow of births rather than on the stock of children. That is, parents care about their
own children, but not about their children’s offspring. Second, we assume in (6) that child mortality depends
on average per-capita consumption. Since women take average consumption as given, child mortality does
not interfere with their optimal labor supply decision. With these assumptions, the more general dynamic
optimization problem (e.g., Barro and Becker, 1989) reduces to a sequence of static problems as given in
(5).

  21
      We implicitly assume that working in grain production is compatible with raising children.
  22
      For simplicity, we treat π as a deterministic frequency, rather than as probability draws. In addition, we assume that child
mortality does not directly influence birth rates. Thus, there is no role for precautionary children in our model.
   23
      Historically, child mortality was the main driver of overall life expectancy.
   24
      A historical justification for child mortality depending on average (rather than individual) income is that its main cause were
diseases like diarrhea and typhus, whose spread depends on hygienic conditions (and therefore income) in the community.



                                                                11
3.2     The Landlord, Location of Production, and Technology

Both technologies – grain (g) and horn (h) – use land and labor as inputs. A landlord owns all land T , which
is in fixed supply. He does not work. Peasants rent land Tg for grain production. On the remaining land
Th = T − Tg , the landlord operates large-scale horn production, hiring female workers and paying them
their marginal product as wages.25 We assume that the horn technology is only available to owners of large
estates, i.e., to the landlord in our model. This is motivated by size differences between arable and pastoral
farms (Campbell, 2000).26
       The landlord does not work and does not derive utility from children; he is infinitely-lived. Therefore,
he does not influence fertility directly. The landlord’s only source of income are land rents, generated by
charging the marginal product of land in the two sectors, rg and rh . He uses his income in each period
to finance activities that are unrelated to agricultural production (e.g., building castles or engaging in war-
fare). Thus, his expenditure does not affect the relative demand for grain vs. horn products. The landlord
maximizes rental income, allocating land optimally between the two sectors:

                                                max {rg Tg + rh (T − Tg )}                                                  (7)
                                                 Tg


Horn output is produced according to:

                                                   Yh = Ah Lαh h Th1−αh ,                                                   (8)

where Ah denotes total factor productivity (TFP), Th is land used for pastoral production, and Lh is total
labor input in this sector. The grain technology is more labor-, and less land-intensive than horn production.
This is represented by αg > αh in the production function

                                                           b αg g Tg1−αg ,
                                                   Yg = Ag L                                                                (9)

where Ag and αg are TFP and the labor share in grain production, respectively; Tg is land dedicated to grain,
    b g denotes effective peasant grain-labor supply. The latter is given by:
and L

                                                   b g = LM,g + L
                                                   L            b F,g .                                                    (10)

               b F,g denote total male and effective female grain-labor input, respectively. While both
where LM,g and L
types of labor are perfectly substitutable, men have a relative advantage compared to women because grain
farming requires arduous physical labor, such as ploughing, threshing, and reaping. This is captured by the
  25
      Alternatively, we could assume that landlords manage the production on all their land, paying grain and horn workers their
marginal product. The crucial assumption for our mechanism is that large-scale horn production requires female workers to remain
celibate.
   26
      A minimum land requirement for horn production would have similar implications for who produces horn. To save on notation
and concentrate on the main mechanism, we do not model this dimension explicitly. Instead we assume that only the landlord
produces horn; peasants can only grow grain on the farm land that they rent.



                                                              12
relative strength parameter ρi < 1 introduced above. Because there is a mass N of peasant households,
                                       bg = N · b
grain labor supply can be expressed as L        lg . The lower case letter denotes the average effective grain
labor supply by peasant households, which is equal to the sum of average male and female labor in grain:
                                   ∫    1                                       ∫   1
                  b
                  lg = lM,g +               ρi · li,F g (ρi )f (ρi )dρi = 1 +           ρi · (1 − li,h (ρi )) f (ρi )dρi .         (11)
                                    0                                           0

To derive the second equality, we used the fact that men work in grain throughout adulthood (lM,g = 1),
while women split their labor supply across the two sectors, li,F g + li,h = 1. The integral in (11) is the
average effective female labor supply in grain, across all strength types ρi . Note that li,h (ρi ) is the share of
adult lifetime that a woman with strength ρi spends working in horn production, so that ρi (1 − li,h (ρi )) is
her effective labor supply in grain. Correspondingly, the average horn labor supply per woman (and thus
                                         ∫1
per peasant household) is given by lh = 0 li,h (ρi )f (ρi )dρi , while Lh = N · lh is the total labor supply in
horn.
       Because peasants do not have access to the large-scale horn technology, production occurs as follows:
Peasants grow grain on rented land, while the landlord engages in livestock farming on large demesnes.
Peasant households (where the woman has strength ρi ) rent land tg (ρi ) for grain production. Thus, the
                                         ∫1
average rented land per household is tg = 0 tg (ρi )f (ρi )dρi . We normalize aggregate land by the mass of
peasant households: t = T /N so that average pastoral land per household is th = t − tg . This completes the
basic setup of our model. Next, we derive factor payments and show how land is allocated between grain
and horn production. In addition, we examine the female labor supply decision.

3.3     Factor Payments and Allocation of Labor

When pastoral production occurs, the landlord pays a wage rate equal to the marginal product of labor in
(8), taking the relative price of horn ph as given:27
                                                        (        )1−αh                    (        )1−αh
                                                            Th                                th
                                  wh = αh ph Ah                           = αh ph Ah                         .                     (12)
                                                            Lh                                lh

Next, we turn to arable production. When growing grain on rented land, the marginal product of male labor
follows from (9) and is given by
                                                         (        )1−αg                 (        )1−αg
                                                             Tg                             tg
                                       wM g = αg Ag                       = αg A g                       .                         (13)
                                                             bg
                                                             L                              b
                                                                                            lg

The marginal product of a married woman in home grain production depends on her strength and is given
by wi,F g = ρi wM g .
  27
     Note that the ratio of pastoral land per household to the labor supply in horn per average peasant household, th /lh , is equivalent
to the aggregate land-labor ratio in horn, Th /Lh . The same is true for the strength-adjusted land-labor ratio in grain production.
In the interest of simplicity, we use the terminology ’land-labor ratio’ in horn and grain in the following, whenever we refer to the
ratios th /lh or tg /b
                     lg


                                                                    13
    Peasant households pay the rental rate rg , while the return to land in horn production is rh , as given by:
                                            (        )αg                                                 (        )αh
                                                b
                                                lg                                                           lh
                         rg = (1 − αg )Ag                    ,     rh = (1 − αh )ph Ah                                    (14)
                                                tg                                                           th

The landlord’s optimal allocation of land according to equation (7) implies rg = rh = r. This yields:

                                            (                           )    1   (        ) αg
                                    th          ph Ah 1 − αh                αh       tg        αh

                                       =                                                            .                     (15)
                                    lh           Ag 1 − αg                           b
                                                                                     lg

This equation says that the land-labor ratio in horn is proportional to its efficiency-adjusted counterpart in
grain production, provided that both sectors operate. Land per unit of labor in horn relative to grain increases
(i) in the TFP ratios – relatively more land is dedicated to the more productive technology, (ii) in the price
of horn ph , and (iii) in the land-intensity of horn relative to grain, as governed by αh and αg .
    Much of our analysis relies on changes in the aggregate land-labor ratio t. With decreasing returns to
labor in both sectors, larger t spells higher wages. The following proposition shows how sector-specific
land-labor ratios change with their aggregate counterpart. The response of ph to income (and thus, t) is
important in this context. For now, we merely assume that dph /dt ≥ 0 (horn is not an inferior good). In
section 3.6 we explicitly model demand for the two goods.

Proposition 1. If both technologies operate and the aggregate land-labor ratio t = T /N grows, then the
                                                 d(th /lh )
land-labor ratio in horn will also increase:        dt           > 0.

PROOF. If both technologies operate and average land per household t increases, factor market clearing
implies that land-labor ratios must increase in at least one of the two sectors. First, suppose that dph /dt = 0.
Then, following (15), d(tg /blg )/dt and d(th /lh )/dt have the same sign. Consequently, both derivatives are
strictly positive. Second, suppose that dph /dt > 0. In this case following (15), if d(tg /b
                                                                                           lg )/dt > 0, then
                                                b
d(th /lh )/dt > 0. On the other hand, if d(tg /lg )/dt ≤ 0, then d(th /lh )/dt > 0 must hold because the
land-labor ratio must increase in at least one of the two sectors when t rises.

    Next, we rearrange (15) and substitute it into (13) to derive the wage rate in grain as a function of the
horn land-labor ratio:
                                            (                           ) 1−αg (               ) αh (1−αg )
                                                  Ag 1 − αg                  αg           th     αg
                           wM g = αg Ag                                                                           .       (16)
                                                 ph Ah 1 − αh                             lh

We have now obtained all wage rates as functions of the land-labor ratio in horn, th /lh . Finally, we derive
the female wage premium in horn production. We divide (12) by the female marginal product in grain
production (using (16) and wM g = wi,F g /ρi ) to obtain:

                                            (            )    1   (               ) 1−αg (               ) αg −αh
                          wh       αh           ph A h       αg       1 − αh          αg            th        αg
                                =                                                                                     .   (17)
                         wi,F g   ρi α g         Ag                   1 − αg                        lh

                                                                 14
The return to female labor in horn vs. grain is therefore driven by four components in our model. First, if
horn technology is highly productive relative to grain technology (Ah /Ag is large), female wages in horn
are comparably high. Second, the same is true if horn products are in high demand, such that ph is high.
Third, wh /wi,F g is low if women are relatively productive in grain (ρi is high). Finally, wh /wi,F g grows
when land becomes more abundant, as the following corollary shows.

Corollary 1. Provided that both sectors operate, the female wage premium in horn is increasing in the
aggregate land-labor ratio: d(wh /wi,F g )/dt > 0, ∀i.

PROOF. Since αg > αh , dph /dt ≥ 0, and d(th /lh )/dt > 0 (Proposition 1), this result follows from
deriving (17) with respect to t.

      Because of Corollary 1, abundance in land after the Black Death makes the horn sector more attractive
to female labor. In addition, if horn products are superior goods (as historical evidence strongly suggests),
higher demand due to increased income (dph /dt > 0) reinforces this effect.

3.4    Fertility and Female Labor Supply for Given Strength ρi

Female labor supply in horn production – and thus fertility – depends crucially on the female wage pre-
mium in horn, which in turn rises and falls with the abundance of farmland. In the following, we explain
this mechanism for a given female strength ρi . The optimization problem (5) yields (for illustration, we
substitute bi and Ii back into the solution):
                                              
                                              
                                               π
                                                       µ   Ii −c+ϵ
                                                                       if Ii > c
                                                      1−µ wh −wi,F g
                                   bi − b =                                                                (18)
                                              
                                                      µ
                                                  π           ϵ
                                                      1−µ wh −wi,F g   if Ii ≤ c

This solution depends crucially on whether or not there is a female wage premium in horn, wh > wi,F g .
We first consider the case where wh ≤ wi,F g . Then, increasing li,h unambiguously lowers female welfare
because both income and birth rates fall according to (3) and (4), respectively. Thus, female workers do not
supply labor in horn production, and we obtain a corner solution with li,h = 0 and bi = π. This holds for
both Ii > c and Ii ≤ c.
      Next, we describe the solution when horn labor offers a wage premium, wh > wi,F g . In the following,
we refer to this case as horn production being economically viable for women of strength ρi . If the income
condition Ii > c holds, the first line in (18) describes the solution, and the birth rate bi increases in wages
(income effect). At the same time, bi falls in the horn wage premium, because a higher wh > wi,F g makes
celibate work time more rewarding for women (wage premium effect). Which of the two effects dominates
depends on how close income is to c, and is discussed in detail below. Finally, for incomes below c, the
second line in (18) describes the solution, which depends on the ratio of ϵ to wh − wi,F g . Because ϵ is
infinitesimal, any wh > wi,F g implies that this ratio is very small. Thus, birth rates are at (or close to) the
minimum: b ≃ b.

                                                           15
       Summing up, we distinguish between three regimes for birth rates. When horn does not offer a wage
premium (wh ≤ wi,F g ), birth rates are constant and high; in the presence of a wage premium (wh > wi,F g )
birth rates are low and constant if income is below c, and increasing in income if it exceeds c. Equation
(19) gives the corresponding results for female labor supply in horn, li,h . We begin with a low land-labor
ratio, such that horn is not economically viable for women of strength ρi (i.e., wh ≤ wi,F g ); hence, li,h = 0.
When land-labor ratios rise and horn labor becomes attractive given strength ρi , the solution depends on
whether or not female income Ii exceeds c. If it does not, we are in the second regime of (19), and women
of type i work the maximum time in horn, li,h = lh , which just ensures b children (lh ≡ 1 − b/π). If income
exceeds c, we obtain the internal solution given by the third regime.
                                 
                                 
                                  0,                                  if wh ≤ wi,F g
                                 
                                 
                        li,h   =   lh ,                                if wh > wi,F g and Ii (lh ) ≤ c                           (19)
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                  (1 − µ)l − µ        wi,F g −c+ϵ
                                           h           wh −wi,F g ,    if wh > wi,F g and Ii (lh ) > c

There is a complication related to determining the cutoff point between the second and the third regime,
i.e., the point where Ii = c. Income Ii is itself a function of li,h , as given by (3). To resolve this issue,
we use the fact that in the second regime li,h = lh , so that the corresponding female income is given by
Ii (lh ) = wi,F g (1 − lh ) + wh lh . This is the maximum income that can be earned when wh > wi,F g , under
the constraint b ≥ b. We can thus use the income condition Ii (lh ) ≤ c to determine the cutoff point between
the second and the third regime.
       Note that Ii (lh ) is increasing in the horn land-labor ratio because all wage rates increase in th /lh (see
equations (12) and (16)). In addition, wh /wi,F g rises with th /lh , as given by (17). The transition from
the first to the third regime can thus be illustrated as a function of the land-labor ratio in horn, as shown
in Figure 2.28 The upper panel depicts both wh /wi,F g and Ii (lh )/c as functions of th /lh , for women with
strength ρi = 0.5 (the average in our calibration below). The lower panel shows the corresponding female
labor supply in horn, li,h , as well as the birth rate bi . Because of the wage premium condition (dashed line),
work in horn is viable for female strength-type i only if it pays more than the marginal product in grain
production, wi,F g = ρi wM g . Thus, for wh /wi,F g ≤ 1, women of strength ρi do not work in horn, such
that li,h = 0 (regime 1 in (19)). Growing th /lh eventually leads to wh /wi,F g > 1, making the horn sector
attractive for female labor (beyond point A). The exact level of li,h then depends on the income condition,
depicted by the solid line in the upper panel. When th /lh – and thus income – is low, i.e., if Ii (lh )/c ≤ 1,
women of type i are still below the reference level c. In this case, they supply the maximum possible female
labor in horn, li,h = lh (regime 2).

                                                     [Insert Figure 2 here]
  28
     At this point, it is convenient to focus on the horn land-labor ratio. All qualitative arguments also hold for the aggregate land-
labor ratio T /N (Proposition 1). However, to to derive the exact (increasing) functional relationship between T /N and th /lh , we
have to solve for the general equilibrium of the model. Here, it is sufficient to concentrate on the partial equilibrium for a given
th /lh in order to illustrate the intuition for female labor supply decisions.


                                                                 16
    Further increases in th /lh finally allow consumption above the reference level c (point B, where Ii /c =
1). With th /lh rising beyond this point (regime 3), two effects govern female labor supply decisions. First,
the wage premium effect leads to more work in horn when wh increases relative to wi,F g . Second, the
income effect implies less female labor in horn production (and more children) as income grows.29 The
income effect dominates for all relevant land-labor ratios in our model.30 Therefore, li,h falls in th /lh .
    This discussion leads to a crucial condition for the emergence of EMP:

Proposition 2. Women of strength ρi make optimal fertility decisions in line with EMP (Definition 1) over
                                                                                    T                    T
some range of aggregate land-labor ratios (T /N ) if and only if                    N wh =wi,F g    <    N Ii =c   , i.e., if the horn
technology offers a wage premium for strength ρi at land-labor-ratios that do not yet grant the reference
consumption for this strength-type.

PROOF: See Appendix A.1, where we show that bi < b and that bi is upward sloping in income over some
range if the condition holds, while bi is always downward sloping otherwise.

    While Proposition 2 is formulated for the more general aggregate land-labor ratio, it equivalently applies
to the horn-specific land-labor ratio th /lh (Proposition 1). Proposition 2 thus implies that point A in Figure
2 has to be to the left of point B for EMP to emerge. In other words, EMP-fertility behavior emerges for a
given strength when income is below c at the point where horn becomes economically viable. In this case,
the income effect over-compensates the wage premium effect. Thus, on net, li,h falls in the land-labor ratio
– and birth rates rise. On the other hand, if A lies to the right of B, the income effect is relatively weak:
When horn becomes viable, women are already relatively rich. At the same time, the horn wage premium is
small relative to income. In this setting, women do not forego children for work in horn, so that li,h = 0.31
Thus, EMP does not emerge. The proof of the proposition builds on this intuition.
    Proposition 2 has implications for the relative productivity across sectors that allows EMP to emerge.
We assume that the densely populated pre-plague economy has low land-labor ratios such that the horn
sector is only attractive for few women. The plague causes massive land abundance. Corollary 2 discusses
under which condition this leads to the emergence of fertility behavior in line with EMP.

Corollary 2. The following properties favor the emergence of EMP fertility behavior after large population
losses: (i) TFP in the grain sector, Ag , is relatively low, (ii) TFP in the horn sector, Ah , is relatively high,
   29
      To understand the income effect, suppose that Ii is close to, but larger than, c. Thus, li,h is below its upper bound. Now suppose
that productivity falls at the same rate in both grain and horn, pulling income yet closer to the reference level but leaving wh /wi,F g
unchanged. As a result, the marginal utility of consumption rises dramatically. Therefore, for a given premium wh > wi,F g , female
peasants shift labor supply to the horn sector, delaying marriage and giving birth to fewer children over their lifetime. Consequently,
the income effect implies that wage rates and female labor shares in horn move in opposite directions.
   30
      Technically, the income effect is strong when Ii is relatively close to c, and eventually becomes minuscule for very large land-
labor ratios – in the limit, the model behaves like a standard log-utility setup such as in Galor and Weil (1996). At these high land
labor ratios, the wage premium effect is also small relative to the income level. Thus, li,h and bi approximately become constant in
the limit (see appendix A.1 for further detail).
   31
      Technically, the third line in (19) becomes negative if wi,F g − c is large relative to wh − wi,F g . Thus, the constraint li,h ≥ 0
is binding. Intuitively, the wage premium (and thus the cost of children) is so low that – if they could – women would pay to have
more than π children.


                                                                  17
(iii) on average women are relatively unproductive in grain production (the mean of ρi is relatively small),
and (iv) horn is a luxury product so that its relative price increases with income.

PROOF: See Appendix A.2.

      We show in section 3.9 that conditions (i)-(iii) were more likely to hold in Europe than in China when
both regions were hit by the plague in the 14th century. Historical evidence presented in Section 4.2 also
suggests that demand for horn surged after the Black Death, supporting condition (iv).

3.5    Heterogeneous Strength, Aggregate Labor in Horn, and Fertility

So far, we have analyzed fertility and labor supply decisions for individual women of a given strength ρi .
We now derive the aggregate behavior, averaging across all strength types. The average birth rate is given
      ∫1
by b = 0 bi (ρi )f (ρi )dρi . We use a beta distribution for f (·), which ensures that female strength ρ is in the
unit interval. We set both shape parameters equal to 2 – this is the simplest form of a symmetric distribution
with mean 0.5.32 Figure 3 shows that women of low and high strength react differently to rising land-labor
                                             high
ratios. We use values for ρlow
                           i   and ρi               that are one standard deviation below and above the mean of our
strength type distribution, respectively. The left panel shows that women with ρlow
                                                                                i   begin to work in horn at
relatively low land-labor ratios (point A). This is because their foregone wage in grain production is low, so
that even small horn wages are attractive. In addition, income in point A is below the reference level c. Thus,
the horn wage premium provides a large marginal utility, so that women of type ρlow
                                                                                i   work the maximum
                                                                                                 high
amount of time in horn, lh . This is in stark contrast to women with strength ρi                        (right panel). For these,
income exceeds c already at low land-labor ratios due to their high productivity in grain. At the same time,
the horn sector is unattractive, not offering them a wage premium.33 Thus, physically strong women do not
work in horn, because for them point A is located to the right of point B (when horn becomes viable, income
already exceeds the reference level c). Note that increasing female strength moves point A to the right and
point B to the left – making it less likely that fertility restriction will arise for stronger women. In Appendix
A.3 we discuss this in more detail and derive the cutoff strength type ρA=B for which A and B coincide –
i.e., the maximum female strength at which women still make fertility choices in line with EMP.

                                                     [Insert Figure 3 here]

      Next, we derive the average horn labor supply and fertility across all strength types. Figure 4 shows
the average woman’s labor in horn, implied by individual behavior together with the strength distribution.
Initially, female labor in horn rises in the land-labor ratio. This is because horn becomes attractive for
increasingly stronger women. They work at the limit lh , because their income is below c (see the left panel
of Figure 3). Eventually, at sufficiently high land-labor ratios, further increases do not attract additional
   32
      Appendix A.3 shows the distribution. Higher values for the shape parameters lead to tighter distributions. We show in Appendix
A.6 that our results are robust to alternative specifications.
   33
      For large land-labor ratios, the horn sector will eventually offer a wage premium. However, this is so small relative to income
that it does not incentivize women to work in horn (see footnote 31).


                                                                18
women into horn production.34 In addition, women who already work in horn provide less labor than
previously because their wages are above the reference level c (see the range to the right of point B in Figure
2). In combination, an increase in the land-labor ratio first fosters female labor in horn, but eventually leads
to declining labor in horn by raising female incomes beyond c. Correspondingly, fertility first decreases
with land abundance but then increases. Note that throughout this discussion we have focused on the female
labor supply in partial equilibrium. In the following, we close the model by adding labor and goods demand.
This allows us to determine two central parameters in general equilibrium that we have taken as given so far
– the share of land dedicated to horn production (th ), and the relative price of horn (ph ).

                                                     [Insert Figure 4 here]

3.6    Closing the Model: Demand Side and Market Clearing

In this section we introduce the consumption preferences across the two goods, describe demand, and close
the model. We use standard Stone-Geary preferences, where consumption of horn products only takes place
if at least c of grain is consumed. This is in line with our interpretation of c as a reference consumption level
that satisfies basic needs. For women with Ii > c, the expenditure shares for the two products are given by:
                                                                   ( )
                                                ci,g                 c
                                                     = ϕ + (1 − ϕ)
                                                 Ii                  Ii
                                                                         ( )
                                             ph ci,h                      c
                                                     = (1 − ϕ) − (1 − ϕ)                                                        (20)
                                               Ii                         Ii

where ci,g (ci,g ) is grain (horn) consumption of women with strength-type i, and ϕ is the weight on the
grain part of utility.35 When Ii ≤ c, all income is used for grain consumption: ci,g = Ii and ci,h = 0.
Preferences of male peasants have the same structure, with Ii replaced by wM g . Appendix A.4 states the
preferences in detail and shows that the implied indirect utility is compatible with our general setup in
(2). The expenditure shares in (20) imply that once consumption passes the reference level, peasants spend
growing proportions of their income on horn products. For very high income levels Ii >> c, the horn
expenditure share converges to the constant 1 − ϕ. Therefore, the horn demand effect driven by the non-
homothetic preferences is strongest when income is still relatively low, which coincides with the emergence
of EMP.
      Aggregate demand for the two products is obtained by integrating over all strength types for the N
women, and by using the homogeneous income wM G for the N men. Market clearing implies that total
peasant expenditures for each product must equal total output, net of the landlord’s consumption. We have
now fully specified the model; we first solve it for a given land-labor ratio t = T /N . This yields aggregate
birth rates and death rates as functions of t – and thus also as functions of income per capita. In Appendix
A.5 we show the related algebra and explain how we solve the system of equations.
   34
      At such high land-labor ratios, horn offers a wage premium even for strong types with ρi > ρA=B . However, for these women
work in horn is not attractive (their point A lies to right of point B; see the right panel of Figure 3, as well as Appendix A.3).
   35
      The ratio of expenditures for the two products can be written as (ci,g − c)/(ph ci,h ) = ϕ/(1 − ϕ). Thus, the expenditure shares
relative to c are constant, as in a common Cobb-Douglas utility setup.


                                                                 19
3.7     Model Parameters

Our model’s main purpose is to illustrate the mechanism leading to the emergence of EMP. We estimate
the quantitative importance of our mechanism in the empirical section below. Thus, the exact parameter
values mainly serve an illustrative purpose. Whenever concrete numbers for parameters can be derived
from historical figures, we use these. For the remainder, we choose simple approximations. We focus
on England, where data is relatively abundant, and where births were particularly responsive to economic
conditions (Lee, 1981; Wrigley and Schofield, 1981). For the labor shares of production in grain and horn
we use αg = 0.7 and αh = 0.4.36 For the average productivity of women relative to men in grain we use
ρ = 0.5, reflecting the fact that English women’s wages were equivalent to 50-63% of English male wages
(Kussmaul, 1981; Allen, 2009); this is also compatible with the range reported by van Zanden (2011) for
relative female wages in reaping and haymaking. For the corresponding beta distribution we use a simple
symmetric form with a mean of 0.5 (as discussed in Section 3.5).37
       Turning to the demographic parameters, we choose π = 3 (peasant families have three children when
women do not work in horn), b = 2 (two children is the lower bound for birth rates). This captures the fact
that EMP avoided up to one third of all births (Clark, 2007).38 For the elasticity of death rates with respect
to income we use φd = −0.25. This is the average across all 50-year estimates for England from Kelly and
Ó Grada (2010) between 1600 and 1800.39 We choose d0 = 0.84π in (6). This implies that there is already
some horn production prior to the Black Death. Dyer (1988) shows that livestock products account for about
50% of the value of food consumption during the high-wage decades after 1350. The corresponding share
in the model is given by 1 − ϕ for a rich economy. We thus use ϕ = 0.5 for the parameter in the Stone-Geary
utility function. The remaining parameters can be chosen with greater degrees of freedom. We use µ = 0.5
for the relative importance of children in female utility (alternatively, 0.25 or 0.75 yield very similar results).
We normalize c = 1 and land T = 1. Finally, we choose TFP in grain and horn, Ag = 3.5 and Ah = 1.50.

3.8     Steady States and Stability of EMP

We now turn to the steady states and the contribution of EMP to sustaining higher p.c. income levels
after the Black Death. Figure 5 shows the simulation results for our complete model. We plot average
peasant household income on the vertical axis, which increases in the land-labor ratio. The economy has
  36
      This is calculated as follows: We take the estimates of revenue and cost on arable and pastoral farms from Allen (1988) and
combine them with the figures for labor cost per acre from Allen (1991). We find that both relative to costs and revenue, labor’s
share in pastoral farming is approximately half of the value in arable production. This determines the relative magnitudes of αg
and αh . To calculate the levels, we use an average labor share in agriculture of 0.5. According to the figures in Broadberry,
Campbell, and van Leeuwen (2011), arable production was 32% of total agricultural production, while pastoral farming accounted
for 68%. We chose αg = 0.7 and αh = 0.4 so that the average weight of labor in agriculture is identical with the value of 0.5:
0.32 × 0.7 + 0.68 × 0.4 = 0.496.
   37
      Our baseline setup with both parameters of the distribution equal to 2 implies a standard deviation of 0.22. The model is robust
to alternative parameters. For example, choosing 5 instead of 2 for both parameters (implying a standard deviation of .15) yields
very similar results.
   38
      Note that this is a conservative choice for an upper bound. Because strong women do not work in horn, aggregate fertility does
not drop down to b. Choosing lower values for b implies a steeper decline in fertility.
   39
      In Appendix A.6 we discuss the implications of alternative choices for this parameter.


                                                                 20
two stable steady states. The first (EL ) has high population pressure and low p.c. income, while the second
(EH ) involves lower fertility and higher peasant income. The unstable steady state EU lies in between. A
large income shock (such as the Black Death) can trigger the emergence of EMP. This occurs when the
increase in land-labor ratios is large enough to push the economy beyond EU , inducing the transition from
EL to EH . Average peasant income at EH is about double the pre-plague level. While this is above the
increase in wages after the Black Death, we do not expect our simple parameterization to pin down historical
magnitudes exactly.40 What is important is that our findings underline the role of fertility restriction for
increasing living standards in early modern Europe. At the same time, it is clear that EMP alone cannot
account for all of the European (English) lead in terms of per capita income in 1700. Additional factors may
include a different mortality regime, as well as (to a limited extent) technological change. We examine the
contributions of these two other factors in Voigtländer and Voth (2013) in detail.

                                                     [Insert Figure 5 here]

3.9    International Comparisons

Europe was not the only area to suffer from deadly plagues. Yet it is the only one to have evolved a regime
of fertility restriction based on a socio-economic institution that avoided births through delayed marriage.
In this section, we argue that specific European characteristics are responsible for the emergence of EMP,
and that other regions were less likely to evolve a similar way of reducing fertility.

Divergence within Europe
Fertility control in Northwestern Europe was particularly stringent. In Southern Europe, EMP reduced
fertility by less. In Eastern Europe, EMP did not exist at all. Why did such differences evolve?
      In Southern Europe, both age at first marriage and the percentage never marrying were lower than in
the Northwest. Population recovered relatively quickly from the impact of the Black Death. In Italy and
Spain, it returned to the pre-1350 peak by the 16th century. In contrast, England probably did not reach pre-
plague population levels until the 17th or even the 18th century.41 Rapid recoveries of Southern European
populations also reversed post-plague wage gains. Changes in agriculture were less pronounced there. In
particular, while the temporary spike in incomes after 1350 improved wages, it did not lead to the evolution
of service as a standard phase in the transition from childhood to adulthood. If the shock of the plague
was similar, why did it not cause similar social and economic changes? According to Corollary 2, Ah /Ag
is crucial. We argue that low horn productivity Ah prevented the emergence of EMP in Southern Europe,
while high grain productivity Ag had the same effect in Eastern Europe.
      Agricultural conditions in Mediterranean countries did not favor the pastoral farming of the type com-
mon in Northwestern Europe. In particular, low rainfall made it impossible to keep large herds of cattle and
sheep in the same area year-round. Transhumance – the driving of livestock from one area to another – is an
   40
      We obtain similar results for perfect substitutability between horn and grain, i.e., when shutting down the demand effect so that
all results are driven by land abundance (Appendix A.6).
   41
      There is considerable uncertainty about the size of the pre-plague population in England. Slow recovery was not a universal
feature of the Northwestern European experience – the Netherlands experienced rapid population growth (Pamuk, 2007).


                                                                 21
ancient custom in Mediterranean countries, with numerous routes recorded as far back as Roman times. The
most famous is arguably the Spanish Mesta – a council of shepherds that controlled transhumance under a
grant from the Spanish King, allowing them to drive their flocks across a vast stretch of territory extending
from Extremadura and Andalusia to Castile.42 Traversing sparsely populated areas on their own was not
compatible with women’s social role in early modern Europe. Work in husbandry was predominantly per-
formed by men. Without the rise of service in husbandry as a typical phase in young women’s life, marriage
ages remained low.43
       In Eastern Europe, grain productivity was high. Especially in Western Russia and Ukraine, land is
unusually fertile (Nunn and Qian, 2011). In addition, labor was not free, and wages did not surge to the
same extent as in Western Europe after the plague. Instead, landlords continued to farm their estates using
serf labor in arable production. Population declines in Eastern Europe were probably smaller than they were
in the West (Benedictow, 2004). In the presence of high grain productivity, and without a major jump in
land-labor ratios, cattle and sheep farming remained uncompetitive vis-a-vis grain production.

Comparison with China
China also suffered from a devastating plague outbreak in the 14th century, but it did not develop fertility
restriction comparable to EMP. We first summarize Chinese demographic patterns and then apply the main
insights from our model to this case. Why did the same shock not lead to the emergence of a ’low pressure’
demographic regime? We argue that high Chinese grain productivity Ag was key.
       In contrast to Europe, marriage in China occurred early and was near-universal for women. For the
period 1640-1870, the percentage of women not married by age 30 ranged from 4% in Beijing to 1% in
Liaoning (Lee and Feng, 1999). The age at first marriage for women was also low. Amongst members of
the Imperial Qing family in Beijing, age at first marriage was 15.5-19 years in the 17th century. By 1840,
it had risen to 22 years. Marriage outside the urban areas, and amongst those not belonging to the nobility,
probably continued to occur much earlier. In the early 20th century, Chinese women on average married
aged 17.5 (Lee, Feng, and Ruan, 2001).44
       In Appendix B.3 we show that grain production in China was approximately 4 times more efficient than
in England. Following Corollary 2, higher grain productivity makes the emergence of EMP less likely, by
lowering the wage premium that horn labor can offer to women. Thus, our model suggests that – para-
doxically – China’s high land productivity, as emphasized by the revisionist ’California School’ (Pomer-
anz, 2000; Goldstone, 2003), undermined the evolution of fertility limitation. Also, as population pressure
mounted in China, ploughing with oxen disappeared. Consequently, the strength requirements for grain and
  42
      Originally, shepherds took advantage of the agricultural no-man’s-land between Christian and Muslim areas of control. Grad-
ually, the use became institutionalized.
   43
      Similar questions could be raised about the non-emergence of EMP in the early medieval period, when land-labor ratios were
high. For the emergence of EMP, a large-scale, commercial-operated horn sector is key. While we do not explicitly model this
aspect, functioning markets for relatively long-distance trade were crucial. These did not exist in the early Middle Ages.
   44
      While irrelevant for fertility, the same was not true in the case of men. A significant proportion remained unmarried by age
30. The main reason was the unavailability of women. Due to female infanticide, and the practice of taking multiple wives, many
men could not marry. The overall proportion in 1800 was around 22%, compared to 45% in England, Norway, and Sweden. The
average age at marriage for men was 21-22 (Lee and Feng, 1999). Appendix B.3 provides further discussion.


                                                               22
rice production were lower. This eroded the relative male advantage in the grain (rice) sector. Therefore,
the relative female productivity in grain, ρ, was higher than in Europe. As Corollary 2 shows, this made the
emergence of EMP more difficult. In sum, large Ag paired with relatively high ρ in China avoided the shift
to pastoral agriculture and thus the emergence of a female labor market outside the household.


4         Empirical Evidence
According to our model, pastoral production leads to more employment opportunities for women as servants.
This causes the female age at first marriage to rise. In this section, we test this prediction. We first show
that pastoral production was indeed correlated with a high share of unmarried females, and that this was
already true in the Middle Ages. To demonstrate this, we use several types of new data. From 14th century
tax records, we construct proxies for the share of unmarried females, county-by-county, in 1381 – shortly
after the plague. In addition, we use detailed data from employment records of early modern English farms
to show that pastoral farms used female labor on a far greater scale.
         The second prediction of our model concerns the expansion of pastoral production after 1349. We show
that there was a massive rise in pastoral output as incomes surged. We then examine our third empirical
prediction – that late female marriage was "sticky." Once EMP had reached its full strength, it did not
disappear for centuries. We analyze data on the female age at first marriage in panel of parishes, compiled
by the Cambridge Group of Population Studies (CAMPOP). High suitability for pastoral agriculture (due
to soil and climate characteristics) predicts markedly later ages at first marriage for women. In addition,
in these areas, servants mostly worked in livestock farming, as indicated by the seasonality of marriages.
Finally, where a drastic shift away from arable farming towards pastoral farming occurred after the Black
Death, female ages at marriage were markedly higher even centuries later. Table 2 summarizes the evidence
we employ and the steps of the causal chain they refer to. In the following, we begin with evidence from the
middle ages, move on to the early modern period, and then use data from the mid-19th century.

                                                         [Insert Table 2 here]

4.1        Pastoral production and unmarried females in the Middle Ages

Since there is no direct way to estimate the age at first marriage in England before the 16th century, we rely
on a proxy variable for marriage behavior – the implied share of unmarried women as reflected in the poll tax
returns of 1377 and 1381.45 The tax charge levied on each person increased three-fold over the four years.
This lead to wide-spread evasion in 1381, with the number of tax payers dropping by more than one third:
"[E]very shire of England returned an incredibly small number of adult inhabitants liable to the impost. The
adult population of the realm had ostensibly fallen from 1,355,201 to 896,481 persons. These figures were
monstrous and incredible (Oman, 1906)." What is of interest to us is which taxpayers disappeared from the
records between 1377 and 1381: "A glance at the details of the township-returns...reveals the simple form
    45
         If women eventually get married, the proportion of unmarried females is a good proxy for the age at first marriage.


                                                                    23
of evasion...most villages show an enormous and impossible predominance of males in their population, and
an equally incredible want of unmarried females."46 In Appendix B.6 we provide confirming evidence from
a sample of 193 settlements in 22 counties for which individual poll tax records survived. We show that
’missing unmarried women’ can account for a substantial proportion of the drop in tax payers.
       There is data on the aggregate number of taxpayers in 1377 and 1381 for 38 counties. The drop in their
number has a mean of .33 and ranges from .07 to .65. We use data on land usage in 1290 (P astoral1290 )
from Broadberry et al. (2011) to determine which counties were predominantly pastoral.47 Figure 6 shows
a strong and positive correlation of the drop in taxpayers with the share of pastoral land in 1290. In Table
3, we test the link statistically. Column 1 shows that the correlation is positive and highly significant. In
column 2, we control for population density, and column 3 includes regional fixed effects. The size and
significance of the coefficient on pastoral land use is largely unaffected. The magnitude of the coefficient
indicates that a one-standard deviation (.15) increase in the share of pastoral land in 1290 is associated with
a 10-15% drop in the number of tax payers.48

                                                    [Insert Figure 6 here]

       One obvious concern is omitted variable bias, with a variety of factors influencing marriage ages or
celibacy that could be correlated with pastoral land use.49 To sidestep causality issues, we exploit the
suitability of land and climatic conditions for grazing as an instrument, using the number of days during
which grass can grow in different English counties from Down, Jollans, Lazenby, and Wilkins (1981).50 In
column 4 we use ln(daysgrass) as an instrument for P astoral1290 . The instrument is strong, with the first-
stage F-statistic well above 10. The estimated coefficient under IV is larger than in the same specification
under OLS (column 1). This is what one should expect given that the pastoral share in 1290 is only a proxy
and likely measured with error.

                                                     [Insert Table 3 here]
  46
       Oman (1906, p.23); our emphasis. For full quotation, see Appendix B.9. A similar point is made by Goldberg (1990, p.195):
"Married couples are seemingly over-numerous; solitaries, females especially, but also servants, too few. The population recorded
compares unfavourably...with totals recorded for earlier taxes." Without massive evasion, the overall turnout of the poll taxes in
1377 and 1381 should have been similar – in the former, every person of fourteen years and older was liable, in the latter, everybody
fifteen and over.
    47
       Broadberry et al. (2011) give information on the share of land used for arable farming. We use (1-arable) as our measure of
pastoral farming. In Appendix B.5 we show that this proxy is very close to the actual share of pastoral land (using data from 1836),
and that it is strongly associated with livestock production.
    48
       In Appendix B.6, we examine the proportion of unmarried men in a sample of settlement-level tax returns – this proxy allows
us to shed more light on the magnitude of effects. We show that a one standard deviation increase in P astoral1290 is associated
with roughly a 3.7% decline in the proportion of unmarried men.
    49
       Such a factor could be higher per capita income driving up the demand for dairy and beef, and simultaneously encouraging
later marriage.
    50
       Appendix B.5 provides additional detail and shows that the first-stage relationship between the share of pastoral land and
ln(daysgrass) is strong and robust to controlling for general crop suitability. It also shows that our results are very similar when
including general crop suitability as an additional instrument, predicting which regions are relatively less suitable for pastoral
production because of their high arable productivity.




                                                                24
4.2     Agricultural Production and Consumption after the Black Death

Prior to the Black Death, population was increasing while land was in fixed supply – output per capita
was stagnant (Campbell, 2000; Broadberry et al., 2011). Then, the Black Death killed one third to half of
the population. Output per capita surged, and 1350 became a turning point for real wages. By 1450, real
wages in England were 50% higher than they had been on the eve of the plague (Clark, 2005). Per capita
consumption of food overall increased. As consumers grew richer, their consumption patterns shifted from
’corn to horn’ (Campbell, 2000). More money was spent on ’luxury foods:’ Meat and milk consumption
increased markedly. For farm workers on large estates, we can quantify these changes: The percentage
of calories from meat and fish rose from 7% in 1256 to 26% in 1424 (Dyer, 1988). The Great Plague
also caused major changes in production (Apostolides, Broadberry, Campbell, Overton, and van Leeuwen,
2008):

         Between the mid-thirteenth century and the mid-fourteenth century, factor costs and property
         rights encouraged lords to...concentrate on arable production. Following the Black Death, how-
         ever, lords found it...increasingly expensive to hire wage labour, following a substantial increase
         in wage rates. ...Lords...switched away from labour intensive arable production to mixed hus-
         bandry and pastoral production, leaving arable production to peasants who could rely mainly
         on family labour...

       Campbell (2000) estimates that grain acreage declined by approximately 15 percent after 1349, while
livestock reared for meat and milk increased by up to 90 percent. Sheep-farming husbandry expanded
everywhere. The estimates of Broadberry et al. (2011) suggest that pastoral output increased rapidly between
1348 and 1555, while arable output only grew slowly. The share of pastoral production in agricultural value
added went from 47 to 70 percent, while that of arable declined from 53 to 30 percent between 1270-79 and
1450-59.
       Large landowners switched to pastoral farming for two reasons: First, it economized on labor. Per
acre, husbandry required 15-25% fewer hands than arable production (Allen, 1988). Second, cheap labor
(in particular, of women) replaced that of adult males. We use data from Allen’s (1988) estimates of labor
usage to demonstrate the size of the effects involved. The average reduction in labor cost is substantial – for
farms of the same size, the labor cost per acre on average was fully a quarter lower. Since pastoral farms
were on average five times larger, they also profited from economies of scale (Allen, 1988). In combination,
this means that average costs per acre in pasture were 75% lower than in arable farming.51 Allen’s (1991)
early modern data also demonstrate that switching from arable to pastoral farming was associated with a
larger role for women in the labor force. Switching to livestock farming increased the share of females
employed from 26 to 34% on smaller farms (100 acres), and from 19 to 31% on larger ones (250 acres;
see Appendix B.1 for detail). This is because livestock production is particularly well-suited to women and
  51
    Appendix B.1 provides more detail on these numbers and plots the cost of labor per acre for a variety of farm sizes, for both
pastoral and arable farms. Allen’s data is based on Arthur Young’s travels in England during the 18th century. He argues that
labor-saving in pastoral farming relative to arable was even stronger in 1600 and 1700 (Allen, 1988).


                                                              25
children (Smith, 1981). Work as shepherdesses, as milkmaids or in spinning required less physical strength
than plough agriculture. The switch from ’corn to horn’ therefore implied a shift in demand from male to
female labor. It also involved hiring more help from outside the family. Allen (1988) shows that the average
ratio of hired to family labor was 2.3:1 in pastoral farming, but only 1.5:1 in arable.52

4.3     Pastoralism and Marriage Ages after 1600

Next, we examine the association between pastoral output and marriage ages during the early modern period.
We first show that the share of land used for livestock farming is a good predictor of the age at first marriage,
and that the shift out of arable and into pastoral farming after the Black Death is also associated with a higher
age at first marriage. In addition, we demonstrate that spring marriage – reflecting the seasonality of pastoral
agriculture – is a strong predictor of late female marriage. Finally, the 1851 British census provides direct
evidence that farm service was associated with markedly lower marriage rates.
       As the main dependent variable, we use detailed data from family reconstitutions compiled by CAMPOP,
which reconstructed the complete family "trees" of 26 parishes in England starting in 1541 (Wrigley et al.,
1997).53 The average age of first marriage for women in the sample is 25.0, with a (county-level) minimum
of 21.6 and a maximum of 28.6.
       How much of the variation in marriage ages can be explained by the prevalence of pastoral farming and
the switch from "corn to horn" in the Middle Ages? One direct measure of the switch to pastoral production
comes from deserted medieval villages (DMVs) in England (Beresford, 1989). Villages were abandoned in
the late medieval period for a variety of reasons, including general population decline after the Black Death.
One important consequence was the move to pastoral farming, especially sheep farming – areas where once
cereals had been cultivated by local farmers were turned over to grazing.54
       The shift to pastoral farming was massive, and it was near-permanent. If we simply examine mean first
female marriage age, conditional on the density of DMVs per county, we find a clear pattern. Appendix
B.7 provides a more detailed analysis and shows the distributional graph. The modal age at marriage was
markedly higher in parts of England with more abandoned medieval villages, reflecting a strong shift towards
pastoralism after the Black Death.
       In Table 4, we examine the effect of pastoralism and DMVs on the female age at first marriage. In
columns 1-3, we present results for the entire period covered by CAMPOP – five periods between 1600 and
1837.55 We find strong effects throughout. Both P astoral1290 and DM V are significantly correlated with
the female age at first marriage in our panel (column 1). Using fixed effects for larger regions to control for
unobserved heterogeneity (column 2) does not change our results. In column 3 we re-estimate our results
  52
      In Appendix B.2, we examine anthropological evidence on the use of female labor. It clearly shows that pastoral agriculture is
more compatible with the employment of women.
   53
      Their data on age at marriage is given for 26 parishes and five periods between 1600 and 1837. We geo-referenced the parishes
analyzed by CAMPOP and matched them to county-level data on agricultural production and suitability.
   54
      Broadberry et al. (2011) exploit information on DMVs to quantify the change from "corn to horn" after 1290. A full quote of
their assessment is in Appendix B.9.
   55
      All regressions include period fixed effects. The 26 parishes are located in 15 different counties. Because the explanatory
variables are observed for each county, we cluster standard errors at the county level.


                                                                26
with ln(daysgrass) as an instrument for P astoral1290 . We find large and significant coefficients for both
the share of pastoral land use in 1290 as well as for our proxy of medieval land conversion to livestock
farming (DM V ). The coefficients are similar if we restrict our sample to the period 1600-1749 excluding
the period after the onset of the Industrial Revolution (columns 4-6). The effects are quantitatively important.
A one standard deviation increase in the share of land devoted to pastoral farming in 1290 (.15) went hand-
in-hand with average female first marriages occurring .6-1.2 years later; a one standard deviation increase
in the number of DMVs per 100,000 acres raised marriage ages by a third to half a year. How important
was pastoral production overall for late marriage? The variable P astoral1290 has a mean of .57. Given
our preferred specifications in Table 4 – the IV estimates in columns 3 and 6 – this implies that pastoralism
overall raised the average age of female marriage by more than 4 years.

                                                 [Insert Table 4 here]

       We can also show that the link between pastoral land use and late female marriage is closely associated
with the employment of female servants in the pastoral sector. Kussmaul (1990) collected data on the
seasonality of marriage from Anglican marriage registers for 542 parishes in England. These are classified
as pastoral-type (P) if marriage frequency during the autumn was low, but high in the spring: Servants in
husbandry would typically marry after the lambing season in spring. Workers in arable areas, in contrast,
often married after the harvest season, in the late summer. We use the county-level share of parishes with
spring marriage pattern as the explanatory variable.56 Table 5 shows a strong positive association between
pastoral marriage patterns and the age at first marriage. In column 1, we exploit both time-series and cross-
sectional variation. The effect is strong and significant in the sample overall (Panel A), but it is smaller
and not statistically significant when we exclude data after 1749 (Panel B). Column 2 includes time period
dummies to control for overall trends in pastoral production and age at marriage. While the magnitude of
the coefficients is unchanged, the standard errors are now marginally greater than necessary for conventional
levels of significance.

                                                 [Insert Table 5 here]

       The Kussmaul measure is inherently noisy because many other factors besides work in husbandry affect
the date of marriage. To deal with measurement error, we instrument spring marriages by land use and
soil suitability. IV-results (columns 3-4) indicate large and significant effects. For example, the estimation
results in column 3 – where we instrument with the pastoral share in 1290 – suggest that a one standard
deviation increase in the share of parishes with a pastoral marriage pattern (.13) would raise mean female
age at first marriage by .8 years. When using the number of days of grass growth as an instrument, the
effect is 30% larger. This implies that the part of marriage seasonality driven by pastoral land use is a
powerful predictor of late marriage. The part of the variation in pastoral marriages explained by actual land
  56
   Kussmaul (1990) provides data for three periods between 1561 and 1820. We match these to the five CAMPOP periods.
Appendix B.7 provides a more detailed description, as well as scatterplots for the regressions presented in the main text.



                                                           27
use or land suitability arguably captures the husbandry channel best. This strongly suggests that pastoral
agriculture reduced fertility by offering extra employment possibilities to female servants. In Appendix
B.8 we exploit the detailed data available in the 1851 British census to provide further evidence for the
main mechanism. While agriculture was a declining part of the English economy, areas that employed farm
servants still saw markedly later marriage ages.
    In sum, the historical data strongly support all the steps in the causal chain in Table 2. Where women
had more employment opportunities in pastoral farming, and more females worked as servants, marriage
occurred later. The part of pastoral land use driven by climatic conditions is particularly strongly associated
with higher marriage ages; where medieval farms switched from "corn to horn", as reflected by the share of
deserted medieval villages, early modern English women took their vows markedly later.


5     Conclusion
Why did Europe evolve a system of delayed marriage that reduced fertility centuries before the demographic
transition? We argue that the Black Death was one crucial contributing factor. Fertility restriction emerged
as an indirect consequence of the abundance of land after 1348-50, and the associated switch from arable
to pastoral farming. The Black Death reduced population by between one third and half. Land-labor ratios
rose markedly. This favored pastoral production because it uses land more intensively (Campbell, 2000).
Cattle were kept for meat and milk, and sheep for mutton and wool. The rise of large-scale livestock farming
translated into a greater economic role for women. Female labor is better suited to shepherding and milking
than to ploughing or threshing (Alesina et al., 2011) – a fact borne out by the sexual division of labor in
isolated tribes studied by anthropologists (Appendix B.2). After the plague, owners of large estates switched
from arable farming, with its high demand for adult male labor, to husbandry, which required less strenuous
labor, some of which could be supplied by women. In this way, the Black Death raised the demand for
female labor.
    Working as a servant involved moving from the parental household to the master’s. Contracts forbade
marriage. Because the Black Death changed the pattern of production and raised the demand for female
labor, it increased the average age at first marriage for women, reducing fertility rates. This in turn lowered
population pressure in a Malthusian setting and helped to keep wages high after the Black Death. We thus
explain the simultaneous emergence of large-scale pastoral farming, late marriage, higher incomes, and low
fertility.
    We test the predictions of our model against data from England between the 14th and 19th century.
Using information from the Cambridge Group of Population Studies’ family reconstitutions, we show that
counties specializing in pastoral production registered markedly later average ages at first marriage. In the
late 14th century already, areas with more livestock farming had a higher proportion of unmarried women.
Also, where farming switched from "corn to horn" after 1350 – as evidenced by numerous medieval villages
becoming deserted after the plague – marriage occurred much later, even centuries after the Black Death.
These effects are arguably causal. Using a pastoral suitability index based on rainfall and soil temperature


                                                      28
as an instrument, we find large and highly significant effects of livestock farming on marriage ages. Overall,
we estimate that the existence of a pastoral sector in the English economy raised marriage ages by more than
4 years – equivalent to roughly half of the increase between the Middle Ages and the early modern period.
       European women already married later than the age of biological fertility as early as the late Roman
period. However, fertility restriction via this channel only became severe in the early modern period, when
ages at first marriage in many areas reached levels only seen again today. In a Malthusian world, this had
implications for per capita incomes. When birth (or death) rates change, the ’iron law of wages’ need
not hold.57 Lower fertility in Europe as a result of EMP was one important factor for the persistence
of unusually high per capita incomes long before the Industrial Revolution. In models in the spirit of
Acemoglu and Zilibotti (1997) and Voigtländer and Voth (2006), higher incomes facilitate the transition to
self-sustaining growth. By stabilizing incomes at a high level by 1700, EMP may well have laid some of the
foundations for Europe’s industrialization. EMP also reduced the volatility of income – bad shocks were
partly compensated by lower fertility. Paradoxically, one of the weaknesses of the European agricultural
system – relatively low land productivity in grain – strengthened fertility restriction after the Black Death,
laying one of the foundations for Europe’s early rise to riches.


References
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2005). The Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change and
  Economic Growth. American Economic Review 95(3), 546–579.
Acemoglu, D. and F. Zilibotti (1997). Was Prometheus Unbound by Chance? Risk, Diversification, and Growth.
  Journal of Political Economy 105(4), 709–51.
Alesina, A., P. Giuliano, and N. Nunn (2011). On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the Plough. NBER WP
  17098.
Allen, R. C. (1988). The Growth of Labor Productivity in Early Modern English Agriculture. Explorations in Eco-
  nomic History 25, 117–146.
Allen, R. C. (1991). The Two English Agricultural Revolutions, 1450-1850. In B. Campbell and M. Overton (Eds.),
  Land, Labour, and Livestock: Historical Studies in European Agricultural Productivity, pp. 236–254. Manchester:
  MUP.
Allen, R. C. (1992). Enclosure and the Yeoman. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Allen, R. C. (2009). Agricultural Productivity and Rural Incomes in England and the Yangtze Delta, c. 1620–c.1820.
  Economic History Review 62(3), 525–550.
Anderson, M. and R. Lee (2002). Malthus in State Space: Macro Economic-demographic Relations in English History,
  1540 to 1870. Journal of Population Economics 15, 195–220.
Apostolides, A., S. Broadberry, B. Campbell, M. Overton, and B. van Leeuwen (2008).       English
  Agricultural Output and Labor Productivity, 1250-1850: Some Preliminary Estimates. Available at
  http://www.basvanleeuwen.net/bestanden/agriclongrun1250to1850.pdf.
Ashraf, Q. and O. Galor (2010). Dynamics and Stagnation in the Malthusian Epoch. Department of Economics,
  Williams College working paper.
  57
     Mokyr and Voth (2009) distinguish between a weak and a strong form of the Malthusian model, where the former is subject to
the same equilibrating forces, and the latter implies the ’iron law of wages.’



                                                              29
Ashraf, Q. and O. Galor (2011). Dynamics and Stagnation in the Malthusian Epoch. American Economic Re-
  view 101(5), 2003–41.
Barro, R. J. and G. S. Becker (1989). Fertility Choice in a Model of Economic Growth. Econometrica 57(2), 481–501.
Becker, G. S. (1960). An Economic Analysis of Fertility. In Demographic and Economic Change in Developed
  Countries, Number 11, pp. 209–231. National Bureau of Economic Research Series, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
  University Press.
Becker, G. S., K. Murphy, and R. Tamura (1990). Human Capital, Fertility, and Economic Growth. Journal of Political
  Economy 98(5), 12–37.
Benedictow, O. J. (2004). The Black Death 1346–1353. The Complete History. Woodbridge: The Boydel Press.
Beresford, M. (1989). A Review of Historical Research (to 1968). In M. Beresford and J. G. Hurst (Eds.), Deserted
  Medieval Villages, pp. 3–75. Gloucester: Alan Sutton.
Berkeley, C. G. (1963). Agricultural Involution: The Process of Ecological Change in Indonesia. Berkeley, CA:
  University of California Press.
Brenner, R. and C. Isett (2002). England’s Divergence from China’s Yangtze Delta: Property Rights, Microeconomics,
  and Patterns of Development. Journal of Asian Studies 61(2), 609–662.
Broadberry, S., B. M. S. Campbell, and B. van Leeuwen (2011). Arable Acreage in England, 1270-1871. Working
  Paper.
Brown, J. C. and T. Guinnane (2001). The Fertility Transition in Bavaria. Economic Growth Center, Yale, working
  paper 821.
Butz, W. P. and M. Ward (1979). The Emergence of Countercyclical U.S. Fertility. American Economic Review 69(3),
  318–328.
Campbell, B. M. S. (2000). English Seigniorial Agriculture, 1250-1450. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Chenery, H., M. Syrquin, and H. Elkington (1975). Patterns of Development, 1950-70. Oxford University Press.
Chesnais, J.-C. (1993). The Demographic Transition. Clarendon Press: Oxford.
Clark, G. (2005). The Condition of the Working Class in England, 1209-2003. Journal of Political Economy 113(6),
  1307–1340.
Clark, G. (2007). A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the World. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Coale, A. J. and S. C. Watkins (Eds.) (1986). The Decline of Fertility in Europe. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
  Press.
Crafts, N. F. R. and T. Mills (2008). From Malthus to Solow: How the Malthusian Economy Really Evolved. Journal
  of Macroeconomics (forthcoming).
de Moor, T. and J. L. van Zanden (2010). Girlpower. The European Marriage Pattern and Labor Markets in the North
   Sea Region in the Late Medieval and Early Modern Period. Economic History Review 63(1), 1–33.
Devolder, D. (1999). Hajnal’s European Marriage Pattern and the Evolution of Agrarian Structures. Forth Worth,
  Texas: Social Science History Association.
Doepke, M. (2004). Accounting for Fertility Decline During the Transition to Growth. Journal of Economic
  Growth 9(3), 347–383.
Doepke, M., M. Hazan, and Y. Maoz (2007). The Baby Boom and World War II: A Macroeconomic Analysis. NBER
  Working Papers 13707.
Doepke, M. and F. Zilibotti (2008). Occupational Choice and the Spirit of Capitalism. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 123(2), 747–793.
Down, K., J. Jollans, A. Lazenby, and R. Wilkins (1981). The Distribution of Grassland and Grassland Usage in
  the UK. In J. Jollans (Ed.), Grassland in the British Economy, Number 10, pp. 580–583. Reading: University of


                                                          30
  Reading: Centre for Agricultural Strategy.
Dyer, C. (1988). Changes in Diet in the Late Middle Ages: The Case of Harvest Workers. Agricultural History
  Review 36(1), 21–37.
Epstein, L. (2000). Freedom and Growth: The Rise of States and Markets in Europe, 1300-1750. London: Routledge.
Eyre, G. E. and W. Spottiswoode (1854). Population Tables II. Ages, Civil Condition, Occupations, and Birth-Place
  of the People. Vol. I. In Census of Great Britain, 1851. House of Commons Parliamentary Papers.
FAO/IIASA (2010). Global Agro-ecological Zones (GAEZ) version 3.0. Technical report, IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria
  and FAO, Rome, Italy.
Feng, W., J. Lee, and C. Campbell (1995). Marital Fertility Control Among the Qing Nobility: Implications for Two
  Types of Preventive Check. Population Studies 49(3), 383–400.
Fenwick, C. (Ed.) (1998). The Poll Taxes of 1377, 1379, and 1381: Bedfordshire-Leicestershire. Oxford University
  Press for British Academy Records of Social and Economic History.
Fenwick, C. (Ed.) (2001). The Poll Taxes of 1377, 1379 and 1381: Lincolnshire-Westmorland. Oxford University
  Press for British Academy Records of Social and Economic History.
Fenwick, C. (Ed.) (2005). The Poll Taxes of 1377, 1379 and 1381: Wiltshire - Yorkshire. Oxford University Press for
  British Academy Records of Social and Economic History.
Fernandez-Villaverde, J. (2001). Was Malthus Right? Economic Growth and Population Dynamics. PIER Working
  Paper No. 01-046.
Flinn, M. W. (1981). The European Demographic System, 1500-1820. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Foreman-Peck, J. (2009). The Western European Marriage Pattern and Economic Development. Cardiff Economics
  Working Papers.
Galloway, P. R. (1988). Basic Patterns in Annual Variations in Fertility, Nuptiality, Mortality, and Prices in Pre-
  industrial Europe. Population Studies 42(2), 275–302.
Galor, O. (2005). From Stagnation to Growth: Unified Growth Theory. In P. Aghion and S. Durlauf (Eds.), Handbook
  of Economic Growth, Volume 1, Chapter 4, pp. 171–293. Elsevier.
Galor, O. and D. N. Weil (1996). The Gender Gap, Fertility, and Growth. American Economic Review 86(3), 374–387.
Galor, O. and D. N. Weil (2000). Population, Technology and Growth: From the Malthusian Regime to the Demo-
  graphic Transition and Beyond. American Economic Review 90(4), 806–828.
Goldberg, P. J. P. (1990). Urban Identity and the Poll Taxes of 1377, 1379, and 1381. Economic History Review 43(2),
  194–216.
Goldstone, J. (2003). Feeding the People, Starving the State: China’s Agricultural Revolution of the 17th and 18th
  Centuries. Global Economic History Network Conference. London.
Greenwood, J., A. Seshadri, and G. Vandenbroucke (2005). The Baby Boom and Baby Bust. American Economic
  Review 95(1), 183–207.
Hajnal, J. (1965). European Marriage Pattern in Perspective. In Population in History. London: Arnold: D.V. Glass
  and D.E.C. Eversley.
Hajnal, J. (1982). Two Kinds of Preindustrial Household Formation System. Population and Development Review 8(3),
  449–94.
Hallam, H. (1985). Age at First Marriage and Age at Death in the Lincolnshire Fenland, 1252-1478. Population
  Studies 39(1), 55–69.
Hansen, G. and E. Prescott (2002). Malthus to Solow. American Economic Review 92(4), 1205–1217.
Heckman, J. and J. Walker (1990). The Third Birth in Sweden. Journal of Population Economics 3(4), 235–75.
Herlihy, D. (1985). Medieval Households. Harvard University Press.


                                                        31
Herlihy, D. (1997). The Black Death and the Transformation of the West. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hume, D. (1854). Of the Populousness of Ancient Nations. In Philosophical Works. Black and Tait: London. Essay
  XI.
Ingram, M. (1985). The Reform of Popular Culture? Sex and Marriage in Early Modern England. In B. Reay (Ed.),
   Popular Culture in the Seventeenth Century. Beckenham.
Jones, C. I. (2001). Was an Industrial Revolution Inevitable? Economic Growth Over the Very Long Run. Advances
  in Macroeconomics 1(2), 1–45. Article 1.
Jones, L. E. and A. Schoonbroodt (2011). Baby Busts and Baby Booms: The Fertility Response to Shocks in Dynastic
  Models. Working paper.
Jones, L. E., A. Schoonbroodt, and M. Tertilt (2010). Fertility Theories: Can they Explain the Negative Fertility-
  Income Relationship? Demography and the Economy, 43–100. NBER Working Paper 14266.
Kain, R. J. (1986). An Atlas and Index of the Tithe Files of Mid-Nineteenth-Century England and Wales. Cambridge
  University Press.
Kelly, M. and C. Ó Grada (2008). The Poor Law versus the Positive Check: Living Standards and Mortality in England
  since the Middle Ages. UC Dublin working paper.
Kelly, M. and C. Ó Grada (2010). Living Standards and Mortality since the Middle Ages. Working Papers 2010/26,
  School Of Economics, University College Dublin.
Kremer, M. (1993). Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C. to 1990. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 108(3), 681–716.
Kussmaul, A. (1981). Servants in Husbandry in Early Modern England. Cambridge, CUP.
Kussmaul, A. (1990). A General View of the Rural Economy of England, 1538-1840. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
  sity Press.
Laslett, P. and R. Wall (1972). Household and Family in Past Time. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Lee, J. and W. Feng (1999). Malthusian Models and Chinese Realities: The Chinese Demographic System 1700–2000.
  Population and Development Review 25(1), 33–65.
Lee, J., W. Feng, and D. Ruan (2001). Nuptiality Among the Qing Nobility: 1640-1900. In T. L. et al. (Ed.), Asian
  Population History. Oxford: Clarendon University Press.
Lee, R. (1981). Short-term Variation: Vital Rates, Prices, and Weather. In E. A. Wrigley and R. S. Schofield (Eds.),
  The Population History of England 1541-1871, pp. 356–401. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Li, B. (1998). Agricultural Development in Jiangnan, 1620-1850. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Lucas, R. E. (2002). The Industrial Revolution: Past and Future. In Lectures on Economic Growth. Cambridge:
  Harvard University Press.
Macfarlane, A. (1970). The Family Life of Ralph Josselin, a Seventeenth-Century Clergyman: An Essay in Historical
 Demography. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Maddison, A. (2001). The World Economy. A Millennial Perspective. Paris: OECD.
Mincer, J. (1963). Market Prices, Opportunity Cost and Income Effects. In C. Christ (Ed.), Measurement in Economics.
  Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Mingay, G. E. and J. Thirsk (Eds.) (2011). The Agrarian History of England and Wales, 1750-1850, Volume VI.
  Cambridge University Press.
Minge-Klevana, W. (1980). Does Labor Time Decrease With Industrialization? A Survey of Time-Allocation Studies.
  Current Anthropology 21(3), 279–298.
Mitterauer, M. (2003). Warum Europa? Mittelalterliche Grundlagen eines Sonderwegs. C.H. Beck: Munich.
Mokyr, J. (1990). The Lever of Riches. Oxford: Oxford University Press.


                                                        32
Mokyr, J. and H.-J. Voth (2009). Understanding Growth in Early Modern Europe. In S. Broadberry and K. O’Rourke
 (Eds.), Cambridge Economic History of Europe, Volume 1. Cambridge University Press.
Murdock, G. P. and C. Provost (1973). Factors in the Division of Labor by Sex: A Cross-Cultural Analysis. Ethnol-
 ogy 12(2), 203–225.
Nunn, N. and N. Qian (2011). The Potato’s Contribution to Population and Urbanization: Evidence from an Historical
  Experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(2), 593–650.
Oman, C. (1906). The Great Revolt of 1381. Oxford : Clarendon Press.
Pamuk, S. (2007). The Black Death and the Origins of the ’Great Divergence’ across Europe, 1300-1600. European
  Review of Economic History 11(3), 289–317.
Pomeranz, K. (2000). The Great Divergence: China, Europe, and the Making of the modern World Economy. Prince-
  ton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Schellekens, J. (1997). Nuptiality during the First Industrial Revolution in England: Explanations. Journal of Inter-
  disciplinary History 27(4), 637–654.
Schellekens, J. (2001). Economic Change and Infant Mortality in England, 1580–1837. Journal of Interdisciplinary
  History 32(1), 1–13.
Schultz, T. P. (1985). World Prices, Women’s Wages, and the Fertility Transition: Sweden: 1860-1910. Journal of
  Political Economy 93(6), 1126–1154.
Smith, R. M. (1981). Fertility, Economy, and Household Formation in England over Three Centuries. Population and
  Development Review 7(4), 595–622.
Smith, R. M. (2011). Demography and the Great Divergence: Reconsidering the European and Asian Evidence.
  Keynote address at the Economic History Society Conference, Cambridge, UK 2011.
Snell, K. (1981). Agricultural Seasonal Unemployment, The Standard of Living, and Women’s Work in the South and
  East, 1690–1860. Economic History Review 34(3), 407–437.
UK-ONS (2011). United Kingdom – Office for National Statistics. http://www.statistics.gov.uk.
van Zanden, J. L. (2002). The ’Revolt of the Early Modernists’ and the ’First Modern Economy:’ An Assessment.
  Economic History Review 55(4), 619–41.
van Zanden, J. L. (2011). The Malthusian Intermezzo. CGEH working paper no. 14.
Voigtländer, N. and H.-J. Voth (2006). Why England? Demographic Factors, Structural Change and Physical Capital
  Accumulation during the Industrial Revolution. Journal of Economic Growth 11, 319–361.
Voigtländer, N. and H.-J. Voth (2013). The Three Horsemen of Riches: Plague, War, and Urbanization in Early
  Modern Europe. Review of Economic Studies. Forthcoming.
Vollrath, D. (2011). The Agricultural Basis of Comparative Development. Journal of Economic Growth 16(4), 343–
  370.
Wrigley, E. and R. S. Schofield (1981). The Population History of England 1541–1871. Cambridge: Cambridge
 University Press.
Wrigley, E. A. (1988). Continuity, Chance and Change: The Character of the Industrial Revolution in England.
 Cambridge: CUP.
Wrigley, E. A., R. S. Davies, J. E. Oeppen, and R. S. Schofield (1997). English Population History from Family
 Reconstitution 1580-1837. New York: Cambridge University Press.




                                                         33
                                                     Tables

                        Table 1: Age of Marriage and Marital Fertility in 17C Europe

                                          Average Age of Women        Cumulative Marital
                                              at First Marriage         Fertility (20-44)
                           England                   25                        7.6
                           France                   24.6                        9
                           Belgium                   25                        8.9
                           Germany                  26.4                       8.1
                           Scandinavia              26.7                       8.3
                           Switzerland               -                         9.3
                         Source: Flinn (1981). Note: Cumulative marital fertility = number of
                         live births per married women aged 20 to 44.




                            Table 2: Steps of Mechanism and Empirical Variables

Pastoral Production               =⇒        Farm Service                   =⇒        Late/no Marriage
• % of land used for pasture in           • Seasonality of marriage                  • % drop in # of taxpayers
 1290, 1837.                               pattern 1561-1820.                         1377/1381.
• Deserted medieval villages.             • Employment share of                      • CAMPOP data on female
• Soil and climate suitability:            servants in 1851 census.                   age at first marriage.
 days of grass growth (IV).                                                          • % of unmarried women in
                                                                                      1851 census




                                                           34
Table 3: Pastoral Production and a Proxy for the Proportion of Unmarried Women, 1381

           Dependent Variable: Drop in Tax Payers, 1377-1381
                                          (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)
                                         OLS           OLS          OLS            IV
           P astoral1290                .682***      1.067***     .804***      .952***
                                       (.116)        (.304)      (.275)       (.180)
           ln(popdensity)                             .133        .125
                                                     (.107)      (.115)
           Region FE                   no            no          yes          no
           R2                          .483          .515        .649
           Observations                38            38          38           38
           Instrument                                                   ln(daysgrass)
           First Stage F-Statistic#                                           43.4
           Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Key: *** significant at 1%; **
           5%; * 10%. P astoral1290 is calculated as 1 minus the proportion of land used
           for arable production in 1290, and popdensity is the population per square
           mile at the county level in 1290; both variables are from Broadberry et al.
           (2011).
           #
              Kleibergen-Paap rK Wald F statistic. The corresponding Stock-Yogo value
           for 10% maximal IV bias is 16.4.




                                                35
      Table 4: Pastoral Production and Age at First Marriage (Parish-Level Panel)

 Dependent Variable: Female Age at First Marriage
                                  (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)            (6)
                                 OLS         OLS           IV          OLS         OLS             IV
 Period                                    1600-1837                             1600-1749
             1290
 P astoral                     4.036*      5.973**       8.085***     4.321*      6.817**     7.759***
                               (2.166)     (2.554)       (1.895)      (2.235)     (3.089)     (1.838)
 DM V                          5.905*      7.457**       9.266***     6.623*      6.734       9.076***
                               (3.162)     (2.879)       (2.938)      (3.614)     (4.470)     (2.916)
 Period FE                     yes         yes           yes          yes         yes         yes
 Region FE                     no          yes           no           no          yes         no
 R2                            .448        .669          -            .197        .492        -
 Observations                  112         112           112          66          66          66
 Instrument                                       ln(daysgrass)                          ln(daysgrass)
 First Stage F-Statistic#                              30.1                                   36.6
Notes: The panel comprises 26 parishes (located in 15 counties) over 5 periods. All explanatory variables
and the instrument are measured at the county level, while the dependent variable is observed at the parish
level. Robust standard errors in parentheses (clustered at the county level). Key: *** significant at 1%;
** 5%; * 10%. P astoral1290 is calculated as 1 minus the proportion of land used for arable production
in 1290, and daysgrass denotes the days per year during which grass grows at the county level (see
Appendix B.5 for detail). DM V denotes the number of deserted medieval villages per 100,000 acres at
the county level.
#
   Kleibergen-Paap rK Wald F statistic (cluster-robust). The corresponding Stock-Yogo value for 10%
maximal IV bias is 16.4 in both columns 3 and 6.




                                                    36
        Table 5: Pastoral Marriage Pattern and Age at First Marriage

 Dependent Variable: Female Age at First Marriage
                                  (1)         (2)             (3)                 (4)
                                 OLS         OLS              IV                  IV
                      PANEL A: Parish Level Panel, 1600-1837
 P astoralM arriage            4.436**      3.288      6.149**             9.488***
                               (2.054)      (2.421)    (2.656)             (.991)
 Period dummies                no           yes        yes                 yes
 R2                            .096         .410       -                   -
 Observations                  112          112        112                 112
 Instrument                                            P astoral1290       ln(daysgrass)
 First Stage F-Statistic#                              7.5                 53.2
                     PANEL B: Parish Level Panel for 1600-1749
 P astoralM arriage            2.681        2.612      6.611***            9.566***
                               (2.353)      (2.445)    (2.121)             (.731)
 Period dummies                no           yes        yes                 yes
   2
 R                             .058         .060       -                   -
 Observations                  66           66         66                  66
 Instrument                                            P astoral1290       ln(daysgrass)
 First Stage F-Statistic#                              11.0                25.2
Notes: The panel comprises 26 parishes (located in 15 counties) over 5 periods.
P astoralM arriage is the share of parishes with pastoral (spring) marriage pattern in a
county (classified as "P" by Kussmaul, 1990). All explanatory variables and instruments are
measured at the county level, while the dependent variable is observed at the parish level.
Robust standard errors in parentheses (clustered at the county level). Key: *** significant at
1%; ** 5%; * 10%. All regressions are weighted by the number of parishes in each county
for which the pastoral marriage pattern is reported in Kussmaul (1990).
#
   Kleibergen-Paap rK Wald F statistic (cluster-robust). The corresponding Stock-Yogo
value for 10% maximal IV bias is 16.4 in columns 3-4 for both panels.




                                             37
                                                                                   Figures


                      Figure 1: Steady States with and without EMP (Europe vs. China)


                                                                    ROW
                                                                  S

                                                                                                      Birth Rate
                                                                                              Rest of the World (ROW)
                                 Death/Birth rate
                                                                                                          Europe
                                                                                                        S
                                                                            Birth Rate
                                                                            in Europe




                                                                                                                  Death Rate
                                                                 wROW                        wage        wEurope




                        Figure 2: Female labor in horn production for mean strength ρi
                                                                       Relative wage and income conditions


                                       1.2
                               Ratio




                                                                            A            B
                                             1

                                                                                                                         I i (lh )/c
                                       0.8
                                                                                                                         w h /w i,F g
                                       0.6
                                                    0                 0.5                      1                   1.5                  2

                                                                                Female labor supply in horn

                                    0.5                                                                                                     3
                                                                                             Labor in horn li,h
                                                        lh
                             li,h 0.25                                                                                                      2.5 b
                                                                                                                                                i
                                                         Labor in horn li,h

                                            0                                                                                               2
                                                0                     0.5                 1                   1.5                       2
                                                                             Land−labor ratio in horn (th/lh)

Note: For land-labor ratios th /lh below point A, the horn technology is not feasible for women of strength ρi because it
does not offer a wage premium (wh /wi,F g ≤ 1). Thus, female labor in horn is zero. Beyond point A, the horn technology
becomes economically viable (wh > wi,F g ). Between A and B, female income for strength-type ρi is below subsistence
(Ii ≤ c), implying large marginal returns to consumption and thus maximum female labor in horn (li,h = lh ). To the right of
B, the subsistence effect becomes less important as th /lh increases further, and li,h falls. The figure uses the mean strength
from our calibration, ρi = 0.5.




                                                                                             38
                            Figure 3: Female labor supply in horn for low- and high-strength types

                              Low Strength ρlow
                                            i                                                                                                              High Strength ρhigh
                                                                                                                                                                          i
                           Relative wage and income conditions                                                                                          Relative wage and income conditions
             2.5
                                                                                                                                    1.4
              2                                                                                                                     1.2
                                                                                           I i (lh )/c                                              B                                                    A
     Ratio




                                                                                                                            Ratio
                                                                                           w h /w i,F g                              1
             1.5
                       A                                                                                                            0.8
              1
                                                                                                                                    0.6                                                   I i (lh )/c
             0.5                                                                                                                    0.4                                                   w h /w i,F g
                                                                                                                                    0.2
                   0        0.5                              1                            1.5                2                            0              0.5                                   1          1.5   2


                                  Female labor supply in horn                                                                                                  Female labor supply in horn

         0.5                                                                                                     3              0.5                                                                                 3
                              lh


 l                                                                                                                                                                 Labor in horn l
 i,h   0.25                                                                       Labor in horn l                2.5 bi   li,h 0.25                                                                i,h              2.5 bi
                                                                                                    i,h
                                                                                                                                                                   Fertility bi (right axis)
                                                                                  Fertility b (right axis)
                                                                                              i


              0                                                                                                  2                   0                                                                              2
               0            0.5           1               1.5                                                2                        0                  0.5           1               1.5                      2
                             Land−labor ratio in horn (t /l )                                                                                             Land−labor ratio in horn (t /l )
                                                                                        h h                                                                                                              h h

Note: See Figure 2 for a description of points A and B. The left (right) panel uses female strength one standard deviation
below (above) the mean in our calibration (ρlow
                                            i   = 0.276 and ρhigh
                                                             i    = 0.724, respectively).




                                                     Figure 4: Aggregate horn labor supply and fertility
                                                                                0.2                                                                                  3
                                             Average female labor in horn lh




                                                                               0.15                                                                                  2.8
                                                                                                                                                                           Average fertility




                                                                                0.1                                                                                  2.6




                                                                               0.05                                                                                  2.4
                                                                                                                          Avg. female labor in horn lh
                                                                                                                          Avg. fertility (right axis)

                                                                                 0
                                                                                  0                 0.5            1                1.5                             2
                                                                                                      Land−labor ratio in horn (t /l )
                                                                                                                                              h h




                                                                                                                     39
                                                                                                           Figure 5: Steady states
                                                                                         3.2

                                                                                                            EL
                                                                                          3



                                                                                         2.8


                                                                    Birth / Death rate
                                                                                                                          EU

                                                                                                                                                        Birth rate
                                                                                         2.6
                                                                                                                                          EH

                                                                                         2.4



                                                                                         2.2
                                                                                                                                                     Death rate

                                                                                          2
                                                                                          0.2        0.4   0.6      0.8        1    1.2        1.4    1.6    1.8     2
                                                                                                                 Avg. peasant income per capita




Figure 6: Celibacy and Pastoral Production – Evidence from the 1381 Poll Tax (partial scatterplot)
                       Drop in Poll Tax Payers 1377−81 (residual)
                                                                       1
                                                                       .8
                                                                       .6
                                                                       .4
                                                                       .2




                                                                                                .4          .5                 .6              .7           .8           .9
                                                                                                                  Share of Pastoral Land in 1290

                      Notes: The y-axis plots the residual variation in the percentage
                      drop in tax payers between 1377–81, after controlling for county-
                      level population density in 1290. County-level poll tax data for
                      1377 and 1381 are from Fenwick (1998, 2001, 2005).




                                                                                                                               40
                                              Online Appendix
                      How the West ’Invented’ Fertility Restriction
                                 Nico Voigtländer                       Hans-Joachim Voth
                                   UCLA and NBER                                  UPF and CREi


A      Technical Appendix
A.1    Proof of Proposition 2

This section provides the proof for proposition 2 for women of a given strength ρi . By definition, EMP
requires for strength-type i: (i) bi < b and (ii), bi to be increasing over some range of t = T /N . We
                                                                                                                                 T
show that the first condition holds when horn becomes viable for women of type i (T /N >                                         N wh =wi,F g ),
irrespective of whether or not income exceeds subsistence at this point. The crucial part of the proof is thus
condition (ii), which requires that li,h in equation (19) be decreasing in female income over some range of
t = T /N , such that birth rates are increasing. We focus on the third regime in (19), because li,h and bi are
constant in the other two regimes. As a first step, we re-arrange the third line of (19):1
                                                                                            c
                                                                             1 −        wi,F g (t)
                                              li,h = (1 − µ)lh − µ                wh (t)
                                                                                                                                         (A.1)
                                                                                 wi,F g (t) − 1
                                                                             |         {z          }
                                                                                    ≡Zi (t)


Using bi = π(1 − li,h ) we obtain:
                                                           bi = b + µ(Zi (t) + lh )                                                      (A.2)

EMP therefore requires Zi (t) to be increasing in t over some range.2 Throughout the proof, we thus focus
on the derivative of Zi with respect to t:
                                              (               )              (                     )            (            )
                                       c                           dwi,F g                    c
                           dZi        2
                                     wi,F
                                                   wh
                                                  wi,F g    −1 ·     dt     − 1−          wi,F g       ·   d
                                                                                                           dt
                                                                                                                     wh
                                                                                                                    wi,F g
                                          g
                               =                                   (            )2                                                       (A.3)
                            dt                                        wh
                                                                     wi,F g − 1
    1
      For simplicity, but without loss of generality, we ignore the small positive parameter ϵ. Leaving ϵ in the equation and consid-
ering the case ϵ → 0 yields identical results.
    2
      Female income grows hand-in-hand with t over the range where horn is economically viable (wh > wi,F g ).




                                                               Appendix p.1
In order to analyze this expression, we obtain dwi,F g /dt from wi,F g = ρi wM g and (16), and d(wh /wi,F g )/dt
from (17).
                                                                               ( )
                                         dwi,F g             αh l h          d th
                                                 = (1 − αg )        wi,F g ·        >0
                                           dt                α g th          dt lh
                                       (       )                             ( )
                                     d    wh       α g − α h l h wh       d th
                                                 =                     ·           >0                                     (A.4)
                                     dt wi,F g         αg th wi,F g dt lh

Both derivatives are positive because of Proposition 1 and Corollary 1. Throughout the proof, we use the
notation ti,A ≡        T
                       N wh =wi,F g          (T /N at which horn becomes viable for strength-type i) and ti,B ≡      T
                                                                                                                     N Ii (lh )=c
(T /N at which consumption exceeds subsistence). Because the horn technology is not viable for strength-
type i below ti,A , it is sufficient to focus on t ≥ ti,A .
       We now turn to the first part of the proof – the "if" part of the proposition, showing that Zi (t) is increasing
over some range of t if ti,A < ti,B , and that bi is below its maximum level. Before turning to the formal
proof, the upper panel of Figure A.1 illustrates the underlying intuition: We show that Zi (t) = −lh in point
B, is increasing for all t up to (and beyond) point C, and that Zi (t) eventually becomes decreasing (albeit
marginally so) and converges to zero as t → ∞.3 Following (A.2), this means that b = b in B, and then b
increases over some range (beyond C) – this increasing part reflects EMP. Eventually, b becomes decreasing
in t and converges to b + µlh .

                             Figure A.1: Functional form of Z(t) in the proof of Proposition 1


                               Zi (t)                               tA < tB
                                         A     B
                                     0                                                                     t
                                                       C   A: w h = w i,F g
                                                           B: I i (lh ) = c
                               − lh                        C: w i,F g = c



                               Z (t)
                                 i
                                                                    tA > tB



                                                           A: w h = w i,F g
                                                           B: I i (lh ) = c

                                     0                                                                     t
                                         B      A




       We now show this line of argument formally. In point B, we have Ii (lh ) = wi,F g + lh (wh − wi,F g ) =
c. Re-arranging this expression yields Zi (ti,B ) = −lh . For land-labor ratios up to point C, wi,F g ≤ c.
   3
       Note that B lies to the left of C because Ii (lh ) = wi,F g + lh (wh − wi,F g ) > wi,F g for all t > ti,A .


                                                                 Appendix p.2
          (                      )            (            )
                          c
Therefore, 1 −          wi,F g       ·   d
                                         dt
                                                   wh
                                                  wi,F g       ≤ 0 in (A.3). The remaining term in the denominator in (A.3) is
positive because ti,B > ti,A . Consequently, Zi is strictly increasing in t for t ≤ ti,C . In addition, since
Zi (t) and Zi′ (t) are continuous, and since Zi′ (ti,C ) > 0, there exists a δ > 0 s.t. ∀t̃ ∈ (ti,C , ti,C + δ),
Zi (t̃) > 0 and Zi′ (t̃) > 0. That is, Zi (t) is positive and increasing over some range to the right of C. Next,
we show that Zi′ (t) becomes negative, and Zi (t) converges to zero for large t. Substituting (A.4) into (A.3)
and re-arranging yields:

                             (1 − αh )c − (1 − αg ) ααhg wi,Fh g c −
                                                                             w        αg −αh                  (        )
                       dZi                                                              αg wi,F g     lh d        th
                           =                          (             )2                              ·   ·                        (A.5)
                        dt                    w                                                       th dt       lh
                                        wi,F g wi,Fh g wwi,Fh g − 1

The denominator of this expression is positive, and so is d(th /lh )/dt by Proposition 1. Thus, we can
focus on the sign of the numerator in (A.5). The first term in the numerator is constant, the second term
converges to zero as t grows large, and the third term increases, following (A.4). Thus, for large enough t
the numerator becomes negative such that Zi′ < 0.4 Finally, we show that limt→∞ (Zi (t)) = 0. This follows
from (A.1): As t → ∞, the denominator of Zi becomes large while c/wi,F g goes to zero (both because of
(A.4)). Altogether, this delivers the shape of Zi (t) shown in the upper panel of Figure A.1, which establishes
property (ii) of EMP over some range of T /N .
       Finally, we show that bi < b over some range that also involves b′i (t) > 0 (that is, there exists a range
of t over which both criteria for EMP are fulfilled). The latter holds unambiguously for ti,B ≤ t ≤ ti,C . In
addition, in the vicinity of point B, birth rates bi are close to b < π = b, such that bi < b. Formally, ∃ ϵ > 0
s.t. ∀ti,B ≤ t̃ < ti,B + ϵ : bi < π. This establishes property (i) of EMP and completes the "if" part of the
proof.
       We now turn to the "only if" part of the proof. It suffices to show that for all ti,A > ti,B , Zi′ (t) < 0, ∀t >
ti,A , such that birth rates bi are never upward sloping in t, i.e., EMP never emerges. The lower panel of
Figure A.1 illustrates the functional form of Zi for the case ti,A > ti,B . We begin by showing that Zi′ (t)
becomes large and negative as t converges to ti,A from above. If t ↓ ti,A , wh ↓ wi,F g . Since wi,F g /wh → 1,
(A.5) simplifies and we can derive the limit of Zi′ (t):

                                  (            )                      −
                                                                          αg −αh
                                                                                 (wi,F g − c)           ( )
                                         dZi                                αg                     l h d th
                        lim                         =          lim               (            )2 ·    ·     = −∞                 (A.6)
                     wh ↓wi,F g           dt            wh ↓wi,F g                                 th dt lh
                                                                     wi,F g · 1 · wwi,Fh g − 1

This result follows because (i) the numerator in (A.6) is negative and finite. To see this, note that αg > αh
   4
       Taking the limit of each term divided
                                         ( ) by the denominator, it is straightforward to show that Zi′ (t) converges to zero from below
as t → ∞. For this step, note that dtd   th
                                         lh
                                             is positive and finite. To show this we use the fact that for very large t, the expenditure
                                                                                           ) ph is(constant
share for horn converges to a constant (see our Stone-Geary setting in Section 3.6), (so that            )     in t. Then Proposition 1
implies that rising t leads to increasing land-labor ratios in both sectors. Thus: dt lh < dt lh = l1h − lt2 dldth < l1h . The
                                                                                    d   th        d    t
                                                                                                                           h
last inequality follows because Zi′ < 0 for large t, such that (A.1) implies dlh /dt > 0. Finally, 1/lh is finite: As we show below,
limt→∞ (Zi (t)) = 0, such that following (A.1), limt→∞ (li,h (t)) = (1 − µ)lh > 0. Since the individual li,h are finite, so must be
the average lh .



                                                                       Appendix p.3
and wi,F g > c.5 Using the latter in (A.1) also implies that limwh ↓wi,F g Zi (t) = ∞, as shown in the lower
panel of Figure A.1. (ii) The denominator converges to zero from above, and (iii), lh /th and d(th /lh )/dt
are both positive and finite (see footnote 4 for the latter).
      Next, we show that Zi′ (t) is negative for all t > ti,A (and thus wh > wi,F g ). Since the denominator in
(A.5) is positive and finite (t > ti,A ⇒ wh > wi,F g ), it is sufficient to show that the numerator remains
negative as t increases beyond ti,A . To demonstrate this, we label the numerator in (A.5) N U Mi (t) and
show that N U Mi′ (t) < 0, ∀t > ti,A . In other words, the numerator becomes more negative as t increases.
Using (A.4) and taking into account that d(wi,F g /wh )/dt = −(wi,F g /wh )2 d(wh /wi,F g )/dt, we obtain:
                                                                (                 )       ( )
                   dN U Mi    αg − αh           αh                        wi,F g     lh d th
                           =−         (1 − αg )                  wi,F g −        c ·   ·      <0                               (A.7)
                     dt          αg             αg                         wh        th dt lh

The inequality holds because d(th /lh )/dt > 0 and wi,F g > c > (wi,F g /wh )c for all t > ti,A .6 Finally,
we have already shown that limt→∞ (Zi (t)) = 0 (this holds irrespective of ti,A ≶ ti,B ). Altogether, the
second part of the proof shows that Zi′ is negative and large for t ↓ ti,A , remains negative for all t > ti,A ,
and converges to zero from below as t → ∞.                  

A.2     Proof of Corollary 2

Point A in Figure 2 lies to the left of B if (Ii (lh )/c)        t=ti,A
                                                                          < 1, i.e., if Ii (lh ) < c in point A. Horn becomes
viable for women of strength ρi at point A: wh = wi,F g . Using this in (17), we can solve for the land-labor
                     [                             ] αg
                            (       )1 (     ) 1−αg αg −αh
                         α    A      α   1−α    αg
ratio in horn: tlhh = ρi αhg ph Ag h g 1−αhg                , where αg > αh . Next, (3) simplifies to Ii =
                                                                                          (                ) 1−αg ( ) αh (1−αg )
                                                                                         g     Ag 1−αg
                                                                                              th   g          α            α
wi,F g at point A. Using wi,F g = ρi wM g and (16) yields: Ii = ρi αg Ag                      ph Ah 1−αh
                                                                                              lh           .
                             [(      ) αh (      )    (        ]
                                                              ) αg −αh
                                                                 1−αg
                                 α          1−αg 1−αh    Ag
Consequently, Ii = ρi αg Ag ρi αhg          1−αh        ph Ah          at point A, which is increasing in ρi
and Ag , and is decreasing in ph and Ah . Therefore, conditions (i)-(iv) make (Ii (lh )/c)                        t=ti,A
                                                                                                                           < 1 more
likely to hold.      

A.3     Strength-Dependent Female Labor in Horn li,h

This section shows how women across all strength types choose their labor supply in horn in response to
changing land-labor ratios. This illustrates in detail the mechanism behind the aggregate labor supply shown
in Figure 4. Throughout, we use the notation of points A and B introduced in Figure 2 (at the former, horn
begins to offer a wage premium; at the latter, female income exceeds the threshold c). We also take the price
of horn ph as given for now, and discuss implications of changing ph at the end of this section. For ease of
exposition, we refer to the line wh /wi,F g as "line A", and to Ii (lh )/c as "line B" – both as functions of the
   5
     The latter holds because for all t > ti,B : Ii (lh ) > c, and limwh ↓wi,F g Ii (lh ) = limwh ↓wi,F g wi,F g + lh (wh − wi,F g ) =
wi,F g .
   6
     From footnote 5 we know that wi,F g > c at t = ti,A , and (A.4) shows that wi,F g is increasing in t. In addition, for t > ti,A ,
wi,F g /wh < 1.


                                                          Appendix p.4
land-labor ratio in horn th /lh . Line A is defined by (17); it shifts downward if ρi increases. In contrast, line
B is shifted upward for larger ρi (remember the definition Ii (lh ) = ρi wM g (1 − lh ) + wh lh ). Consequently,
increasing ρi moves point A to the right and point B to the left.
    Next, we derive the strength ρA=B at which points A and B coincide. First, at point A, wi,F g = wh , so
that we obtain for point B (if it is identical to A): Ii (lh ) = wi,F g = wh = c. Therefore, we can use (12) to
derive the land-labor ratio at which points A and B coincide:
                                                           (              )     1
                                         th                        c          1−αh
                                                     =                                .                              (A.8)
                                         lh   A=B              αh ph Ah

Second, because wi,F g = ρi wM g = c, we can use (16) and (A.8) to obtain the strength ρi at which A and B
are identical:
                                 /           (                      ) 1−αg (                    ) αh (1−αg )
                                                  Ag 1 − αg              αg      th               αg
                      ρA=B = c       αg Ag                                                                      .    (A.9)
                                                 ph A h 1 − αh                   lh       A=B

For the following discussion, it is also useful to derive two more cutoffs: First, the maximum strength at
which horn is still viable, ρmax
                             A . For any given land-labor ratio, this is the strength at which wi,F g = wh .
Using (17), this is given by:

                                              (            )    1   (            ) 1−αg (            ) αg −αh
                                wh    αh          ph A h       αg       1 − αh        αg        th       αg
                      ρmax   =      =                                                                           .   (A.10)
                       A
                               wM g   αg           Ag                   1 − αg                  lh

Note that ρmax
           A is increasing in the land-labor ratio. This is because wh /wi,F g grows with land abundance
(Corollary 1), so that horn offers a wage premium for ever stronger women. Second, the cutoff ρmin
                                                                                               B is the
minimum strength at which female income exceeds the reference level c. This is given by

                                                            c − wh l h
                                                 ρmin
                                                  B =                                                               (A.11)
                                                           wM g (1 − lh )

The cutoff strength ρmin
                     B is decreasing in the land-labor ratio. Intuitively, ever weaker women can reach the
consumption cutoff level c if land becomes more abundant so that wages surge.
    Figure A.2 illustrates the female labor supply across all strength types, together with the probability
density function f (ρ), which is given by a beta distribution with both parameters equal to 2. In the first
panel, we use a low land-labor ratio. In this setting, only a few low-strength women work in horn (to the
left of ρmax                                                                                min
         A ). For the remainder, horn wages do not offer a wage premium. At the same time, ρB is to
the right of ρmax
              A , so that all women who can earn a wages premium in horn have consumption below the
reference level c, and thus work the maximum amount lh . If the land-labor ratio increases, ρmax
                                                                                             A rises while
ρmin
 B declines. Consequently, there must be an lh /th such that both coincide. This is exactly the ratio given
by (A.8), and the corresponding strength is ρA=B . We use this land-labor ratio in the second panel of Figure
A.2. The point ρA=B corresponds to the kink in the aggregate horn labor supply, as shown in Figure 4 in




                                                    Appendix p.5
the paper. It is the highest strength at which women behave according to EMP.7 When this point coincides
with ρmax    min
      A and ρB , women with strength ρi < ρA=B work the maximum time lh in horn, and women with
strength ρi > ρA=B do not work in horn, at all.
      If the land-labor ratio increases further (third panel in Figure A.2), ρmax                      min
                                                                              A moves to the right of ρB .
Women with strength between ρA=B and ρmax
                                      A do not work in horn because their income is well above the
reference level c, while the wage premium they would earn in horn is relatively small.8 For women with
strength between ρmin
                  B and ρA=B , income now exceeds the threshold level, and the income effect implies
that they provide relatively less labor in horn in order to have more children. Finally, for women the the left
of ρmin
    B income is below c, so that they work the maximum possible time in horn.
      In sum, an increase in the land-labor ratio from just-below ρA=B to just-above this point implies that a)
no additional women are drawn into the horn sector; and b) the strongest among those who do work in horn
now work less. This explains the kink in aggregate labor supply (Figure 4).
      What if we take into account a demand effect such that ph increases with the land-labor ratio (as with
the non-homothetic demand in Section 3.6)? This effect unambiguously strengthens the emergence of EMP.
First, according to (A.8) and (A.9), ρA=B increases with ph . Therefore, a larger fraction of women can earn
a wage premium in horn. Second, following (A.10), ρmax
                                                   A increases in ph , which also results in higher female
labor in horn (see the first panel in Figure A.2). Because of these two effects, the initial increase in aggregate
horn labor supply (and thus the drop in fertility – see Figure 4) is steeper. Finally, (A.11) implies that ρmin
                                                                                                            B
is falling in ph (because the latter raises wh ). This becomes important for relatively high land-labor ratios,
when ρmin  max                                                                min
      B < ρA . As illustrated in the third panel of Figure A.2, a decline in ρB means that more women
reduce their working time in horn in response to growing income. Thus, birth rates are more responsive to
income. To sum up, if horn is a luxury product, the initial drop in fertility is steeper, and the subsequent
positive response of birth rates to income is also more pronounced.

A.4     Stone-Geary Preferences

This section discusses our Stone-Geary consumption preferences in detail and shows that they imply an
indirect utility in line with equation (2) in the paper. Before individuals buy the ’luxury’ horn products, they
need to satisfy their basic nutritional requirement c with grain consumption. Below this reference level, any
increase in income is spent on grain. Preferences take the Stone-Geary form:
                                                   (                       )
                                                   ln (ci,g − c + ϵ)ϕ c1−ϕ , if ci,g > c
                                                                        i,h
                              h(ci,g , ci,h ) =                                                                            (A.12)
                                                   (c − c)/ϵ + ln(ϵ),                 if ci,g ≤ c
                                                      i,g

    7
      For large land-labor ratios, women with strength close to but above ρA=B also work in horn (albeit very little – see the proof
in appendix A.1). However, their fertility is decreasing in the land-labor ratio and is thus incompatible with feature (ii) of EMP.
Thus, the relevant strength range for EMP is to the left of ρA=B .
    8
      The (opportunity) cost of children is so low for these women, that they would like to give up consumption in order to ’buy
time’ and have more children. This is the case explained in footnote 31 in the paper.




                                                         Appendix p.6
Figure A.2: Female labor in horn li,h as a function of strength ρi , for low, middle, and high land-labor ratios

                                                      Low land-labor ratio lh /th

                             1
                                                                                           pdf: f(ρ) (no axis)
                                                                                           Labor in horn li,h



                       l                             ρmax                 ρ                            ρmin
                       i,h 0.5         lh             A
                                                                              A=B                         B




                             0
                                  0      0.1   0.2    0.3    0.4    0.5        0.6   0.7   0.8      0.9          1
                                                      Relative female strength (ρ )
                                                                                     i


                                      Intermediate land-labor ratio (such that ρmax         min
                                                                                A = ρA=B = ρB )

                             1
                                                                                           pdf: f(ρ) (no axis)
                                                                                           Labor in horn li,h
                                                                          ρmax
                                                                           A
                                                                          ρmin
                                                                           B
                       li,h 0.5        lh                                 ρA=B




                             0
                                  0      0.1   0.2    0.3    0.4    0.5        0.6   0.7   0.8      0.9          1
                                                      Relative female strength (ρ )
                                                                                     i


                                                      High land-labor ratio lh /th

                             1
                                                                                           pdf: f(ρ) (no axis)
                                                                                           Labor in horn li,h


                       li,h 0.5        lh            ρmin                 ρ
                                                                           A=B             ρmax
                                                      B
                                                                                            A




                             0
                                  0      0.1   0.2    0.3    0.4    0.5        0.6   0.7   0.8      0.9          1
                                                      Relative female strength (ρ )
                                                                                     i


     Notes: ρmax
               A is the maximum strength at which horn is still viable (i.e., offers a wage premium), given the land-labor
     ratio lh /th . ρmin
                     B is the minimum strength at which female income exceeds the reference level c, given the land-labor
     ratio. ρA=B is the strength at which points A and B coincide (see equation (A.9)).




                                                            Appendix p.7
where ϕ > 0 is a constant and ϵ is infinitesimal. Given income Ii (for women) or wM g (for men), consumers
maximize (A.12) subject to their budget constraint ci,g + ph ci,h ≤ Ii .9 When Ii ≤ c, the (trivial) solution
is ci,g = Ii . For Ii > c, optimization yields the expenditure shares given by (20), when ignoring the
infinitesimal ϵ. Re-arranging the expenditure shares and substituting in the first line of (A.12) we obtain the
indirect utility:                                            ( (     )1−ϕ )
                                        
                                         ln (Ii − c + ϵ) + ln ϕϕ 1−ϕ        , if Ii > c
                        e
                        h(Ii , ph ) =
                                                                   ph
                                                                                                                          (A.13)
                                        
                                         (I − c)/ϵ + ln(ϵ),
                                            i                                                      if Ii ≤ c

Individual female and male peasants take the price of horn as given; they also spend all their income on
consumption, so that ph does not affect intertemporal allocation. Therefore, the second term in parentheses
for the case Ii > c in (A.13) does not affect individual decision making (i.e., it does not influence the
marginal utility of consumption). Consequently, the indirect utility given by (A.13) implies the same optimal
choices of consumption and fertility as the form given by (2) in the paper.

A.5      Solving the Model

In this section, we describe how we solve our model in general equilibrium. We begin by solving the model
for wages, labor supply, and birth rates for given land-labor ratios t = T /N . The steady state level of t (or
more precisely, N , because T is fixed) is then determined by the intersection of birth and death rates, as
shown in Figure.
       Before describing the solution algorithm, we explain the equations that it uses. Consumption of an
average peasant household over the adult period is given by
                                                           ∫       1
                                           cpg
                                             = cM g +                  ρi · ci,g (ρi )f (ρi )dρi
                                                               0
                                                     ∫         1
                                          p
                                         ch = cM h +               ρi · ci,h (ρi )f (ρi )dρi ,                            (A.14)
                                                           0

where cM g and cM h are male grain and horn consumption, respectively, as given by (20) for the male wage
wM g . Multiplying these by N yields aggregate peasant consumption.
       Next, we derive a system of three equations that solves for the three unknowns wM g , wh , and th . This in-
volves market clearing. Because the landlord spends his income on non-agricultural items (such as warfare),
the relevant market clearing condition refers to the peasant part of consumption and production only.10

                                         N (b
                                            lg wM g + lh wh ) = αYg + αh ph Yh .                                          (A.15)
   9
      We model the female optimization only. All results also hold for male peasants, where the index i is not needed because men
are homogeneous.
   10
      One can use an alternative setup with equivalent implications: That the landlord has the same consumption preferences as
peasants. Historically, this alternative assumption is reasonable: While land-owners themselves did not consume goods in the same
proportions as peasants, the staff they employed in large numbers, or the armies they maintained, did. In this alternative setting,
(A.15) is given by N (blg wM g + lh wh ) + rT = Yg + ph Yh . This yields identical results.



                                                         Appendix p.8
Dividing by N and using (8), (9), and tg = t − th yields:

                         b
                         lg wM g + lh wh = αAg b
                                                α
                                               lg g (t − th )1−αg + αh ph Ah lhαh t1−αh
                                                                                        .                                   (A.16)
                                                                                   h


This is the first equation in our system of three. The remaining two are (12) and (13). For a given price of
horn ph and land per household t, as well as labor supply lh and b
                                                                 lg , we can solve this system of equations to
obtain wM g , wh , and th . This solution is for the case where the horn sector operates, i.e., where lh > 0 and
cph > 0. If the horn sector does not operate, equation (A.16) is replaced by th = 0. This also yields wh = 0
in (12), and (13) then uses tg = t.
      We have now specified all equations that we need to solve for the general equilibrium. Starting from
initial guesses for wh , wM g , ph , and th , our algorithm to solve the model then follows the steps:

   1. Obtain individual birth rates bi and individual female labor supply li,h for given wages and ph from
        (18) and (19).

   2. Use (20) to calculate individual demand, given ph and Ii (the latter is obtain from (3) for given wages)
                                                                                      ∫1
   3. Aggregate across all strength types to obtain b
                                                    lg from (11), lh =                 0 li,h (ρi )f (ρi )dρi ,   as well as aggre-
        gate peasant consumption   Cgp   =   N cpg   and   Chp   =   N cph   from (A.14)

   4. For the derived b
                      lg and lh (and given th ), calculate the aggregate output of horn, Yh from (8) and grain,
        Yg , from (9). Derive the part of production that goes to peasants as Yhp = αh ph Yh and Ygp = αg Yg .

   5. Update the price to p′h : If Yhp > Chp , then p′h < ph , and vice versa.

   6. Solve the system of three equations (12), (13), and (A.15) for given p′h , This delivers updated wages
        wh′ and wM
                 ′ , as well as the land per household in horn t′ .
                   g                                            h

We run this loop until the maximum absolute deviation between the four original and updated values is
below a small positive number. Note that birth rates are not needed in the solution algorithm, because it
solves the model for a given land per household t. However, aggregate (average) fertility determines the
Malthusian equilibria as in Figure 5, and thus t. It is derived from individual birth rates (see step 1) by
                                  ∫1
integrating across all types: b = 0 bi (ρi )f (ρi )dρi . Similarly, the death rate follows from average peasant
                                                                    ∫1
consumption c̄p and is given by equation (6). We calculate c̄p = 0 cpi (ρi )f (ρi )dρi , where cpi = p̄h ci,h +ci,g ,
is a measure of real income, with the price of horn held constant at the level p̄h , measured in the equilibrium
EL (see the left panel of 5).

A.6     Robustness Checks of the Model

In this section, we analyze the robustness of our model to alternative parameter choices. The left panel
of Figure A.3 shows the simulation results without the demand effect for ’luxury’ horn products. Here,
we model the case where horn and grain are perfect substitutes, normalizing ph = 1. We use the same


                                                       Appendix p.9
parameters as in the baseline model.11 As the figure shows, the emergence of EMP is slightly dampened:
The drop in fertility rate is now smaller than in the baseline model (Figure 5 in the paper). However, we still
obtain the two stable steady states EL and EH . In the right panel of Figure A.3, we show that our results
are robust to using a tighter distribution. Here, we use a beta distribution with both parameters equal to 5,
so that the mean is still 0.5, but the standard deviation is now 0.15 (instead of 0.22). The results are very
similar to those obtained in our baseline model.

                                            Figure A.3: Model Robustness – Perfect Substitutes and Strength Distribution


                                    Horn and grain are perfect substitutes                                                                        Tighter strength distribution
                             3.2                                                                                                     3.2
                                               EL
                                                                                                                                                   EL
                              3                                                                                                       3


                                                                                    Birth rate




                                                                                                                Birth / Death rate
                             2.8
        Birth / Death rate




                                                                                                                                     2.8
                                                                                                                                                                   EU
                                                              EU                                                                                                                       Birth
                             2.6                                                                                                     2.6                                               rate
                                                                                                                                                                                  EH
                             2.4                                                                                                     2.4
                                                                   EH

                             2.2                                                                                                     2.2
                                                                               Death rate                                                                                          Death
                                                                                                                                                                                   rate
                              2                                                                                                       2
                              0.2     0.4     0.6      0.8     1        1.2   1.4      1.6       1.8     2                            0.2   0.4     0.6      0.8     1    1.2    1.4   1.6     1.8   2
                                                    Avg. peasant income per capita                                                                        Avg. peasant income per capita


   Note: In the left panel, we assume that horn and grain products are perfectly substitutable, so that ph = 1. In the right panel,
   we use a tighter strength beta distribution f (ρ), with both parameters set equal to 5 (instead of 2).



       While the slope of the death schedule (the strength of the "positive Malthusian check") does not affect
our main mechanism, it influences the location (and existence) of the high-income steady state EH . In our
baseline simulation, we use an elasticity of death rates with respect to income of -0.25. This is the average
estimate for England between 1600 and 1800 by Kelly and Ó Grada (2010). Kelly and Ó Grada argue that
in early modern England, the positive check may have been dampened by the Old Poor Law. When we use
an elasticity of -0.5 instead, we still obtain both steady states, but yet more negative elasticities result in a
unique steady state EL . Nevertheless, warfare and epidemics after 1400 arguably shifted the death schedule
upward (Voigtländer and Voth, 2013). Once we account for this shift in the death rate, even elasticities below
-0.5 deliver multiple steady states. At the other extreme, Anderson and Lee (2002) document elasticities of
mortality between -0.076 and -0.16 for 16C–19C England and Europe. When using these values, we always
obtain multiple steady states with larger income levels in EH , thus strengthening the impact of EMP.




  11
    There is one exception: Ah now has double its original value. This compensates for the fact that in the baseline simulation ph
was approximately 2 in the equilibrium EH .


                                                                                                       Appendix p.10
B      Empirical Appendix
B.1     Labor Cost and Female Labor in Pastoral and Arable Farming

Allen (1988) calculates labor cost per acre for pastoral and arable farms (tables 8 and 9). We plot his data
in figure B.1. The average farm size is calculated from Allen (1988, Table 4). The size distribution of farms
is from Table 4 in Allen (1988). Conservatively, we assume that farms listed as having 1,000+ acres (which
are all pastoral) had an average size of 1,000 acres. This means that the estimated average size for pastoral
farms is a lower bound of the true value.

                        Figure B.1: Arable and pastoral labor cost per acre, by farms size




                Notes: Data source: Allen (1988). The figure shows individual observations and a fourth-degree
                polynomial for each farm type.




      Figure B.2 shows that switching from arable to pastoral farming resulted in a more important role for
female labor.

B.2     Sexual Division of Labor – Anthropological Evidence

Does the anthropological literature on work patterns support the notion that pastoral activities are more
compatible with female labor? To answer this question, we examine the data on 185 societies compiled
by Murdock and Provost (1973). They classify each activity according to the extent to which it uses male
or female labor. To take one example, the hunting of large aquatic animals is classified as an exclusively
male activity in the 48 tribes where it is observed. At the opposite end of the spectrum, in 174 societies


                                                      Appendix p.11
                  Figure B.2: Labor Usage on Arable and Pastoral Farms, by Size of Farm




                    Data source: Allen (1991, Table 9.4).



where there is information on the preparation of vegetal foods, fully 145 (83%) only used female labor for
the purpose. Most activities fall between these two extremes. Murdock and Provost assign a letter for each
tribe and activity: M – exclusively male; N – dominantly male; E – equal participation; G – dominantly
(but not exclusively) female; F – exclusively female. They then compile an index of male labor intensity,
which takes values between 0 and 100, using weights of M = 1; N = 0.8; E = 0.5; G = 0.2; F = 0.
We invert it by taking the female activity index as 100–male activity index. The result is plotted in Figure
B.3. The most male activities are on the left; the most female-labor intensive tasks are on the right of the
spectrum. Pastoral activities such as looking after small and large animals, milking, etc. are highlighted
in black (’Narrow Pastoral’); pasture-related activities are grey (’Broad Pastoral’). As is readily apparent,
pastoral activities use ample female labor – they are far to the right in the distribution. All of them except
one use female labor more intensively than the average activity sampled by ethnographers.
    Next, we perform regression analysis, using both the female activity index and the ranking of activities
as dependent variables. As explanatory variables, we first use a dummy for the broader set of pastoral and
pastoral-related activities (P astoralbroad ). In addition, we restrict the analysis to strictly pastoral activities
(P astoralnarrow ). Table B.1 gives the results. We find strongly significant relationships for most combina-
tions of dependent and explanatory variables. For example, the result in column 1 suggests that on a scale
from 0–100, pastoral activities score on average 64.7; non-pastoral activities have an average score of 37.3,
a difference of 27.4. If we exclude the pastoral-related activities (column 2), the coefficient drops to 20.3,
but is still significant at the 10% level. When we use the rank as the dependent variable (columns 3-4), the
result is the same – pastoral activities score much higher than non-pastoral activities in their intensity of


                                                    Appendix p.12
                                                Figure B.3: Intensity of female labor usage, by activity
                             100




                                                                                                                  0
                                       80




                                                                                                                                       20
                Female Intensity Index




                                                                                                                  Male Intensity Index
                             60




                                                                                                                               40
                    40




                                                                                                                      60
                             20




                                                                                                                  80
                                                                                                                  100
                             0




                                            0            10            20            30            40        50
                                                          Activity rank (increasing female intensity)

                                                            Narrow Pastoral                 Broad Pastoral
                                                            Average Intensity

Notes: Data source: Murdock and Provost (1973). Pastoral activities (narrowly defined) include ’tending large ani-
mals’, ’milking’, ’care of small animals’, ’loom weaving’, and ’dairy production’. Pastoral activities (broadly defined)
additionally include ’preparation of skins’, ’manufacture of leather products’, ’preservation of meat and fish’, ’manu-
facture of clothing’, and ’spinning’.




                                                                      Appendix p.13
using female labor.

                  Table B.1: Anthropological evidence: Female labor intensity of pastoral activities

                                                     (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)
                              Dep. Var.:           Female Intensity Index       Female Intensity Rank
                              P astoralbroad       27.41***                     11.44***
                                                   (8.926)                      (4.045)
                              P astoralnarrow                   20.26*                        9.444**
                                                                (11.38)                       (4.514)
                              Constant             37.25***     37.96***        24.36***      24.56***
                                                   (4.899)      (4.917)         (2.216)
                              R2                   .066         .036            .057          .039
                              Observations         50           50              50            50
                           Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Key: *** significant at 1%;
                           ** 5%; * 10%. Data from Murdock and Provost (1973). P astoralbroad and
                           P astoralnarrow are dummies for broad and narrowly defined pastoral activities,
                           respectively. See the note to Figure B.3 for a list of these activities.



       In combination, these results strongly suggest that pastoral agriculture is more intensive in the use of
female labor than other farming activities. A similar conclusion emerges if we use information on patterns
of time-use in different farming activities. Minge-Klevana (1980) collect evidence on working hours in 15
agricultural societies. Where pastoralism is mentioned as at least one of the forms of cultivation (5 societies),
working hours for women are markedly longer – 11 hours per day, vs 8.4 hours in the rest of the sample (the
difference is statistically significant at the 10% level).

B.3      Background on Demography and Agriculture in China

The extent to which Chinese demography resulted in higher fertility and greater pressure on living standards
is debated. As Lee and Feng (1999) and Feng, Lee, and Campbell (1995) have argued, infanticide and lower
fertility limitation within marriage reduced population growth rates. However, what matters for population
pressure is the total fertility rate – the combined effect of marriage rates and fertility within marriage. There
is no question that this rate was markedly higher in China than in Europe – by 20-40% (Smith, 2011). In
line with this, Chinese population size increased by a factor of over 5 between 1400 and 1820, while Europe
only grew by a factor of 3.2 – annual population growth rates were 0.4% and 0.28%, respectively (Maddison,
2001). In other words, Chinese population growth was approximately one third faster than in Europe.
       Grain production in China was approximately 4 times more efficient than in England. We use the figures
by Allen (2009) on output per acre and output per day, weighting them with a labor share of 0.5.12 Chinese
land productivity was 700% of English land productivity in grain, and labor productivity was 86%. This
implies a factor-weighted average of 392%. The main reason for high land productivity was the limited
size of plots: Chinese farms were markedly smaller, and labor input per acre much higher, than in England.
  12
       From his figures, we derive an estimate of output per acre in arable farming in the midlands of 3.5 pounds per acre.


                                                           Appendix p.14
Continuous population pressure led to increasing subdivision of farms. Table B.2 compares farm sizes in
the most advanced areas – England and the Yangtze Delta. At the dawn of the nineteenth century, English
farms were thus, on average, 150 times larger than Yangtze ones.

            Table B.2: Average farm size in England, China, and the Yangzi delta 1300-1850 (acres)


                   Year                    1279     c.1400     c.1600     c.1700     1750     c.1800     1850
                   England                  13.9                  72         75                 151
                   China                               4.2       3.4                                      2.5
                   Big Yangzi delta                   3.75      1.875      1.875     1.25      1.16      1.04
                   Small Yangzi delta                 2.89                                     1.04
                  Source: Brenner and Isett (2002). English figures are from Allen (1992).



       Chinese grain production was efficient because it used various techniques to raise output per unit of
land. All of them required the use of more labor – rice paddy cultivation, the use of bean cake as fertilizer,
and intercropping with wheat (Goldstone, 2003; Brenner and Isett, 2002). The relatively low productivity of
grain agriculture in England is reflected in its low share in land use. Arable production accounted for only
39-43% of acreage in England, according to Broadberry, Campbell, and van Leeuwen (2011, Table 3). In
contrast, rice and grain accounted for almost all of China’s land use.
       Chinese farms used all means available to raise output per unit of land; the same is not true of output
per worker. Ever fewer draft animals were in use. While Chinese 16th century writers observed that "the
labor of ten men equals that of one ox,"13 the use of draft animals declined in the Ming (1368-1644) and
Qing (1644-1911) period. By the mid-Qing period, animal use had disappeared almost entirely, except for
the most arduous tasks.14 The land needed to feed an ox was dear, and farms were typically too small for
keeping an ox.
       Ever smaller farm sizes in China also meant that there was less scope for female employment in agricul-
ture. Labor requirements could be satisfied by the existing male labor force on small plots. As Li (1998) has
argued, women were increasingly rendered superfluous for agricultural tasks, which were also less and less
well-matched to their comparative advantages. They consequently sought employment outside agriculture,
in home production of textiles through spinning and weaving.
       Overall, the market value of female labor declined during the Ming and Qing periods, as a result of
falling labor productivity combined with changes in the pattern of production arising from growing ’agri-
cultural involution’ (Berkeley, 1963). Even authors skeptical of the involution hypothesis conclude that
female market wages were only 25% of male wages in 1820s China, whereas English women’s market
wages were equivalent to 50-63% of English male wages (Kussmaul, 1981; Allen, 2009).15 This offers
  13
     Cited after Brenner and Isett (2002).
  14
     The view is controversial. Wider availability of bean cake may have helped the increased use of oxen after 1620 (Allen, 2009).
  15
     In our model, female market wages are represented by wh . Low wh /wM g is thus an indicator for relatively high productivity


                                                        Appendix p.15
important empirical support for the predictions of our model - in Europe, female labor was relatively more
valuable, partly because technology, soil, and climate favored the pastoralism, where women could make
more of a contribution.

B.4     Comparison of Marital Fertility Rates

This section compares fertility within marriage for Hutterites, Western Europe before 1800, and China.
Table B.3 shows that European marital fertility was only slightly below contemporaneous levels of Hutterites
and therefore probably close to the biological maximum.16

                             Table B.3: Marital fertility rates (births per year and woman)
                                        Age        Hutterites     Western Europe        China
                                                                   before 1800
                                        20-24         0.55              0.45             0.27
                                        25-29        0.502              0.43             0.25
                                        30-34        0.447              0.37             0.22
                                        35-39        0.406               0.3             0.18
                                        40-44        0.222              0.18             0.12
                                       Source: Clark (2007).




B.5     Measures for Pastoral Production and Instrumental Variables

In this section we check the consistency of our measure for pastoral production at the English county level
in 1290, and describe the construction of our instrumental variable, the days of the year during which grass
grows.

Arable Acreage in 1290
Because the share of pastoral land is not available for medieval times, we use the proxy P astoral1290 =
1–share of arable land in 1290. We take the share of arable land in 1290 from Table 7 in Broadberry et al.
(2011). In the following we show that this proxy performs well. We first construct the same variable for
1836 – when more detailed data on land use are available – and compare it to the actual share of pastoral
land. Kain (1986) reports four categories: arable land, woodland, grassland, commons, for 28 counties in
1836. In an average county, these account for 97.8% of county acreage. Grassland and commons (which
were mostly pastures) reflect pastoral land. We plot this against 1–share of arable land in 1836 in the left
panel of Figure B.4. The fit is very good, and, importantly, there is no systematic bias (deviation from the
45-degree line) in our proxy.
      Next, we analyze how strongly our main explanatory variable P astoral1290 itself is correlated with
in grain (i.e., small Ah /Ag in China).
   16
      The remaining minor difference is at least partially explained by the better nutrition and general health of Hutterites.



                                                          Appendix p.16
the share of pastoral land in 1836. The right panel of Figure B.4 shows the relationship. The correlation
coefficient is .58, significant at the 1% level.


                                                                   Figure B.4: Consistency check of the variable P astoral1290
                                              Correlation using 1836 data and 45-degree line                                                    P astoral1290 and 1836 share of pastoral land
                                    .8




                                                                                                                                           .8
 1 − Share of Arable Land in 1836
                                    .7




                                                                                                          Share of Pastoral Land in 1836
                                    .6




                                                                                                                                           .6
                                    .5
                                    .4




                                                                                                                                           .4
                                    .3
                                    .2




                                                                                                                                           .2
                                         .2         .3        .4         .5         .6      .7       .8                                         .4        .5           .6          .7          .8      .9
                                                           Share of Pastoral Land in 1836                                                            Pastoral1290 = 1 − Share of Arable Land in 1290

                                         Source: County level data for 1836 are from Kain (1986), who reports four categories: arable land, grassland, com-
                                         mons, and woodland. We use the combined share of grassland and commons as the share of pastoral land in 1836.
                                         County-level arable acreage in 1290 is calculated as 1–share of arable land in 1290, which is from Broadberry et al.
                                         (2011).



                                     Finally, we verify that more pastoral land in a county also implies more pastoral production.17 Data on
livestock at the county level in 1867 from Mingay and Thirsk (2011) suggest a strong positive relationship
(Figure B.5).

Grass growing days
We use days of grass growth (daysgrass) from Down, Jollans, Lazenby, and Wilkins (1981) to instrument
for the suitability for pastoral agriculture. Grass growing days are derived based on suitable soil temperature
(above 6 degrees Celsius), adjusted for a drought factor and altitude. Figure B.6 plots the number of days
of grass growth in a typical year in the British Isles. While the broad pattern is of higher suitability to the
West, there is substantial variation even at relatively low levels of aggregation.
                                     In Figure B.7 we show that ln(daysgrass) is a strong predictor of the share of pastoral land in 1290.
The left panel of the figure depicts the raw correlation, while the right panel shows a partial scatterplot, after
controlling for general crop suitability for agriculture. The latter is calculated following Alesina, Giuliano,
and Nunn (2011). We first define land as "suitable" for a crop (wheat, barley, or rye) if it reaches a yield/ha
at least 40% of the maximum observed yield.18 We then calculate county-level crop suitability as the share
of each county’s land area that is "suitable" for at least one crop according to the 40% cutoff.
               17
     One concern is that grassland and commons may merely reflect fallow land.
               18
     Soil suitability for each crop is from Gaez 3.0 (FAO/IIASA, 2010), derived for low inputs (traditional farming technology) and
rain-fed agriculture (no irrigation). This best reflects the conditions of early modern agriculture.



                                                                                                 Appendix p.17
Figure B.5: Regions with more Grass and Commons have more Livestock




                                                   50
           Livestock units per 100 acres in 1867
                                                   40
                                                   30
                                                   20
                                                   10




                                                        .2       .3         .4           .5            .6   .7
                                                                      Share of Pastoral Land in 1836

         Source: Data on livestock at the county level in 1867 is from
         The Agrarian History of England and Wales, vol. VI (Mingay
         and Thirsk, 2011), Table III.10. One unit of livestock reflects 1
         cow/ox, or 7 sheep. See note to Table B.4 for the share of pastoral
         land in 1836.




                                                             Figure B.6: Days of Grass Growth

             Historic Counties of England
             Days200
             Days205
             Days215
             Days230
             Days250
             Days270
             Days290
             Days320




         Source: Data from Down et al. (1981).




                                                                       Appendix p.18
                                                        Figure B.7: First stage using days of grass growth as IV for pastoral land
                                                            Raw correlation                                                                                          Controlling for general crop suitability




                                                                                                                                                         5.4
                                  1




                                                                                                             Share of Pastoral Land in 1290 (residual)
 Share of Pastoral Land in 1290




                                                                                                                                                         5.3
                                  .8




                                                                                                                                                         5.2
                                                                                                                                                         5.1
                                  .6




                                                                                                                                                         5
                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                         4.9
                                       5.2        5.3           5.4          5.5            5.6     5.7                                                        5.2       5.3           5.4          5.5            5.6   5.7
                                                        ln(Days during which grass grows)                                                                                      ln(Days during which grass grows)

                                       Source: The number of days during which grass grows is from Down et al. (1981). County-level arable acreage in
                                       1290 is from Broadberry et al. (2011). General crop suitability is derived from FAO/IIASA (2010), following Alesina
                                       et al. (2011).



                                   Table B.4 shows the corresponding first-stage regressions for both P astoral1290 and P astoral1836 as
dependent variable. Our instrument ln(daysgrass) is a strong and robust predictor of pastoral land shares.
As one should expect, general crop suitability is negatively correlated with pastoral land use. None of our
IV results depends on whether we control for general grain feasibility. All results presented in the paper use
only ln(daysgrass). This is shown in Table B.5, which replicates the estimates from the paper, including
general crop suitability in the first stage.

                                                                                    Table B.4: First stage regressions

                                                                                                    (1)        (2)                                                             (3)       (4)
                                                             Dep. Var.:                              P astoral1290                                                             P astoral1836
                                                             ln(daysgrass)                         .788***                                                .545***         .808***         .652**
                                                                                                  (.135)                                                 (.163)          (.185)          (.252)
                                                             General Crop Suitability                                                                    -.279***                        -.189*
                                                                                                                                                         (.067)                          (.108)
                                                             R2                                   .328                                                   .569            .344            .422
                                                             Observations                         41                                                     41              28              28
                                                            Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Key: *** significant at 1%; **
                                                            5%; * 10%. The number of days during which grass grows is from Down et al.
                                                            (1981). County-level arable acreage in 1290 is from Broadberry et al. (2011).
                                                            General crop suitability is derived from FAO/IIASA (2010) as described in the
                                                            text.




                                                                                                  Appendix p.19
                  Table B.5: Main IV results, using general crop suitability as additional instrument

                                                      (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)             (5)
                   Table (T.), Column (col.):      T.3, col.4    T.4, col.3   T.4, col.6    T.5, col.3      T.5, col.4
                   P astoral1290                   1.045***      5.130**      4.985**
                                                   (0.147)       (2.252)      (2.508)
                   DM V                                          6.813**      7.098**
                                                                 (2.684)      (3.125)
                   P astoralM arriage                                                       7.321***        7.130***
                                                                                            (1.765)         (1.909)
                   Period FE                       -             yes          yes           yes             yes
                   Observations                    38            112          66            112             66
                   First Stage F-Statistic#        18.9          33.2         30.6          41.6            16.5
                  Notes: The table replicates the IV regressions reported in the paper, using 2 instruments: 1) The
                  number of days during which grass grows (from Down et al. (1981)), and 2) general crop suitability
                  (derived from FAO/IIASA (2010) as described in the text). The second row in this table indicates
                  which regression from the paper is replicated. Robust standard errors in parentheses (in columns
                  2-5 clustered at the county level). Key: *** significant at 1%; ** 5%; * 10%.
                  #
                    Kleibergen-Paap rK Wald F statistic.




B.6      Evidence from the 1377 and 1381 Poll Tax: Sampling Procedure and Results

This section describes our use of the poll tax returns of 1377-81 as an indicator of the number of unmarried
women. We begin by explaining our sampling procedure and then turn to the empirical approach and results.

Sampling Procedure
Ideally, we would like to have direct information on the number of unmarried women in 1377 and 1381. For
1377, the surviving rolls are not complete enough to determine this for a country-wide sample.19 Instead,
we do two things. First, we calculate the drop in the number of taxpayers between 1377 (when evasion
was minimal) and 1381 (when it was massive). The 1381 rolls are more complete, and we collect direct
information on marital status of the assessed population for this year. This procedure shows that in those
areas where there are many "missing women" in the 1381 tax returns, relative to 1377, there is also a
suspiciously high number of unmarried men relative to unmarried women.
       Medieval England was subdivided into either hundreds, wapentakes, or liberties, depending on the local
naming convention. Below this level, the parish or vill formed the smallest administrative unit. The Exche-
quer named county-level commissions, which in turn appointed local collectors in charge of assessing and
collecting the tax dues in a given area (usually a small number of vills or parishes).
       The collectors would then turn over proceeds and tax rolls to the county commission. Tax rolls contain
the names of each taxpayer, the amount taxed, and the parish or vill where the taxpayer was assessed.
Marital status and occupation were recorded at the discretion of the individual tax collector.
  19
       Only seven counties have surviving nominative rolls in 1377, and these contain little information.



                                                           Appendix p.20
    These tax rolls (also called nominative rolls) were checked and aggregated at the county level, with
extracts (particulars of account) sent to London along with the proceeds of the collection. These generally
included a list of all settlements in the county with their respective number of taxpayers and taxed amount.
Sometimes the aggregation was conducted at the hundred level, rather than that of the individual vill or
parish.
    Surviving data on the Poll Taxes either comes from the nominative rolls or the particulars of account
(Fenwick, 1998, 2001, 2005). In the former case, information on sex and marital status might be available.
The latter only contain aggregate information on the number of taxpayers and amounts collected. In 1381,
no account particulars were compiled.
    The sampling was performed by first eliminating all counties for which no nominative rolls remained
for the 1381 Poll Tax. Then, the number of settlements in each county with usable data was determined. A
settlement was included in the sampling pool if it satisfied the following criteria: 1. It showed the presence
of at least one married couple (thus eliminating records where marital status was not recorded). 2. It was
complete, or, only a few centimeters of the medieval tax roll was missing, with no discernible pattern in
the sequence of entries for married and unmarried people (i.e., missing individuals would not skew the
sampling).
    From the remaining settlements, a maximum of ten settlements were picked at random for each county
(using the Excel random number generator). For counties where records from fewer than ten settlements
survived, all available settlements were sampled. The sex was determined from either the name, or from
the occupation (in the case of individuals with faded first names), when it unambiguously indicates gender
(e.g., "milkmaid").
    The nominative rolls used two different conventions for recording marital status. In the first, the names
of all men, and only unmarried women were recorded. The wives present were tallied by adding "ux." next
to the name of their husband [from Latin uxor, wife]. In other rolls, names for all taxpayers are recorded,
with each wife listed after their husband, followed by "Ux. Eius" ["His wife"]. In each of these cases, the
number of married couples and of unmarried men and women can easily be calculated.
    The Cities of London and York were not considered part of any county for taxation purposes. Where
the records for a county included one or more cities, at least one was sampled in each case in addition to
the ten rural settlements. For Canterbury, a large city (2,200 taxpayers) with no division into parishes, ten
randomly selected blocks of 45 people were sampled.
    The end result is a dataset of 193 vill/parish records from 22 counties. Table B.9 at the end of this
appendix shows the list of sampled settlements and the sample number of people living in each settle-
ment. There are 17 counties with the full complement of ten sampled settlements. Somerset has only nine,
Northamptonshire has seven, and Kent, Worcestershire and Sussex only have records for one city each
(Canterbury, Worcester and Chichester respectively).




                                               Appendix p.21
Empirical Approach and Results
We construct two variables from the poll tax returns of 1377 and 1381. Fenwick (1998, 2001, 2005) provides
transcriptions of the names and assessed amounts of tax payers for each sub-county ("hundred", where they
survived), as well as county totals (of which a substantially larger number is available). The drop in the
number of taxpayers is calculated from changes in the total number of assessed individuals in 1377 and
1381. For example, in south-east Lincolnshire, the sub-division of Holland returned 18,592 taxpayers in
1377. In 1381, only 13,519 appear as taxed, equivalent to a drop of 27 percent (Fenwick, 2001, p. 3). We
construct the percentage drop in tax payers between 1377–81 (%T axDrop) for 38 English counties.20
       To verify that ’missing women’ are indeed an explanation for the drop in tax payers, we use our sample
of 193 settlements from 22 counties where individual tax records survived, as explained above (Fenwick,
1998, 2001, 2005). We count the number of unmarried men (Msingle ) and women (Wsingle ). This allows
                                                                               (                )
us to construct a measure for ’missing single women’ (following Oman, 1906): ln Msingle /Wsingle . This
variable equals zero when there are no missing single women; its mean is .25, and it ranges from .06 to
.39, and it can be constructed for 22 counties. Next, we examine the link between the measure with broader
                                    (               )
coverage – %T axDrop – and ln Msingle /Wsingle . Figure B.8 shows that these measures are strongly
positively correlated.

                           Figure B.8: Excess Single Men and Drop in 1381 Poll Tax Payers
                                                                                  .3
                                     Drop in Poll Tax Payers 1377−81 (residual)
                                                                                  .2
                                                                                  .1
                                                                                  0
                                                                                  −.1




                                                                                        0    .5             1              1.5    2
                                                                                            ln(Unmarried Men / Unmarried Women)

        Notes: The y-axis plots the residual variation (after controlling for population density in 1290) in the county-level drop
        in tax payers between the 1377 and 1381 poll tax. County-level poll tax data for 1377 and 1381 are from Fenwick
        (1998, 2001, 2005). To obtain gender and marital status, we sample 193 settlements, as described in detail in Section
        B.6 and Table B.9.



       In Table B.6, Columns 1-3 show that missing single women are strongly associated with the drop in tax
revenues. Our proxy itself accounts for 27% of the variation in tax payer reduction (column 1), and together
with county population density it can explain 47% of the variation (column 2). The coefficient on population
density is negative – as expected if it is easier to evade tax collection in more remote areas. Column 3 shows
  20
    Unfortunately, directly counting the number of unmarried women in 1377 – when tax evasion was low – is not an option. Only
a handful of counties have surviving information at the settlement level that could be used.


                                                                                                  Appendix p.22
that this finding is robust to controlling for regional fixed effects. The remainder of Table B.6 shows that
the results are driven by a low proportion of unmarried women (columns 4-6), but not by unmarried men
(columns 7-9).

                Table B.6: ’Missing’ unmarried women and the drop in poll tax payers, 1377-81

 Dependent Variable: Drop in Tax Payers at the County Level, 1377-1381
                             (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)         (7)        (8)        (9)
 ln(Msingle /Wsingle )      .111**     .119***      .132***
                           (.044)     (.037)       (.026)
 Wsingle /Nsample                                               -1.389**      -1.308***     -2.053***
                                                                (.523)        0.413         0.315
 Msingle /Nsample                                                                                           .141      .714      .499
                                                                                                           (.430)    (.527)    (.673)
 ln(popdensity 1290 )                 -.110**      -.286***                   -.0885        -.346***                 -.126*    -.245*
                                      (.049)       (.081)                     (.059)        (.058)                   (.071)    (.121)
 Region FE                 no         no           yes          no            no            yes            no        no        yes
 R2                        .273       .473         .683         .262          .392          .746           .003      .222      .368
 Observations              22         22           22           22            22            22             22        22        22
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Key: *** significant at 1%; ** 5%; * 10%. The dataset consists of 22 counties for
which detailed records from the 1381 English poll tax has survived. Msingle and Wsingle reflect the number of unmarried men and women,
respectively. These are derived based on sampling 193 hundreds (sub-parish level), where Nsample denotes the total number of sampled tax
payers at the county level (ranging 316–1,963 with a mean of 776); this variable is used as analytical regression weight. popdensity is
the population per square mile at the county level in 1290 from Broadberry et al. (2011).



       How important was pastoralism for late marriage or celibacy in the 14th century? To gauge magnitudes,
we need the proportion of unmarried women. However, we cannot construct this direct measure because
single women are underreported in the poll tax data. Instead, we use the proportion of unmarried men as a
proxy. As before, this variable can be constructed for the 22 counties with detailed tax records. Figure B.9
shows that it correlates strongly with the share of pastoral land in 1290. After controlling for population
density, the coefficient is .244 with a standard error of .086.21 Thus, a one-standard deviation increase in
P astoral1290 (.15) is associated with an increase of 3.7% in the share of unmarried men.22

Drop in Tax Payers at the County Level
While tax rolls listing individual names and marital status survived for only 22 counties, the overall number
of tax payers in 1377 and 1381 is available for 38 English counties. We use these data in the paper. Figure
B.10 shows that tax evasion in 1381 was a broad phenomenon across all regions in England.

  21
   The coefficient is almost identical but marginally insignificant when we additionally include regional fixed effects.
  22
   This figure has to be interpreted with caution. The share of unmarried men in the observed population is mechanically higher
where many unmarried women evaded the poll tax, because then the denominator is lower.




                                                       Appendix p.23
                 Figure B.9: Unmarried men in the 1381 Poll Tax (partial scatterplot)




                                                                         .35
                             Share of unmarried men in 1381 (residual)
                                                                         .3
                                                                         .25
                                                                         .2
                                                                         .15
                                                                         .1




                                                                               .4    .5            .6           .7         .8   .9
                                                                                          Share of Pastoral Land in 1290

Notes: The y-axis plots the residual variation in unmarried men relative to total population, after controlling for county-
level population density in 1290. To obtain gender and marital status, we sample 193 settlements from Fenwick (1998,
2001, 2005), as described in detail in Appendix B.6 and Table B.9. See note to Figure B.4 for share of pastoral land in
1290.




                  Figure B.10: Spatial distribution of drop in poll tax payers 1377-81

                      Historic Counties of England
                      Drop in Number of Taxpayers (%)

                                                                         No Data
                                                                         11% - 20%
                                                                         21% - 30%
                                                                         31% - 40%
                                                                         41% - 50%
                                                                         51% - 60%
                                                                         61% - 70%




Notes: The figure shows the percentage drop of the number of tax payers in each county between 1377 and 1381. The
data is from Fenwick (1998, 2001, 2005).




                                                                                           Appendix p.24
B.7     Female Marriage Age and Patterns of Land Use

In this appendix, we provide additional information on the relationship between deserted medieval villages,
pastoral marriage patterns, and the female age at first marriage.

Deserted Medieval Villages and Age at Marriage
We use data on abandoned medieval villages to capture agricultural change after the Black Death, using data
by Beresford (1989). On the usefulness of deserted medieval villages as an indicator of agricultural change
after the Black Death, Broadberry et al. (2011) conclude that:

        One guide to the scale and geographical extent of this shift is provided by a simple count of the
        numbers of deserted medieval villages (DMVs) in each county...in a band of counties stretching
        north-east to south-west through the heart of the midlands, potentially at least 1/2 million acres
        of land which had been in arable production before the Black Death may have been converted to
        permanent grassland thereafter and much of it, even at the height of the ploughing-up campaign
        of the Napoleonic Wars, was never converted back.

      From the CAMPOP dataset, we take the average age of first marriage for women in each parish. The
number of deserted villages per 100,000 acres in each county is our indicator for the extent to which the
switch from "corn to horn" occurred after 1350. In Figure B.11, we plot the kernel density of marriage ages,
conditional on the share of deserted villages being above or below the median. The distribution is clearly
shifted to the right, with a difference in modes of one year.

              Figure B.11: Deserted medieval villages and female age at marriage (kernel density)
                                  .4




                                             DMV above mean
                                             DMV below mean
                                  .3
                                  .2
                                  .1
                                  0




                                       22               24                 26               28
                                                        Female age at marriage

       Notes: Mean age at first marriage is from CAMPOP Wrigley, Davies, Oeppen, and Schofield (1997); we use the parish-
       level average over all five CAMPOP periods between 1600 and 1837. Deserted medieval villages per 100,000 acres
       (DM V ) are from Broadberry et al. (2011). DM V serve as a proxy for the shift from arable to pastoral production
       after the Black Death.




                                                       Appendix p.25
Pastoral Production and Age at Marriage
In Table B.7 we show that a higher share of pastoral land use in 1836 (when the measure is available directly
from the tithe records) has a similar effect as our variable for 1290. This underlines the long-run stability of
effects shown in Table 4 in the paper.23

                 Table B.7: Pastoral Production and Age at First Marriage (Parish-Level Panel)

             Dependent Variable: Female Age at First Marriage
                                              (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)           (5)           (6)
                                             OLS          OLS             IV          OLS          OLS            IV
             Period                                    1600-1837                               1600-1749
             P astoral1836                3.622***      7.580**      4.502***      4.177***      7.842       4.812***
                                          (.804)        (3.293)      (.706)        (.867)        (5.101)     (.703)
             Period FE                    yes           yes          yes           yes           yes         yes
             Region FE                    no            yes          no            no            yes         no
             R2                           .577          .715         -             .417          .591        -
             Observations                 83            83           83            49            49          49
             Instrument                                        ln(daysgrass)                            ln(daysgrass)
             First Stage F-Statistic#                               47.0                                     51.7
             Notes: The panel comprises 26 parishes (located in 15 counties) over 5 periods. All explanatory variables
             and the instrument are measured at the county level, while the dependent variable is observed at the parish
             level. Robust standard errors in parentheses (clustered at the county level). Key: *** significant at 1%;
             ** 5%; * 10%. P astoral1836 is the fraction of grass and commons in the total county area in 1836, and
             daysgrass denotes the days per year during which grass grows at the county level (see Appendix B.5
             for detail).
             #
                Kleibergen-Paap rK Wald F statistic (cluster-robust). The corresponding Stock-Yogo value for 10%
             maximal IV bias is 16.4 in both columns 3 and 6.




Pastoral Marriage Pattern
As mentioned in the text, Kussmaul (1990) provides data on the pastoral (spring) marriage pattern for 542
parishes over 3 periods: 1561-1640, 1641-1740, and 1741-1820. We match these as follows to the five
periods in CAMPOP (Wrigley et al., 1997): 1561-1640 –> 1600-40; 1641-1740 –> 1650-99 and 1700-49;
1741-1820 –> 1750-99 and 1800-37.
       Figure B.12 shows the relationship between the share of pastoral land in 1290 and our proxy for pastoral
service (P astoralM arriage) variable for a cross-section of 40 counties. The corresponding regression
(weighted by the number of Kussmaul parishes in each county) has a coefficient of 0.389 (0.139) and is
significant at the 1% level.

  23
     P astoral1836 is available for 28 counties only. In specifications with P astoral1836 we do not include DM V , because the
variable should already reflect the post-plague shift "from corn to horn."




                                                         Appendix p.26
                                                                           Figure B.12: Pastoral Land, and Spring Marriage
                                                                                 Share of pastoral land and pastoral marriage




                                                                      .6
                           Prevalence of Pastoral (Spring) Marriage
                                                                      .4
                                                                      .2
                                                                      0




                                                                            .4         .5            .6           .7            .8   .9
                                                                                            Share of Pastoral Land in 1290

      Source: County-level arable acreage in 1290 is from Broadberry et al. (2011). To obtain the prevalence of pastoral
      marriage, we take the county-level average across all parishes reported by Kussmaul (1990) that are located in the
      respective county.




B.8   Evidence from the 1851 Census

Although our main focus of analysis is the period before 1800, we can exploit the detailed data available in
mid-19th century censuses to illustrate the main mechanism that linked farm service for women and delayed
marriage. Farming was a declining part of the English economy. Nonetheless, areas that employed servants
in agricultural production still saw markedly later marriage ages. In the following, we describe the data in
detail and then present our empirical results.

Variables from the 1851 Census
We collect county-level information on civil condition and occupations from the 1851 British Census, Vol-
ume I (Eyre and Spottiswoode, 1854). Civil conditions comprise bachelors, spinsters, husbands, wives,
widowers, and widows, all aged 20 or older. We calculate the share of unmarried women as spinsters, di-
vided by the sum of wives, spinsters, and widows. Thus, our measure reflects women who have never been
married – the relevant group for our argument. The census also lists detailed occupations in agriculture (for
both male and female workers), including farmers, graziers, agricultural labourers, shepherds, cowkeep-
ers/milksellers, and farm servants. We define the variable %AgServants as the number of farm servants,
divided by all listed occupational categories in agriculture. In addition, we define the more specific category
%AgServantsfemale , which includes only female servants in the numerator. Finally, we extract the number
of employees in ’chief manufactures and products,’ and divide it by the total population aged 20 and above
to obtain the variable %M anuf Emp.


                                                                                              Appendix p.27
Empirical Results
In Table B.8, we investigate the link between pastoral employment in agriculture and marriage probabilities.
The dependent variable is the ratio of spinsters (unmarried, but not widowed) to all women aged 20 or older,
in each county. Where many females remained unmarried until late in life, average age at first marriage must
have been high. The ratio of single women has a mean of .28 and a standard deviation of .027 across 41
counties. We use two explanatory variables. First, the share of female agricultural servants in total agricul-
tural employment (%AgServantsfemale ) captures the demand for women as servants in agriculture. Second,
we use the share of all agricultural servants in total agricultural employment (%AgServants). This reflects
the strength of hiring labor year-long in agriculture in general; it is also the explanatory variable used by
Kussmaul (1981). Columns 1 and 2 show a positive correlation between %AgServantsfemale and the pro-
portion of single women. The statistical significance of this result increases when we use %AgServants
instead (columns 4 and 5). The number of agricultural servants reported in the census does not differenti-
ate between arable and pastoral farms. One way to address this issue is by instrumenting with pastoral land
suitability (days of grass-growing). Because our story relies on animal husbandry, we expect the coefficients
to increase when we isolate this channel by IV estimation. Columns 4 and 6 show that, for both explana-
tory variables, results are stronger when we instrument. According to these estimates, farm service was
powerfully associated with a higher proportion of unmarried females. A one standard deviation increase in
%AgServantsfemale pushes up the the proportion of single women by up to 3.5 percentage points. The same
proportional increase of %AgServants raises the dependent variable by 3.9 percentage points. In levels
(using the means of the explanatory variables), pastoral farm service raises the proportion of single women
by 5.6–6.8 percentage points. Interestingly, we also find a negative effect of the share of manufacturing
employment. This suggests that as industrial employment opportunities increased, the European Marriage
Pattern declined.
      Figure B.13 complements the evidence provided above. The left panel shows the relationship between
agricultural service and the proportion of single women, after controlling for manufacturing employment
(this corresponds to column 5 in Table B.8). The right panel performs an additional analysis, regressing
the fraction of single women directly on the historical share of pastoral land (again, after controlling for
%M anuf Emp. The coefficient on P astoral1290 is .102 (.023). Given that the average of P astoral1290
is .57, this estimate implies that pastoral production raises the share of unmarried women by about 5.7
percentage points countrywide.

B.9     Additional Historical Evidence

On the use of poll tax data as an indicator of the share of unmarried women (Oman, 1906):

        The result was that every shire of England returned an incredibly small number of adult in-
        habitants liable to the impost. This can be proved with absolute certainty by comparing the
        returns of the earlier...Poll-tax of 1377 with those of this...Poll-tax of 1381. ...The adult popu-
        lation of the realm had ostensibly fallen from 1,355,201 to 896,481 persons. These figures were


                                                 Appendix p.28
   Table B.8: Celibacy and Service Employment in Agriculture in the 1851 British Census

    Dependent Variable: Proportion of Unmarried Women in Female Population over 20
                                   (1)        (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)             (6)
                                  OLS        OLS             IV         OLS         OLS              IV
    %AgServantsfemale             .335       .387*      1.766**
                                 (.229)     (.210)      (.773)
    %AgServants                                                         .141*      .186***      .681***
                                                                       (.073)     (.062)       (.214)
    %M anuf                                 -.0626*     -.0969**                  -.0781**     -.145***
                                            (.034)      (.049)                    (.032)       (.053)
    R2                           .06        .14         -              .09        .20          -
    Observations                 41         41          41             41         41           41
    Instrument                                          ln(daysgrass)                        ln(daysgrass)
    First Stage F-Statistic#                            15.8                                   13.4
    Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Key: *** significant at 1%; ** 5%; * 10%. The dependent
    variable is defined as the share of spinsters (unmarried, but not widowed) in the population over 20 years
    old. %AgServantsfemale and %AgServants are, respectively, the shares of female and all agricultural
    servants in total agricultural employment. %M anuf is the employment share in manufacturing.
    #
       Kleibergen-Paap rK Wald F statistic (cluster-robust). The corresponding Stock-Yogo value for 10%
    maximal IV bias is 16.4 in both columns 5 and 6.



monstrous and incredible – in five years, during which the realm, though far from being in a
flourishing condition, had yet been visited neither by pestilence, famine, nor foreign invasion,
the ministers were invited to believe that its population had fallen off in some districts more
than 50 per cent, in none less than 20 per cent...

A glance at the details of the township-returns...reveals the simple form of evasion which the
villagers had practised when sending in their schedules. They had suppressed the existence
of their unmarried female dependants, .... The result is that most villages show an enormous
and impossible predominance of males in their population, and an equally incredible want
of unmarried females. When therefore we find Essex or Suffolk or Staffordshire townships
returning, one after another, a population working out in the proportion of five or four males to
four or three females, we know what to conclude. [our emphasis]




                                                     Tables


                                                  Appendix p.29
                                                   Figure B.13: Pastoral Land, Servants in Agriculture, and Celibacy in 1851 (partial scatterplots)
                                                              Celibacy and servants in agriculture                                                                           Reduced form with pastoral land share
                                           .1




                                                                                                                                                                  .1
Proportion of unmarried women (residual)




                                                                                                                       Proportion of unmarried women (residual)
                                           .05




                                                                                                                                                                  .05
                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                           −.05




                                                       .05            .1            .15             .2        .25                                                       .4         .5            .6            .7        .8        .9
                                                                      Share of Servants in Agriculture                                                                                  Share of Pastoral Land in 1290

                                                  Notes: The y-axis plots the residual variation in the share of unmarried women (in population aged above 20), after
                                                  controlling for the employment share in manufacturing. Employment shares and civil conditions are from the 1851
                                                  British Census (Eyre and Spottiswoode, 1854). See note to B.4 for share of pastoral land in 1290.




                                                                               Table B.9: List of Sampled Settlements from the 1381 Poll Tax


                                                                  County                  # Settlem.                    Name of                                                                     Type of          # of People
                                                                                          per county                   Settlement                                                                  Settlement         in Sample
                                                  1          Berkshire                       10          Shaw                                                                                          rural             16
                                                  2          Berkshire                       10          Faringdon                                                                                     rural             195
                                                  3          Berkshire                       10          Bercote                                                                                       rural             35
                                                  4          Berkshire                       10          Enborne                                                                                       rural             73
                                                  5          Berkshire                       10          East Hanney                                                                                   rural             41
                                                  6          Berkshire                       10          Burghfield                                                                                    rural             25
                                                  7          Berkshire                       10          Idstone                                                                                       rural             46
                                                  8          Berkshire                       10          Balking                                                                                       rural             18
                                                  9          Berkshire                       10          Steventon                                                                                     rural             171
                                                  10         Berkshire                       10          Grove                                                                                         rural             117
                                                  11         Derbyshire                      10          Youlgrave                                                                                     rural             231
                                                  12         Derbyshire                      10          Darley                                                                                        rural             246
                                                  13         Derbyshire                      10          Tideswell                                                                                     rural             165
                                                  14         Derbyshire                      10          Wormhill                                                                                      rural             331
                                                  15         Derbyshire                      10          Bakewell                                                                                      rural             166
                                                  16         Derbyshire                      10          Buxton                                                                                        rural             126
                                                  17         Derbyshire                      10          Baslow                                                                                        rural             292
                                                  18         Derbyshire                      10          Glossop                                                                                       rural             118
                                                  19         Derbyshire                      10          Blackwell                                                                                     rural             26
                                                  20         Derbyshire                      10          Castleton                                                                                     rural             262
                                                  21         Dorset                          10          Wareham                                                                                       rural             150
                                                  22         Dorset                          10          Radipole                                                                                      rural             33
                                                  23         Dorset                          10          Tyneham                                                                                       rural              5
                                                                                                                                                                                                      continued on next page


                                                                                                            Appendix p.30
                       Table B.9 – continued from previous page

            County      # Settlem.                  Name of        Type of     # of People
                        per county                 Settlement     Settlement    in Sample
24   Dorset                 10       Hanford                        rural          19
25   Dorset                 10       Afflington                     rural          22
26   Dorset                 10       [name unknown]                 rural          4
27   Dorset                 10       Bishop’s Candle                rural          15
28   Dorset                 10       Kyngeston                      rural          22
29   Dorset                 10       Chartlon and Herrington        rural          17
30   Dorset                 10       W[...]                         rural          29
31   Essex                  10       West Ham                       rural         239
32   Essex                  10       Broomfield                     rural         34
33   Essex                  10       Leaden Roding                  rural         39
34   Essex                  10       Foxearth                       rural         63
35   Essex                  10       Lamarsh                        rural         43
36   Essex                  10       Bobbingworth                   rural         48
37   Essex                  10       Chigwell                       rural         123
38   Essex                  10       LittkeBentley                  rural         46
39   Essex                  10       GreatTotham                    rural         71
40   Essex                  10       Witham                         rural         58
41   Gloucestershire        10       Frampton Mansell               rural          19
42   Gloucestershire        10       Hampnett                       rural          19
43   Gloucestershire        10       Hatherop                       rural          50
44   Gloucestershire        10       Bagendon                       rural          7
45   Gloucestershire        10       Postlip                        rural          23
46   Gloucestershire        10       Admington                      rural          72
47   Gloucestershire        10       Rodborough                     rural          62
48   Gloucestershire        10       North Cerney                   rural          26
49   Gloucestershire        10       Lower Swell                    rural          44
50   Gloucestershire        10       Ashton Under Hill              rural          65
51   Hampshire              10       Amport                         rural         18
52   Hampshire              10       Quarley                        rural         106
53   Hampshire              10       [...]ute                       rural         61
54   Hampshire              10       Pokesole                       rural         31
55   Hampshire              10       North Fareham                  rural         12
56   Hampshire              10       Hambledon                      rural         49
57   Hampshire              10       Chilworth                      rural         18
58   Hampshire              10       Portsea                        rural         32
59   Hampshire              10       [name unknown]                 rural         86
60   Hampshire              10       [name unknown]                 rural          8
61   Kent                    1       Canterbury                     urban         445
62   Lancashire             10       Salford                        rural          35
63   Lancashire             10       Bolton                         rural          35
64   Lancashire             10       Heaton Norris                  rural          29
65   Lancashire             10       Castleton                      rural          20
66   Lancashire             10       Chortlong Upon Medlock         rural          12
67   Lancashire             10       Hale                           rural          73
68   Lancashire             10       Aughton                        rural          65
69   Lancashire             10       Sutton                         rural          43
70   Lancashire             10       Abram                          rural          17
                                                                   continued on next page

                                          Appendix p.31
                         Table B.9 – continued from previous page

           County         # Settlem.                  Name of               Type of     # of People
                          per county                 Settlement            Settlement    in Sample
71    Lancashire              10       Much Woolton                          rural          20
72    Leicestershire          10       Wyfordby                              rural         37
73    Leicestershire          10       Bottesford                            rural         156
74    Leicestershire          10       Croxton Kerrial                       rural         67
75    Leicestershire          10       Stockerston                           rural         37
76    Leicestershire          10       Great Glen                            rural         110
77    Leicestershire          10       Queninborough                         rural         107
78    Leicestershire          10       Barrow Upon Soar                      rural         67
79    Leicestershire          10       Loddington with Launde                rural         117
80    Leicestershire          10       Braunstone                            rural         79
81    Leicestershire          10       Shenton                               rural         110
82    Lincolnshire            10       Whaplode                              rural         725
83    Lincolnshire            10       Holbeach                              rural         399
84    Lincolnshire            10       Benington                             rural         126
85    Lincolnshire            10       Butterwick                            rural         118
86    Lincolnshire            10       Fishtoft                              rural         193
87    Lincolnshire            10       Skirbeck                              rural         140
88    Lincolnshire            10       Swarby                                rural         27
89    Lincolnshire            10       Totill and South Reston               rural         59
90    Lincolnshire            10       Mablethorpe                           rural         57
91    Lincolnshire            10       Belleau and Aby                       rural         60
 92   Norfolk                 10       Wereham                               rural         51
 93   Norfolk                 10       StowBardolph with Wimbotsham          rural         113
 94   Norfolk                 10       Denver                                rural         66
 95   Norfolk                 10       Beetley                               rural         74
 96   Norfolk                 10       Colkirk                               rural         50
 97   Norfolk                 10       East Brandenham                       rural         32
 98   Norfolk                 10       HolmeHale                             rural         35
 99   Norfolk                 10       Ridlington                            rural         71
100   Norfolk                 10       NorthWalsham                          rural         153
101   Norfolk                 10       Crostwight                            rural         44
102   Northamptonshire         7       Wellingborough                        rural         142
103   Northamptonshire         7       EastonMaudit                          rural         49
104   Northamptonshire         7       KingsCliffe                           rural         147
105   Northamptonshire         7       Southwick                             rural         32
106   Northamptonshire         7       Fotheringhay                          rural         74
107   Northamptonshire         7       Duddington                            rural         66
108   Northamptonshire         7       [name unknown]                        rural         55
109   Oxfordshire             12       Banbury                               rural         52
110   Oxfordshire             12       Neithrop and Calthorpe                rural         44
111   Oxfordshire             12       Adderbury                             rural         85
112   Oxfordshire             12       Arncott                               rural         33
113   Oxfordshire             12       Radford                               rural         30
114   Oxfordshire             12       Fifield                               rural         40
115   Oxfordshire             12       Mongewell Cadwell and Huntercombe     rural         27
116   Oxfordshire             12       Warborough and Ganglesdown            rural         124
117   Oxfordshire             12       StMary Magdalen                       urban         156
118   Oxfordshire             12       StGiles                               urban         60
                                                                            continued on next page

                                            Appendix p.32
                      Table B.9 – continued from previous page

           County      # Settlem.                  Name of            Type of     # of People
                       per county                 Settlement         Settlement    in Sample
119   Oxfordshire          12       Attington                          rural          26
120   Oxfordshire          12       Waterstock                         rural          50
121   Shropshire           10       Fauls Willaston and Adderley       rural          51
122   Shropshire           10       Halesowen                          rural          95
123   Shropshire           10       Waltone                            rural          23
124   Shropshire           10       Marrington and Walcot              rural          62
125   Shropshire           10       CondoverwithParcels                rural          50
126   Shropshire           10       Rowton with Parcels                rural          40
127   Shropshire           10       Minsterley                         rural          44
128   Shropshire           10       Coleham                            rural          33
129   Shropshire           10       Alveley                            rural          78
130   Shropshire           10       Wrickton and Walkerslow            rural          28
131   Somerset              9       Bath                               urban         295
132   Somerset              9       Hardington Mandeville              rural         22
133   Somerset              9       Sutton Bingham                     rural         13
134   Somerset              9       Closworth                          rural         44
135   Somerset              9       WestCoker                          rural         56
136   Somerset              9       Hardington Marsh                   rural         10
137   Somerset              9       Chilton Cantelo                    rural         21
138   Somerset              9       Pendomer                           rural          8
139   Somerset              9       EastCoker                          rural          8
140   Staffordshire        11       Moreton and Wilbrighton            rural         47
141   Staffordshire        11       High Onn                           rural         33
142   Staffordshire        11       Rugeley                            rural         156
143   Staffordshire        11       Gnosall                            rural         61
144   Staffordshire        11       Essington Coven and Stretton       rural         73
145   Staffordshire        11       Lichfield                          urban         667
146   Staffordshire        11       Curborough and Elmhurst            rural         50
147   Staffordshire        11       Norton Canes and Little Wirley     rural         37
148   Staffordshire        11       Pipe Ridware and Packington        rural         48
149   Staffordshire        11       Mavesyn Ridware                    rural         99
150   Staffordshire        11       West Bromwich                      rural         60
151   Suffolk              10       Langham                            rural         89
152   Suffolk              10       Buxlow                             rural         28
153   Suffolk              10       Bulcamp                            rural         31
154   Suffolk              10       Hadleigh                           rural         312
155   Suffolk              10       Thwaite                            rural         46
156   Suffolk              10       Mildenhall                         rural         396
157   Suffolk              10       Flixton                            rural         116
158   Suffolk              10       [name unknown]                     rural         127
159   Suffolk              10       Gipping                            rural         43
160   Suffolk              10       Chevington                         rural         63
161   Surrey               10       Wotton                             rural         67
162   Surrey               10       Dorking                            rural         279
163   Surrey               10       Abinger                            rural         20
164   Surrey               10       Shere                              rural         166
165   Surrey               10       Westcott                           rural         59
                                                                      continued on next page

                                         Appendix p.33
                            Table B.9 – continued from previous page

             County           # Settlem.                    Name of                      Type of       # of People
                              per county                   Settlement                   Settlement      in Sample
166    Surrey                     10        Godalming                                       rural          238
167    Surrey                     10        Farncombe                                       rural          56
168    Surrey                     10        Chiddingfold                                    rural          176
169    Surrey                     10        Hurtmore                                        rural          13
170    Surrey                     10        Hambledon                                       rural          23
171    Sussex                      1        Chichester                                     urban           474
172    Wiltshire                  11        Throope                                        rural           33
173    Wiltshire                  11        Croucheston                                    rural           72
174    Wiltshire                  11        Bishopstone                                    rural           46
175    Wiltshire                  11        Wick                                           rural           26
176    Wiltshire                  11        Stourton                                       rural           53
177    Wiltshire                  11        Mere                                           rural           144
178    Wiltshire                  11        Charnage                                       rural           33
179    Wiltshire                  11        WestKnoyle                                     rural           50
180    Wiltshire                  11        Zeals                                          rural           131
181    Wiltshire                  11        Salisbury                                      urban           304
182    Wiltshire                  11        Netton                                         rural           40
183    Worcestershire              1        Worcester                                      urban           410
184    YorkshireER                10        Thornthorpe                                     rural           14
185    YorkshireER                10        Fimber                                          rural           45
186    YorkshireER                10        Westow                                          rural           54
187    YorkshireER                10        Acklam with Leavening                           rural           34
188    YorkshireER                10        Holme on the Woods                              rural           64
189    YorkshireER                10        Hayton                                          rural           69
190    YorkshireER                10        Lomdesborough                                   rural           32
191    YorkshireER                10        Naburn                                          rural           47
192    YorkshireER                10        Fulford                                         rural           47
193    YorkshireER                10        Cottyngwyth                                     rural           44
Notes: The sampling procedure is described in Section B.6. Underlying settlement data for the 1381 poll tax are from
Fenwick (1998, 2001, 2005).




                                                 Appendix p.34
References
Alesina, A., P. Giuliano, and N. Nunn (2011). On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the Plough. NBER WP
  17098.
Allen, R. C. (1988). The Growth of Labor Productivity in Early Modern English Agriculture. Explorations in Eco-
  nomic History 25, 117–146.
Allen, R. C. (1991). The Two English Agricultural Revolutions, 1450-1850. In B. Campbell and M. Overton (Eds.),
  Land, Labour, and Livestock: Historical Studies in European Agricultural Productivity, pp. 236–254. Manchester:
  MUP.
Allen, R. C. (1992). Enclosure and the Yeoman. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Allen, R. C. (2009). Agricultural Productivity and Rural Incomes in England and the Yangtze Delta, c. 1620–c.1820.
  Economic History Review 62(3), 525–550.
Anderson, M. and R. Lee (2002). Malthus in State Space: Macro Economic-demographic Relations in English History,
  1540 to 1870. Journal of Population Economics 15, 195–220.
Beresford, M. (1989). A Review of Historical Research (to 1968). In M. Beresford and J. G. Hurst (Eds.), Deserted
  Medieval Villages, pp. 3–75. Gloucester: Alan Sutton.
Berkeley, C. G. (1963). Agricultural Involution: The Process of Ecological Change in Indonesia. Berkeley, CA:
  University of California Press.
Brenner, R. and C. Isett (2002). England’s Divergence from China’s Yangtze Delta: Property Rights, Microeconomics,
  and Patterns of Development. Journal of Asian Studies 61(2), 609–662.
Broadberry, S., B. M. S. Campbell, and B. van Leeuwen (2011). Arable Acreage in England, 1270-1871. Working
  Paper.
Clark, G. (2007). A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the World. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Down, K., J. Jollans, A. Lazenby, and R. Wilkins (1981). The Distribution of Grassland and Grassland Usage in
  the UK. In J. Jollans (Ed.), Grassland in the British Economy, Number 10, pp. 580–583. Reading: University of
  Reading: Centre for Agricultural Strategy.
Eyre, G. E. and W. Spottiswoode (1854). Population Tables II. Ages, Civil Condition, Occupations, and Birth-Place
  of the People. Vol. I. In Census of Great Britain, 1851. House of Commons Parliamentary Papers.
FAO/IIASA (2010). Global Agro-ecological Zones (GAEZ) version 3.0. Technical report, IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria
  and FAO, Rome, Italy.
Feng, W., J. Lee, and C. Campbell (1995). Marital Fertility Control Among the Qing Nobility: Implications for Two
  Types of Preventive Check. Population Studies 49(3), 383–400.
Fenwick, C. (Ed.) (1998). The Poll Taxes of 1377, 1379, and 1381: Bedfordshire-Leicestershire. Oxford University
  Press for British Academy Records of Social and Economic History.
Fenwick, C. (Ed.) (2001). The Poll Taxes of 1377, 1379 and 1381: Lincolnshire-Westmorland. Oxford University
  Press for British Academy Records of Social and Economic History.
Fenwick, C. (Ed.) (2005). The Poll Taxes of 1377, 1379 and 1381: Wiltshire - Yorkshire. Oxford University Press for
  British Academy Records of Social and Economic History.
Goldstone, J. (2003). Feeding the People, Starving the State: China’s Agricultural Revolution of the 17th and 18th
  Centuries. Global Economic History Network Conference. London.
Kain, R. J. (1986). An Atlas and Index of the Tithe Files of Mid-Nineteenth-Century England and Wales. Cambridge
  University Press.
Kelly, M. and C. Ó Grada (2010). Living Standards and Mortality since the Middle Ages. Working Papers 2010/26,
  School Of Economics, University College Dublin.


                                                 Appendix p.35
Kussmaul, A. (1981). Servants in Husbandry in Early Modern England. Cambridge, CUP.
Kussmaul, A. (1990). A General View of the Rural Economy of England, 1538-1840. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
  sity Press.
Lee, J. and W. Feng (1999). Malthusian Models and Chinese Realities: The Chinese Demographic System 1700–2000.
  Population and Development Review 25(1), 33–65.
Li, B. (1998). Agricultural Development in Jiangnan, 1620-1850. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Maddison, A. (2001). The World Economy. A Millennial Perspective. Paris: OECD.
Mingay, G. E. and J. Thirsk (Eds.) (2011). The Agrarian History of England and Wales, 1750-1850, Volume VI.
  Cambridge University Press.
Minge-Klevana, W. (1980). Does Labor Time Decrease With Industrialization? A Survey of Time-Allocation Studies.
  Current Anthropology 21(3), 279–298.
Murdock, G. P. and C. Provost (1973). Factors in the Division of Labor by Sex: A Cross-Cultural Analysis. Ethnol-
 ogy 12(2), 203–225.
Oman, C. (1906). The Great Revolt of 1381. Oxford : Clarendon Press.
Smith, R. M. (2011). Demography and the Great Divergence: Reconsidering the European and Asian Evidence.
  Keynote address at the Economic History Society Conference, Cambridge, UK 2011.
Voigtländer, N. and H.-J. Voth (2013). The Three Horsemen of Riches: Plague, War, and Urbanization in Early
  Modern Europe. Review of Economic Studies. Forthcoming.
Wrigley, E. A., R. S. Davies, J. E. Oeppen, and R. S. Schofield (1997). English Population History from Family
 Reconstitution 1580-1837. New York: Cambridge University Press.




                                                Appendix p.36
