                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        WAS IT REAL? THE
               EXCHANGE RATE-INTEREST DIFFERENTIAL
                       RELATION, 1973—1984




                          Richard Meese


                          Kenneth Rogoff



                      Working Paper No. 1732




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 1985




The authors are grateful to seminar participants at the NBER Sumer
Institute, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, and the
tJniversity of California at Davis for coments on an earlier draft.
Financial support from the Institute for Business and Economic
Research at II.C. Berkeley and the Sloan Foundation is gratefully
acknowledged. Cathy FitzGerald and Joe Mattey assisted with the
data collection and calculations. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in International Studies and
project in Productivity and Industrial Change in the World Economy.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #1732
                                                 October 1985




                    Was It Real? The Exchange Rate—Interest
                       Differential Relation, 1973—1984.



                                    ABSTRACT

    The main result of Meese and Rogoff [1983 a,b] is that small structural

exchange rate models forecast major dollar exchange rates no better than a naive

random walk model. This result obtains even when the model forecasts are based

on actual realized values of the explanatory variables. Here we improve our

methodology by implementing a new test of out—of—sample fit; the test is valid

even for overlapping long—horizon forecasts. We find that the dollar exchange

rate models perform somewhat less badly over the recent Reagan regime period

than over the episodes studied previously. The methodology is also applied to

the mark/yen and mark/pound exchange rates, and to real exchange rates.

Finally, we test to see if real exchange rates and real interest differentials

can be represented as a cointegrated process. The evidence suggests that there

is no single common influence inducing nonstationarity in both real exchange

rates and real interest differentials.




Richard Meese                                    Kenneth Rogoff
University of California                         Economics Department
School of Business Administration                1180 Observatory Dr., Rm. 6428
350 Barrows Hall                                 University of Wisconsin
Berkeley, CA 94720                               Madison, WI 53706
(415) 642—1435                                   (608) 262—3906
 I.      Introduction

What forces cause exchange rates to be so volatile? Unfortunately, it has not proven easy
to identify the key determinants of exchange rate movements. Even the theoretically elegant
asset models of exchange rate determination have fared poorly. Using a rolling regression
methodology, Meese and Rogoff (1983a, b) find that both sticky- and flexible-price monetary
models of exchange rate determination fail to outforecast a naive random walk model, even
when the forecasts are based on actual realized values ("news") of the explanatory variables.
While it would be unrealistic to expect these simple models to explain a large percentage of
the variance of exchange rate changes, it is still surprising that exchange rate movements
seem to have so little correlation with changes in relative monies, incomes, interest rates,
inflation rates, and current accounts. Some may find it tempting to conclude that it is
necessary to use more sophisticated models; e.g., models with a wider menu of domestic and
foreign assets held by risk averse agents. However, current evidence suggests that these
portfolio balance models do not yield better results.1

The purpose of the present paper is fourfold. First, we wish to update our earlier results
on the out-of-sample fit of small-scale monetary exchange rate models. Our two earlier
studies covered the period March 1973-June 1981. Here we add three years of data and
investigate whether the models perform any better over the more recent forecasting period.



1     See Frankel (1982), Langenborg (1985), Rogoff (1984) or the Federal Reserve staff studies paper #135 by
      Danker et al. (1985).




                                                                                                           1
By extending the data set, we are also able to meaningfully examine longer forecasting
horizons than was previously possible. Second, and perhaps foremost, we improve on the
methology of our earlier studies by formally comparing the out-of-sample fit of each model
with that of the random walk model; the test we develop is valid even for multiple forecast
horizons.   In our earlier studies, we were only able to present formal comparisons for
one-month (non-overlapping) forecasts. Other, relatively minor, econometric improvements
here are that we implement some different estimation techniques, including one where the
rolling regression coefficient estimates depend more heavily on recent observations. We also
make a crude attempt to incorporate fiscal deficits into the empirical models. Third, we
report detailed results for two non-dollar exchange rates in this study: the mark/pound and
the mark/yen rates. (As in our previous work, we also examine the dollar/mark, dollar/yen
and dollar/pound rates.) One reason for considering non-dollar rates is to see whether money
demand instability in the U.S. is an important explanation of the models' poor performances.2
For the same reason, we devote considerable attention to examining real versions of our
selected structural exchange rate models. Fourth, we further explore the relationship between
real exchange rates and real interest differentials by testing to see if the two series can be
represented as a cointegrated process [see Granger (1983)1. The evidence here suggests that
there is no common influence inducing nonstationarity in both real exchange rates and real
interest rate differentials.

Section II contains the results for nominal exchange rate models over the forecasting period
November 1980-June 1984. In contrast to our previous results based on earlier time periods,
we now do find instances where the structural models have lower root-mean-square forecast
errors (RMSE) [or mean absolute forecast errors (MAE)] than the random walk model.
However, only in the case of the dollar/yen rate do these differences approach statistical
significance (using the formal test discussed above and in Appendix B). In Section III, we
derive real exchange rate versions of the models and present results for the forecasting periods



2 Simpson and Porter (1980), among others, have documented the instability of U.S. money demand for
  conventionally measured aggregates such as Ml and M2.




                                                                                                 2
 January 1977-June 1984, and November 1980-June 1984. In the real exchange rate models,
 the real interest rate differential is the most important explanatory variable. We find that
 it usually enters with the theoretically anticipated sign; i.e., a high real interest rate differ-
 ential implies a high real exchange rate. However, only in one case (the mark/pound rate at
 one month horizons for the November 1980-June 1984 forecasting period) do any of the
 models ever significantly outforecast the random walk model. Still, the results are somewhat
 more favorable than those obtained in our previous work. In Section IV, we consider a
 number of modifications to the real exchange rate models of Section II, and present repre-
 sentative results for the dollar/yen rate. We consider longer-term interest rates, cumulative
 government deficits, lagged adjustment mechanisms, and alternative estimation techniques.
 None of these modifications yields any substantial improvement. Section V contains a test
 of the cointegration of real exchange rates and real interest rate differentials. Section VI
concludes.




II.   The Out-of-Sample Fit of Nominal Exchange Rate Models

This section updates the results of Meese and Rogoff [1983a, b] on the out-of-sample fit of
simple monetary (nominal) exchange rate models. We improve on our earlier methodology
by implementing a test which allows us to formally compare the RMSE of alternative models
at multiple forecast horizons.


As the main focus of the present paper is on the real exchange rate, our description of the
nominal exchange rate models will be quite brief.3 The models considered here are all variants
of the monetary model of exchange rate determination; they differ only in their assumptions
about the price adjustment mechanism and the behavior of the ttlong_runet (flexible-price
equilibrium) real exchange rate. (An example of a sticky-price model is Dornbusch 's [1976]



3 The reader is referred to Meese and Rogoff (1983b) for a more complete discussion of these models.




                                                                                                       3
"overshooting" model.)4 The quasi-reduced form specification of all the models we test is
subsumed in the general specification below:


(1)       s=aai(m_m*)+_y*)+a3(r3_r;)

             +a4(lre_lr*e) +a5(TB_TB*) +u,

where star (*) superscripts denote the foreign country, s is the logarithm of the nominal
exchange rate (the domestic price of foreign currency), m - m is the logarithm of the ratio


output, rs — r is the short-term interest differential, and 112 —
                                                                             '
of the home to foreign money supply, y - y* is the logarithm of the ratio of home to foreign
                                                                         r       is the long-term expected
inflation differential. Finally, TB and TB * are the cumulated home and foreign trade
balances, and u is a disturbance term.

It is important to recognize that although equation (1) contains only contemporaneous
explanatory variables on the right-hand side, the exchange rate does depend on market
expectations about future fundamentals. These expectations are embodied in the interest
differential and the expected inflation differential, which are both endogenous variables.
Expected future fundamentals (say, money supplies and real incomes) would appear on the
right-hand side if one were to solve out for a true reduced-form instead of using the
quasi-reduced form of equation (1). Of course, one would then have to find a good method
I or measuring market expectations about the fundamental exogenous variables.

The assumptions that al = 1 and that a <0 are common to all the models; an increase in
the supply of money or a decrease in the transaction demand for money causes a depreciation
of the exchange rate. The flexible-price monetary model posits that a > 0, under the
assumption that the predominant shocks are monetary and that a rise in interest rates signals



4 For other monetary models, see Bilson (1978). Frenkel (1976), Frankel (1979), and Hooper and Morton (1982).




                                                                                                          4
 a rise in expected inflation. The sticky-price monetary model (or Dornbusch-Frankel [D-FJ
 model) similarly posits that a rise in expected inflation causes a depreciation. However, a
 rise in the real interest differential causes an appreciation (when disturbances are primarily
monetary), so that a <0, a > 0. Hooper and Morton's (H-M) model contains the further
assumption that a rise in the cumulated current account (relative to trend) signals an appre-
ciation of the long-run flexible-price real exchange rate, so that a5 <0.

The main result of Meese and Rogoff [1983 a,b] was that the models subsumed in equation
(1) forecast major dollar exchange rates no better than a naive random walk model, even
when their forecasts are based on realized values of the explanatory variables. Thus "news"
about market fundamentals would appear to be of little value in predicting nominal exchange
rates. It is true that some types of news (omitted variables) are difficult to quantify: political
events, financial crises, and central bankers' views of equilibrium exchange rates. These types
of news may have considerable explanatory power. The effects of "unquantifiable news't
could not be studied in the current experimental design, but we do provide some indirect
evidence in Section V.5


Aside from the omitted variable caveat, the main result of our prevous work was robust to
a variety of estimation techniques, specifications 0f the underlying money demand functions,
alternative serial correlation or lagged adjustment corrections, and measures of forecast
accuracy [including both RMSE and MAE]; it was also robust to allowing for different
coefficients on home and foreign variables. The two earlier studies were based on data from
March 1973 through June 1981; the two forecasting periods considered were January
1977-June 1981 and December 1978-June 1981.6


5 Our quasi-reduced form specifications will still be valid in the presence of certain types of speculative
   bubbles (since interest rates enter as explanatory variables). Burmeister, flood, and Garber (1983) note the
   observational equivalence of bu.bbles and certain types of omitted variables. See also Hamilton and Whiteman
   (1985).

6 We readily admit that it is possible to find shorter sample periods where one of the models strongly
   outperforms the random walk model for a particular exchange rate; see, for example, Woo (1985). However,
   our results highlight the fact that the correlations of exchange rates and market fundamentals over these
   subperiods are not structural.




                                                                                                            5
In Table 1 below, we present representative rolling regression results for the current Reagan
regime, November 1980-June 1984. The coefficients of the models are first estimated for
the period March 1973 through October 1980. These estimates are used to produce forecasts
at one- to twelve-month horizons, employing actual realized values of the explanatory vari-
ables. Then we add the data f or November 1980, re-estimate the models, and repeat the
procedure. As the RMSE statistics listed in Table 1 indicate, the models do not perform
particularly well over the recent forty-four month period. However, the D-F model does do
better than the random walk (RW) model for the dollar/yen rate and the mark/pound rate.
The improvement for the dollar/yen, while not dramatic, falls just short of being statistically
significant. (The entries in parentheses in Table 1 are for the asymptotically N(0, 1) statistic
discussed in Appendix B. A positive entry indicates improvement over the RW model.) The
H-M model improves on the RW model for the dollar/pound and mark/pound exchange rates
at all horizons, though again the improvement falls short of statistical significance. For the
dollar/yen rate, there is a very slight improvement at six- and twelve-month horizons. Results
based on MAE are qualitatively similar. Finally, we note that the RMSE for the forward
rate (not listed) are slightly higher than those for the spot rate across all horizons and
currencies for the November 1980-June 1984 sample period.

In part for illustrative purposes, and in part because ttmarket timing" tests have recently
become popular in the finance literature, Table 1 also lists the percent of the time that each
model correctly forecasts the direction of change in the exchange rate. If the null hypothesis
is that a structural model predicts the one-month direction of change of the exchange rate
no better than a coin toss, then a model which successfully predicts the direction of change
61 percent of the time (27 out of 44 months) would constitute significant evidence against
the null at the ninety-five percent significance level. (The longer horizon forecasts are serially
correlated, so the statistics there must be regarded as purely descriptive.) While the impor-



7 The results presented in Table 1 are based on Cochrane-Orcutt estimation. In our previous papers, we also
   considered both instrumental variable (IV) techniques and constrained coefficient estimation. The GLS
   forecasting results were typically no worse than IV. See Appendix C for a listing of the full-sample GLS
   coefficient estimates.




                                                                                                        6
 tance of the direction of change metric is debatable,8 it is interesting to note that the models
 seem to perform somewhat better by this criterion than by either RMSE or MAE.

We have previously explored a number of alternative explanations for the poor out-of-sample
fit of monetary exchange rate models, including simultaneous equations bias, sampling error,
risk premia, measurement of inflationary expectations, failure of the constraint that home
and foreign country variables enter with equal but opposite sign, nonlinearities, and shifting
parameters. Other explanations of our results are that real disturbances are importance (and
are not captured by H-M's model), and that there are speculative bubbles (omitted variables).
The real disturbance explanation is appealing because it is consistent with the low volatility
of forward premia [see Flood (1981)]. As a practical matter, however, it may not be as easy
to identify and measure real disturbances as it is monetary disturbances (though this remains
an open question). The next two sections of this paper will be devoted to exploring whether
the models perform poorly because of shifts in the underlying money demand specifications.



Ill.   Real Exchange Rate Models


It has often been asserted that the most robust relationship in empirical exchange rate models
is between the real exchange rate and the real interest rate differential.9 In the next two
sections, we confirm that the sign of the correlation between these two variables is indeed
typically consistent with the predictions of sticky-price monetary models. However, models
featuring the real interest differential (short or long) do not appear to fit out-of-sample
significantly better than the random walk model. In this section, we present both in-sample



g See, for example, Henriksson and Merton (1983) or Levich (1980). While the direction of change statistics
   listed in Table 1 is of descriptive interest, a model which forecasts small changes accurately but misses big
   market turns is not necessarily of any great use. The direction of change statistics is only at all meaningful
   when the distribution of forecast errors is symmetric.

9 See, for example, the 1984 Economic Rejvrr of the President. Shafer and Loopesko (1983) present evidence on
   the relationship between real interest rates and real exchange rates.




                                                                                                              7
and out-of-sample results for real versions of the Dornbusch-Frankel (D-F) and Hooper-Morton
(H-M) models. (In the flexible-price monetary model, of course, the real exchange rate is
exogenous.) By implementing real versions of the models, we also hope to abstract from
misspecification of the money demand functions, which are a crucial building block of the
monetary models.

There is more than one way to derive the real versions of the D-F and H-M models. One
can, for example, substitute out for (mm*) in equation (1) by using the underlying money
demand equations. After the imposing coefficient constraints, the resulting equation simplifies
to one involving the real exchange rate, the real interest differential, and cumulated trade
balances. It is instructive, however, to adopt an alternative approach. This approach uses
the fact that in the models subsumed in equation (1), all endogenous variables adjust mono-
tonically at the same constant rate to their flexible-price values (along the saddlepath)   In
particular, this implies that the real exchange rate q. S + — Pr adjusts towards its flexible-
price value      according to


(2)                — qtk) =        —       0 <0 < 1


where       is the real exchange rate which would prevail at time t if all prices were fully
flexible, p is the home-currency price of the domestically-produced good, p* is the foreign-
currency price of the (different) good produced abroad, and 0 is a speed of adjustment
parameter which depends on all the parameters in the model. Note that q is not in general
equal to Efq in (2). However, both the D-F and H-M models impose the assumption that
   follows a random walk; thus


(3)        Eq=qf


10   See Obstfeld and Rogoff (1984). There are, of course, more general versions of the Dornbusch model in
     which variables can adjust at different rates and in which adjustment needn't be monotonic.




                                                                                                        8
In the H-M model, q is actually posited to be a function of the cumulated current account
(which itself is posited to follow a random walk).


Substituting equation (3) into equation (2), one can obtain


(4)         = a(Efq — qr) + c


where a =   1        <0. To obtain an equation relating real exchange rates to real interest
                / (0k — 1)
rates, we make use of the uncovered interest parity relation


(5)             ÷k—.s=k—kr1

where   krt is the k-period nominal interest rate. Equation (5) implies that


(6)


where the k-period real interest rate kRr      —
                                                   (Etpt+k —Pt).


Substituting equation (6) into equation (4) yields


(7)


Adding an exogenous risk premium to equation (5) will add an exogenous forcing term to
equation (7).

Equation (7) relates the real exchange rate to the real interest differential and to the
flexible-price equilibrium real exchange rate; this is the equation which will be used in our
forecasting experiments. [In the H-M model, =           ? *).J Before turning to our empirical




                                                                                            9
results, we wish to contrast our derivation of equation (7) with the popular "identities"
approach." This approach begins with the relation between the real interest rate differential
and the expected rate of change of the real exchange rate which obtains when uncovered
interest rate parity holds, equation (6). Rearranging terms in (6), we have


(8)


In equation (8), the coefficient of the real interest rate differential is one (or, if we annualize
the real interest differential, then the coefficient is approximately k). To obtain an "esti-
mating" equation using the identities approach, it is typically assumed that Eq÷
and then some proxy is used for Ett+k. Because the coefficient on R — R * is given under
the null, it is not clear how to best interpret estimates of (8).

In Table 2, we present in-sample instrumental variable estimates of equation (7) in first-
difference form for the dollar/mark, dollar/yen, and dollar/pound rates only. The estimates
are based on monthly data for March 1974-June 1984. We have chosen k=3, so that the
variable R — .R * represents a three-month real interest differential, which is formed by using
the cx post realized three-month inflation differential as a proxy for its expected value (that
is, by imposing rational expectations). The resulting equation is then estimated by McCallum's
technique.12 This method would be impractical, of course, if we were to employ long-term
real interest rates. (Indeed, it is probably more difficult to measure long-term expected
inflation differentials than short-term expected inflation differentials.) The Lagrange multiplier
test statistics reported in Table 2 indicate that no further serial correlation is required (with
the exception of the H-M model on the dollar/pound rate).



11 See, for example, Isard (1983).

12 See McCallum (1976). Because the Lagrange Multipler tests of serial correlation do not indicate any residual
   serial correlation for all but one model, it does not appear likely that we would obtain substantially different
   results by using a technique such as two-step, two-stage least squares, which would correct for a residual
   MA error term. See Cumby, Huizinga and Obstfeld (1983).




                                                                                                               10
The good news in Table 2 is that for the dollar/mark and dollar/yen rates, both the real
interest differential and the cumulated trade balance variable have the theoretically expected
signs. A rise in the real interest differential between dollar and mark assets leads to an
appreciation of the dollar; so too does a trade balance surplus. (In the H-M model, a trade
balance surplus signals an appreciation of the long-run real exchange rate.) In fact, many of
the regressions obtained in this study yield the right sign on the real interest differential
(short or long), with the exception of some regressions involving the dollar/mark and dollar/
pound rates. This finding provides weak confirmation for the widely-held view that amidst
all the volatility of exchange rates, there has been a consistent relationship between real
exchange rates and real interest rates. The bad news in Table 2 is that taken individually,
the coefficients are not statistically significant. Also, the real interest rate coefficients should
always be greater than .25 in absolute value [see equations (4) and (7); the constraint is .25
instead of 1 because the three-month real interest differentials have been annualized.] Last,
an F-test for a structural break in November 1980 rejects the null hypothesis that the
coefficients have been stable across the two subperiods for only the dollar/pound rate.13

The in-sample results reported in Table 2 are reinforced by the rolling regression (forecasting)
results presented in Tables 3 and 4. (A tabulation of MAE in place of RMSE again yields
a similar picture.) Table 3 lists results for the forty-four month forecasting period November
1980 - June 1984. As with the in-sample results in Table 2, the results in Table 3 are based
on three-month real interest differentials; however, current three-month inflation is used as
a proxy for expected inflation. In contrast to Meese and Rogoff (1 983a,b), we do find cases
where the structural models outperform the RW model at horizons twelve months and under.
Indeed, each model outperforms the RW model for at least one forecast horizon for every
exchange rate (with the exception of the D-F model for the dollar/mark and H-M model for




13 The acceptance of the stability hypothesis for all but one equation would appear to be good news for the
   real exchange rate models. However, the acceptance is more a consequence of the poor fit of the
   unconstrained model, as it is frequently the case that the signs of the real interest differential and cumulated
   trade balance variables are incorrect over the two subperiods, March 1973 - October 1980 and November
   1980 - June 1984.




                                                                                                               11
the dollar/yen). However, the difference is statistically significant only in the case of the
mark/pound rate at one-month horizons.

Table 4 lists RMSE for the forecasting period December 1977 - June 1984 (ninety months).
Because we have three years more data than in our previous studies, it is possible to
meaningfully examine forecast horizons up to thirty-six months. While one or both of the
structural models outperform(s) the RW model for all the exchange rates for at least one
forecast horizon, the improvement is never statistically significant.

The results in Tables 3 and 4 are based on a generalized least squares (GLS) estimation
procedure with a correction for a first-order autoregressive process (denote the AR coefficient
as p). Similar results obtain when the models are estimated in first-difference form or by
instrumental variables techniques. In Table 5, we present "average't coefficients for the
regressions used to construct Tables 3 and 4. These coefficients are formed as follows: for
the November 1980 - June 1984 forecasting period, the initial rolling regressing estimates are
through October 1980; denote this vector of coefficient estimates by <al>. Then we add
data for November 1980 and form a new set of coefficient estimates, <a2), etc. The average
coefficients are then the sample mean of these estimates:


(9)


The coefficients in parentheses in Table 5 are the standard deviations of these estimates;
they measure the stability of the coefficient estimates across the forty-four different rolling
regression periods. As reported above, the coefficient on the real interest differential typically
has the theoretically expected (negative sign), except for the dollar/mark and dollar/pound
rates (for both models). The theoretically expected (negative sign) for the cumulated trade
balance differential obtains only for the dollar/yen rate (forty-four month horizon) and the
mark/yen (both horizons). Not surprisingly, the most stable coefficient is p. the coefficient
for the first-order autoregressive disturbance term. The coefficient estimates are less than




                                                                                              12
 unity but as is well-known, we cannot use conventional significance levels to test this
 hypothesis (see Section V below).


Summarizing the results of this section, we do find a consistent correlation between the real
interest differential and the real exchange rate (though of the wrong sign for the dollar/mark
and dollar/pound). Generally speaking, models emphasizing real interest differentials do not
improve significantly on the random walk model. (Though the D-F model does yield a
significant improvement for the mark/pound rate at one-month horizons.)



IV. Alternative Real Exchange Rate Model Specifications

In this section we show that the dollar/yen results of Section III are robust to using long-term
real interest differentials in place of short-term differentials, to using a lagged adjustment
mechanism in place of an autoregressive disturbance, to using cumulated government deficits
in constructing the proxy for the long-term real exchange rate, and to using an estimator
which places a greater weight on recent observations. In the interest of brevity, we only
present results for the dollar/yen rate.

Models (2) and (6) in Table 6 are the same as the D-F and H-M models of the previous
section, except that the long-term government bond differential is used in place of the
three-month treasury bill differential. (Note that equation (7) holds for real interest differ-
entials of any maturity.) Inflationary expectations are proxied by the current twelve-month
inflation rate. A comparison of Table 6 with Tables 3 and 4 reveals that the D-F model
performance is unaffected by the use of long-term rates. (The H-M model performs slightly
better at the thirty-six month horizon with the long rates.) A lagged adjustment specification
[models (3) and (7)] never yields improvement over the models reported in Tables 3 and 4.
(The lagged adjustment specification is obtained from equation (7) by adding qt...i as an
additional explanatory variable.) The lagged adjustment model performs quite poorly over




                                                                                            13
the longer forecasting periods. In models (4) and (8) we attempt to allow for coefficient
drift by weighting observations by •95b01, where i0 is the final observation period. This
modification improves the performance of the D-F model over the forty-four month periods
and improves the H-M model at thirty-six month horizons over the ninty-month period.

There has been considerable recent discussion of whether federal government deficits affect
the real exchange rate.14 The models we are considering already incorporate one major
channel through which deficits affect exchange rates, namely the real interest rate differential.
Federal deficits can also cause changes in the exchange rate by affecting the long-run real
exchange rate required to generate an equilibrium current account. (If transitory government
deficits cause transitory current account deficits then, in some models, a long-run real exchange
rate depreciation may be required to produce a trade balance surplus to offset the service
account deficit.) To adequately capture the effects of government deficits, it would be
necessary to estimate a fully dynamic model of private saving and portfolio behavior, a task
beyond the scope of this paper. However, for descriptive purposes, we chose to include the
difference between cumulated home and foreign federal government deficits as an additional
explanatory variable in both the D-F and H-M models. As can be observed from the results
for models (5) and (9) in Table 6, inclusion of the cumulated deficit variable as a proxy for
the long-run real exchange rate yielded little forecasting improvement over the random walk
model.15


Finally, we considered three purely statistical models as alternatives to the random walk
model: (1) a random walk with drift, (2) an ARIMA (0,1,1) or simple exponential smoothing,
and (3) a local trend predictor.'6 The last two procedures were employed to test the
possibility that there exists exploitable (positive) serial correation in monthly exchange rate


14 The relationship between deficits and exchange rates has been a major issue in recent editions of the Economic
   Report   of the President.

15 Similar results obtain when the Japanese cumulated deficit was converted to dollars using the mean exchange
   rate over the period. Entering the deficit variables separately yielded similar forecasting results. (The same
   comments hold for cumulated trade balanaces.) See Appendix A for data sources.




                                                                                                             14
 changes. This empirical regularity has been uncovered using daily exchange rate data; Dooley
 and Shafer (1976, 1983) document the profitability of simple filter rules on daily exchange
 rate data over the modern floating rate period. At monthly horizons, however, our alternative
 statistical models forecast no better than the random walk model withoutdrift, so the results
 of these experiments are not reported.

It is also known that exchange markets are characterized by periods of relative calm and
turbulance (Mussa (1979)), so that exchange rate regression disturbances typically exhibit
conditional heteroskedasticity. (See Cumby and Obstfeld (1982), among others.) We did not
experiment with estimation techniques robust to this possibility, as it seems unlikely to
improve the accuracy of point forecasts. In terms of forecasting applications, the major
contribution of the literature on conditional heteroskedasticity has been to refine our estimates
of the k-step ahead forecast error variances. Nevertheless, the forecasting performance of
models allowing for conditional heteroskedasticity merits further attention.



V. Tests of the Cointegration of Real Exchange Rates and Real Interest
Differentials

It is clear from the evidence presented in the preceding sections that real exchange rates
exhibit behavior which at least borders on nonstationarity. In this section, we use nonstructural
methods to investigate whether the same factor which introduces nonstationarity in real
exchange rates introduces a similar order of nonstationarity in real interest differentials. Our
tests are based on the concept of cointegration, first introduced by Granger (1983), and



16 The sample autocorrelations and partial autocorrelations of monthly exchange rate changes do not typically
   suggest models other than the ARIMA (0,1,1) or a random walk. The local trend predictor is based on a
   linear trend estimated from all observations that have occurred since the. last "turning point." A turning
   point is defined by the occurrence of at least an a% change of direction from the previous change of the
   exchange rate. A value of a = 5% typically produced the lowest RMSE exchange rate forecasts far the
   local trend model.




                                                                                                         15
expanded upon in Granger and Engle (1984). A vector time series is cointegrated of order
(d,b) if each element needs to be differenced d times to achieve stationarity, but yet there
exists a (not necessarily unique) linear combination of the two vectors which only needs to
be differenced (d-b) times to achieve stationarity. It is not unusual to find evidence of unit
roots in the autoregressive representation of asset price data. In our context, we are interested
in exploring the possibility that the nonstationarity we find in real exchange rates can be
accounted for by the nonstationarity of real interest differentials.

In Table 7, we report results of a test for a unit root in autoregressive representations of the
real exchange rate, and short- and long-term real interest differentials, for the U.S.-German,
Japanese, and U.K. data sets. The results in Table 7 are based on regressions of the following
general form.


(10)      (q1 — q1_1)   = k + t'iqt_i + (q_1 —


                    — q_3)   +e

The    b• are constant parameters and e is a white noise disturbance. If the autoregressive
representation of q contains a unit root (is integrated of order one), the t-ratio for b1 should
be consistent with the hypothesis b1 = 0. Conventional t-tables are inappropriate for this
hypothesis test, so we use the results of Dickey and Fuller (1979) and the tabulated distri-
bution in Fuller (1976, p. 373) to interpret the t-ratio. The approximate critical values for
this ratio, using a five percent significance level and T = 100, are -2.89 and -.05. From
inspection of Table 7, we can therefore accept the null hypothesis of a unit root for the real
exchange rate and real long-term interest differential equations. But we reject it for real
short-term interest differential equations for the dollar rates vis-a-vis the pound, yen and mark.


It is puIing that real long term interest differentials appear to be nonstationary, given the
current system of highly integrated capital markets. This anomaly is also characteristic of




                                                                                               16
the nominal long-term government bond rate differential, at least for the data used in this
study. As such, we cannot attribute the apparent nonstationarity in the long-term interest
differential to our expected inflation proxy. Both the nominal and real short-term interest
differentials do appear to be stationary in levels.17 The stationarity of short-term rates is
consistent with Mussa's (1979) observation that forward premia exhibit much less volatility
than any of the individual variables related by covered interest parity. (Nominal k-period
interest rate differentials equal the forward premium for regularly traded forward rates,
k= 1,3,6 or 12 months.) The puzzling nonstationarity of long-term interest differentials might
be a consequence of the lack of homogeneity of our long-term bond yields, the use of on-shore
instead of Euromarket rates, or the lack of organized forward markets for long maturities.

The most probable explanation of the nonstationarity of long-term real interest rate differentials
is the low power of the unit root tests to detect borderline stationary alternatives. We know
for example that it cannot be literally true that real exchange rates have a unit root, but a
coefficient of .95 in a regression of the real exchange rate on a single lag of itself is quite
plausible. It suggests that deviations from purchasing power parity take five years to damp
down. Given our sample size, the probability of a type H error (accept a coefficient of 1.0
when it is really .95) is roughly 80%; see Evans and Savin (1981, p. 771).

The nice feature of the cointegration tests reported below is that they can be meaningful
even if there is high probability of a type II error. Effectively they test whether some linear
combination of the "large variance components" of real exchange rates and real interest
differentials effectively cancel one another, leaving an "equilibrium error" with small variance.
If there does not exist a linear combination of real exchange rates and real interest differentials
that is itself a stationary process, it suggests the relationship between the two variables is at
best tenuous, or that a highly variable factor has been omitted from the real exchange rate
- real interest differential relation.

17 Test statistics for the hypothesis b1 =0 in (10) for the U.S.-German, U.S.- Japanese, and U.S.-U.K. three
   month nominal interest rate differential are -3.08, -1.82, and -3.54, respectively. The failure to reject the
   unit root for the U.S.-Japanese interest differential might be a consequence of Japanese capital controls in
   effect over much of the sample period.




                                                                                                            17
Since real short-term interest differentials appear to be stationary in levels, real exchange
rates and real short-term interest differentials cannot be cointegrated. To test whether real
exchange rates and real long-term interest rates are cointegrated we employ the preferred
tests of Granger and Engle (1984). An "equilibrium regression" of qt on the real interest
differential is run (or the reverse regression) and the residuals are examined for nonstationary
behavior.18 The results in Table 8 suggest that real exchange rates and long-term real interest
rate differentials are not cointegrated. Given this evidence, we should not necessarily expect
to find damped (stationary) forecast errors when predicting real exchange rates with real
interest rate differentials. Our earlier estimates of the D-F and H-M models confirm this
fact, as the first order serial correlation parameter is always close to unity.

Real interest differentials and real exchange rates are linked by international parity conditions,
so our findings of no cointegration suggest that a variable omitted from relation, possibly
the expected value of some future real exchange rate,19 must have large variance as well.
Alternatively, the set of shocks inducing near nonstationarity in real exchange rates can not
be the same as the set of shocks impinging on real interest rate differentials.



VI.    Conclusions


The results we have presented are slightly more favorable than the results of our earlier
studies. We do find that the real exchange rate and the real interest differential have the
theoretically anticipated sign (except for some regressions involving the dollar/mark and
dollar/pound rates). However, the relationship is not statistically significant, and real interest



18 The forward regression (real spot rate on the real interest differential) or the reverse regression can be used
   to test for cointegration. In the limit the data matrix becomes colinear so the coefficient of the reverse
   regression is equal to the reciprocal of the coefficient of the forward regression. Simultaneity does not pose
   a problem for the test procedure either; see Granger and Engle (1984).

19 Isaftl (1983, pp. 22-23) discusses the identity that links real exchange rates, real interest differentials, the
   expected future real exchange rate, and the risk premium.




                                                                                                               18
differentials do not provide significant improvement over a random walk model when f ore-
casting real exchange rates (except in a few isolated cases). Thus, the results of our forecasting
experiments corroborate the in-sample findings of, both Alder and Lehmann (1983) and
Hakkio (1984). These authors also provide evidence for the martingale behavior of real
exchange rates.


One popular explanation of why monetary models perform so poorly is that the disturbances
impinging on exchange markets are predominantly real.20 Thus models which focus primarily
on monetary disturbances should not be expected to explain very much. While this hypothesis
deserves further attention, it is not yet certain whether it will be helpful in building better
empirical exchange rate models. It has proven extremely difficult to identify which real
factors (such as technology shocks or changes in preferences) affected exchange rates over
what periods. Another popular current explanation of the failure of monetary exchange rate
models is the existence of self-fulfilling expectations or exchange market bubbles. This is an
active area of theoretical research.21 Empirical evidence for the existence of bubbles or
extraneous variables in exchange markets is mixed, and this explanation of the failure of
monetary exchange rate models also merits further research.22




20 See, for example, Flood (19i) or Barro (1983).

21 Obstfe]d and Rogoff (1983, 1985) present the theoretical case for ruling out divergent (explosive or implosive)
   bubbles.

22 See Meese (1986), West (1985), and Woo (1984).




                                                                                                              19
                                   Appendix A

The data is sampled monthly from March 1973 - June1984. All the asset market data are
end-of-month point sample from Federal Reserve Board (FRB) data base. {In Meese and
Rogoff (1983a,b) asset market data were drawn from the same day as foreign money supply
figures. The results do not seem to depend much on this issue, and end-of-month data are
much more conveniently obtained.] The exchange rates are N.Y. noon bids. The short-term
interest rates are three-month interbank rates, and long-term rates are five- to ten-year
government bond yields. The trade balance and industrial production data are from the
OECD. CPI data is from the FRB. Japanese fiscal deficit data are taken from the Bank of
Japan's Economic Statistics Monthly, table 80, section 3, item "balance of ordinary receipts and
payments with the public." U.S. fiscal deficit data are taken from International Financial
Statistics, line 80. All raw series are seasonally unadjusted.




Appendix A                                                                                  20
                                        Appendix B

Let e(1, t) and e(2, t) denote the period t forecast errors from models (1) and (2) respectively.
Let A = {a}, i,j      1,2   denote the covariance matrix of forecast errors.                 Define
x(1)                         e(1,z) + e(2,t). A test of the null hypothesis a11 = a22 is easily
       e(1,t) — e(2,:) and y(t)
conducted using x(t) and y(t), as all = a22 only when cov(x(t),y(t)) is zero. Assuming the
vector process (e(1, t), e(2, t)) is independent and identically distributed as a N(0,A), then a
uniformly most powerful unbiased test of a1 = a22 can be based on the sample correlation
coefficient of x(t) and y(z), Ap(x,y). Specifically, a test of au = a22 can be based on a statistic
with a t-distribution with T-2 degrees of freedom:


                                  i
                                                22
         t(T_2)p(X,y)(T_2)            /(l—(x,y) )


for T> 2. (See Hogg and Craig (1970), pp. 339-342, or Granger and Newbold (1977), pp.
28 1-282.) T is the number of known forecast errors.


This procedure can only be appiled to unbiased, serially uncorrelated, normally distributed
forecast errors. For multiple (k-step-ahead) forecast horizons, a sequence of forecast errors
will in general follow a moving average (MA) process of order (k — 1). In this case, we can
still use x(t) and y(t) to construct a test of a1 a22 but asymptotic distribution theory for
time series is required. Given our assumptions, x(1) and y(z) are themselves MA(k — 1)
stationary processes. Using results in Hannan (1970), chapter 4, we know that the sample
covariance of x(t) andy(t), coAv(x(z),y(z)), is a consistent estimator of the population covariance.




Appendix B                                                                                       21
In addition,


(Bi)     ./_1[coAv(x(t),y(z)) — cov(x(t),y(t))]    N(0,B),


where B is a complicated function of the autocovariances and fourth cumulants of the vector
process (x(t), y(t)); see Hannan (1970), p. 209. Assuming normality of forecast errors, we
can ignore fourth cumulants. Exploiting the MA(k — 1) behavior of optimal k-step-ahead
forecasts, B can then be consistently estimated by



(B2) =               (1—    Isl /{coAv(x(t),x(t_s))coAv(y(t),y(t_s)) +



         cv(x(s),y(t — s))cv(y(s),x(t — s))}

The test statistics reported in the paper are thus


                                   1

                             A     2
(B3)    coAv(x(z),y(z)) /   (B /

which is approximately N(O,1) for large T.


An alternative estimator of B that does not require normality of forecast errors can be
calculated using the generalized method of moments (GMM) methodology described in Hansen
and Singleton (1982) or White and Domowitz (1984). The estimate of the covariance of x(1)
and y(z) is chosen to satisfy the orthogonality condition


(B4)    0=                         —   (x(t) —i)(y(z) —9)]
               +[coAv(x(z),y(z))




Appendix B                                                                             22
A consistent method of moments estimator of B is then

               k+1
(B5)       =         4 (1   —     / 7') [x(z)y(t)x(t — s)y(t   — s) —   cv (x(t),y(t))2]

The test statistic (B3) is again appropriate. The use of (B2) or (B5) to estimate B made no
qualitative difference in the results reported in Tables 1, 3, 4, and 6.

Several caveats are in order. First, multiple step-ahead forecasts (large k) are typically
biased; the mean error of these forecasts (not reported in the text) generally increases in
absolute value with k. Second, the assumption of normality of forecast errors is also suspect
for large k (the normality assumption is not needed for the GMM methodology). Third, our
test statistic (B3) has not been subjected to any simulation experiments. Last, the rolling
regression estimates of e(1, z) and e(2,t) are based on different sample sizes. To correct for
small sample bias in (B3), the sample size can be kept constant across all regressions, or
forecast errors can be weighted by s/(T— t) /T,where T is the last (largest) sample, and (T— t)
is the number of observations in the regressions that generated e( 1, z) and e(2, i).




Appendix B                                                                                  23
                                           Appendix C

                   Average Coefficient Estimates for Rolling Regressionsa


              b
Coefficient :        Constant     Money     Incomes   Short-     Long-        Cumulated      A.R.
                                supplies              term       term           trade       coeffi-
                                                        rates    rates        balances      dent
Exchange
 rate    Model                   m_m*        y_y*                              TB-TB*          p
                                                        r3r5    rLrL

             D-F      .25       -3.5         5.7        -.66    -.11                       .96
$/mark               (.13)       (5.4)      (2.3)       (.06)   (.01)                     (.002)
             H-H      .26       -3.1        -5.6        -.7     -.1             .12        .96
                     (.11)       (5.7)      (2.8)       (.1)    (.05)         (1.2)       (.002)



             D—F      .12         8.8       17.9        -.53     .04                       .98
$/yen                (.04)       (7.4)      (3.5)       (.13)   (.00)                     (.002)
             H-H      .12         5.0      22.3         -.6      .04           -.17        .97
                     (.08)       (9.5)      (5.0)       (.3)    (.00)          (.07)      (.01)



             D-F     -.04       31.6       -6.1         -.04    -.05                       .96
$/pound              (.16)       (3.3)     (1.4)        (.01)   (.00)                     (.006)
             H-M     -.05       22.0       -5.1         -.02    '-.05         11.0         .97
                     (.11)       (2.8)     (1.6)        (.01)   (.00)         (2.5)       (.005)



             D-F      .25       14.6       -16.5        - .27    .01                       .93
mark/yen             (.16)       (4.6)      (3.3)       (.12)   (.00)                     (.004)
             H-H    '-.21       12.6       -11.7        -.35     .01          -.17         .92
                     (.10)       (4.9)      (2.6)       (.13)   (.00)         (.02)       (.006)



          D-F       -.30        29.4        2.9         -.12     .01                       .95
mark/pound           (.03)      (2.5)       (1.6)       (.06)   (.01)                     (.001)
             H-N    -.18        12.1        2.0         —.14     .02        -9.9           .96
                     (.06)      (4.3)       (1.8)       (.05)   (.00)        (.6)         (.004)



a Each
       initial rolling regression is estimated (GLS) over March 1973 - October 1980.
  Then a month of data is added, and the coefficients are re-estimated. The final
  estimation is over March 1973 - October 1984. Denoting c(i,j) as the estimate for
  a(i) for regression period j, the table entries are



Appendix C                                                                                24
                            1
                  &(i) =
                           44
                                      c(i,j)
                                  j


    that is, the average coefficient estimates. Entries in parentheses are the standard
    deviation of these estimates, i.e.,


                    = [
                                      (cY(i,j) - &(i),2]i
                           43 j

b
    All table entries are multiplied by 102          ,   except those in the cumulated trade balance
    column (which are multiplied by io), and those in the "p" column (which have not been
    adjusted).




     Appendix C                                                                                        25
                                                                      Bibliography

      1.   Alder, M. and Bruce Lehmann, "Deviations from purchasing power parity in the
           long run," Journal of Finance 38 (December 1983): 1471-1488.
      2. Barro, Robert J., 1983, "Real determinants of real exchange rates," unpublished,
           University of Chicago.
      3. Bilson, John F.O., 1978, "Rational expectations and the exchange rate," in Jacob
           Frenkel and Harry Johnson, eds., The economics of exchange rates (Reading: Addison-
           Wesley Press).
     4. Burmeister, Edwin, Robert P. Flood, and Peter M. Garber, 1983, "On the equivalence
        of solutions in rational expectations models," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control
        5, 311-321.

     5. Council of Economic Advisors, 1984, Economic report of the President, (Washington:
        U.S. Government Printing Office).

     6. Cumby, Robert E., John Huizinga and Maurice Obstfeld, 1983, "Two-step two-stage
        least squares estimation in models with rational expectations," Journal of Econometrics
        21, April, 333 -355.
     7. Cumby, R.E. and Maurice Obstfeld, "International interest-rate and price-level link-
        ages under flexible exchange rates: A Review of recent evidence," Bellagio Conference
        on Exchange Rate Theory and Practice (January 1982).
     8. Danker, Deborah J., Richard A. Haas, Dale W. Henderson, Steven A. Symansky, and
        Ralph W. Tryon, 1985, "Small empirical models of exchange market intervention:
        applications to Germany, Japan, and Canada," Board of Governors of the Federal
        Reserve System Staff Studies 135.

     9. Dickey, D.A., and W.A. Fuller, 1979, "Distribution of the estimators for autoregressive
           time series with a unit root," JASA 79, 427-431.




Bibliography                                                                               26
      10. Dooley, Michael P., and Jeffrey R. Shafer, "Analysis of short-run exchange rate
         behavior: March, 1973 to September, 1975," International Finance Discussion Paper
         No. 76 (February 1976).
     11. ______________________________________, "Analysis of short-run exchange rate
         behavior: March, 1974 to November, 1981," in D. Bigmon and T. Taya (eds.),
         Exchange Raze and Trade Instability, Cambridge: Balinger Press, 1983.

     12. Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1976, "Expectations and exchange rate dynamics," Journal of
         Political Economy 84, 1161-1176.

     13. Evans, G.B.A., and Savin, N.E., 1981, "Testing for unit roots: 1," Econometrica49,
         753-780.

     14. Flood, Robert P., 1981, "Explanations of exchange-rate volatility and other empirical
         regularities in some popular models of the foreign exchange market," in Karl Brunner
         and Allen Meltzer (eds.), Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 15.

     15. Frankel, Jeffrey A., 1979, "On the mark: A theory of floating exchange rates based
         on real interest differentials," American Economic Review 69, 610-622.

     16. Frankel, Jeffrey A., 1982, "In search of the exchange risk premium: a six currency
         test assuming mean variance optimization," Journal of International Money and Finance
         1, 255-274.

     17. Frenkel, Jacob A., 1976, "A monetary approach to the exchange rate: Doctrinal
         aspects and empirical evidence," Scandinavian Journal of Economics 78, 200-224.

     18. Frenkel, Jacob A., 1981, "Flexible exchange rates, prices and the role of news:
         Lessons from the 1970's," Journal of Political Economy 89, 665-705.

     19. Fuller, Wayne, A., 1976, Introduction to Statistical Time Series (New York: John Wiley
        and Sons).

    20. Granger, C.W.J., 1983, "Co-integrated variables and error-correcting models," un-
        published, U.C. San Diego Discussion Paper No. 83-139.

    21. Granger, C.W.J., and R.F. Engle, 1984, "Dynamic model specification with equilibrium
        constraints: Co-integration and error correction," unpublished, U.C. San Diego.
    22. Hakkio, Craig S., "A re-examination of purchasing power parity: A multi-country
        and multi-period study," Journal of International Economics (November 1984): 265-278.




Bibliography                                                                                   27
    23. Hamilton, James D., and Charles M. Whiteman, 1985, "The observable implications
        of self-fulfilling expectations," forthcoming in the Journal of Monetary Economics.

    24. Hannan, E.J., 1970, Multiple time series (New York: John Wiley and Sons).

    25. Harvey, A.C., 1981, The Econometric Analysis of Time Series (Oxford: Philip Allan).

    26. Henriksson, R.D., and R.C. Merton, 1981, "On market timing and investment per-
        formance, II. Statistical procedures for evaluating forecasting skills," Journal of
        Business 54, 513-533.

    27. Hogg, Robert V., and Allen T. Craig, 1970, Introduction to Mathematical Statistics (New
        York: Macmillan).

    28. Hooper, Peter and John E. Morton, 1982, "Fluctuations in the dollar: A model of
        nominal and real exchange rate determination," Journal of International Money and
        Finance 1, April 39-56.

    29. Isard, Peter, 1983, "An accounting framework and some issues for modeling how
        exchange rates respond to the news," in Jacob Frenkel (ed.), Exchange rates and
        international macroeconomics (Chicago: NBER and University of Chicago Press).

    30. Langenborg, Ralph G., 1985, "The Deutschmark 1973-1982: A portfolio balance
        approach," unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.

    31. Levich, Richard M., 1980, "Analyzing the Accuracy of Foreign Exchange Advisory
        Services: Theory and Evidence," chapter 5 in Levich and Wihlborg (eds.), Exchange
        Risk and Exposure (Lexington Books).
    32. McCallum, Bennet T., 1976, "Rational expectations and the natural rate hypothesis:
        Some consistent estimates," Econometrica 44, Janaury, 43-52.

    33. Meese, Richard A., and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1982, "On unit roots and the empirical
        modeling of exchange rates," Journal of Finance 37, September, 1029-1035.
    34. Meese, Richard A., and Kenneth Rogoff, 1983a, "Empirical exchange rate models of
        the seventies: Do they I it out-of-sample?" Journal of International Economics 14,
        February, 3-24.
    35. Meese, Richard A., and Kenneth Rogoff, 1983b, "The out-of-sample failure of
        empirical exchange rate models: Sampling error or misspecification?" in Jacob
        Frenkel (ed.), Exchange rates and international macroeconomics (Chicago: NBER and
        University of Chicago Press).




Bibliography                                                                               28
     36. Meese, Richard A., 1986, "Testing for bubbles in exchange markets: A case of
         sparkling rates?" Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

     37. Mussa, Michael, 1979, "Empirical regularities in the behavior of exchange rates and
         theories of the foreign exchange market." In K. Brunner and A. Meltzer (eds.),
        Policies for employment, prices, and exchange rates. Carnegie-Rochester Conference,
         Volume H. Amsterdam: North Holland.

     38. Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, 1984, "Speculative hyperinflations in maxi-
         mizing models: Can we rule them out?" Journal of Political Economy 91, August,
         675-687.

     39. ___________________________________, 1984, "Sticky-price exchange rate models
        under alternative price-adjustment rules," International Economic Review 25, 159-174.
    40. __________________________________, 1986, "Ruling out divergent speculative mod-
        els," Journal of Monetary Economics 16 (May).

    41. Rogoff, Kenneth, 1984, "On the effects of sterilized intervention: An analysis of
        weekly data," Journal of Monetary Economics 14, 133-150.

    42. Shafer, Jeffrey R., and Bonnie E. Loopesko, 1983, "Floating exchange rates after
        ten years," Brooking Papers on Economic Activity 1, 1-70.

    43. Simpson, Thomas D., and Richard D. Porter, 1980, "Some issues involving the
        definition and interpretation of the monetary aggregates," in Controlling Monetary
        Aggregates, Vol. III, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston conference series No. 23.

    44. West, K.D., 1985, "A standard monetary model and the variability of the
        Deutschemark-dollar exchange rate," unpublishe d., Princeton University.
    45. Woo, W.T., 1984, "Speculative bubbles in the foreign exchange markets," Brookings
        Discussion Papers No. 13.
    46. ____________________, 1985, "The monetary approach to exchange rate determination
        under rational expectations: The dollar-deutschemark rate," Journal of International
        Economics 18, 1-16.




Bibliography                                                                             29
                                             Table 1

             Root mean square forecast errors for the logarithm of the

                          nominal exchange rate, 11/80 —


                 Model:     Random      Dornbusch—        looper—      Correctly predicts b
                             walk         Frankel         Morton       direction of change
Exchange                                                               (percent)
  rate          Horizon              ____________ ____________           D—F       H—M

                1 month       3.1      3.1 (—.1) 3.2 (—.2)               48        50

$/mark          6 months     7.9       8.4 (—.5) 8.5 (—.1)               56        56

               12 months     8.7      11.1 (—1.0) 11.4 (—1.0)            10        03


                1 month      3.5       3.3 (1.4) 3.5 (—.1)               55        54

$/yen           6 months     7.8       7.0 (1.6) 7.7         (.1)        67        50

               12 months     9.0       7.5 (1.6) 8.7         (.1)        81        64


                1 month      3.0       3.1 (—.4) 2.8 (1.5)               54        75*

$/pound        6 months      9.1       9.2             7.5 (1.4)         49        92

              12 months 12.8          13.6 (—.8) 9.4 (1.2)               52       100


               1 month       3.2       3.3 (—.2) 3.2        (.0)         57        66*

mark/yen       6 months      6.7       9.3 (—1.2) 7.4 (—.6)              38        64

              12 months 10.1          13.2 (—.8 8.1         (.8)         36        80


               1 month       3.1       3.0     (.2) 2.9     (.8)         61 *      57

mark/pound     6 months      6.6       5.9 (1.2) 6.4        (.5)         69        69

              12 months      6.6       5.4 (1.1) 7.0        (.8)         91        82


aThe 44—month forecasting period runs from 11/80 — 6/84. Initial rolling
 regression runs 3/73 — 10/80. The entries in parentheses are for the asymptot-
 ically N(0,1) statistic discussed in appendix B; they compare the RMSE of the
 0—F or [-I—N model ith that of the RW.

bThe direction of change statistic indicates the number of times each model
 correctly predicted the direction of change of the exchange rafe. Using a
 binomial test for one—month horizons only, the 95% critical value is 61%.
An asterisk denotes significance at the          five percent level.
                                                                                   30
                                             Table 2

              In-sample coefficient estimates and stability tests for real versions
                             of Dornbusch-Frankel and Hooper-Ilorton models.



              Coefficient:   Constant       Real         Cumulated     LN-test        Standard       Stability
                                          Interest     trade balance                   Error of       test
                                                                        2         b
                                           diff.                       x (12)          Regression    F(13,105)
                                           R-R'          TB-TB*
                              (x102)                       (x104)                                    F(14,104)



Real exchange     Model
  rate (q)

                  D - F            1.4      -.25                        13.1            .031         .93
                                  (1.3)    (-.24)
    $/mark
                  H -   M          0.9      -.40              -13.      14.2            .032         .88
                                  (0.8)    (-.40)            (-.64)



                  D - F            2.1      -.34                            8.1         .033        1.60
                                  (1.7)    (—.98)
    $/yen
                  H - H            1.9      -.33             -8.0           8.7         .034        1.57
                                  (1.4)    (—.94)           (—.58)



                  D — F            1.6        .01                      20.1            .032         4.32*
                                  (1.6)      (.04)
    $/pound
                  H — H            1.7        .04            17.       23.3*           .032         1.63
                                  (1.7)      (.14)          (.88)



a
  Monthly data, March 1973 - June 1984. All regressions are reported in first-difference
form. Estimates are based on McCallum's technique, since the realized three-month
inflation rate is used as proxy for expected inflation in forming the three-month real
interest differentials. Instruments for the H-M model are lagged four R - R', TB - TB*
and q, and current value and four lags of relative incomes, y - y*. Instruments for
the D - F model are the same except for lag four of TB - TB*.  t-statistics are in
parentheses. Each regression also includes monthly seasonal intercept dummies, the
coefficients of which are not reported.
b
  The LM-test for serial correlation is used since the regressors in the real exchange
equation cannot be regarded as being independent of th disturbance. A typical UI-
statistic is calculated as sample size multiplied by R from the regression of the
residual on the regressors of the appropriate structural model plus 12 lags of the resi-
duals. See Harvey (1981).
                                                                                                     31
C Tests for stability compare slope coefficients, and seasonal dummies pre- and post-
November 1980. The null hypothesis of no change is rejected at the 95% significance
level for only the D - F model of the $/pound rate. Tests are based on a "Lagrange
multiplier" F statistic, as the denominator is an estimate of the residual variance of
the constrained (no structural break) model. An asterisk denotes significance at a
five percent level.




                                                                                     32
                                           Table 3

                             Root mean square forecast errors
                      for real exchange rate models, 11/80 — 6184a

                                                                     Correctly pre-
                                                                     dicts direc-
                                                                     tion   of cang
                                                                     (percent)
                 Model
                             Random Dornbusch—    Hooper—
Exchange                      Walk    Frankel     Morton
rate             Horizon    _____ ______________ _____________        D—F      H—ri

             1 month          3.2    3.4 (—0.1)       3.,1   (0.1)     45        55
$/mark       6 months         8.5 11.2 (—0.7)        7.8 (0.5)         31        69
            12 months         9.6 17.0 (—2.3)*       8.9 (0.2)          0        42

             1 month          3.6    3.5   (0.1)     3.6 (—0.0)        55        50
$/yen        6 months         8.8   8.5 (0.1)         8.9 (—0.0)       56        54
            12 months        10.8 11.1 (—0.1)        12.2 (—0.2)       45        36

             1    month       3.2  3.0 (0.2)          3.0 (0.2)        57        68*
$/pound      6 months         9.3  8.6 (0.1)          7.9 (0.3)        49        74
            12 months        13.4 12.5 (0.1)         10.4 (0.5)        52      100

         1 month              3.1    3.0 (0.6)       3.0 (0.1)         66*       68*
mark/yen 6 months             64     7.6 (—0.8)      6.0 (0.1)         46        74
        12 months             9.8 11.5 (—0.6)        6.7 (1.2)         42        91

             1 month          3.1    2.7 (2.0)*      2.8 (1.8)         68*       57
mark!        6 months         7.0    6.4 (0.8)       6.5 (0.8)         62        62
pound       12 months         7.3    5.9 (0.8)       6.2 (0.8)         76        88



aSee footnote a to Table 1.

bs      footnote b to Table 1.
* denotes    significance at a 57.   level.




                                                                                       33
                                          Table 4

                           Root mean square forecast errors
                    for real exchange rate models, 1/77 — 6/84•a

                                                                        Correctly pre'
                                                                        dicts direc-
                                                                        tion of cang
                                                                        (percent)
                Model
                           Random Dornbusch—        Ho ope r—
Exchange                    Walk   Frankel          Morton
rate        Horizon                                                       D—F       H—M

            1   month        3.4    3.4 (—0.2)          3.3  (0.3)         57*       53
$/mark      6   months      8.2     9.7 (—1.1)          8.7 (—0.4)         45        59
           12   months     13.0    16.1 (—1.0)         13.7 (—0.3)         29        47
           36   months     31.5    30.4  (0.5)         24.9     (0.8)      62        82

            1   month       3.7     3.7   (0.2)         3.6     (0.6)      49        51
$/yen       6   months     10.6    10.6   (0.1)        10.7   (—0.0)       53        52
           12   months     15.4    14.5   (0.6)        15.2     (0.1)      52        42
           36   months     20.1    16.2   (0.9)        20.2 (—0 • 0)       51        44

            1   month       3.2     3.0   (1.1)         3.0     (1.5)      56*      61*
$/pound     6   months      8.2     8.9 (—0.7)          8.5 (—0.3)         39       49
           12   months     13.4    14.0 (—0.3)         13.5 (—0. 1)        34        53
           36   months     29.5    23.9   (1.0)        27.2 (0.5)          64       56

         1      month       3.6     3.5 (0.3)           3.5     (0.6)      63*      62*
mark/yen 6      months     10.7    10.6 (0.1)          10.2     (0.7)      59       65
        12      months     16.4    15.5 (0.6)          13.9     (1.6)      53       87
        36      months     15.5    17.5 (—0.6)         12.2     (1.0)      45       58

            1   month       3.0     3.0 (0.6)           3.0 (0.5)          60*      53
mark/       6   months      8.1     8.7 (—0.8)          8.8 (—1.0)         47       49
pound      12   months     12.4    13.5 (—0.6)         13.5 (—0 .8)        44       48
           36   months     28.6    30.6 (—0.4)         29.0 (—0.3)         24       45



a1111      rolling regressions run 3/73 —     12/76.     See footnote a to Table 1.

bThe direction of change    statistic
                                   indicates the number of times each model
 correctly predicted the direction of change of the exchange rate. Using a
 binomial test for one—month horizons only, the 95% critical value is .56.

* denotes significance at a 5% level.




                                                                                          34
                                              Table 5

             Average coefficient estimates for real exchange rate modelsa


                                                            *
                Coefficient:   Constant                 R — R    TB—TB          p

3/73 — 11/80 —   6/84.

Exchange                                  3                           4
rate              Model        -   (x 10 )                       (x 10 )

$/mark            D—F              0.8   (1.9;      .11 (.02)                .96 (.004)
                  H—M              2.1 (1.0         .13 (.02)   6.6 (.7)     .96 (.002)

$/yen             D—F              1.4 (1.0        —.04 (.01)                .97 (.004)
                  H—N              1.6 (1.3        —.04 (.01)   —.01 (.1)    .97 (.002)

$/pound           D—F              1.4 (1.4         .23 (.01)                .97 (.01)
                  H—M              1.8 (1.1         .23 (.01)   7.0 (2.4)    .98 (.01)

mark/yen          D—F              0.6 (1.11       —.06 (.01)                .95 (.004)
                  H—M              0.7 (0.6)       —.06 (.01)   —.18 (.02)   .94 (.01)

mark/pound        D—F              1.2 (0.61       —.02 (.01)                .97 (.01)
                  H—M          —0.2 (0.5           —.01 (.01)   6.8 (1.6)    .97 (.01)


3/73 — 1/77 —   6/84
$/mark            D—F              4.5 (3.9         .17 (.06)                .94 (.03)
                  H—M              4.0 (4.8:        .17 (.05)   4.6 (2.6)    .92 (.05)

$/yen             D—F              2.0 (1.7;       —.03 (.02)                .96 (.02)
                  H—N              2.7 (2.8        —.03 (.01)    .06 (.1)    .96 (.02)

$/pound           D—F              0.3 (2.3         .22 (.02)                .96 (.01)
                  H—N              0.6 (2.6         .21 (.03)   6.4 (3.8)    .97 (.01)

mark/yen          D—F          —0.6 (1.8           —.05 (.02)                .96 (.01)
                  H—M          —0.4 (1.7           —.06 (.02)   —.22 (.1)    .94 (.01)

mark/pound        D—F          —1.7 (3.3           —.08 (.09)                .97 (.01)
                  H—M          —2.8 (2.81           .07 (.09)   5.0 (3.1)    .97 (.01)



aEach initial rolling regression is estimated (GLS) over 3/73 — 10/80 (12/76).
 Then a month of data is added, and coefficients are updated, etc. Forty—four
 (ninety) sets of coefficient estimates are thus obtained; table entries are
 the average of these estimates. Entries in parantheses are the standard
 deviations of these forty—four (ninety) element vectors.




                                                                                    35
                                                  Table 6

                   Root-mean square errors for the real $/yen exchange ratea


                                   November 1980 -                     January 1977 -
                                      June 1984                          June 1984

        Horizon:               1           6            12       1        6         12       36
                             month       months      months   month     months    months    months


Model

(1) Random walk               3.6          8.8        10.8      3.7      10.6      15.4      20.1

(2) D-F with long             3.5          8.5        11.1      3.7      10.6      14.5      16.2
     rate differential       (0.4)        (0.4)      (-0.2)    (0.1)     (0.1)     (0.6)     (0.9)

(3) D-F with lagged           3.6          9.1        12.4      3.7      13.4      28.1        b
        adjustment           (0.0)       (-0.5)      (-0.8)   (—0.1)    (-1.6)    (_2.1)*

(4) D-F with geometric        3.6          8.1         9.2      3.8      10.9      15.5      19.4
        weights             (-0.2)        (1.5)       (1.2)   (-0.6)    (-0.4)    (-0.0)     (0.2)

(5) D-F with cumulated        3.6          9.2        12.5      3.7      10.8      15.3      24.9
        deficits            (—0.1)       (—0.5)      (—0.7)    (0.0)    (—0.2)     (0.1)    (—1.0)

(6) H-M with long rate        3.6          8.9        12.2     3.6       10.7      15.2      20.1
        differential        (-0.1)       (-0.2)      (-0.6)    (0.6)    (—0.1)    (-0.1)    (-0.0)

(7) H-N with lagged           3.8         11.8        20.2     3.8       14.6      30.6      b
     adjustment             (—1.1)       (—1.6)      (—1.4)   (—0.7)    (_2.1)*   (—2.5)*

(8) H—N with geometric   3.6               9.8        17.4     3.7       11.5      19.5      12.3
    weights            (—0.0)            (-0.4)      (—0.9)    (0.2)    (-0.5)    (-1.1)     (1.0)

(9) H—N with cumulated        3.6          9.2        12.7     3.7       11.3      16.7      23.1
        deficits            (-0.3)       (-0.6)      (-0.8)    (0.0)    (—0.9)    (-0.7)    (—0.8)



a The entries in parentheses are for the asymptotically N(0,1) statistic discusssed in
Appendix B. A negative entry indicates that the forecast error variance of the random
walk is smaller than that of the structural model.
b
  The long run stock adjustment forecasts were nonsensical because the coefficient on
the lagged real exchange rate was not constrained to be less than one.




                                                                                               36
                                           Table 7

                           Tests for unit roots using equation (10)a




                                --          "DF t-ratio"        -
Dependent variable                             for b1
                                b1                              b2             b3



$/mark                         -.012           -.613          .105           .016
    "                          -.169
             Rt (short)                       —3.336*         .185          -.079
    "                          -.016                         - .027
             Rt (long)                         -.836                         .082




$/pound                        -.024          -1.161          .096           .060
    "                          - .301
             R   (short)                      -4.931'         .300         - .076
    "                          -.077          -2.500
                 (long)                                       .139           .221




$/yen                          -.035          -1.583          .147         -.017
    "                          -.347
             Rt (short)                       -4.970*         .194           .149
    "                          -.060
             Rt (long)                        -2.200          .005         -.087


a
    Regressions with        and Rt (short) as dependent variable are estimated over
    9/73 -    6/84 (130 observations), while regressions with Rt (long) as regressand
    are estimated over 6/74 - 6/84 (121 observations). In all cases, no further
    lags of the dependent variable were necessary to whiten the residuals. An
    asterisk denotes rejection of the unit root hypothesis using a least a 5%
    significance level. All regressions included a constant and seasonal duimnies.




                                                                                        37
                                          Table 8

                      Tests for cointegration of real exchange rates

                        and real long-term interest

                 Tabulated results are based on the following regression:

                        (Ti)    =   constants   +
                                                    c.R   (long) +   disturbance.
Test 1:     Reject the hypothesis of no cointegration at approximately a 5%
            significance level f the Durbin-Watson (DW) statistic exceeds
            .28; see Granger and Engle (1984) tables II and III.

Test 2:     Reject the hypothesis of no cointegration at approximately a 5%
            significance level if the Dickey-Fuller (DF) t-ratio of equation
            (8) applied to the residuals of (Ti) is less than -3.2; see
            Granger and Engle (1984) tables II and III.



                                                                 Test 1                Test 2
       Dependent variable                                     DW statistic          DF statistic



            $/mark                       -4.345                      .163             -2.251

real        $/pound                        .018                      .048             -1.015

            $/yen                        -2.058                      .118             -2.023



  All regressions are estimated over 6/74 -          6/84 (121 observations) and include
  a constant and 11 seasonal dummies.




                                                                                               38
