                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          WAS WHAT AIL'D YA' WHAT KILL'D YA'?

                                          Robert W. Fogel
                                             Louis Cain
                                           Joseph Burton
                                         Brian Bettenhausen

                                        Working Paper 17322
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17322


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




Fogel is Charles R. Walgreen Distinguished Service Professor, Booth School of Business, University
of Chicago. Cain is Professor of Economics at Loyola University Chicago and Adjunct Professor
of Economics at Northwestern University. All the authors are associated with the Center for Population
Economics (CPE) at the University of Chicago. Earlier versions of this paper were presented to the
Workshop on the Economics and Biodemography of Aging, University of Chicago, the Economic
History Workshop at Northwestern University, the annual meeting of the Economic History Association,
and the annual meeting of the Social Science History Association. We thank Michael Haines, Ann
Keating, and all the seminar participants for their comments. Special thanks to epidemiologist Lauren
E. Cain for her help with the empirical work. This work was supported in part by NIH program project
grant P01 AG10120. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Robert W. Fogel, Louis Cain, Joseph Burton, and Brian Bettenhausen. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Was What Ail'd Ya' What Kill'd Ya'?
Robert W. Fogel, Louis Cain, Joseph Burton, and Brian Bettenhausen
NBER Working Paper No. 17322
August 2011
JEL No. I1,N11

                                            ABSTRACT

Making use of those Union Army veterans for whom death certificates are available, we compare the
conditions with which they were diagnosed by Civil War pension surgeons to the causes of death on
the certificates. We divide the data between those veterans who entered the pension system early because
of war injuries and those who entered the pension system after the 1890 reform that made it available
to many more veterans. We examine the correlation between specific conditions and death causes
to gauge support for the hypothesis that death is attributable to something specific. We also examine
the correlation between the accumulation of rated conditions to time until death to gauge support for
the “insult hypothesis.” In general, we find support for both hypotheses. Examining the hazard ratios
for dying of a specific condition, there is support for the idea that what ail’d ya’ is what kill’d ya’.


Robert W. Fogel                                        Joseph Burton
Director, Center for Population Economics              Center for Population Economics
University of Chicago, Booth School of Business        University of Chicago - GSB
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue, Suite 367                     1101 E. 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637                                      Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                               jburton@cpe.uchicago.edu
rwf@cpe.uchicago.edu
                                                       Brian Bettenhausen
Louis Cain                                             CPE
Loyola University Chicago                              University of Chicago
lcain@luc.edu                                          bbett@cpe.uchicago.edu
Using the Early Indicators life cycle health histories of Union Army veterans, we compare the

conditions with which they were diagnosed by Civil War pension surgeons to the death

certificates of veterans (and other documents that declare a cause of death). We examine

specific chronic disease conditions and death causes to gauge support for the hypothesis that

death is likely attributable to a single chronic condition, and we will present evidence in regard

to the “insult hypothesis” of mortality.

       The Union Army data is a sample of white males who were mustered into the army. We

have limited the data to those veterans for whom we had at least one medical exam and a death

cause. The information on medical examinations are part of the “surgeons’ certificates” data set;

they are the product of detailed physical examinations completed by a local pension surgeons’

board, detailing the health and disability status of Union Army veterans who applied for a

pension. The death cause comes from a death certificate or some alternative document that

declares a cause of death.

       Our sample is divided into two groups. The first are “injured” veterans who were either

injured during the war or developed a chronic condition related to wartime service; this group

was immediately eligible for pension funds. The second, “uninjured” veterans, entered the

pension system after the 1890 reforms that made the pension available to many more veterans,

first on the basis of any chronic disease condition and then, after 1907, on the basis of age.

Pension awards were related to veterans’ health statuses as recorded on the surgeons’ certificates.

The examinations were conducted according to examination standards and procedures set by the

U.S. Bureau of Pensions. The Bureau’s disease definitions, while they differ from current disease

classification schema, are used in this analysis. Semantic and diagnostic differences arising from




                                                                                                     1
the disparity between 19th century medical knowledge and current medical understanding are

noted. This is discussed in detail below.

       Pension surgeons did not diagnose conditions per se; rather, they described observed

symptoms in vivid detail and, sometimes, would provide what they believed to be the underlying

medical condition. We do not attempt to resolve discrepancies arising from the inexactness

associated with the reporting of symptoms. If, for example, a veteran had a cardiovascular

problem that entitled him to a pension, a change in the severity of his condition or the presence

of a new condition entitled him to an increase in pension amount. In each case, the veteran had

to be examined by a pension board surgeon to confirm a change in health status. We have not

attempted to deal with the problem of increasing severity. Our analysis assumes the existence of

a condition from the first examination that results in a rating for that condition.

       There is support for the idea that what ailed veteran is what killed them. In the aggregate,

of the 8,332 veterans in our sample, 96.42 percent of them were diagnosed with one or more of

the 20 chronic conditions that qualified a veteran for a pension; the average number of diagnosed

conditions was 4.71. In 44.7 percent of the cases, a diagnosed condition was listed as a cause of

death, and in 51.2 percent of the cases, a diagnosed condition was listed as either the cause or a

contributing cause of death.




                                                                                                     2
                                                  I



The Union Army (UA) data set consists of the military, pension, census and lifetime medical

records of 35,330 white men from 25 northern states who served as infantrymen in 331

companies in the Union Army during the U.S. Civil War. The data were collected under the

auspices of Robert Fogel’s Early Indicators of Later Work Levels, Disease, and Death project at

the University of Chicago Booth School of Business’ Center for Population Economics (CPE).

The data set has been shown to be representative of white northern men who served in the Civil

War, and more generally, of white northern men who became adults during the 1860s.1

       Over 85 percent of the UA sample survived the war; the rest succumbed to injury or

disease. In the years between 1861 and 1890, veterans who were wounded or who experienced

chronic aftereffects of wartime disease exposure were entitled to pensions in amounts related to

the severity of their injuries. In the present study, we refer to these pre-1890 pensioners

collectively as “the injured.” The “uninjured”—those who escaped the war without long-term

sequelae of disease and injury exposure—were only admitted to the pension system after an 1890

act of Congress extended the UA pension to all veterans with any verifiable chronic health

condition, regardless of cause (exceptions were chronic diseases resulting from “vicious habits,”

which were not pensionable).




1 Robert W. Fogel and Dora L. Costa, “A theory of technophysio evolution, with some implications for
forecasting population, health care costs, and pension costs,” Demography 34(1), 1997, “The
Demography of Aging.”


                                                                                                       3
Pension History, and the Pension Data



All pensions required an examination by a surgeons’ board located in the applicant veteran’s

county or congressional district. These surgeons’ boards were each comprised of three politically

appointed, trained physicians who, despite the primitiveness of diagnostic techniques and the

unavailability of effective treatments for most chronic diseases, were nevertheless thorough

examiners and vivid describers of any physical abnormality they could see, feel, smell, or, in

extreme cases, taste.

       In the UA data set, these records are coded and classified according to a nosology similar

to ICD-9, with 20 general classifications (see Table 1). The records of these examinations and

the surgeons’ recommendations were forwarded to the U.S. Bureau of Pensions for a ruling on

pension amount, which was often around $12 to $18 per month, receivable in person at the post

office closest to the veteran’s home address.

       Pension eligibility was further liberalized by administrative rule in 1904, extending the

pension to those who were “disabled by reason of age.” In 1907, the pension was fully extended

to all veterans over 62 years of age. By 1912, the UA pension payments were increased on a

graduated basis, with older pensioners receiving larger pensions.




                                                                                                   4
                                              Table 1
                                        Ratable Conditions



             Cardiovascular                         Respiratory
             Diarrhea                               Gastro-intestinal
             Ear diseases                           Rheumatism/Musculo-skeleton
             General appearance                     Spleen
             Hernia                                 Tumor (neoplasm)
             Infectious disease                     Genito-urinary
             Endocrine disease (kidney)             Varicose veins
             Liver                                  Wound
             Rectum/Hemorrhoids                     Eye disorder
             Nervous system                         Gall bladder




       Pension applicants could apply under whatever law they thought would be most lucrative.

Therefore, sick people generally applied under the 1890 law, which for full disability or

blindness paid up to $50; veterans who were simply old applied under the 1907 law, which

awarded 62-year-olds $12 and 72-year-olds $15 per month. These incentives serve our purposes

now by insuring that sick people generally were examined by surgeons to verify their disabilities

and that well people, or people who didn’t believe they were ill, applied under the age rule.

       Pensions could be inherited upon proof of death cause and date by 1) parents of

unmarried soldiers killed in action; 2) minor dependents of veterans who died during or after the

war; and 3) widows of pensioners who died during or after the war. Successors to veterans’

pensions provided death certificates, death notices, sworn affidavits, and other registers to prove

the death cause and date of their veterans, and these records ended up in the veterans’ pension

files (and subsequently in the UA data set). Pensioners without successor applicants might still

have a death date since the Pension Bureau could usually only cease payment with proof of a

veteran’s death.


                                                                                                      5
        In the UA data, death causes have been coded and classified according to the same

nosology used to categorize the diseases on the surgeons’ certificates. For example, a soldier

who was diagnosed with an arrhythmia and who died of congestive heart failure would be coded

as having a cardiovascular condition and having died of a cardiovascular condition.

        About 71 percent of Union Army soldiers were represented in the pension system, either

because they were qualified under a relevant statute or because they had a successor who applied

on their behalf. Only about 60 percent were admitted to the pension system as invalids; 51

percent have surgeons’ certificates. A not-entirely overlapping 52 percent have a death cause.

For this paper, we care most about the death cause and disease history. And so, even though the

data contain some 15,387 death causes, fewer than 8,400 have both a medical history and a death

cause. Death causes favor those who died during service (those lacking a medical history); those

with widows or successors; and those who were still living in 1907 (i.e., the healthy).

        About 43 percent of those who were admitted to the pension system came in after 1890.

Less than 1 percent came into the pension system after 1907. Ten percent died before 1890 and

30 percent died before 1900. Over half our sample was dead by 1920, and nearly all were gone

by 1930 when the cohort of men who were in the Union Army would have been in their early

90s. Cain and Hong have examined causal factors in this precipitous die-off in detail.2 In the

present study, we are not concerned with the timing of the deaths as much as we are with why

men in that cohort died. As noted, we use a subsample of 8,332 UA men who were pensioners,

who had surgeons’ certificates and both a recorded date of death and a death cause or




2 See Louis P. Cain and Sok Chul Hong, “Survival in 19th century cities: The larger the city, the smaller
your chances,” Explorations in Economic History 46(4), 2009.


                                                                                                            6
contributing cause. This subsample was then divided into pre-1890 and post-1890 pensioners—

the “injured,” and the “uninjured.”



Data Limitations



Using the UA data is difficult, not only because of certain biases that may be present, but also

because it requires users to make certain assumptions about both the meaning of surgeons’

certificates and about the relevance of medical history.

        The inputting of the surgeons’ data and the death-cause data was designed, supervised,

reviewed, and corrected by medical doctors at the CPE.3 Medical doctors also coded the disease

descriptions by the pension surgeons to reflect signs and symptoms of chronic disease. These are

not diagnoses that require a more holistic approach, where each soldier’s entire medical history

would be examined to determine underlying conditions related to the symptoms reported.

Because of the expense of that approach, the CPE doctors simply coded the symptoms separately

without regard to comorbidities. This is a reasonable approach in most cases. However,

sometimes this presents problems. Consider a case where a veteran is observed with what the

surgeons call “chronic diarrhea” and that he is also observed with “blindness.” CPE doctors

coded chronic diarrhea and blindness as separate conditions, unless the pension surgeons had

noted that they thought the two conditions were related, in which case the CPE doctors would

note the relationship. Consider another case where a veteran is observed with “pneumonia,”

“disease of heart,” and “failure of kidneys,” which many would diagnose as “congestive heart



3 “Reflections on the ‘Early Indicators’ project: A partial history,” in Dora Costa, ed., Health and Labor
Force Participation over the Life Cycle: Evidence from the Past (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2003).


                                                                                                             7
failure.” Unless the pension surgeons noted “congestive heart failure” on the surgeons’

certificate, CPE doctors did not make such determinations. CPE doctors took the symptoms

supplied and coded them as conditions of lungs, kidneys, and heart; the three were assumed to be

independent of one another. So, if the soldier ended up dying of pneumonia, it was coded as a

lung-related (pulmonary) death rather than a cardiovascular death. Modern death-cause data have

similar problems, but modern medical histories contain diagnoses, whereas the UA data set does

not. For this reason, without additional work by medical doctors, we cannot make diagnostic

determinations about the chronic disease causes of death. We can only talk about correlations

between comorbidities and death causes.

       The data contain information on multiple causes and contributing causes of death. We

used MICAR/SUPERMICAR/ACME software provided by the Centers for Disease Control for

use in coding diseases and death causes in the modern healthcare industry to determine which of

the multiple causes was the most plausible. We then used that cause (and the most probable

contributing cause) in our analyses. To the extent that this approach drops what the software

considers to be causes that are implausible, it limits the amount of information we really have

concerning a veteran’s death. The software also limits us to the extent that historical death

causes are less reflective of the current understanding of medical conditions. For example, many

soldiers died of yellow, green, or red “softening.” This is thought to be indicative of different

types of hemorrhage or possibly of different stages of one type of hemorrhage. Our analysis is

limited to the extent that this distinction matters one way or the other; we code this as

“hemorrhage” and assume that the color modifiers are not significant. There are other such cases

where historical terms for infectious illness require that we generalize the death cause more than




                                                                                                    8
modern medical studies would do. Without holistic analysis of individual health histories,

general death causes are the best we can do.4

       Finally, pension surgeons were legally prohibited from treating the medical conditions

they observed and were legally required to substantiate that the conditions they noted were

chronic, as opposed to acute, ailments. For our study, this means that we will lack information

about the buildup of conditions that are acute unless those conditions result in death, in which

case it would show up as a death cause. On the other hand, if an acute condition has long-term

sequelae, it would be noted by the surgeons. For example, if an acute infection leaves a soldier

with chronic bronchitis, the bronchitis will be noted, but its infectious origin will not. So, our

analysis will be able to say something about the buildup of conditions that are rated by surgeons

to be disabling, but it will say nothing about the effects of repeated exposure to infections and

other acute, episodic conditions, except as those effects are related to detectable scars or sequelae

(i.e., we won’t know about a gunshot wound in 1885, but we will know every imaginable thing

about the scar tissue it leaves behind).



The Literature


The UA pension period (1860–1930) saw infection decline as a death cause. Male infant

mortality rates declined rapidly as infections became less important as causes of population

death.5 Fogel observed an 84 percent decline in urban infant mortality rate (IMR) disparities

between 1890 and 1920, so that by 1930 the reduction in disparity was nearly equal to the


4 CPE doctors plan to develop appropriate algorithms for determining probable disease diagnoses based
on the surgeons’ data in the near future.
5 Greg L. Drevenstedt, Eileen M. Crimmins, Sarinnapha Vasunilashorn, and Caleb E. Finch, “The rise
and fall of excess male infant mortality,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105, 2008.


                                                                                                        9
reduction in the overall infant mortality rate.6 Other research has equated these declines in infant

death to declines in infant disease exposure, which have resulted in reduced mortality at later

ages.7

         Costa found that cardiovascular conditions in the 19th century were mostly the long-term

sequelae of acute infectious disease exposure, as opposed to ischemic heart disease.8 Also, these

scarring effects of acute disease exposure are important indicators of lifetime disability and

mortality declines since the UA period. Chronic “scars” of acute disease exposure have been

found to reduce life span below the expected level throughout the 19th century.9

         These and other findings on chronic disease and mortality point to the mortality or health

transition in the 19th century—that as the infectious environment improved, later life disability

and chronic conditions would have been more important as causes of death. This also implies

that a population with reduced acute disease-related death would have higher levels of chronic

disease at every age.

         Riley argued that health transitions happen for a variety of causes, some of which are

related to the type of conditions, some of which are more related to comorbidity.10 The UA

period was one of radical decline in infectious illness. It also saw a reduction in deaths by




6 Robert W. Fogel, The Escape from Hunger and Premature Death: Europe, America and the Third
World, 1700–2100 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004).
7 Fogel and Costa, op. cit. See also Angus Deaton, “Health, inequality, and economic development,”
Journal of Economic Literature 41(1), 2003, and “Measuring poverty in a growing world (or measuring
growth in a poor world),” Review of Economic Statistics 87(1), 2005.
8 Dora L. Costa, “Changing chronic disease rates and long-term declines in functional limitation among
older men,” Demography 30(1), 2002.
9 Ralph Catalano and Tim Bruckner, “Child mortality and cohort life span: A test of diminished
entelechy,” International Journal of Epidemiology 35(5), 2006.
10 James C. Riley, Rising Life Expectancy: A Global History (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2001).


                                                                                                     10
infectious causes, even where infection rates remained high.11 If chronic diseases are assumed to

accumulate throughout the life course and early-life exposure to insults results in later-life

chronic disease, it is of secondary importance whether the cause of death was acute or chronic.12

Riley argues that mortality will be more likely to result from each acquisition of a chronic

condition. So, in essence: the most important condition, in terms of mortality, is your next

condition, not the chronic conditions you now have.

        In subsequent sections of this paper, we present limited evidence for both views: first,

that the long-term effects of chronic illness are important in predicting death cause; and second,

that an insult, or the interaction between old insults and a newly acquired insult—a soldier’s next

acquired insult, whether acute or infectious—is a plausible predictor of death cause.



                                                   II



As noted, the veterans are divided into injured and uninjured. There seem to be persistent and

possibly important differences in the timing of the onset of a condition between injured and

uninjured veterans. Table 2 shows how much more or less likely injured veterans were to be

observed with specific conditions at each of the first three examinations after 1890. The first

column shows the injured were being diagnosed with new conditions at their first visit after 1890

at a greater rate than the uninjured veterans who were entering the pension system for the first


11 Tommy Bengtsson, “The great mortality decline: Its causes and consequences,” in Núñez, C-E., ed.,
Debates and Controversies in Economic History (Madrid: Fundación Ramón Areces e Fundación
Fomento de la Historia Económica, 1998).
12 George Alter and James C. Riley, “Frailty, sickness, and death: Models of morbidity and mortality in
historical populations,” Population Studies 43(1) 1989. See also Fogel, The Escape from Hunger and
Premature Death and Costa, “Changing chronic disease rates,” Demography 39(2) 2002 and “Displacing
the family: Union Army pensions and elderly living arrangements,” Journal of Political Economy 105(6)
1997.


                                                                                                     11
time. This indicates that with repeated pre-1890 observation, injured veterans or their surgeons

may have had a more thorough understanding of the veterans’ physical conditions, making them

more likely to be rated for pension increases. The second and third exams, however, show

dissimilarities that are much less likely to be artifacts of the data, and they indicate that the

uninjured were catching up to the injured in terms of the number and type of conditions.

With respect to the data on death causes, Table 3 shows the average age at which injured and

uninjured veterans died by the number of conditions with which they were diagnosed prior to

death. On average, the injured were diagnosed with a little less than one-half more condition

before death than the uninjured (4.86 v. 4.45). This was in part due to the fact that 43.7 percent

of injured veterans were rated for wounds as opposed to only 27 percent of uninjured. On

average, the uninjured veterans lived roughly four years longer, but a good deal of this difference

is likely attributable to injured veterans entering the pension system early. In fact, about 16

percent of the injured veterans in the pension died before the uninjured veterans were even

eligible. The table suggests some support for the insult hypothesis as the incremental age

narrows for each additional condition.




                                                                                                    12
                                   Table 2
           Newly Rated Conditions at Examinations After 1890
              Injured During War / Uninjured During War
                                                        Examinations
                                          First - Full
Condition
                                             Rating         Second      Third
                                                    +
                                           History
Cardiovascular                             1.471***        0.737***     0.813**
Diarrhea                                   2.230***         0.699**       0.97
Ear Diseases                               1.336***          0.932        0.873
General Appearance                         1.966***        0.740***    0.737***
Hernia                                       1.097         0.663***       0.816
Infectious Disease                         2.519***          0.782        0.896
Endocrine Disease                            0.826           0.535        0.557
Liver                                      2.102***          0.942        0.959
Rectum / Hemorrhoids                       1.359***          0.861*      0.811*
Nervous System                             2.657***           1.01       0.825*
Respiratory                                1.437***        0.700***     0.773**
Gastrointestinal                           1.693***         0.795**       0.97
Rheumatism / Musculo-skeletal               1.063**        0.682***    0.561***
Spleen                                     1.791***          1.284       1.367*
Tumor                                       1.655**          0.923        0.722
Genito-Urinary                             1.579***          0.939        0.823
Varicose Veins                             1.842***           0.81        0.65
Wound                                      2.278***        0.576***    0.577***
Eye Disorder                               1.322***          0.813*     0.716**
Gallblader                                 2.711***          0.951          ~
+ includes all conditions ever rated before 1890 among injured,
only first condition rating among uninjured




                                                                                  13
                                              Table 3

                                      Average Age at Death




            Note: Average age at death for injured veterans with 0 conditions is
            only 55.4 (n = 449).


       Next, we evaluate the specific causes of death, which we have coded according to the

same nosology used for the chronic conditions in the pension surgeons’ data. The distribution of

death by cause for the injured and uninjured together is indicated in Table 4. Only those causes

responsible for 5 percent or more of the deaths are listed, and they account for over 80 percent of

the total deaths. We will focus our analysis on this subset of six causes.




                                                                                                 14
                                                    Table 4

                                    Cause of Death on Death Certificate




          The disease histories of the injured and uninjured were similar. Table 5 gives the

percentage of veterans who were diagnosed with the above conditions by their first and second

examinations after 1890. If one allows for the fact that the injured have had many more visits

with the surgeons prior to 1890 (because of their early pension eligibility), the table shows a

small difference between injured and uninjured. A chi-squared test of the percentages for the

second visit cannot reject the null hypothesis that the percentages are equal between the two

groups.


                                                  Table 5

                                    Conditions Rated by Visit after 1890

                                            First Visit (%)               Second Visit (%)
                                        Injured       Uninjured       Injured     Uninjured
               Cardiovascular            38.6            26.2          52.8          44.5
               Infectious Disease        10.0             4.0           11.8          6.5
               Tumor                      1.2             0.7           1.6           1.2
               Pulmonary                 24.7            17.2            31          44.1
               Genito-Urinary              8               5            11.9          9.2
               Gastrointestinal          16.7             9.9          24.6          39.8

               n                         3996          3095            3187        2273




                                                                                                  15
       As shown in Table 6, for conditions such as tumors and genito-urinary, the age at death

was similar for the two groups. For the others, the injured died at earlier ages, particularly when

an infectious disease was involved. It seems likely that the wound that led to admission in the

pension prior to 1890 created a greater susceptibility to infectious disease.


                                              Table 6

                              Death by Age for Injured vs. Uninjured

                                              Injured            Uninjured
                     Cause of Death         Age       n         Age      n
                     Cardiovascular         72.5    1900        75.2   1253
                     Infectious disease     56.5     434        65.2    185
                     Tumor                  71.8     261        72.6    183
                     Pulmonary              68.7     665        73.0    397
                     Genito-Urinary         73.2     532        74.5    380
                     Gastrointestinal       66.5     322        70.2    127




                                                 III


The next step is to examine the link between listed conditions and death causes. We concentrate

on the six death causes responsible for at least 5 percent of the deaths as reported in Table 4.



Nosological Concerns


While the nosology is the same for listed conditions and death causes, reality can be quite

different. The typical cardiovascular conditions that qualify a veteran for a pension include

indications of valvular disease, myocarditis and hypertrophy, and atherosclerosis; all that may

have been reported by the surgeon, however, is “disease of heart.” Typical death causes

recorded as attributable to cardiovascular conditions include “heart disease chronic,” valvular


                                                                                                   16
damage, arteriosclerosis, hemorrhage, stroke, indicators of chronic congestive heart failure, and

“disease of heart.”

       Pulmonary conditions are neither as clear nor as related. What typically appears on the

surgeons’ certificates are conditions such as lung disease, catarrh, congestion, and bronchitis of

various types. The death certificates are dominated by pneumonia of various types (including

many that are assumed in ICD guidelines to be acute), embolisms, and bronchitis. Clearly,

pneumonia may result when a body is no longer able to cope with other conditions, but if it

appeared on the death certificate (and it commonly did so), it was recorded as a pulmonary

condition.

       Gastrointestinal conditions often contained the words “chronic diarrhea,” but it could not

have been what one would consider chronic diarrhea today. Most likely it was persistent,

episodic (acute) tropical gastroenteritis. Similar wording appeared on death certificates as well as

congestion, tubercular infections, and intestinal conditions likely related to infectious disease.

       The genito-urinary (kidney) problem listed on the surgeons’ certificates was almost

always chronic kidney disease. The death certificates were more expansive and included uremia,

nephritis, Bright’s and Addison’s disease, prostate conditions, and cystitis. Two-thirds of “acute”

designations on death certificates are genito-urinary conditions.

       The infectious diseases that qualified one for a pension are largely malaria and

tuberculosis, plus chronic sequelae of infection. Malaria and tuberculosis are the two chronic

infectious diseases found on death certificates, but acute infectious conditions are even more

likely to appear as a cause of death.

       Finally, tumors were extremely difficult to identify in these years when examination was

limited to what you could see with a magnifying glass, hear through a stethoscope, feel, or smell.




                                                                                                     17
While an autopsy would make it possible to identify when death was attributable to a tumor,

autopsies were not normally performed on the veterans in order to determine a death cause.



Cardiovascular



We begin with cardiovascular disease, which was the most frequent cause or contributing cause

of death in our sample, appearing on 43.9 percent of all certificates. For those who were rated

for a cardiovascular condition, Table 7 reports the frequency distribution of causes of death. The

frequency among the injured is basically similar to that of the uninjured, and once again a chi-

squared test is unable to reject the hypothesis that this is the case.



                                                Table 7

                                Death Cause if Rated Cardiovascular




        As can be seen, roughly two-fifths of those with a rated cardiovascular condition had a

cardiovascular condition listed as a cause of death. An additional one-fourth had either a

pulmonary or genito-urinary condition listed as the cause of death. The rest is split between a

variety of causes including tumors, which (based on the diagnosis of the doctor signing the death



                                                                                                   18
certificate) only accounted for only 5–6 percent of the cases. As noted earlier, this is probably an

underestimate based on the limitations of diagnosis at the turn of the 20th century.

       In Table 8, we look at the inverse of Table 7, the conditions with which veterans who

died of a cardiovascular condition were rated. As in Table 7, a chi-squared test cannot reject the

hypothesis that the two sets of proportions are equal. Almost two-thirds of those who died of a

cardiovascular condition had been rated for one, but almost a third had been rated with a

pulmonary condition, and almost half of the injured with a gastrointestinal condition.



                                              Table 8
              Rated Conditions for Those Whose Death Cause Was Cardiovascular




       There were several specific conditions that fell under the rubric “cardiovascular.” Table

9 reports the frequency distribution of these specific conditions for those who were rated for

cardiovascular. We know what type(s) of cardiovascular condition(s) each veteran had, but, in

general, if he died of a cardiovascular condition, we don’t know what type killed him.




                                                                                                  19
                                             Table 9

                 Percent of Rated for Cardiovascular with a Specified Condition




       Where a cardiovascular condition was listed as a cause or contributing cause of death, the

differences between the injured and uninjured were relatively small, both with respect to the age

at which they were first diagnosed and the number of years they lived after the diagnosis with the

exception of the before-50 age group when many of the uninjured would have been ineligible for

a pension.



                                             Table 10
                  Cardiovascular as a Cause and Contributing Cause of Death
                                Age at which                        Mean life after
                             first observed (%)                    diagnosis (years)
                          Injured        Uninjured            Injured          Uninjured
       Before 50           22.1            15.1                37.2               27.2
       In 50s              23.4            28.0                19.1               20.6
       In 60s              15.7            15.2                11.8               11.6
       70 and after         3.4             2.5                 7.1                6.1
       Never Rated         35.4            39.3

       n                   2210           1444




                                                                                               20
The Other Five Death Causes



Given that 43.2 percent of those rated with a cardiovascular condition had such a condition listed

as a cause of their death (50.0 percent if contributing causes are included), there might be some

evidence that what ail’d ya was indeed what kill’d ya’. That impression changes immediately

when one looks at Table 11, which is identical to Table 8 for the other five causes. For veterans

who died of the other major causes, they were more likely to have been rated with a

cardiovascular condition than anything else.

                                               Table 11

        Rated Conditions for Those Whose Death Cause Was Other than Cardiovascular




       As can be seen, for all five of the other major conditions, with two exceptions, a larger

percentage had been rated for a cardiovascular condition than had been rated for the condition on

their death certificate. Those two exceptions are the uninjured veterans who had been diagnosed

with a gastrointestinal condition and the injured veterans who died of an infectious disease. The

uninjured who died of a gastrointestinal condition are the only group in Table 11 where the

condition on their death certificate was the condition with which the largest share of the deceased




                                                                                                   21
was rated. For the injured veterans who died of an infectious disease, the rated condition that

received the largest share was pulmonary.

        For the injured who died of a gastrointestinal condition, both a cardiovascular and a

pulmonary condition were rated more often than a gastrointestinal condition. For the uninjured,

the ranking was gastrointestinal, pulmonary, and then cardiovascular. For those who died of a

genito-urinary condition or tumors, more were rated with cardiovascular, pulmonary, and

gastrointestinal conditions than with a genito-urinary condition or a tumor. Those three were

also more common for those who died of infectious diseases with some variation in the order, as

the exception testifies. For those who died of a pulmonary condition, cardiovascular conditions

are rated at a higher percentage, with pulmonary second and gastrointestinal third.



                                                   IV



To further examine these data, we use a pooled logistic regression model for the discrete time

hazards in the surgeons’ certificates.13 We adopt 1890 as the baseline; the regressions include

only those veterans who were alive in 1890, whether they received a pension before that year or

not. Initially, the group is the 8,332 defined above, but the program eliminated the veterans for

which there was only one visit to a surgeon. This means that the effective sample size was

reduced to 7,544.

        We began by looking at those who died of the six particular conditions (cardiovascular,

pulmonary, genito-urinary, gastro-intestinal, infectious disease, and tumor) that each were

responsible for at least 5 percent of the veterans’ deaths. We only consider the reported cause of


13 There are well-defined problems that emerge when this specification is used with a fixed population.
Each group has a survivor rate of 1 at the start, and they each have a rate of 0 by some year.


                                                                                                          22
death; we did not include contributing causes in this analysis. In these regressions, the

dependent variable is a time-dependent indicator for having died of a particular condition (equal

to 1 if the veteran died of that condition or equal to 0 if the veteran was alive, censored, or died

of another cause that year). In each regression, we include an indicator for whether a veteran was

rated for one of the twenty specific conditions that would have made him pensionable (equal to 1

if rated or equal to 0 otherwise). Controls are included for an urban birthplace (equal to 1 if born

in one of the top 100 urban places based on population size in the 1860 Census or a foreign

birthplace and equal to 0 otherwise) and their age in 1840 (the median birth year of veterans at

baseline).14 We include a variable for whether they were injured (equal to 1 if they were in the

pension before 1890 and equal to 0 otherwise) and an interaction term between injured and

whether or not they had received a rating for the condition listed as their cause of death. In

addition, a linear time trend is included in each regression.15

        Table 12 reports the hazard ratios for dying from a condition given that you had that

condition (the “own” relationship) and the other variables discussed above. In the top panel, the

results for the six conditions are grouped, and the hazard ratios for cause-specific mortality

appear on the principal diagonal of this panel. The middle panel reports the ratios for the other

fourteen conditions, while the bottom panel reports the results for the control variables. It should

be noted that the coefficient on the interaction term is not statistically significant at conventional

test levels in all regressions except the one for those who died of gastro-intestinal problems. For



14 See Cain and Hong, op. cit., for more on the hazard of urban life among these veterans. The hazard
function for the foreign born closely followed that for urban born.
15 Alternative specifications of the time trend were estimated, but standard statistical tests led to the
conclusion that a parsimonious linear specification was all that was necessary. We also explored whether
having been rated for a cardiovascular condition modified the effect of each of the other five conditions
on cause-specific mortality, but an interaction term between having been rated for that condition and
having been rated for a cardiovascular condition did not add any explanatory power.


                                                                                                       23
the five regressions where this term is not statistically significant, it is reasonable to look at a

regression that combines the injured and the uninjured. This is not true for those who died of a

gastro-intestinal condition.

        Looking across that principal diagonal, a veteran’s hazard of dying from a cardiovascular

condition increases by 25 percent if he had been rated with such a condition. The hazard of dying

from a pulmonary or genito-urinary condition increases by approximately 50 percent if such a

condition had been rated. This is the same increase as for a gastro-intestinal condition, but this is

the condition for which the injured and uninjured need to be considered separately (the complete

regressions are not reported here). The hazard ratio for the injured is just under 0.8 and is

statistically significant; whereas for the uninjured it is over 2.00, but not statistically significant.

This suggests there may be important differences between the form gastro-intestinal conditions

take between the two groups. For tumors, the hazard increases by a factor of four. For infectious

diseases, the ratio increases by 15 percent, an increase that is not considered to be statistically

significant.

        The hazard for death due to a cardiovascular condition was less for those rated for a

pulmonary condition and higher for those with a poor general appearance and varicose veins.

For deaths from a pulmonary condition, the hazard was less for a veteran with a gastro-intestinal,

ear or rheumatism/musculo-skeleto condition, while it increased for those with a gall bladder

condition. Rheumatism reduced the hazard for those who died from genito-urinary conditions,

while varicose veins increased it. The hazard of dying from a gastro-intestinal condition actually

decreased for those rated with the condition, but liver, genito-urinary, and gall bladder conditions

all increased the hazard. The hazard of dying from an infectious disease was increased by a




                                                                                                       24
pulmonary condition and reduced by an ear condition. A nervous condition reduced the hazard

of dying from a tumor.

       For the hazard of dying with a gastro-intestinal condition, the combined regression

suggests that the hazard was increased by the presence of a hernia or gall bladder condition.

Looking at the separate regressions, no other condition has a statistically significant effect on the

hazard ratio for the uninjured, but a genito-urinary, liver, or (particularly) gall bladder condition

increases the hazard. Once again, the difference between the two groups requires more study.

       The hazard ratio increases at approximately 8 percent a year for all the conditions that

killed these veterans except infectious disease; fatal infections could strike veterans at any age.

Having been born in an urban area increases the hazard ratio for deaths attributed to

cardiovascular, pulmonary or tumor conditions.

       For these regressions, unexpected associations between disease conditions and death

causes present areas for future testing and research. Several unexpected associations might be

explicable as artifacts of the UA data set and the examination schedule and procedures or as a

representation of an actual medical relationship between the condition and death.




                                                                                                      25
             Table 12

Hazard Ratios for Injured Veterans
        First, within-cause or within-condition heterogeneity makes it difficult to determine if a

particular relationship ought to be expected. For example, the hazard of death by genito-urinary

condition appears to be increased by the presence of varicose veins. Genito-urinary conditions

causing death ranged from nephritis to hepatitis to pancreatic cancer. And within each of those

deadly conditions, there is also variation. For example, while nephritis and varicose veins might

both be symptoms of a cardiovascular condition, nephritis had other causes, including infection.

        Second, a protective condition might simply be one that is so severe that it protects

against death by any condition but itself (or a related condition). Consider the protection against

death by tumor offered by nervous conditions. This might indicate simply that brain injuries and

brain infections are more likely to cause death than even an extremely advanced tumor.

        Third, unexpected relationships between disease conditions and causes of death might be

a result of the differential detectability of specific diseases. Some diseases, like arteriosclerosis,

stroke, and tumor, were not detectable by surgeons until they reached extreme severity. The

presence of these conditions might have indicated a higher hazard of death by certain conditions,

or a higher hazard of contracting an acute condition leading to death. Conversely, the presence of

rheumatism was easy to observe (it only required the presence of pain or tenderness in the joints

and muscles) and was nearly ubiquitous at older ages. It might have indicated heartiness as much

as anything else. Also, easily detectable conditions that were more likely to strike younger men,

such as wounds, hernias, and hemorrhoids that were the result of wartime experience, might

simply be chronic, non-deadly conditions that indicate a soldier’s ability to survive.

        Fourth, uninjured soldiers could have been protected against death by infectious causes

from previous exposure to an infectious disease. This might be a medically verifiable

relationship, whereby a veteran gained immunity to future infectious conditions because of his
wartime experiences in the camps or because he was born in an urban area where the infectious

disease environment was much different than in a rural area. Also, there is the now known

association between infectious diseases and chronic conditions and tumors.

       Finally, differences in the chronicity of diseases and death causes might underlie the

unexpected associations between them. Gastro-intestinal conditions tended to be protective

against death as a result of a gastro-intestinal condition among the injured. This may be simply

that the gastro-intestinal conditions noted on surgeons’ certificates were not deadly conditions

and didn’t increase a soldier’s hazard of contracting a deadly gastro-intestinal condition, but that

they were more likely to weaken his system in other ways. For example, mild, tropical enteritis

need not be a harbinger of death by stomach ulcer or of chronic diarrhea of infectious origin, but

it might indicate imminent death by another less immediate cause.

       We briefly turn to the Riley-Alter insult hypothesis. Table 13 examines this hypothesis

with the specific ratable conditions established by the pension board.16 In this data, the

dependent variable is the number of deaths occurring in a year. The independent variable

“numconds” is the total number of unique rated conditions for each veteran each year beginning

in 1890. We also included an interaction term between the number of conditions and number of

injured (those in the pension system before 1890) to determine if we could view the veterans as a

single population. The model includes a linear time trend, their age in 1840, and an indicator for

whether they had an urban-foreign birth place.




16 See, for example, James C. Riley, Sickness, Recovery and Death: A History and Forecast of Ill Health
(Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 1989) and Riley and George Alter, “The epidemiological transition
and morbidity,” Annales de Démographie Historique, 1989.


                                                                                                     28
                                              Table 13

                                     “Insults” Regression Result
                                                   Hazard
                                                     ratio         z
                             numconds               1.018          3.18
                             numcondinj~d           1.006          1.21
                             urban                  1.188          6.38
                             age1840                1.096         45.40
                             t                        Y


The results indicate that for each additional condition with which a veteran was rated, the hazard

ratio increased by 1.8 percent. There was no statistically significant difference between those

who entered the pension system before 1890 and those who entered later. Being born in an

urban area increases the hazard, as does each year of age.



                                                  V


In sum, we return to the question: was what ail’d ya’ what kill’d ya’? In general, once a veteran

was rated for a particular condition, his hazard of dying from that condition increased. All the

coefficients on the principal diagonal of Table 12 are greater than one, and all save that for

infectious diseases are statistically significantly greater than one at the 95 percent level of

confidence.

       Why this is so requires further research. All these associations, both expected and

unexpected, will be the subject of future work with the Union Army data set that will require the

analysis of more disaggregated disease and death variables than are currently publicly available.

1




                                                                                                   29
