NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ORGAN ALLOCATION POLICY AND THE DECISION TO DONATE
Judd B. Kessler
Alvin E. Roth
Working Paper 17324
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17324

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2011

The authors are grateful for financial support from the National Science Foundation, the CLER staff
and Harvard Business School, and acknowledge helpful conversations with Alexandra Glazier and
Frank Delmonico of the New England Organ Bank, and with Kieran Healy, Kim Krawiec and seminar
participants at Duke Law School. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Judd B. Kessler and Alvin E. Roth. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Organ Allocation Policy and the Decision to Donate
Judd B. Kessler and Alvin E. Roth
NBER Working Paper No. 17324
August 2011
JEL No. C91,C92,D02,D71,I11,I28
ABSTRACT
Organ donations from deceased donors provide the majority of transplanted organs in the United States,
and one deceased donor can save numerous lives by providing multiple organs. Nevertheless, most
Americans are not registered organ donors despite the relative ease of becoming one. We study in
the laboratory an experimental game modeled on the decision to register as an organ donor, and investigate
how changes in the management of organ waiting lists might impact donations. We find that an organ
allocation policy giving priority on waiting lists to those who previously registered as donors has a
significant positive impact on registration.

Judd B. Kessler
Department of Business and Public Policy
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
judd.kessler@wharton.upenn.edu
Alvin E. Roth
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer 308
Cambridge, MA 02138-3001
and NBER
aroth@hbs.edu

The majority of transplanted organs in the United States come from deceased donors,
whose organs are transplanted into patients following the donor‘s death.1 Despite the need for
organs (over 110,000 patients are currently awaiting organ transplants in the United States2) and
the ease of registering as a donor (a few clicks on a website or checking a box when getting a
driver‘s license), only 40.3% of individuals over the age of 18 in the United States are registered
as organ donors.3
Changes in organ allocation procedures can influence the supply of transplantable organs.
One line of research, concerning kidney exchange among incompatible patient-donor pairs, has
investigated how matching mechanisms for live donors can increase the number of kidney
transplants (Alvin E. Roth, Tayfun Sönmez, and M. Utku Ünver 2004, 2005a,b, 2007; Roth et al.
2006; Susan L. Saidman et al. 2006; C. Bradley Wallis et al. 2011) and has led to a number of
new practices and institutions.4 Kidney exchanges match incompatible patient-donor pairs to
other incompatible patient-donor pairs, allowing for exchanges and also for chains of donation
that start with an undirected donor and that increase the number of transplants that live donation
can achieve (Michael A. Rees et al. 2009; Itai Ashlagi et al. 2011) Thus allocation policies can
increase the donation rate of live donors as well as deceased donors. Despite a growing (but still
small) number of transplants resulting from kidney exchange, the kidney waiting list has
continued to grow and shows no signs of slowing down. For kidneys in the United States, Table
1 lists the number of donors, transplants, and the number of people on the waiting list. Kidneys
have longer waiting lists than other organs because dialysis can keep patients in need of kidney
transplants alive for a time while waiting, but the need for other organs is great as well, and
patients who do not promptly receive a transplant often die while waiting.
In addition, economists and others have discussed the possibility of cash markets for
organs, in which kidneys could be bought and sold to address the current excess demand for
kidneys. Proposals to introduce monetary payments for organs are constrained by concerns about
the morality and ethicality of such practices, and repugnance towards cash markets for organs
1

Based on OPTN data as of July 29, 2011 (see http://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/latestData/rptData.asp).
For example, over 89,000 are on the waiting list for a kidney. Waiting list numbers are based on Organ
Procurement and Transplantation Network (OPTN) data as of July 29, 2011.
3
Based on the Donate Life America National Donor Designation Report Card 2011 (which can be found at
http://donatelife.net/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/DLA-Report-BKLT-30733-2.pdf).
4
For example, the New England Program for Kidney Exchange (NEPKE) and the Alliance for Paired Donation
(APD). Following the passage of new federal legislation in 2007, plans are underway for a national exchange, which
is running a pilot program that began in October 2010.
2

2

limits their feasibility, at least for now (see Roth 2007; Stephen Leider and Roth 2010 and the
references there).

Here we focus on deceased donation and mechanisms to increase the number of
individuals registering to be organ donors (individuals who agree to donate those of their organs
that are usable in the event of an untimely death). Deceased organ donation is a natural place to
focus attention since the registration rates for organ donation are rather low (40.3 percent
nationally and, for example, only 7 percent in Texas and 15 percent in New York, the second and
third most populous states respectively).5 Since next of kin can provide consent for donation at
time of death, donation rates of eligible deceased donors are higher than registration rates,
although still well below 100 percent. In addition, the gains to generating more deceased organ
donors are substantial: one deceased donor can provide multiple vital organs (including kidneys,
liver, heart, pancreas, lungs, and intestine) as well as tissues (including corneas, skin, heart
5

Based on the Donate Life America National Donor Designation Report Card 2011 (which can be found at
http://donatelife.net/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/DLA-Report-BKLT-30733-2.pdf).

3

valves, cartilage, bone, tendons, and ligaments). Finally, while exchanges and donor chains can
increase the number of transplanted kidneys, there is essentially no possibility of live donation
for other solid organs such as the heart, pancreas, and intestine, and not much transplantation of
live donor lungs or livers. Live donation of blood and of bone marrow is very feasible, and has
been the subject of considerable study. (Recent work on blood donation has investigated whether
incentives for blood donors can be effectively used to increase donations, or whether the
donations suffer from a ―crowding out‖ (see Nicola Lacetera and Mario Macis 2008; Carl
Mellstrom and Magnus Johannesson 2008; Lacetera, Macis, and Robert Slonim 2009).6 Research
on bone marrow donations by Ted C. Bergstrom, Rodney J. Garratt, and Damien SheehanConnor (2009, 2011), Frédérique, A. Fève and Jean-Pierre Florens (2005), and Fève et al. (2007)
argues that fewer individuals are on the bone marrow registry than is optimal.)
In this paper we consider deceased organ allocation policies that give priority for
receiving organs to people who are themselves registered donors (and have been registered for
some time). Such policies provide an incentive for registering to be an organ donor. This kind of
donor-priority system is in use in Singapore (since the 1986 passage of their Human Organ
Transplant Act7) and is being implemented in Israel (following passage of a 2008 organ
transplant law8). Singapore has an opt out system, in which everyone is by default a donor in the
national registry, and any citizen or permanent resident of Singapore who opts out of being an
organ donor gets lower priority for deceased donor organs in the event that they need one. Israel
has an opt in system, in which (once the system is fully implemented) anyone who has registered
to be a deceased donor at least three years earlier will receive priority. Such donor-priority
policies generate an incentive for becoming a donor within the organ donation system and do not
require additional incentives from outside of the system. A related approach is being attempted
in the U.S. by a private club called Lifesharers, which prioritizes deceased donations of organs
6

Both Mellstrom and Johannesson (2008) and Lacetera, Macis, and Slonim (2009) investigate the hypothesis of
Richard M. Titmuss (1970) that paying for blood donation might crowd out the altruistic reasons for giving and lead
to less donation. While Mellstrom and Johannesson (2008) find evidence of crowding out in a field experiment on
blood donation in Sweden, Lacetera, Macis, and Slonim (2009) do not find crowding out on blood donations from
observational data and a field experiment in America. Nicola Lacetera and Mario Macis (2008) find that giving
recognition to donors increases the number of blood donations and the timing of the donations.
7
The Human Organ Transplant Act can be found at http://www.moh.gov.sg/mohcorp/legislations.aspx?id=1672
8
The proposed Israeli policy gives priority to the individuals and family members of those who have signed donor
cards or made live organ donations (news stories can be found at
http://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/174514.php and http://www.jpost.com/HealthAndSciTech/Health/Article.aspx?id=195354). The details of the implementation of this program have been highly contested
and were still being debated at the time of final submission of this paper.

4

by its members to its members who need them. Lifesharers is not part of the national allocation
system, so it requires individuals to opt into the club in addition to registering as a donor, and
gives priority access to only those organs donated by members of the club.9
One strategy discussed for increasing registration rates in the United States is to change
to an opt out system in which those who take no action are assumed to be donors at death, as in
Singapore, Spain (which has the highest rate of deceased organ recovery), and other European
countries (most of which have lower rates of organ recovery and transplantation than the United
States). This policy is an interesting and important one to consider but may have legal
consequences that make it less effective at increasing final donation rates than increasing
registration rates. We discuss this again in the conclusion.
This paper investigates incentives to donate by means of an experimental game that
models the decision to register as an organ donor. The main manipulation is the introduction of a
priority rule, inspired by the Singapore and Israeli legislation, which assigns available organs
first to those who had also registered to be organ donors. Another experimental condition
replicates the incentive effects of the priority rule (in expectation) but provides organs by a
standard waiting list. A final condition institutes a simple discount in the cost of agreeing to be
an organ donor.
Results from our laboratory study suggest that providing priority on waiting lists for
registered donors has a significant positive impact on donation.10 We are able to replicate most of
the benefit with a rebate that provides the same incentive for donating as priority, and with a
discount in the cost of donation, although only when they are introduced after the subjects have
made donation decisions a number of times. When the policies are introduced at the start of the
game, the priority rule outperforms an equivalent change in the cost of donation.
It may be helpful to pause for a moment and think about what kinds of hypotheses
relevant to organ donation can be investigated in a laboratory experiment that does not involve
actual organ donation decisions. While there are obviously important questions related to organ
donation that cannot be studied in the abstract, there are also important aspects of the actual

9

As of July 2011, Lifesharers‘ membership is less than 15,000 and there has not yet been a transplant on the
Lifesharers network (see http://www.lifesharers.org/).
10
In our experiment, registration results in donation whenever the registered organ donor becomes deceased and a
recipient is available. We will discuss in the conclusion some of the legal and practical gaps between registration as
an organ donor and successful donation and transplantation.

5

organ donation decision that cannot be reliably or systematically manipulated, but which can be
manipulated in the lab.
To see both sides of this, consider the issues that arise in modeling in the laboratory the
costs associated with the decision to donate an organ after death. The costs of registering to be an
organ donor are difficult to identify and to manipulate in the field. These costs may include
worries that doctors will not work as hard to keep organ donors alive or that organs will be
removed prematurely, and there may be visceral issues in thinking about actual organ donation
such as discomfort in thinking about one‘s own death. In the laboratory, monetary costs can be
imposed and manipulated, to model to some level of approximation the costs experienced by
donors. And since compensation for donation is not allowed by United States law,11 cash rebates
or cash transfers are not possible for actual organ donation decisions, so conditions that
manipulate the net costs of registering as an organ donor with cash payments can only be run in
the laboratory.
So in the laboratory we do not use real organs, but we impose real (monetary) costs. The
cost of registering to be a donor in the experiment is imposed and denoted in dollars (it decreases
cash payment from the experiment). We take advantage of the opportunity to manipulate the cost
of donation by running two conditions (discount and rebate) that decrease the costs of registering
to be a donor to better understand why the priority rule generates an increase in the number of
donors. While a donor-priority rule can be implemented in the world and in the lab, cash rebates
and discounts cannot be implemented outside of the lab, but they allow us to test hypotheses
about which features of the priority rule are responsible for increasing registration rates in the
lab.
While organ transplantation is a private good—only one person can receive each organ—
it is useful to think of the organ donor registry as resembling a public good, since ex ante the
pool of registered organ donors provides organs for the pool of potential recipients (from which
no medically eligible candidate can be excluded under present US law). Even though an
individual who is a deceased organ donor will not get to be an organ recipient, a larger pool of
potential donors benefits everyone, including potential donors who end up needing organs rather
than providing them. In other words, registering to be an organ donor resembles a public good ex
11

The National Organ Transplant Act of 1984 states, in part: ―it shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly
acquire, receive or otherwise transfer any human organ for valuable consideration for use in human transplantation.‖
(Section 301, National Organ Transplant Act (NOTA), 42 U.S.C. 274e 1984)

6

ante that is a private good ex post.12 It may be that the donor-priority organ allocation policy
increases registration rates in part because the allocation rules allow for non-donors to be
excluded (or to have a smaller probability of receiving an organ), effectively turning the registry
into a club good and generating an incentive to become a donor. We investigate the impact of
this incentive in a simple model in Section IV.13
Our laboratory environment allows us to study the incentive issues involved in this type
of public good, abstracted away from the important but complex sentiments and institutional
details associated with actual organs. Results suggest that rewarding contributors with first
access to the ex post private goods generated by the ex ante public good—by transforming the
public good into something more like a club good—may generate increased contribution in
public good environments of this form.

I. Experimental Design
In the experiment, subjects made a decision modeled on the decision to register as an
organ donor. In the experiment there is no difference between registering (in advance) to donate
and being an available donor at death, and we will refer to this decision as ―donating‖. The
instructions to subjects were stated in abstract terms, not in terms of organs. Subjects started each
round with one ―A unit‖ (which can be thought of as a brain) and two ―B units‖ (representing
kidneys). Each subject earned $1 in each period in which they had both an active A unit and at
least one active B unit (representing a flow of utility from being alive and healthy). Each period,
the subject‘s A unit had a 10% probability of failing and the B units had a 20% chance of failing
(both B units operated or failed together).
Before making the donation decision in the first round, all subjects were informed that
each round began with the subject having $2 and consisted of a number of periods in which they
could earn more money. Whenever a subject‘s A unit failed, he lost $1 and the round ended for
12

The organ donor registry is rival (or congestible) in that the more people who take advantage of the pool of organs
make it less likely another person is able to take advantage of it, but this characteristic is shared by other nonexcludable goods (i.e. public parks, roads, and bridges) that are commonly thought of as public goods.
13
Unlike other games in the experimental literature on excludible public goods (for examples see Kurtis J. Swope
2002; Matthias Cinyabuguma, Talbot Page and Louis Putterman 2005; and T. K. Ahn, R. Mark Isaac and Timothy
C. Salmon 2009) our game does not fully exclude non-contributors from accessing the public good but instead
provides priority to those who contribute. Different potential recipients have different shares in the public good, in
the sense that different priorities may give them different probabilities of drawing from the public good if need
arises. In particular, non donors receive a smaller probability of access to the public good.

7

him (representing brain death). When a subject‘s B units failed, he had up to five periods to
receive a B unit from someone else (representing dialysis, during which time he did not earn any
money), if a subject did not receive a B unit in those five periods, he lost $1 and the round ended
for him (again representing death). Subjects could receive a B unit from another player in a given
period if that player‘s A unit failed in that period while his B units were still active, if and only if
the player had agreed to donate his B units at the start of that round.
Subjects made a donation decision 31 times in a fixed group of 12 subjects. Subjects were
not informed of the number of times they would make the decision but were told they would be
paid for four randomly selected rounds. The donation decision was always asked at the start of
the round, before any periods had passed, so subjects made the donation decision before knowing
whether their A unit or B units would fail first.
Subjects were randomly assigned at the beginning of the game to have either low or high
costs of donation (each group of 12 subjects had 6 low-cost donors and 6 high-cost donors) and
were only informed of their own cost of donation. Low cost donors had to pay $0.40 so that their
B units would be given to other subjects in the event that they had A unit failure (subjects who
agreed to be donors always paid the cost, regardless of whether they had A unit failure or B unit
failure first, representing the psychological costs of donation incurred at the time of the decision
to register as a donor). High cost donors had to pay $0.80 for their B units to be donated in the
event of A unit failure. Subjects remained high cost or low cost donors for the entire experiment.
All subjects were told that if they were a donor and their A unit failed first, each of their
B units would be donated to a subject who had failed B units and was waiting for a B unit if such
a subject was present in that period. They were also told that B units could not be donated again
in the same round (i.e. a donated B unit could not be donated again after the failure of the
recipient‘s A unit). After making the donation decision, subjects watched their outcome for each
period of that round and were able to observe if any of their units failed in that period, how many
periods they were waiting for a B unit, whether they received a B unit in that period, and how
much money they had earned so far in that round of the game. After a subject could not earn any
more money in a round, he stopped receiving information each period and waited for the next
round to begin. Subjects received no information about the donation decisions or earnings of
other subjects, and subjects were not informed if B units they donated were actually provided to

8

other subjects (i.e. they did not know whether a subject needed a B unit in the period in which
their A unit failed).
There were 4 different conditions under which subjects made donation decisions in the
experiment. In the control condition, subjects were informed that donated B units were provided
to those who needed B units in the order that those subjects had been waiting for B units: so
subjects who had been waiting 5 periods would receive an available B unit before a subject who
had been waiting 4 periods and so on.14
In the priority condition (motivated by the donor-priority rules in Singapore and Israel),
subjects were informed that those who agreed to be donors at the start of the round would be
given priority should they need to receive a B unit, and that B units would be provided first to
subjects who had agreed to be donors, and only if no donors were in need of B units would B
units be provided to subjects who were not donors. Within each priority group, B units were
assigned by the length of time subjects had been waiting for B units with those who were waiting
the longest getting available B units first. The priority condition generated an incentive for
donating, the value of which depended on the number of other subjects who registered as donors.
As long at least one other member of the group donated, donors were more likely than nondonors to receive a B unit if they needed one. In addition, in the priority condition, registering as
a donor provided a relatively strong positive externality to other donors since they are more
likely than non-donors to receive donated B units.
In the discount condition, B units were assigned as in the control condition, but all
subject costs were $0.35 lower than in the control condition, so low cost donors paid $0.05 to
donate their B units and high cost donors paid $0.45 to donate their B units. The $0.35 discount
approximates the expected value of the incentive for donation achieved by the priority rule (and
the amount paid to donors in the rebate condition, described next) if 5 to 6 donors are
contributing in a round.15 This treatment was run to investigate whether the behavior change due
to the priority rule could be replicated by a discount alone, simply offsetting the costs of
donation and not generating the positive externalities to other donors.
14

If multiple subjects had been waiting the same number of periods and there were not enough B units for all of
them, the B units were assigned randomly among the subjects who had been waiting the longest.
15
Since the average donation rate across all rounds of the discount condition turns out to be 55.4% (implying an
average of 6.65 donors per round), this $0.35 discount turns out to be remarkably similar to the benefit from
donating they would have received from donating in the priority condition (in expectation), and to the rebate
donating subjects would have received if they had been in the rebate condition, described next.

9

In the rebate condition, B units were assigned as in the control condition, but subjects
were informed that those who paid to be a donor would receive a rebate at the end of the
experiment based on the number of other subjects in their group who also agreed to be donors.
(Rebates were reported only at the end of the experiment to avoid giving subjects direct
information about the number of donors or how that number was changing from round to round,
since this information was not available in the discount treatment.) This treatment was meant to
reproduce the incentive effects and the externality effects of the priority condition without
affecting the allocation of B units. This treatment was run to investigate whether the priority rule
was changing behavior as a result of the incentives associated with creating a club good. The
rebate amounts were selected to be the expected value of receiving priority in the priority
condition of the experiment. The rebate consequently depended on the number of other donors
(just as the benefits of priority depend on the number of other donors and how many others in
need of B units also have priority). The rebate amounts were the expected benefit of having
priority given the probability of A unit and B unit failure in the experiment. The rebate was
weakly increasing and concave in the number of other donors in that round. Subjects received no
rebate if they were the only donor and received up to $0.46 if 10 or 11 other subjects in their
group were donors in that round.16 This meant that at the time of the donation decision, the
private incentives in the rebate condition matched the private expected value of the incentives in
the priority condition. Like being a donor in the priority condition (in which B units are more
likely to go to other donors) being a donor in the rebate condition had a relatively strong positive
externality on other donors, which distinguishes it from the discount condition.
Subjects were not told how many rounds they would play the game, but all subjects
played 15 rounds in one of the conditions followed by 16 rounds in another condition. All
subjects played the control condition either for the first 15 or last 16 rounds (36 subjects, in three
groups, played the control condition in all 31 rounds to test for a restart effect). After the first 15
rounds, subjects were informed that the rules of the game had changed and any changes in the
16

The expected value of receiving priority was calculated by simulating one million rounds of the game for each
number of donors from 1 to 12 and estimating the earnings of subjects who were given priority and those who were
not conditional for each number of donors. The rebate profile was: $0 for 0 other donors, $0.10 for 1 other donor,
$0.20 for 2 other donors, $0.28 for 3, $0.33 for 4, $0.37 for 5, $0.40 for 6, $0.42 for 7, $0.44 for 8, $0.45 for 9,
$0.46 for 10 or 11 other donors. Note that the return to donation is increasing in the number of other donors up to
11, reflecting that with these parameter choices there remains a shortage of kidneys even when all possible donors
are registered. (If there were excess kidneys, so that the queue was always empty, priority on the queue would no
longer be valuable.)

10

game were explained. Three groups of subjects who had played the first 15 rounds in the control
condition were stopped after round 15 and told that there were no changes in the rules of the
game. After round 30, all groups were interrupted and told that they would play the game one
final time (in the same condition they had been playing for the past 15 rounds). The number of
groups who played in each of the orderings of conditions is displayed in Table 2.

Table 2: Number of Groups (Subjects) in each order of conditions

Condition in
first set of rounds
(Round 1-15)

Condition in second set of rounds (Round 16-31)
Control

Priority

Rebate

Discount

Control

3 Groups (36 Ss) 8 Groups (96 Ss) 5 Groups (60 Ss) 4 Groups (48 Ss)

Priority

4 Groups (48 Ss)

Rebate

4 Groups (48 Ss)

No Groups

Discount 4 Groups (48 Ss)

After all rounds had been played, subjects were informed of which 4 rounds had been
randomly selected for payment and were informed of any rebate earnings in those rounds (if
subjects played in the rebate condition). All subjects were paid in cash at the end of the
experiment.

II. Results
The experimental results are from 384 subjects who participated in the experiment in 32
groups in one of 23 sessions in the Spring and Summer of 2009.17 Subjects were students at
Boston-area colleges and universities. The experiment lasted up to one and a half hours and
average earnings were $25.87 per subject, including a $10 show up fee. The experiment was
conducted using z-Tree 2.1.4 (Urs Fischbacher 2007).
Figure 1 displays the results across all sessions. The graph displays the percent of
subjects who were donors in each round of the game for each condition (again for exposition, we
17

Subjects played in groups of 12 in sessions of either 12 or 24 subjects. When two groups played simultaneously,
they received the same order of conditions so all instructions (except for the costs of donating, which differed
between subjects) could be read aloud.

11

will refer to registering as an organ donor as ―donating‖ or ―being a donor‖). The break in the
lines after round 15 represents the break in play during which groups may have been switched
into one of the other conditions. Twenty groups played in the control condition for the first 15
rounds of the experiment and then either switched to one of the three other treatment conditions
(17 groups) or stayed in the control condition (3 groups). The other twelve groups played one of
the three treatment conditions for the first 15 rounds and then switched to the control
condition for the last 16 rounds. Consequently, for the first 15 periods of the game the control
line represents the 20 groups who made donation decisions in the control condition—these
groups went on to all four of the conditions in the second 16 rounds. For the last 16 periods of
the game, the control line also represents the 15 groups who made donations in the control
condition (aggregated from the groups that, in the first 15 periods, were in any of the four
conditions).18

Figure 1: Share Donating by Round
1
0.9
0.8

Share Donating

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31

Round
Control

Priority

Discount

Rebate

18

There were no significant differences in donation in the control condition in the last 16 rounds of the experiment
between groups that played in the four different conditions in the first 15 rounds of the experiment.

12

Figure 1 suggests that the priority condition had a significant positive impact on donation
rates, starting in the first round in which it was implemented (either round 1 or round 16). In
round 1, organ donation rates averaged 83.3% for the priority condition and only 35% percent
for the control condition. In round 16, organ donation rates averaged 79.2% for the priority
condition and only 28.9% percent for the control condition. Averaging across the first 15 rounds
of the game, the priority condition averaged a donation rate of 74.2% while control condition
averaged a much lower donation rate of 35.9%. Over the last 16 rounds of the game, priority
averaged 54.0%, while control condition averaged a much lower donation rate of 22.3%. That
the donation rate in the priority condition is 2 to 2.5 times higher than the donation rate under the
control condition suggests a significant impact of the allocation rules on donation decisions. No
additional financial incentives were added to the donation decision, so the rule change increased
donations at no additional cost, simply providing incentives for the donors in terms of a higher
probability of receiving a B unit.
To investigate why the priority condition is so effective at increasing donation rates, we
ran two additional treatment conditions that provide some of the incentive effects of the priority
rule. Compared to the control condition, the priority condition provides an incentive to donate in
terms of an increased likelihood of getting a B unit when it is needed, and it provides a relatively
strong positive externality to other donors (since when a subject donates, other donors are more
likely to reap the benefits).
The rebate condition captures these two effects, providing the same direct incentives for
donating as the priority rule. The rebate condition directly replicates the extra earnings that
accrue to donors in the priority condition (in expectation) and replicates the relatively strong
positive externality on other donors (also in expectation). The rebate condition does not change
organ allocation, however, and so does not penalize non-donors with decreased access to B-units.
The discount condition only provides a decrease in cost for donors relative to the control
condition but does not provide positive externalities to other donors. The discount of $0.35
means that in each round donation is still costly, even for the subjects whose initial costs of

13

donation were only $0.40, although much less costly than the control condition. The discount is
provided to all donors but does not provide any positive externality to other donors.19
Figure 1 shows that the rebate and discount conditions perform differently in the first 15 periods
(when subjects play the treatment condition first) and the last 16 rounds (when subjects play the
control condition for the first 15 periods). In the first fifteen rounds of the game, the priority
condition generates significantly more contribution than the discount, rebate, and control
conditions. In addition, the discount condition generates significantly more contribution than the
rebate and control conditions (which cannot be ranked).20 When implemented in round 16 of the
game (after 15 rounds of the control condition), the priority, rebate and discount conditions all
have similar effects (and all outperform the control condition).21
That the priority condition performs so much better than the rebate condition when
implemented at the start of the experiment is particularly striking when we consider that the
rebate provides the same incentives as the priority rule and that the rebate does just as well as
priority after subjects have become familiar with the game (by playing 15 rounds in the control
condition). We want to avoid over-fitting the theory to our experimental data, but while we think
of the priority and rebate conditions as being essentially the same on the most relevant
dimensions, there are a number of small differences between the conditions that might explain
why the priority rule outperforms the rebate condition in round 1 of the game and not in round 16
(after the subjects have played 15 rounds in the control condition).
The private benefits of priority and the rebate condition depend on the number of other
donors in a given round, and subjects in the two conditions get different information about the
number of other donors over the course of the experiment. In the priority condition, subjects who
are donors in a given round are more likely to receive a B unit when they need one (and thus are
more likely to get information that others are donating while the experiment is still ongoing). In
the rebate condition, however, donors are no more likely than a non-donor to receive a B unit,
and rebates are only received at the end of the experiment, after all decisions have been made.
19

The two treatment conditions (rebate and discount) that involve a decrease in the costs of becoming an organ
donor should be seen as relative costs, since the psychological costs underlying the decision to become an organ
donor are hard to measure. The lesson from these treatments is that lowering costs has a significant, positive effect
on behavior.
20
Probit tests on donation rate (without additional controls) and with standard errors clustered by subject find over
the first 15 rounds that: Priority > Discount (p=0.015); Discount > Rebate (p=0.003); Rebate = Control (p=0.205).
21
Probit tests on donation rate (without additional controls) and with standard errors clustered by subject find no
differences between Priority, Discount and Rebate over rounds 16-31 (p>0.1 for all tests).

14

Thus, the positive reinforcement of receiving a B unit is likely to be more effective at
encouraging donors in the priority condition (where the B units are more likely to go donors,
who learn about them in a timely way) than in the rebate condition (where B units are not more
likely to go to donors, and rebates are only paid at the end).22 This difference in information is
most stark at the start of the game, since subjects without experience do not have any
information about the number of donors while subjects with 15 rounds of experience may have a
much better perception of the number of donors, since they have observed how often they
received a B unit when they needed one over the 15 rounds in the control condition for 15
rounds.
Of the mechanisms that we examined in the lab, the priority allocation rule is the most
effective at increasing organ donation rates when implemented at the start of the experiment and
it is as effective when implemented after subjects have become familiar with the game. In
addition, it is worth noting again that we can implement the priority rule outside of the lab, but
we do not know how to decrease the psychological costs of registering to be an organ donor.
Also, legal constraints prohibit the use monetary payments like cash rebates to compensate for
registering to be an organ donor. We will discuss these issues in the conclusion.
Table 3 demonstrates the results from Figure 1 in a regression analysis, estimating the
probability the subjects chose to be a donor in each of the conditions. In addition, Table 3
displays results about the between-subject effect of being a high cost donor. Finally, the random
failure of A and B units in each round allows for a more-in-depth analysis of the motivations for
being a donor across rounds.23
22

This is consistent with models of reinforcement learning such as those explored in Roth and Ido Erev (1995) and
Erev and Roth (1998).
23
Table 3 reports linear probability models using OLS regression specifications with robust standard errors clustered
at the subject level. The results are qualitatively the same whether we add session dummies, or cluster at the group
level, or cluster by round. The results are also qualitatively the same if we include subject dummies (although this
specification prevents estimation of between-subject variables that do not change over the course of the experiment,
like the effect of having a high cost of donating). In addition, the results are qualitatively the same when we specify
Probit rather than a linear probability model. While the linear probability model is inefficient, it is unbiased and we
use robust standard errors to address the heteroskedasticity of the error terms. In addition, none of our specifications
imply estimated probabilities less than 0 or greater than 1. The linear probability model is the primary specification
since the regressions are meant to demonstrate the differential average effects across the treatments and since Probit
specifications can introduce bias in estimates of interaction terms (see Chunrong Ai and Edward C. Norton 2003 for
an explanation of the bias and for a correction). We also estimated coefficients for each interaction using a Probit
specification and the correction proposed in Norton, Hua Wang and Ai (2004) and the coefficients are almost
identical to those estimated by the linear probability model (i.e. all coefficient estimates are quantitatively similar
and therefore we never estimate a different sign or a different level of significance from the linearly probability
model when using the corrected Probit).

15

The significant positive coefficients on Priority, Rebate, and Discount in regression (1)
show that across all 31 rounds, subjects are 14 to 31 percentage points more likely to donate
when they are in one of the three treatment conditions than in the control condition (representing
roughly 50% to 100% more donations than the 30% donation rate in the control condition),
results that are highly statistically significant. Including all of the rounds in the analysis in
regression (1), Priority outperforms Rebate (p<0.01) and Discount outperforms Rebate
(p=0.017), but Priority and Discount are statistically indistinguishable (p=0.254).
Regression (2) separates the effect of the treatment into the first half and the second half
by including a control Second Half that is equal to 1 in rounds 16 to 31 and is interacted with the
treatment conditions. Donation is about 14% less likely in the second half of the experiment
(Second Half is negative and significant). The positive coefficient on Second Half*Rebate
represents the Rebate condition working particularly well in the second half of the experiment,
after subjects have experience with the game from playing in the Control condition for 15
rounds. Using estimates from regression (2), we find that Priority outperforms Discount and
Rebate in the first 15 rounds of the experiment but the three are indistinguishable in the second
half of the experiment.
Regression (3) additionally controls for whether the subjects had randomly been assigned
the high cost of donating ($0.80) rather than the low cost ($0.40). The coefficient on High Cost is
negative and significant, suggesting that facing a donation cost that is $0.40 lower makes
subjects 6% more likely to donate.24 The variable High Cost is also interacted with all three
treatment conditions. The only significant coefficient on these interaction terms are for the
Discount condition, which suggests that the Discount condition had a more significant impact on
the low cost donors than on high cost donors. The Discount condition may have been particularly
appealing for the low cost donors since the discount decreased the cost of donation to only $0.05
each round for the low cost donors.

24

The estimate of 6% for the between-subject effect of lower costs is small relative to the within-subject effect of
26%, as estimated in regression (1) that results from a $0.35 discount being implemented. This difference may be
due to a difference in information. Subjects have only private information about own donation costs but information
about the discount is made publicly, so subjects may infer changes in the donation behavior of others that reinforces
their own donation decisions.

16

Table 3: Donation by Condition
(1)
Priority
Rebate
Discount

Linear Probability Model (OLS)
(2)
(3)

0.306
(0.029)***
0.143
(0.030)***
0.255
(0.034)***

Second Half
Second Half*Priority
Second Half*Rebate
Second Half*Discount

0.383
(0.041)***
0.062
(0.050)
0.249
(0.045)***
-0.136
(0.028)***
-0.066
(0.066)
0.172
(0.081)**
0.030
(0.077)

High Cost
High Cost*Priority
High Cost*Rebate
High Cost*Discount

0.395
(0.048)***
0.083
(0.058)
0.327
(0.055)***
-0.136
(0.028)***
-0.066
(0.065)
0.172
(0.081)**
0.030
(0.073)
-0.062
(0.031)**
-0.025
(0.055)
-0.042
(0.060)
-0.155
(0.063)**

Recipient Last Time
Earnings Last Time
Earned from Receipt Last Time

Constant

Observations
R-squared

(4)

0.080
(0.059)
0.321
(0.057)***
-0.133
(0.028)***
0.000
0.000
0.169
(0.081)**
0.032
(0.074)
-0.058
(0.031)*

-0.046
(0.061)
-0.158
(0.064)**
0.054
(0.019)***
0.005
(0.002)***
0.004
(0.004)

0.298
(0.016)***

0.359
(0.020)***

0.390
(0.025)***

0.359
(0.026)***

11904
0.07

11904
0.09

11904
0.1

9312
0.07

Robust standard errors, clustered by subject are in parentheses: * significant at 10%; ** significant
at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Independent Variables: Priority, Rebate and Discount are dummy variables representing the
treatment; Second Half is a dummy variable equal to 1 for rounds 16 to 31; High Cost is a dummy
variable equal to 1 if the potential donor faced the $0.80 cost rather than the $0.40 cost; Recipient
Last Time is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the subject received a B unit in the last round; Earnings
Last Time are earnings from the previous round (excluding the costs of donating); Earned from
receipt last time represent the earnigns associated with the receipt of a B unit in the previous
round.

17

Regression (4) investigates the role of receiving a B unit in this round on donation in the
following round. Receiving a B unit is the only way a subject can get positive information about
the donation decisions of other subjects (if his A unit fails first, he does not see any information
about the donations of others; if his B unit fails first and he never receives a B unit, he gets
negative information about the number of people in his group that are donating their B units).
Regression (4) excludes data from the Priority condition since the probability of getting a B unit
in that treatment is correlated with the decision to be a donor. The coefficient on Recipient Last
Time is positive and significant, suggesting that subjects are about 5% more likely to be a donor
when receiving a B unit in the previous round. The higher probability of donation after receiving
a B unit is driven in part by the positive news and in part due to the additional earnings of a
subject who receives a B unit, since higher earnings in a previous round increase the likelihood
of donating (Earnings Last Time is positive and significant). However, there is no additional
increase in the likelihood of donation when the earnings came after a B unit was needed and
received (Earned from Receipt Last Time is not significant).

III. Simple Model
The experimental results demonstrate that the priority rule implemented in the priority
condition had a significant positive impact on donation in the experiment. The priority rule
provides an incentive for registration as an organ donor within the organ allocation system. To
help interpret the effect of the priority rule, we develop a simple model to examine the
equilibrium impact of introducing this incentive and we conduct welfare analysis. Compared to
the game subjects played in the experiment, the model makes three simplifying assumptions for
analytical tractability.
First, the model collapses the game into two periods. The stochastic process by which A
units and B units fail in the experiment is complicated, but it is not essential to understanding the
effect of the priority rule. In the experiment, all subjects decide whether to donate before the first
period of each round and so their decisions are made before they have received any information
about the failure of their units or any information about their payouts. Thus, the stochastic
process allows subjects to observe the period-by-period outcomes that generate the final payoff
in the round, but each round has first a decision period followed by a payoff (accumulated over
potentially many periods as determined by the stochastic process and donation decisions of other
18

subjects). The model presented here collapses this into a two-period game. In the first period,
subjects simultaneously make donation decisions, and all payoffs are revealed in the second
period.
Second, we model the agents as a continuum rather than the 12-person groups used in the
experiment. Usually when making this leap we need to take into account that in a small group an
agent‘s contribution impacts his own payoff (while it does not in a continuum of agents). In our
setting, however, a subject can never give himself an organ. Consequently, in the laboratory
experiment, as in a continuum of agents, a subject who donates does not increase his likelihood
of getting a B unit by increasing the organ supply, while donation in the priority condition
increases priority in the continuum model as in the lab.
Third, the model assumes that all agents know the distribution of costs agents face for
donating. As will be discussed below, this cost collapses the direct cost of donating and any
altruism or positive feelings associated with making a donation, which means the cost can be
negative. In the laboratory experiment, subjects only know their own monetary cost of donating
($0.40 and $0.80 as randomly assigned by the experiment) and not the distribution of these costs
or any warm glow laboratory subjects might feel from donating.
To summarize, we model the decision to register as an organ donor as a two-period
game. In the first period, a continuum of agents decide whether to register as an organ donor. In
the second period, agents realize their health states, their organ outcomes (whether they receive
an organ if they need one), and their payoffs.
An agent‘s health state is either: (1) dead from brain death (and in a position to donate an
organ if the agent had registered as an organ donor), which occurs with probability

; (2) in

need of an organ (we assume that everyone who needs an organ needs only one), which occurs
with probability

; or (3) neither, which occurs with probability

. If an agent

is in need of an organ, he also realizes his organ outcome. He either: (1) receives an organ (for
simplicity all donated organs are treated as identical) or (2) does not receive an organ. The
number of organs made available by the brain death of an agent is , and the probability of
receiving an organ depends on the decisions of other agents in equilibrium.
The first part of the payoff is associated with an agent‘s health and organ outcome. This
part of the payoff is normalized to be 0 when the agent is in need of an organ and no organ is
received, and the payoff is normalized to be

when an agent is in need of an organ and
19

receives one. The assumption that all agents are homogeneous in their value of receiving an
organ is not necessary, and we will weaken the assumption when analyzing welfare. The payoffs
for all other states of the world are unrestricted, since they never enter the decision problem.
The second part of the payoff is the cost associated with registering as an organ donor,
which is additively separable from the payoffs from health and organ outcomes. Agents incur a
cost of registering as an organ donor that combines the direct costs of registering (for example,
fear of worse medical treatment or discomfort the agent feels from thinking about his own death)
with the benefits of being a donor (for example altruism or warm glow from registering as a
( ) where can be less

donor). We assume a continuum of agents with cost of donating
than 0 so that some agents get a private benefit from donating.

Baseline Case
In the baseline case organs are assigned randomly to anyone who needs one. There is no
incentive for an agent to register as an organ donor and the share of agents who become organ
donors in equilibrium depends only on their costs of registering as an organ donor. Only agents
with a cost c ≤ 0 choose to register as donors. There is no additional incentive to register as a
( ).

donor before priority is introduced, so
A

share of agents end up needing organs and a share

and are in a position to donate

of agents suffer from brain death

organs each, but only if they have previously registered as an

organ donor. Since the share of registered donors is ( ), the equilibrium probability of
receiving a kidney conditional on needing one is
Notice that when

( ) then

{

( ) }.

, so all agents who need an organ receive one.

To model an environment like the one in the U.S. today, where there is excess demand for
organs, we assume in all that follows that

( ), so that not enough organs are provided in

the equilibrium without a priority rule or some other intervention.

Priority for registered donors
With the introduction of a donor-priority rule there is a benefit to registering as an organ
donor. Under a donor-priority rule, agents who have registered as donors get priority for any
available organs, and those who are not registered donors only receive an organ if all registered

20

donors who need an organ receive one. (If there are not enough organs for all agents in a priority
group, then any available organs are assigned randomly among members of that priority group.)
The priority and rebate conditions of the experiment mirror the case of donor-priority in
the model in that being an organ donor generates an incentive that is a function of the number of
other donors. In the priority condition, being a donor increases the likelihood of receiving an
organ when one is needed. In the rebate condition, being a donor generates a cash benefit
equivalent to the expected value of having priority in the priority condition.25
It should be noted that if ( )

, so that no agents have a cost of contribution of 0 or

less, then there is always an equilibrium in which no one registers as a donor, even under a
donor-priority rule. This equilibrium exists since an agent can never give an organ to himself, so
there is no donor-priority benefit to being the only registered organ donor. Notice that this does
not result from assuming a continuum of agents; even with a finite number of agents, an agent
can never donate an organ to himself. Consequently, we focus on the case ( )

, so that at

least some agents prefer to register as an organ donor even without donor priority and the noregistration equilibrium does not exist. This assumption mirrors the data in our experiment, in
which agents registered as donors even in the control condition, and the data for organ donation
in the U.S., where 37% of eligible adults are registered as organ donors in the absence of a
donor-priority rule.
We define the probability that a registered donor who needs an organ gets one as
Under the donor-priority rule, with ( )

,

is
{

where

.

}

can now be interpreted as the share of registered donors who need organs (which is of

course the same as the share of the general population).
We look for a cutoff equilibrium in the cost space, where

is defined as the cost at

which agents are indifferent between registering as an organ donor and not registering. All
agents with

choose to register and all agents with

choose not to register. Agents

who do not register do not get priority and, if they need an organ, receive one with probability

25

As noted above, the experiment has many periods within each round that are collapsed into one payoff period in
the model.

21

, which is the share of remaining organs (

) ( ) divided by the share of agents who are
( )) or

not registered donors but are in need of an organ (
{
Note that

if

{

(

) ( )
( ))

(

}}

, since all the donated organs are going to registered donors who

ended up needing an organ. Equilibrium requires that
[
so that the agent who has cost

( ( ))

( ( ))]

is indifferent between not registering, which generates no cost

and no benefit from registering, or registering, which generates a cost

and increases an agent's

probability of receiving an organ (and thus increases the probability of a payout of V) by
[

] where

is the probability of needing an organ and

is the increase in

probability of receiving the organ with priority.
Notice that the equilibrium depends on whether agents who are not registered donors ever
get an organ in equilibrium, this is equivalent to whether
the ―production-need ratio‖ of organs. When

or

. We can think of

as

, registered donors who suffer brain death

produce enough organs to supply organs to all the registered donors who need organs and some
organs go to people who are not registered donors.
When
one (unless

then

, so not all registered donors receive an organ when they need

). In this case,

So agents contribute when they have
contribute is (

[

. Thus equilibrium requires

]

and in equilibrium the share of agents who

). Notice that if (

)

( ), then there are more donors under the donor-

priority rule than in the baseline case. Donor priority introduces a positive incentive for
registering as a donor in the form of a higher likelihood of receiving an organ if it is needed,
which encourages donation.
When

, all registered donors who need an organ receive one and there are organs

available for some non-registered agents as well. In this case,
(since we have assumed that

( ), which rules out

and

(
(

) ( )
( ))

). This means that in

equilibrium
22

(

[

(

) ( )
]
( ))

which implies that
( )
This condition defines

and implies that F( ) < 1 (since

agents register as organ donors. Consequently,
is ruled out by the assumption that ( )

since
The

and

in this case), so not all
. We can see that

.

case demonstrates the countervailing forces to register as a donor present

under the donor-priority rule. First, there is an incentive for individuals to register as a donor in
the form of a higher likelihood of receiving an organ if it is needed, which encourages donation.
Second, there is a countervailing force in that the extra donors generated by the priority rule are
producing more organs for those who are not registered donors, so as more people register or
more organs are provided, the chance of getting an organ when not registered increases.26
Depending on the ―production-need ratio‖ of organs, the share of agents who are
registered as organ donors is given by
(

)

( )

26

While not described in detail here, the model makes possible comparative static analysis on the number of donors
that identifies differences between the donor-priority allocation rule and the current allocation rule without priority.
Under the donor-priority rule, the number of donor registrations responds to increased success in recovering organs
by increasing until enough organs are recovered that those without priority also have positive probability of
receiving an organ, after which it decreases. The number of organ registrations also increases in response to an
increase in the rate of organ failure, until so many organs are failing that all organs go to registered donors, after
which there is no change in the donation rate as the organ failure rate continues to rise. Finally, as the value of
transplantation compared to non-transplantation increases (e.g. through better surgical techniques that promise
longer survival of the transplanted organ), so does the rate of donation under the donor-priority rule. In contrast,
under the rule without priority, the registration rate does not vary in response to the recovery rate, the incidence of
disease, or the increased benefit of transplantation. While not modeled here, it is possible that the ―warm glow‖ that
some part of the population feels from the decision to register as a donor may respond to these changes in
parameters under both a donor-priority rule or in the baseline case.

23

The effect of decreased costs
A decrease in the cost of donation, as implemented in the experiment in the discount
condition, serves to decrease the cost for all agents. This change in the cost of donation would
increase the share of agents who register as donors by increasing the share of agents who have
negative costs.
For example, if the distribution of original costs
generate a net cost of donation of

( ), then a decrease in costs of

. Now, donors who have an original cost of

are

willing to register, leading to a share of agents ( ) who register as donors, which generates
( ) kidneys. If ( )

( ) then the decrease in costs increases the probability an agent
{

receives an organ if one is needed from

( ) } to

{

( ) }.

Welfare Analysis
The model as formulated above allows for a welfare analysis of different policies that
affect the number of organ donors. A social planner interested in maximizing the sum of welfare
of the continuum of agents is concerned with the welfare benefit of receiving a kidney, V,
weighted by the probability that it is needed and received, and the welfare cost associated with
being a deceased organ donor, c, which may be negative. Total welfare can be written as the sum
of these two terms:
( )
where

and

[

( )

(

( ))]

[

( )] ( )

are again the probabilities that registered donor and non-registered donors

(respectively) receive an organ if they need one. Again
register as organ donors and those with

is the cutoff cost such that those with

do not. The first term is the benefit of

receiving an organ when it is needed and the second term is the expected cost of registering as a
donor multiplied by the share of the population that registers. The first term calculates the
probability of receiving an organ as the sum of the probability of getting an organ when
registered as a donor,

, times the share of agents who are registered donors ( ) plus the

probability of getting an organ when not registered as a donor,
are not registered donors

, times the share of agents who

( ).

24

Welfare in the baseline case
( ) and

Without a donor-priority rule,
[

( )] ( )

( )]

[

[

( )

so welfare simplifies to

( )] ( )

[

( )] ( )

Since the only people who register as donors when there is no donor-priority rule are
those who have a negative cost of donation,

if ( )

and

.

Welfare with donor priority
With a donor-priority rule, both the cases above generate welfare with the same general
form. As noted above, when

then

, so (unless

receive an organ when they need one. In this case,
[
Alternatively, when

(

) not all registered donors

,

)]

, and welfare is

[

] (

)

, all registered donors who need an organ receive one and

there are organs available for some non-registered donors as well. In this case,
(
(

) ( )
( ))

[

,

(

) ( )
],
( ))

(

and ( )

(

[ ( )

) ( )
(

( ))

,

, so welfare is therefore
(

( ))]

[

] ( )

Notice that welfare in both cases simplifies to the same form, where
[
and

or

[

(
(

) ( )
],
( ))

( )]

[

] ( )

depending on the case.

In addition we can compare welfare under a donor-priority rule to welfare in the baseline
case. We rewrite welfare under a donor-priority rule
[

( )

( ( )

( ))]

[

as as
] ( )

[

][ ( )

( )]

which implies that
(

[

])[ ( )

( )]

Essentially, the change welfare associated with switching from the baseline case to a
donor-priority rule is the share of donors induced to donate by the priority rule ( )

( )
25

times the difference of the expected benefit from each additional organ donor,
average cost of donation for these new donors [
respect to

, and the

]. While the two cases (with

) are different, the welfare gain is never negative since the cost of a marginal donor

is never greater than the benefit from donating. Welfare is strictly increased whenever there is a
positive measure ( )

( ) of new donors.

The welfare change associated with introducing a donor-priority rule when
thus

and

is weakly positive. We can see this by noting that (in this case) the donors with

the highest cost of donation,

, incur a cost that is equal to the benefit that they create in

extra organs. Any agents who have c in the range

generate a net welfare gain by

choosing to become donors. Consequently, the welfare gain of the priority rule
so long as at there are agents with in the range
When

, however,

arising from the condition that
when

than when

[

(
(

.
) ( )
]
( ))

, with the last inequality

. This means that fewer people are donors in equilibrium
. This decrease in share of donors arises from the weakening of

incentives associated with having priority when

In this case, some non-donors get

organs, which decreases the benefit of priority. Thus, the highest cost incurred by a donor in this
case is below the expected benefit created by their donation. Thus
( )

( ), whenever the are agents with c in the range

whenever
.

Welfare with decreased costs
There are two ways that the social planner can decrease costs: by somehow manipulating
the underlying distribution of ( ) or by providing transfers that decrease the net costs of
contributing.
If the social planner can directly decrease the costs of donation by manipulating ( ) say
by increasing the warm glow from giving or alleviating psychological costs of contribution, she
can increase welfare by doing so. A decrease in the costs of donation for all agents: makes all
previous donors better off by making previously negative costs more negative, makes some

26

previously positive costs negative getting new agents to donate, and makes some agents better
off because they receive the organs generated by the new donors.
If instead agents‘ costs of donation are lowered through transfers (and assuming there is
not a cost of raising the revenue for the transfers or a cost of implementing them) the welfare
benefit of decreasing the costs of donation is a function of the number of new organs created
minus the added costs for new donors. We can compare welfare under the first-best transfer with
welfare under the donor-priority rule.
If

, the optimal transfer will achieve organ donor registration from anyone who has
(i.e. a cost less than or equal to the expected benefit of the organs the registered donor

creates). So the optimal decrease in costs is

. Notice that in this case, the donor-priority

rule achieves the same first best outcome as the optimal transfer policy. If
expected benefit of generating a new donor is

until a share of agents

, then the
is donating such that

, which implies that everyone is getting a kidney who needs one (and so new donors do
not increase welfare). Consequently, to maximize welfare the social planner wants to induce
everyone to enter who has
and ( )

or

so long as ( )
and ( )

. The social planner sets

such that

. Notice that in this case, the social planner

can achieve the first best with a transfer while the donor-priority rule generates fewer donors
than is optimal, since some non-donors get organs from donors, which weakens the incentive of
having priority.

Welfare with value priority
The donor-priority rule uses organ allocation to create an incentive for organ donation.
However, there are other ways one might use organ allocation to increase welfare. One proposal
is to assign deceased donor organs to maximize expected life years of the recipients rather than
to purely satisfy a first-come-first-served allocation procedure (Organ Procurement and
Transplantation Network 2011).
To demonstrate the relative benefit of a donor-priority rule and a policy that allocates
deceased donor organs to those who value them the most (a value-priority rule) we need to
introduce heterogeneity in the value of receiving an organ into the model. We do this simply by
assuming there are two types of agents, those who have a high value from receiving an organ
27

and those who have a low value

. The difference in value for an organ can derive from

agents being at different ages or different quality of health when the need for an organ arises. We
call

the share of the population that has

(

and redefine

)

to be the

average value of receiving an organ (the expected value of receiving an organ before an agent
knows his type).
To make the contrast between donor priority and value priority most stark, we assume
that agents do not know their value when they make their organ donation decision (otherwise,
those who have a high value for organs would get a larger expected benefit from donation under
a donor-priority rule and donor-priority would work to achieve sorting on value as well).
We compare the welfare under the donor-priority rule with welfare under a value-priority
rule and look for conditions when one outperforms the other. We have already solved for welfare
under a donor-priority rule, since it does not distinguish between high and low value recipients,
we can treat each organ as having its expected value
[
where

when

( )]
(

[

and

[
(

] ( )
) ( )
]
( ))

when
( )

Welfare under a value-priority rule depends on whether
( )

high value types or whether

.
, so all organs go to

, so some organs go to low value types. We can solve

for welfare in each case:
( )

( )

[

( )

[

( )

] ( )
]

[

] ( )

We look for the conditions under which the donor-priority rule outperforms the valuepriority rule in each of the cases. We start first with

( )

. We can see that

( )

( )

[

] ( )

( )

[

] ( )

Which simplifies to
(

[

])

[ ( )

( )]
( )

and can be rewritten as
( )

28

This result demonstrates that donor priority outperforms value priority as long as the high
value,

, is not too much larger than the average value, .
( )

We can now investigate the case where

. We can see that

( )

[

( )]

[

] ( )

[

( )

]

[

] ( )

Which simplifies to
(

[

])

[ ( )

( )]
(
( )

)

and can be rewritten as
( )

(

)

or as
( )
Which shows that donor priority outperforms value priority as long as the average value,
V, is not too much larger than the low value,

.

Again depending on the parameters of the model, the donor-priority rule or the valuepriority rule will be optimal. The basic tradeoff is that a donor priority rule produces more
organs, but does not necessarily allocate them to the recipients who would gain the most from
them.
One could also imagine taking advantage of both donor status and value in organ
allocation. For example, organs could be assigned first based on donor status and then, within a
priority class, based on value; or, organs could be assigned first based on value and then based
on donor status within a priority class. While we do not formally address these cases, they would
further leverage allocation policy to enhance welfare.

Experimental Parameters
Our experimental game has the same structure as the 2-period model outlined above.
Subjects make registration decisions in period 1 and then payoffs are revealed. However, the
payoff ―period‖ has a more complicated structure and occurs over a number of periods instead of
one. In our experiment, payoffs are generated by a stochastic process in which subjects suffer
from B-unit failure with a 20% probability in each period and suffer brain death with a 10%
29

probability in each period. Rather than collect and distribute all organs simultaneously, we
introduce more complicated timing and allow subjects who have B-unit failure to survive for up
to 5 periods without a B unit, during which time they may receive a B-unit and earn a stochastic
payoff that is a function of the number of periods they survive after that.
Since the payoffs in the game are complicated, it is most useful to simulate the payoffs
associated with priority. Figure 2 shows the expected benefit of receiving priority under the
priority rule for different parameter values (based on 10 million simulations of each number of
other donors for each set of parameters). The parameter values vary the probability of A-unit and
B-unit failure for groups of 12 players who each have two B units available for donation when
they suffer A-unit failure.

Figure 2: Rebate Profiles
$0.50
$0.45

A=0.1; B=0.2

$0.40
$0.35

A=0.1; B=0.1

$0.30
$0.25

A=0.2; B=0.2

$0.20
$0.15
$0.10

A=0.2; B=0.1

$0.05

$0.00
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Number of Other Registered Donors in Group of 12

The top-most rebate profile is the benefit of having priority with the parameters actually
used in the experiment. Notice that the benefit to having priority is increasing with the number of
other donors and that even when all 11 other players are registered donors, there is still a
30

significant benefit to having priority. One can interpret this feature of our payoffs as suggesting
that there is a significant waiting list for organs (and so there is always a benefit to having
priority). Notice that while the payoff structure in our experiment guarantees that under a priority
rule, a subject who is not a donor cannot get a B unit in a period when a subject who is a donor
needs but does not receive one. However, the payoffs in the experiment are more complicated
than in the model, which is a simplified version of both the experimental game and actual
decisions to donate. Consequently, the rebate profiles in Figure 2 representing the benefit of
priority collapse the benefits and costs and simply represent the benefit of priority, which is most
similar to the value in the model of
[

( ( ))

( ( ))]

The functions in Figure 2 demonstrate the benefit to priority under different parameter
values, which make the probability of brain death relatively higher (similar to increasing ) or
the probability of organ failure lower (similar to decreasing ) or both.27
If the only costs the subjects face for registering as a donor in the experiment are the
financial costs imposed in the experiment (and if subjects do not have altruistic or warm glow
motive for donating) then in our experiment the only equilibrium of the game is for no one to
register as a donor, even under the priority and rebate rules. Each group of 12 subjects had 6
subjects who had a donation cost of $0.40 and 6 subjects who had a donation cost of $0.80. Since
the expected benefit of priority when 5 other subjects are contributing is only $0.38, there is no
equilibrium in which these 6 low-cost subjects all contribute. However, we see many subjects
registering as a donor even without priority, suggesting that there may be altruism or warm glow
associated with the decision to register as a donor. In the case of heterogeneous costs, in which
some agents contribute in the absence of a priority rule, we expect priority and the rebate
conditions to generate more contribution than the control condition in equilibrium, which is what
we observe in the experimental data.

Lifesharers
27

In the three functions that lie below the rebate profile used in the experiment, the benefit to priority peaks in the
interior, so while there is always a positive benefit of priority, it is not always increasing in the number of other
donors. While the model assumed a distribution of costs of registering as an organ donor, if all subjects had a
common cost of registering as an organ donor, there would be certain common costs at which a mixed strategy
equilibrium would exist in which only some agents registered as organ donors and everyone was indifferent between
not getting priority and incurring the cost of registering in order to get priority.

31

With the model providing intuition about behavior with and without priority rules, we can
consider other proposals similar to the donor-priority rule discussed here. For example, the
Lifesharers club has formed in the United States to provide priority-type incentives for
registering as a donor and joining the Lifesharers club. Individuals who join Lifesharers and
register as organ donors commit to directing their deceased organs to other members of
Lifesharers who might need them.
Notice that if the existence of the Lifesharers club were widely known and if registering
as an organ donor automatically registered an individual in Lifesharers at no cost, the club would
replicate the donor-priority rule discussed here. However, the existence of the Lifesharers club is
not widely known, and while there is no financial cost to joining the club, there may still be a
cost of informing your next of kin that you are a member of the club (and that they will inherit
the task of enforcing your wishes to have your organs be offered first to other members of
Lifesharers) or similar psychological costs to joining Lifesharers as with registering as an organ
donor. As soon as there is an additional cost of joining Lifesharers, there is an equilibrium at
which no one joins, since there is no benefit to being the only member of Lifesharers (and little
benefit to being one of few members). Introducing a priority system nationally eliminates this
non-participation equilibrium, since registering as a donor in a national donor-priority system
provides priority access to the organs provided by all those people who chose to register as
donors together with all the additional unregistered donors whose next of kin decide to donate
their organs.

IV. Discussion
The donor-priority rule significantly increased registration rates for organ donation in our
experiment. When implemented at the start of the game, the priority rule was more effective at
increasing donation rates than either the rebate or the discount. When implemented after subjects
were familiar with the game, the increase in registration rates generated by the priority rule was
also achieved by the discount that directly decreased the costs of donation and by the rebate that
provided the same incentive for registration as the priority rule, and the same positive
externalities to other donors, in expectation.
The rules for allocating deceased donor organs present a complex problem, because they
determine not merely who receives the next available organ, but may also influence how many
32

organs become available, by influencing the decisions of potential donors. As in other areas of
market design involved with exploring incremental improvements to complicated existing
institutions, it is necessary to think about how any proposed change will interact with existing
rules and procedures (cf. Roth 2002, 2008). One reason this paper focuses on donor-priority rules
is that we think that these might fit well with the existing legal and procedural institutions.
In this respect it is worth noting that there are other ways to change policy that could
increase the number of registered organ donors. For example, one proposal that has received a
good deal of attention would change the current ―opt in‖ registration method used in the United
States to an ―opt out‖ system in which everyone is presumed to be a donor unless he or she
actively indicates otherwise.28 Another proposal, ―mandated choice‖ would require everyone
(e.g. who applies for a driver‘s license) to specifically indicate whether they wished to be a donor
or not. We want to briefly argue here that the priority rule that we consider may create a more
direct link between registration as an organ donor and subsequent successful organ recovery and
transplantation than policies that change the procedure by which individuals register as organ
donors.
Attempts to increase organ donation rates by changing the default organ registration
status (and adopting an ―opt out‖ policy) would surely generate more organ donor registrations,
since those who do not take any explicit action would automatically be registered as donors (see
Eric J. Johnson and Daniel G. Goldstein 2003, 2004, who find direct evidence that registration
rates are higher with an ―opt out‖ system).29 However, such a policy may weaken the link
between the registration decision and the legal clarity of the potential donors‘ last wishes. Under
current United States gift law, changing the default status is likely to have legal consequences
that could be detrimental to organ retrieval.
Since the Uniform Anatomical Gift Act of 1968 (UAGA), an individual can make his or
her own legally binding decision to be an organ donor after death, which does not require the

28

Switching to an ―opt out‖ system might not be easy, as shown by the so-far-failed attempt to do so in Britain. In
2008, senior British politicians supported changing British organ donation registration from an ―opt in‖ to an ―opt
out‖ system, but faced considerable opposition (http://marketdesigner.blogspot.com/2008/11/british-organ-donationopt-in-versus.html). Sheila M. Bird and John Harris (2010) report on the continued effort to change the system.
Similarly, in a speech announcing a new organ donor registry in California, Governor Schwarzenegger said an opt
out system had been suggested to him, but that an opt-out system was not plausible due to constitutional concerns
(http://gov.ca.gov/speech/16126/).
29
Manipulation of defaults in choice situations has been shown to be a powerful force in changing behavior in many
settings (see Shlomo Benartzi and Richard H. Thaler 2007 and Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein 2008).

33

consent of next of kin (Alexandra K. Glazier 2009). However, a donor symbol on a driver‘s
license has not been considered sufficient evidence of the deceased‘s intent to donate to proceed
without permission from the next of kin. Aside from the fact that the driver‘s license is often not
available in a timely way, the law allowed that a registered donor could have changed his or her
mind about donation subsequent to the issuance of the driver‘s license (Glazier 2006).
In recent years, computer registries have allowed for fast checks of organ registration
status. They also provide individuals with a way to easily change their organ donor status online,
which allows the presence in the registry to be interpreted as intent to donate. The legal status of
the anatomical gift has meant doctors can recover donated organs without receiving explicit
permission the next of kin (see Glazier 2006). In contrast, a donor registration that does not
reflect a positive decision to donate (as under an ―opt out‖ policy) might not be taken as evidence
of the deceased‘s intent in the legally compelling way that registration is currently. Under an opt
out policy, approval from next of kin might again become necessary for an organ to be
transplanted.30
A ―mandated choice‖ system would also change the way in which individuals became
registered donors (see Thaler and Sunstein 2008 and Thaler 2009). Under ―mandated choice,‖
every individual who registered for a driver‘s license (or potentially other state or federal
documentation) would be required to indicate that he will be an organ donor or that he will not.
While there is suggestive evidence that a ―mandated choice‖ policy would (like ―opt out‖)
generate more registration of organ donors (Johnson and Goldstein 2003, 2004), similar concerns
arise about whether a change to mandated choice would lead to more donated organs and
transplants. While the UAGA makes registering to be a donor legally binding under an ―opt in‖
policy, failing to register as an organ donor is not a legally binding decision, whereas registering
as a person who declines to donate could be legally binding on the next of kin.31 Discussions
with the staff at the New England Organ Bank suggests that they are able to recover organs from

30

In addition to finding high rates of willingness to register in a survey of potential organ donors, Johnson and
Goldstein (2003, 2004) also suggest that more organs are recovered and transplanted in European countries that have
―opt out‖ systems. Bruno Deffains and Jean Mercier Ythier (2010) argue, on the other hand, that the success of
organ recovery rates in Spain (which has the highest recovery rates in Europe) is not due to the ―opt out‖ system but
to the way in which the Spanish transplant system has professionalized the harvesting of organs, by specialists who
do nothing else. See also Kieran Healy (2006).
31
Mandated choices could of course be framed so that a negative decision was merely recorded as a decision ―not to
register as a donor at this time,‖ but even this less binding formulation might inform next of kin‘s beliefs about the
deceased‘s intentions and wishes.

34

about half of all non-registered potential donors in New England by approaching next of kin.
This means that more than half of the people who are not currently registered under ―opt in‖
would need to choose ―yes‖ in mandated choice to increase the recovery rate. Consequently, it
remains an empirical question whether a change to ―mandated choice‖ would generate more
organ transplants.
Even though registration under ―opt out‖ and ―mandated choice‖ systems may raise legal
concerns about the intent of registrants under the UAGA, changing the procedure by which
individuals register as donors may still be a fruitful avenue to pursue to increase organ donation
and recovery.32 Gift laws can also potentially be changed to address any legal concerns that
might arise from new policies. We simply see these legal issues as additional hurdles to monitor
and overcome in successfully implementing a change in registration policy. One attraction of the
donor-priority rule is that it seems to avoid these particular hurdles since it preserves the current
donor registration process as is (and thus is consistent with current United States law regarding
donor intent at time of death).
Although changing priority rules would involve a regulatory rather than a legislative
process, a change such as we consider here would nevertheless involve substantial debate and
principled opposition. Much of the opposition would likely have to do with thinking of priorities
as reflecting justified claims. For example, we would not feel that a serial killer serving a life
sentence who happens to be a registered donor would have a more justified claim to a scarce
organ than an exemplary citizen who happened not to be registered as a donor. And, under a
donor-priority system, there would likely be opposition if there were disparity across groups in
the opportunity to register and receive priority.
While comparing the different mechanisms in our experiment, the priority rule, rebate,
and discount all generate an incentive to donate that offsets the costs of donation. But the priority
rule has an advantage over the rebate and discount, namely priority rule seems feasible and can
be implemented without any additional costs to the system. In contrast, decreasing the costs of
registering to be an organ donor may be difficult (both to understand the costs and to decrease
them) and decreasing net costs through monetary incentives is not currently allowed by the U.S.
National Organ Transplant Act and by similar legislation in many countries.
32

Some of the U.S. states have been pursuing these avenues independently. In New York, a discussion has recently
begun about the potential to switch to an opt out system (see http://www.dailynews.com/news/ci_14970110) and
Illinois has had a mandated choice system in place since 2006 (see Thaler 2009).

35

Decreasing the costs of registering to be a donor is a particular challenge in part because
the costs are hard to identify. Since the physical removal of the organs only occurs after death
and since the monetary costs are not borne by the donor‘s estate, it is unlikely that the costs are
physical or monetary. Additionally, the costs appear to be more substantial than transaction
costs, since registering to be an organ donor in most states only requires checking a box at the
time of receiving a driver‘s license (and the registration rates remain low while the benefits to
others are substantial). These facts suggest that the costs of registering to be an organ donor are
most likely psychological costs.
The psychological costs may involve fear of improper medical treatment if registered as
an organ donor. A national survey of 5,100 adults conducted in January 2010 on behalf of
Donate Life America found that 52% of survey respondents believe doctors will try less hard to
save them and 61% of survey respondents believed they might have their organs removed when
they might still come back to life.33 (We have not seen evidence consistent with these beliefs, but
regardless of whether this is properly labeled as a ―psychological‖ cost, it is a cost that seems
difficult or impossible to decrease. For example, attempts to dispel such beliefs about worse
medical treatment of organ donors may only serve to strengthen it or introduce it into the minds
of others). In addition, deciding to be an organ donor requires an individual to think about his
own death, which may itself generate psychological costs. It remains unclear how these costs can
be effectively lowered. While future research should certainly investigate the costs to registering
to be an organ donor and how policies aimed at decreasing these costs might work, allocation
policy that implements a priority rule is likely to increase registration rates, even with the current
costs in place.34
Care must always be taken in extrapolating experimental results to complex
environments outside the lab, and caution is particularly called for when the lab setting abstracts
away from important but intangible issues, as we do here. However the difficulty of performing
comparable experiments or comparisons outside of the lab makes it sensible to look to simple
experiments to generate hypotheses about organ donation policies. The results of our experiment
33

Based on the Donate Life America National Donor Designation Report Card 2010.
Changes in allocation policy may have additional benefits beyond the incentives of higher priority in motivating
individuals to register as donors. Contracts between agents have been shown to establish social norms that can lead
to more prosocial behavior (Judd B. Kessler and Leider 2011). By providing a benefit (in terms of higher priority for
deceased donor organs) an allocation policy like the one in Singapore may act as an implicit contract, setting a social
norm of behavior at registering to be a donor.
34

36

lend support to the hypothesis that the priority rule used in Singapore and being introduced in
Israel is a potentially powerful policy tool. Results from this experiment suggest that it performs
as well as or better than discounts and rebates that are of a similar magnitude to the benefits of
priority, and that, along with other policies, it is a plausible mechanism to increase rates of
registration.
In conclusion, we note that many scarce resources are allocated via queues. One of the
things that makes organs for transplantation unusual in this respect is that the way the queues are
administered can influence the scarcity of the resource, by influencing donor decisions.

REFERENCES
Ahn, T.K., R. Mark Isaac, and Timothy C. Salmon. 2009. ―Coming and going: Experiments on
endogenous group sizes for excludable public goods.‖ Journal of Public Economics,
93(1-2): 336-351.
Ai, Chunrong and Edward C. Norton. 2003. ―Interaction terms in logit and probit models.‖
Economics Letters, 80(1): 123-129.
Ashlagi, Itai, Duncan S. Gilchrist, Alvin E. Roth, and Michael A. Rees. 2011. ―Nonsimultaneous
Chains and Dominos in Kidney Paired Donation – Revisited.‖ American Journal of
Transplantation, 11(5): 984-994.
Benartzi, Shlomo and Richard H. Thaler. 2007. ―Heuristics and Biases in Retirement Savings
Behavior.‖ Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(3): 81-104.
Bergstrom, Ted C., Rodney J. Garratt, and Damien Sheehan-Connor. 2009. ―One Chance in a
Million: Altruism and the Bone Marrow Registry.‖ American Economic Review, 99(4):
1309-1334.
Bergstrom, Ted C., Rodney J. Garratt, and Damien Sheehan-Connor. 2011. ―Stem Cell Donor
Matching for Patients of Mixed Race.‖ Unpublished.
http://escholarship.org/uc/item/22w466q9
Bird, Sheila M. and John Harris. 2010. ―Time to move to presumed consent for organ donation.‖
British Medical Journal, 340, May 8: 1010-1012.
Cinyabuguma, Matthias, Talbot Page, and Louis Putterman. 2005. ―Cooperation under the threat
of expulsion in a public goods experiment.‖ Journal of Public Economics, 89(8):
1421-1435.

37

Deffains, Bruno and Jean Mercier Ythier. 2010. ―Optimal production of transplant care
services.‖ Journal of Public Economics, 94(9-10): 638-653.
Donate Life America. 2010. National Donor Designation Report Card 2010. Richmond,
Virginia: Donate Life America.
Donate Life America. 2011. National Donor Designation Report Card 2011. Richmond,
Virginia: Donate Life America.
Erev, Ido and Alvin E. Roth. 1998. ―Predicting how people play games: Reinforcement learning
in experimental games with unique, mixed strategy equilibria.‖ American Economic
Review, 88(4): 848-881.
Fève, Frédérique, Anne Cambon-Thomsen, Jean-François Eliaou, Pierre-Antoine Gourraud,
Colette Raffoux, and Jean-Pierre Florens, ―Évaluation Économique de l‘Organisation
d‘un Registre de Donneurs de Cellules Souches Hématopoïétiques,‖ Revue
d’Épidèmiologie et de Santé Publique, 55, 4, 2007, 275-84.
Fève, Frédérique and Jean-Pierre Florens. 2005. ―Matching Models and Optimal Registry for
Voluntary Organ Donation Registries.‖ Unpublished.
Fischbacher, Urs. 2007. ―z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Ready-made Economic Experiments.‖
Experimental Economics, 10(2): 171-178.
Glazier, Alexandra K. 2006. ―Donor rights and registries.‖ Med Ethics, 13(1): 4.
Glazier, Alexandra K. 2009. ―A Gift For Life. Considerations on Organ Donation: America.‖
Transplantation, 88(7S): S131-132.
Healy, Kieran. 2006. ―Do Presumed Consent Laws Raise Organ Procurement Rates?‖ DePaul
Law Review, 55: 1017–1043.
Johnson, Eric J. and Daniel G. Goldstein. 2003. ―Do Defaults Save Lives?‖ Science, 302(5649):
1338-1339.
Johnson, Eric J. and Daniel G. Goldstein. 2004. ―Defaults and Donation Decisions.‖
Transplantation, 78(12): 1713-1716.
Kessler, Judd B. and Stephen Leider. 2011. ―Norms and Contracting.‖
Forthcoming at Management Science.
Lacetera, Nicola and Mario Macis. 2008. ―Social image concerns and prosocial behavior: Field
evidence from a nonlinear incentive scheme.‖ Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization, 76: 225–237.
Lacetera, Nicola, Mario Macis, and Robert Slonim. 2011. ―Will There Be Blood? Incentives and
38

Substitution Effects in Pro-Social Behavior.‖ Forthcoming at American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy.
Leider, Stephen and Alvin E. Roth. 2010. ―Kidneys for sale: Who disapproves, and
why?‖ American Journal of Transplantation, 10(5): 1221-1227.
Mellström, Carl and Magnus Johannesson. 2008. ―Crowding Out in Blood Donation: Was
Titmuss Right?‖ Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(4): 845-863.
Norton, Edward C., Hua Wang, Chunrong Ai. 2004. ―Computing interaction effects and standard
errors in logit and Probit models.‖ The Stata Joumal, 4(2): 154-167.
Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network (OPTN), ―Concepts for Kidney Allocation,‖
February 16, 2011, http://www.documentcloud.org/documents/70555-concepts-forrevising-kidney-allocation-system.html
Rees, Michael A., Jonathan E. Kopke, Ronald P. Pelletier, Dorry L. Segev, Matthew E. Rutter,
Alfredo J. Fabrega, Jeffrey Rogers, Oleh G. Pankewycz, Janet Hiller, Alvin E. Roth,
Tuomas Sandholm, Utku Ünver, and Robert A. Montgomery. 2009. ―A NonSimultaneous Extended Altruistic Donor Chain.‖ New England Journal of Medicine, 360(
11): 1096-1101.
Roth, Alvin E. 2002. ―The Economist as Engineer: Game Theory, Experimental Economics and
Computation as Tools of Design Economics.‖ Econometrica, 70(4): 1341-1378.
Roth, Alvin E. 2007. ―Repugnance as a constraint on markets.‖ Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 21(3): 37-58.
Roth, Alvin E. 2008. ―What have we learned from market design?‖ Economic
Journal, 118(March): 285-310.
Roth, Alvin E. and Ido Erev. 1995. ―Learning in Extensive-Form Games: Experimental Data and
Simple Dynamic Models in the Intermediate Term.‖ Games and Economic Behavior,
8(1): 164-212.
Roth, Alvin E., Tayfun Sönmez, and M. Utku Ünver. 2004. ―Kidney Exchange.‖ Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 119(2): 457-488.
Roth, Alvin E., Tayfun Sönmez, and M. Utku Ünver. 2005. ―A Kidney Exchange Clearinghouse
in New England.‖ American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 95(2): 376-380.
Roth, Alvin E., Tayfun Sönmez, and M. Utku Ünver. 2005. ―Pairwise Kidney
Exchange.‖ Journal of Economic Theory, 125(2): 151-188.
Roth, Alvin E., Tayfun Sönmez, M. Utku Ünver, Francis L. Delmonico, and Susan L. Saidman.
2006. ―Utilizing List Exchange and Undirected Good Samaritan Donation through
39

‗Chain‘ Paired Kidney Exchanges.‖ American Journal of Transplantation, 6(11): 26942705.
Roth, Alvin E., Tayfun Sönmez, and M. Utku Ünver. 2007. ―Efficient Kidney Exchange:
Coincidence of Wants in Markets with Compatibility-Based Preferences.‖ American
Economic Review, 97(3): 828-51.
Saidman, Susan L., Alvin E. Roth, Tayfun Sönmez, M. Utku Ünver, and Francis L. Delmonico.
2006. ―Increasing the Opportunity of Live Kidney Donation By Matching for Two and
Three Way Exchanges.‖ Transplantation, 81(5): 773-782.
Swope, Kurtis J. 2002. ―An Experimental Investigation of Excludable Public Goods,‖
Experimental Economics, 5(3): 209-222.
Thaler, Richard H. and Cass R. Sunstein. 2008. Nudge: improving decisions about health,
wealth, and happiness. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Thaler, Richard H. 2009. ―Opting in vs. Opting out.‖ The New York Times, September 26, 2009.
Titmuss, Richard M. 1970. The Gift Relationship. London: Allen and Unwin.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration,
Healthcare Systems Bureau, Division of Transplantation. 2009. 2009 Annual Report of
the U.S. Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network and the Scientific Registry of
Transplant Recipients: Transplant Data 1998-2008. Rockville, MD.
Wallis, C. Bradley, Kannan P. Samy, Alvin E. Roth, and Michael A. Rees. 2011. ―Kidney Paired
Donation,‖ Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation, 26 (7): 2091-2099
NEWS STORIES AND BLOGS MENTIONED BUT NOT CITED
http://www.dailynews.com/news/ci_14970110
http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601101&sid=ajgBoFtYJFKI
http://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/174514.php
http://marketdesigner.blogspot.com/search/label/chains
http://marketdesigner.blogspot.com/2008/11/british-organ-donation-opt-in-versus.html
LEGISLATION
Section 301, National Organ Transplant Act (NOTA), 42 U.S.C. 274e 1984
Human Organ Transplant Act: http://www.moh.gov.sg/mohcorp/legislations.aspx?id=1672
PROPOSED LEGISLATION
http://assembly.state.ny.us/leg/?default_fld=&bn=A09865&Summary=Y&Actions=Y&Text=Y

40

