                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        IMPLICIT GUARANTEES AND RISK TAKING:
                         EVIDENCE FROM MONEY MARKET FUNDS

                                         Marcin Kacperczyk
                                          Philipp Schnabl

                                        Working Paper 17321
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17321


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Marcin Kacperczyk and Philipp Schnabl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Implicit Guarantees and Risk Taking: Evidence from Money Market Funds
Marcin Kacperczyk and Philipp Schnabl
NBER Working Paper No. 17321
August 2011
JEL No. E44,E5,G01,G1,G11,G14,G2,G21,G32,G33

                                              ABSTRACT

A firm's termination generates bankruptcy costs. This may create incentives for a firm's owner to bail
out a firm in bankruptcy and to curb the firm's risk taking outside bankruptcy. We analyze the role
of such implicit guarantees in the context of financial institutions that sponsor money market mutual
funds. Our identification strategy exploits a large, exogenous expansion in risk-taking opportunities
of money market funds during the period of August 2007 to August 2008. We find that a fund's response
to the expansion depends on its sponsor's ability to provide implicit guarantees: Funds sponsored by
financial institutions with higher equity take on less risk than those sponsored by financial institutions
with lower equity. Moreover, fund sponsors with higher equity are more likely to provide financial
support to their funds during a market-wide run in September 2008. The difference in risk taking disappears
once implicit guarantees by fund sponsors are replaced with an explicit government guarantee. Overall,
our findings suggest that implicit guarantees may reduce, rather than increase, risk taking.


Marcin Kacperczyk
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
KMC 9-190
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
mkacperc@stern.nyu.edu

Philipp Schnabl
Leonard N. Stern School of Business
Kaufman Management Center
44 West 4th Street, Room 9-76
New York, NY 10012
schnabl@stern.nyu.edu
A firm’s termination generates bankruptcy costs. These bankruptcy costs can create incen-

tives for the firm’s owner, or third parties doing business with the firm, to bail out the firm if

bankruptcy looms. The expectation of such bailouts is often referred to as an implicit guarantee;

implicit, because the provider of the guarantee does not have to commit to bailing out the firm.

      Implicit guarantees can have important consequences for firms’ risk-taking decisions. From

a theoretical perspective, there are two opposing effects: On the one hand, the provider of the

guarantee may want to reduce risk taking to minimize the costs of a bailout. On the other

hand, the beneficiary of the guarantee may want to increase risk taking because the guarantee

provides protection on the downside. As a result, the overall impact of implicit guarantees on

risk taking is ambiguous and remains an empirical question—one that we address in this paper.

      Our research context is money market funds. Money market funds are mutual funds that

invest exclusively in short-term debt instruments. The most important characteristic of these

funds is that, contrary to other mutual funds, they use historical cost accounting, rather than

market value accounting, to assess the value of their holdings. The benefit of this valuation

approach is that money market funds can maintain a constant net asset value of $1 per share.

This allows them to sell demand deposits that are considered almost as safe as bank deposits

(or money) to outside investors. The downside of this valuation approach is that it exposes such

funds to self-fulfilling runs a la Diamond and Dybvig (1983): If investors expect the market

value of a fund’s holdings to drop below its amortized cost, they may all redeem their shares

at the same time, which can then trigger a drop in market value due to forced liquidation at

fire-sale prices.

      Implicit guarantees are the main mechanism used by money market funds to address the

threat of self-fulfilling runs. These guarantees are provided by a fund’s sponsoring financial

institution, also called a fund sponsor. Contrary to bank deposits, the guarantee is not ex-

plicit, that is, sponsors have no contractual obligation to support a fund, but there is a strong

expectation by fund investors that they do so.1 This implicit arrangement between sponsors
  1
    This expectation is evident in an investor alert by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA),
which states: ‘Typically, there has been an expectation that when a money market fund reaches a point where


                                                     1
and investors has served the money market fund industry remarkably well. From the start of

the first fund in October 1971 until September 2008, only one fund ever suffered a run.2 As

a result of the perceived safety, money market funds, also called “mutual funds for overnight

surpluses”, have grown to $3 trillion in assets under management by 2008. By comparison, in

2008 the entire U.S. equity mutual fund industry accounted for $3.7 trillion and the total value

of overnight bank deposits issued by the U.S. commercial banking sector equaled $4 trillion.

    Analyzing the effect of implicit guarantees on risk taking poses significant empirical chal-

lenges. First, by the very nature of being noncontractual, implicit guarantees are difficult to

observe and quantify. Second, a firm’s risk taking involves many different decisions, some of

which are hard to measure. Third, the provision of implicit guarantees might be endogenous

with respect to a firm’s risk taking. We believe the money market fund sector is an ideal setting

in which one can address these challenges. First, using data on sponsor’s capital, we can measure

the strength of implicit guarantees based on the ex-ante likelihood that a sponsor can provide

a guarantee if called upon. Second, risk taking is a central element of money market funds’

operations, the scope of which, in contrast to a regular corporate setting, we can quantify using

novel data on weekly fund portfolios and fund returns. Third, and most importantly, we can

use a natural experiment that allows us to use the cross-sectional variation in fund sponsors’

ability to provide implicit guarantees.

    Our natural experiment relies on a large, exogenous expansion in risk-taking opportunities of

money market funds. Money market fund regulation requires funds to invest solely in short-term

debt securities that satisfy strict safety criteria such as short maturity, high credit rating, and

sufficient liquidity. Before August 2007, as shown in Figure 1, the spread between the average

yield on eligible securities and that on Treasury Bills was at most 25 basis points, which made

the securities almost as safe as short-term government debt. At the same time, such a small

spread provided little scope for extra risk taking. However, starting in August 2007 the risk

it might break the buck, the investment management firm that sponsors the fund will take action to infuse the
fund with cash so that the fund can maintain a stable NAV of $1.00 per share.’ (FINRA (2010)).
   2
     In 1994, a small money market fund, Community Bankers Money Fund, broke the buck, that is, its net asset
value dropped below $1 down to 96 cents, because of its exposure to the Orange County bankruptcy.


                                                     2
of eligible securities increased because the collateral and liquidation values underlying money

market instruments deteriorated due to the U.S. subprime mortgage crisis. As a result, the

spread between the most risky eligible securities and Treasury Bills increased five-fold to 125

basis points, which greatly enhanced the scope for risk taking. Money market funds had strong

incentives to boost their returns by taking on more risk because the flows from money market

investors were highly sensitive to return differentials across funds.

   To identify the impact of implicit guarantees, we exploit differences, over time and across

funds, in fund sponsors’ abilities to provide guarantees. Before August 2007, sponsors were

generally expected to have access to capital markets to prevent runs on their funds. However,

as a result of the subsequent new risk-taking opportunities, it became apparent that stopping a

run would require significantly higher capital outlays and only sponsors with sufficient financial

strength would be able to provide support.

   In our tests, we use a sponsor’s financial strength before August 2007 as a measure of the

strength of a fund’s implicit guarantees. Specifically, we measure such strength using the value

of sponsor’s equity. We use sponsor’s equity before August 2007 because it is unlikely to be

chosen in anticipation of a fund’s risk-taking behavior. The reason is that all money market

funds are sponsored by mutual fund organizations that are either independent or affiliated

with a large financial institution and the choice of affiliation is an important determinant of a

sponsor’s financial strength. This choice usually occurs years prior to the (unexpected) change

in risk-taking opportunities and is based primarily on characteristics of the entire mutual fund

organization of which money market funds are only a small part.

   Our main result is best illustrated with a tale of two funds: the Reserve Primary Fund

(“Reserve Primary”) and the Columbia Cash Reserves Fund (“Columbia Cash”). Before Au-

gust 2007, both funds had comparable values of assets under management and charged similar

management fees. The main difference between the two funds was that Reserve Primary was

managed by an independent mutual fund company with effectively no equity and Columbia Cash

by a mutual fund company owned by Bank of America with total equity of $57.1 billion.



                                                 3
   As shown in Figure 2, the returns on both funds roughly matched the industry average up to

August 2007. Starting in August 2007, however, the returns on the two funds diverged sharply:

Relative to the industry average, the return on Reserve Primary increased by about 40 basis

points, while the return on Columbia Cash decreased by about 20 basis points. The return

differential triggered significant flows: Reserve Primary tripled its assets under management

from $20 billion in August 2007 to $60 billion in August 2008, while assets under management

of Columbia Cash declined from $30 billion to $20 billion. Figure 3 illustrates that the return

differential was entirely driven by changes in the funds’ holdings after August 2007: Reserve

Primary increased its holdings of risky assets from 0% to 60%, while Columbia Cash decreased

slightly its holdings of risky assets.

   We attribute the difference in the risk-taking behavior between Reserve Primary and Columbia

Cash to the differential abilities of their sponsors to provide implicit guarantees after August

2007. Consistent with this interpretation, we find that the sponsors of the two funds reacted

differently when runs eventually occurred. On September 16, 2008, the Reserve Primary Fund

lost about 1% of its portfolio value due to its direct exposure to Lehman’s bankruptcy, which

triggered a run on the entire money market fund industry. During the run, Reserve Primary’s

sponsor scrambled to support its fund but was unable to do so; at the same time, money market

funds of Columbia Management Group received jointly a $600 million bailout from its sponsor.

   To confirm that the tale of two funds is representative of all money market funds, we turn

to evidence from panel-based regression analysis. At the outset, we restrict our sample to

institutional prime money market funds, which are funds that invest in non-government securities

and are sold exclusively to institutional investors. We focus on these funds because we do not

expect the subprime crisis to have an economically meaningful effect on funds that invest solely

in government securities and because, in contrast to retail investors, we expect institutional

investors to react promptly to yield differentials across funds. In general, these funds represent

the majority of assets under management in the money market fund industry.

   We first assess the benefits of taking risk by estimating the relationship between fund flows



                                                4
and fund past returns. We find that a one-standard-deviation increase in fund returns raises

subsequent weekly flows by 0.6%, or equivalently fund size by 36.4% per year. This result

is independent of a sponsor’s financial strength, which suggests that all funds faced similar

incentives to boost their portfolio returns.3

    Subsequently, we examine the impact of a sponsor’s financial strength on risk taking. Our

primary measure of financial strength is the size of a sponsor’s equity, which we interpret as an

empirical proxy for a sponsor’s ability to provide substantial financial support at a short notice.

We measure risk using four proxies: (1) the fund return relative to Treasury Bills (spread);

(2) the share of risky assets holdings (holdings risk); (3) the sum of squared risky asset shares

(concentration risk); and (4) the weighted average maturity of fund holdings (maturity risk).

    We find that a one-standard-deviation increase in the natural logarithm of a sponsor’s equity

reduces spread by 3.5 basis points, holdings risk by 3.4 percentage points, concentration risk

by 2.7 percentage points, and maturity risk by 2.8 days after August 2007. This result is

economically significant in that each respective effect accounts for 15%, 18%, 16%, and 23% of

the cross-sectional standard deviation of each risk measure. We do not find a statistically or

economically significant impact of equity on these risk measures prior to August 2007. Consistent

with the importance of guarantees, we further find that a sponsor’s equity predicts financial

support: A one-standard-deviation increase in equity increases the likelihood that a sponsor

announces a bailout in the week after Lehman’s bankruptcy by 12.5 percentage points. These

results strongly suggest that implicit guarantees reduce risk taking of money market funds.

    One possible concern with our results is that, even if sponsor’s equity were not chosen to

accommodate risk taking, equity might be correlated with other (unobserved) sponsor charac-

teristics that directly affect risk taking. For example, sponsor’s equity is a proxy for a sponsor’s

affiliation with a large financial institution and this affiliation might be correlated with other

sponsor characteristics, such as the quality of risk management, risk aversion, investment style,

   3
     Such “yield chasing” by fund investors is consistent with recent models of neglected risks and costly learning
(e.g., Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny (2011)). This type of a model applies quite well to our context, given that
fund investors experienced a 35-year period without significant runs.


                                                        5
or access to private information. These variables would explain our results to the extent that the

unobserved sponsor characteristic affects risk taking after (but not before) August 2007. This

may be the case if, for example, the quality of risk management matters for risk taking only in

times of greater risk-taking opportunities.

   To address this concern, we introduce another dimension along which we can compare funds,

the distinction between institutional and retail funds. Our analysis so far focuses on funds offered

to institutional investors; yet, the same sponsors also offer funds to retail investors. Retail funds

constitute a useful placebo group because the flow-performance relationship is much weaker for

these funds and, as a result, the impact on such funds’ risk taking should be smaller. This

prediction is specific to our economic mechanism of implicit guarantees and does not apply

to other mechanisms that could explain risk taking, such as the quality of a sponsor’s risk

management. Indeed, we find that a sponsor’s equity has almost no effect on risk taking of

retail funds. This result supports our interpretation that the differences in risk taking across

funds are due to differences in the scope of implicit guarantees provided by their sponsors.

   In another attempt of validating our identification strategy, we exploit the time-series varia-

tion in the importance of implicit guarantees. Following the run on money markets in September

2008, the government introduced an explicit government guarantee program for all money mar-

ket fund deposits, which effectively replaced sponsors’ implicit guarantees. Consequently, if the

presence of implicit guarantees causes the differences in risk taking, we should expect no dif-

ferences in risk taking after the government guarantee was announced. This is indeed what we

find: After the announcement, the differences in risk taking across funds gradually disappeared.

   We further confirm the robustness of our results in a series of additional tests. First, we

find that managerial compensation is similar across sponsors with different equity values. Any

differences in managers’ quality or managerial monetary incentives are thus unlikely to explain

our results. Second, we perform our analysis using the sponsor’s affiliation with a large financial

institution and the its external credit rating as alternative measures of implicit guarantees and

find that the results are similar. Third, our results remain unchanged when we control for



                                                 6
relative assets size of prime funds within a fund family, which suggests that the sponsor type

does not simply proxy for the reputation costs of money market distress. Fourth, our results

hold if we include managerial tenure as an additional control variable, which indicates that

managerial career concerns are not an important driver of our findings. Fifth, our effects are

slightly stronger for larger fund companies, which is consistent with the general observation that

large funds are more involved in active risk management. Last, we show that all our results are

robust to excluding outliers.

   Overall, our paper’s main message is that implicit guarantees can reduce risk taking because

the provider of the guarantee internalizes the expected bailout cost. This finding stands in

contrast to those broadly discussed in other, mostly theoretical studies, which predict increased

risk taking in the presence of implicit guarantees. We argue that the reason behind such dif-

ferences stems from differences in the underlying information structure. While the risk-taking

predictions derived in other studies are largely dependent on the asymmetric information (moral

hazard) problem between the manager and the guarantee provider, in our paper, the risk-taking

behavior is largely driven by the asymmetric information between the fund sponsor and outside

fund investors. We believe both effects can be plausible and which one dominates depends on

the observability of risk taking and the monitoring incentives of the provider.

   Our study makes contributions to several strands of the literature. To the best of our

knowledge, ours is the first paper to offer systematic and direct empirical evidence on the role

of implicit guarantees inside financial institutions. More generally, we present an account of

corporate support within organizations. In this regard, our paper is related to a study by

Gopalan, Nanda and Seru (2007) which examines the impact of financial support offered by

headquarters of Indian business groups to their divisions. Their study, however, is not about

implicit guarantees, and their focus is on ex-post outcomes rather than on ex-ante decisions.

   From a theoretical perspective, our work is related to a voluminous literature that has

studied the impact of financial strength on allocation of resources within financial institutions.

This literature considers the role of so-called balance sheet amplifiers in generating distress. The



                                                 7
main sources of variation in financial strength addressed by these studies are leverage, credit

constraints, and limited capital. An excellent summary of the main ideas offers Krishnamurthy

(2010). We extend this literature by analyzing empirical implications of differences in financial

strength for risk-taking behavior.

   A separate strand of literature examines the role of mutual funds within larger financial

complexes. Ritter and Zhang (2007) show that lead underwriters allocate hot initial public

offerings to affiliated funds. Massa and Rehman (2008) argue that information flows within

financial conglomerates affect asset holdings of their equity mutual funds. Chen, Goldstein and

Jiang (2010) examine runs in the context of equity mutual funds. More specific to our empirical

context is a small literature on the workings of money market funds. Notable contributions

in this group include Christoffersen (2001), Christoffersen and Musto (2002), Kacperczyk and

Schnabl (2010), and Squam Lake Group (2011). Relative to these studies, ours is the first one

to emphasize the role of implicit guarantees and their impact on risk-taking decisions.

   Finally, our study parallels contemporaneous empirical literature on the impact of the recent

financial crisis on money markets. Gorton (2009) and Gorton and Metrick (2009) investigate

the impact of the crisis on the pricing of repo contracts. Brunnermeier (2009) studies the freeze

in the market for asset-backed commercial paper. Kacperczyk and Schnabl (2010) investigate

the relative role of demand and supply sources and their consequences for the commercial paper

market. Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2010) investigate the role of macroeconomic

conditions in the pricing of Treasuries relative to corporate bonds. Cornett, McNutt, Strahan

and Tehranian (2011) examine the impact of banks’ funding liquidity on credit supply. Acharya,

Schnabl and Suarez (2009) study the incentives for issuing asset-backed commercial paper.

   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 1, we lay out the theoretical foundations

for our empirical tests. In Section 2, we describe our research setting. Section 3 describes the

data. In Section 4, we discuss our identification strategy and present main empirical results,

and in Section 5 we study their robustness to alternative explanations. Section 6 concludes.




                                                8
1    Hypothesis Development

Theoretical literature in finance and economics emphasizes two mechanisms through which any

guarantee may affect risk taking. While the implications of these theories are applicable to

many settings, in this section, we discuss their importance in the context of money market

funds. Notably, the two mechanisms generate different predictions regarding risk taking largely

because they make different assumptions about the underlying information structure.

    The first mechanism relies on the information asymmetry (moral hazard) between the guar-

antee provider and the fund manager. The main driving force is that the provider of the

guarantee cannot perfectly observe the fund manager’s risk-taking decisions. To the extent that

the manager’s expected compensation increases in risk taking, the manager may be willing to

take on more risk as she is protected by the guarantee. Put differently, the expectation of future

bailouts encourages risk taking among managers.

    A substantial empirical literature documents the importance of such moral hazard for risk-

taking decisions. The literature focuses on explicit and implicit guarantees provided by the

government to the banking sector. Keeley (1990) finds that the combination of deposit insurance

and lower bank charter values leads to risk shifting among commercial banks. Saunders, Strock

and Travlos (1990) show that stockholder-controlled banks take on more risk than manager-

controlled banks. Esty (1997) finds that stock thrifts take on more risk than mutual thrifts

because of limited monitoring by depositors. Kelly, Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2011) show

that during the financial crisis of 2008 the price of put options on individual member banks

increased more than the price of a put option on a financial sector index, consistent with the

idea that the provision of systemic guarantees is priced by investors.

    Despite its intuitive appeal, we believe that the moral hazard problem delineated above is

unlikely to explain risk taking in money market funds. The reason is that a given security’s asset

class and its return—both being good measures of risk for most money market instruments—

are readily observable outcomes. As a result, the provider of a guarantee (fund sponsor) can

easily monitor a fund manager’s risk taking and effectively mitigate the degree of risk-shifting

                                                9
behavior.4 Moreover, fund sponsors are likely to lay off any fund manager contributing to a

negative outcome such as a run, which effectively eliminates managers’ downside protection.

    The second mechanism focuses on the information asymmetry between the guarantee provider

and the fund investors. The main assumption behind this mechanism is that, in their interpre-

tation of the observed fund returns, fund investors do not fully account for any differences in

risk, resulting, for example, from differences in strength of implicit guarantees provided by a

fund sponsor. In general, one explanation of such behavior could be that the expected benefit

of learning such information is low relative to the cost of acquiring such information (Dang,

Gorton and Holmstrom (2009)). Alternatively, investors may neglect risks which are not salient

to them given the absence of negative events from past data (Gennaioli and Shleifer (2010) and

Gennaioli et al. (2011)).

    Empirical evidence supports the apparent lack of risk adjustment among investors. For

example, Kacperczyk and Seru (2007) show that investors’ fund flows react to funds’ raw returns

even after controlling for any differences in the funds’ risk-adjusted returns. Also, Chevalier and

Ellison (1997)) show that the flow-performance relationship for equity mutual funds is convex,

which suggests that fund investors might evaluate their funds in a rank-based fashion and not

just based on risk-adjusted returns. Finally, several observers suggested that investors did not

sufficiently account for risk in the run-up to the financial crisis of 2007–2009 (e.g., Jarrow, Li,

Mesler and van Deventer (2007), Gerardi, Lehnert, Sherlund and Willen (2008)).

    We argue that the behavior of money market fund investors might have exhibited a similar

lack of risk adjustment. First, until the recent financial crisis, fund investors had little experience

with runs given the industry’s lack of runs in the past. Second, since fund investors are small

relative to fund size in which they invest, they suffer from a free-rider problem in acquiring

information about the fund safety. Third, rather than research sponsor’s ability to support

funds, any investors that worry about the risks of money market funds are likely to choose other

   4
     Our multiple private conversations with money market fund managers and their sponsors suggest that one of
the specific characteristics of the money market industry is a high degree of transparency inside the organization
in the process of information transmission between manager and fund sponsor.


                                                       10
investment products, such as banks deposits.

       Based on the above, we posit in our empirical tests the lack of risk adjustment among fund

investors and analyze its impact on risk taking. Specifically, if investors do not adjust for dif-

ferences in sponsors’ ability to provide guarantees, we should expect investors to choose funds

without regard to the fund sponsor’s financial strength. This leads us to our first hypothesis.



Hypothesis 1. If fund investors do not adjust for the fund sponsor’s financial strength, then

the flow-performance relationship should be independent of the sponsor’s financial strength.



       We next evaluate the fund manager’s optimal investment strategy given that investors do not

adjust for the sponsor’s ability to provide guarantees. To focus on this mechanism, we assume

away a moral hazard problem between the fund sponsor and the fund manager.

       To gain an intuitive understanding of our idea, consider two types of sponsors: The first one

has no capital and thus no ability to provide an implicit guarantee; the second one has access

to unlimited capital and thus can provide a guarantee if called upon. Assume that a fund’s

franchise value at risk is large enough such that a fund sponsor is willing to provide a guarantee

ex post. Also, assume that risk taking increases the cost of providing support in case of a run.5

       Given the assumptions, we now trace risk-taking responses given a positive probability of

a large-scale run on the industry. The sponsor type with unlimited capital would internalize

the cost of providing support but the sponsor type without capital would not. As a result,

the sponsor type with unlimited capital would reduce risk taking relative to the sponsor type

without capital. We summarize this result in our second hypothesis.



Hypothesis 2. Risk taking should decrease in a sponsor’s financial strength.



       The above mechanism relies on the assumption that sponsors with higher financial strength
   5
    Note that depositors may run even if they expect to receive the full value after a fund sells off its entire asset
holdings because depositors may suffer negative liquidity shocks during the sell-off (Bernardo and Welch (2004)).


                                                         11
are more able to provide support if a run occurs. This assumption is testable in case of a run

on the industry. This leads us to our third hypothesis.



Hypothesis 3. If a run occurs, the likelihood of providing support is increasing in the sponsor’s

(ex-ante) ability to provide guarantees.



    We conclude this section with two general observations. First, our empirical result can

be also interpreted as a form of asset substitution (or risk shifting). While sponsors with no

capital neglect the cost of a run and maximize a fund value conditional on survival, sponsors

with unlimited capital internalize the cost and optimally maximize their funds’ value. Hence,

the sponsor’s equity plays the same role as the owner’s equity in a standard model of asset

substitution.

    Second, risk taking by sponsors with unlimited capital need not be socially efficient. For

example, if sponsors with unlimited capital benefit from government guarantees that lower their

costs of capital, then the implicit guarantees may be mispriced and in turn affect the funds’

risk taking. However, such mispricing would not affect our main cross-sectional prediction that

sponsors with no capital increase risk relative to sponsors with unlimited capital. The economic

force behind this result is due to the fact that sponsors with unlimited capital internalize the

costs of runs and the sponsors’ costs of capital only affect the relative size of this effect.




2     Context: Money Market Funds

2.1   Primer on money market funds

Money market mutual funds (henceforth, money market funds) emerged in the 1970s as an

alternative to bank deposits. At that time, bank deposits were highly regulated and paid lower

interest rates than did money market instruments, which made money market funds attractive to

investors as they paid higher interest for taking on comparable risks. Even though the regulation

                                                 12
of bank deposits was eventually abolished, the size of money market fund industry grew steadily

over time up to $2.4 trillion at the beginning of 2007 (see Federal Reserve Flow of Funds Data).

   An important characteristic of money market funds is that, contrary to bank deposits, in-

vestments in money market funds are generally not insured by the government. Although money

market funds seek to preserve the value of their assets at $1 per share, it is still possible that

fund investors could realize losses on their investments. Such losses could result from changes

in interest rates or from defaults of individual securities.

   To limit risks of money market funds, their holdings have been regulated under Rule 2a-7

of the Investment Company Act of 1940. This regulation restricts fund holdings to short-term

assets and prevents funds from purchasing long-term assets such as mortgage-backed securities,

corporate bonds, or equity. Moreover, the regulation requires short-term debt to be of high

credit quality. For example, the regulation limits commercial paper holdings to those that carry

either the highest or second-highest rating from at least two of the nationally recognized credit

rating agencies. Also, the regulation requires portfolio diversification: Money market funds

must not hold more than 5% of their assets in securities of any individual issuer with the highest

rating and not more than 1% of their assets in securities of any other individual issuer.

   To provide an overview of the various money market instruments held by money market

funds, we use data provided by iMoneyNet. These data are the most comprehensive source

of money market funds’ holdings. We focus on taxable funds because non-taxable funds hold

tax-exempt instruments issued by state and municipal governments, which are not the focus of

our study. Taxable money market funds account for 84.5% of all assets under management in

the money market fund industry.

   As of January 2007, there were 473 taxable money market funds holding assets worth $1.95

trillion. About one-third were Treasury funds, which only hold government debt, government-

backed agency debt, and repurchase agreements. The remaining two-thirds were prime funds

that also invest in non-government assets. In January 2007, the largest asset class held by prime

funds was commercial paper, accounting for $634 billion or 32.5% of total asset holdings. The



                                                 13
other asset classes were government debt and government-backed agency debt ($585 billion),

repurchase agreements ($390 billion), bank obligations ($297 billion), and other assets ($45

billion) (Kacperczyk and Schnabl (2010)).

   Most large money market funds are geared towards institutional investors. In Table 1, we

present summary information for the 20 largest institutional prime funds as of January 2007.

At that time, these funds accounted for a total of $491 billion worth of assets. The largest

fund was the JP Morgan Prime Money Market Fund with assets under management equal to

$88.4 billion, followed by Columbia Cash Reserves and BlackRock Liquidity funds, which were

about half the size. The last fund on the list, Evergreen Institutional Money Market Fund still

managed a considerable $15.8 billion worth of assets. On average, institutional prime funds

were well diversified across asset classes but highly exposed to risks in the financial industry as a

whole. Assets originated by the financial industry—measured as the total of financial commercial

paper, structured securities, bank obligations, and repurchase agreements—accounted for 91.4%

of money market fund assets.

   In addition, Table 1 provides information about the funds’ sponsors: their equity values,

credit ratings, and organizational form, that is, whether a fund sponsor is independent or affil-

iated with a commercial bank, investment bank, or insurance company. Among the largest 20

funds, an equal number was independent or had an affiliation. The largest sponsor in terms of

equity value was Bank of America, followed by JP Morgan, and Deutsche Bank.


2.2     Money market funds during the financial crisis

2.2.1    Change in risk-taking opportunities

Money market funds played an important role during the financial crisis of 2007–2009. Prior

to August 2007, fund regulation effectively prevented the funds from investing in risky assets.

As a result, since its origins in the 1970s, money market funds invested in similar assets and

paid similar returns. However, starting from August 2007, a number of events changed the

risk-taking opportunities of money market funds. On August 9, 2007, the French bank BNP

                                                 14
Paribas halted withdrawals from its three funds invested in mortgage-backed securities and

suspended calculation of their net asset values. Even though defaults on mortgages had been

rising throughout 2007, the suspension of withdrawals by BNP Paribas had a profoundly negative

effect on money market assets. Within one day, the interest rate spread of overnight asset-backed

commercial paper over the Fed funds rate rose from 10 basis points to 150 basis points, possibly

because investors became concerned about the credit quality and liquidation values of collateral

underlying money market instruments and stopped rolling over these instruments.

       Even though money market funds suffered almost no losses from impaired asset-backed

commercial paper because these assets were effectively insured by commercial banks, going

forward, it became clear that liquidation values of money market instruments were lower and

that new issuances had to offer higher risk premia. Similar increases in risk premia also built up

in other money market instruments that were perceived as risky—bank obligations, floating-rate

notes, and commercial paper. At the same time, the rates of asset classes that were perceived

as safe, such as Treasuries, repurchase agreements, and bank deposits, remained at much less

elevated levels.

       Figure 1 presents evidence of this sudden change in relative asset returns. From January

2005 to July 2007, all asset classes had returns of about 15 to 25 basis points higher relative

to those of Treasury Bills and agency debt, with no significant differences across asset classes.

However, beginning with August 2007, the returns on risky asset classes started to increase

rapidly with a peak in March 2008 when we observe relative returns of up to 125 basis points.

After March 2008, the returns started to decline but still remained at a high 60 basis points as

of August 2008. Over the same period, the returns on safe asset classes remained constant at

around 20 basis points or even declined. In sum, starting in August 2007, we observed a clear

divergence in returns across risky and safe asset classes.6

       Notably, the observed variation in returns on risky and safe asset classes coincided with key
   6
    The returns on individual asset classes are not directly observable to us, but we can impute them using
fund-level data on returns and holdings. To this end, we regress fund returns on interaction terms of indicator
variables for each asset class and month fixed-effects plus standard controls. For each asset class, the interaction
terms capture the monthly return relative to that of Treasury Bills and agency debt.


                                                        15
events during the financial crisis. First, the expansion in risk-taking opportunities occurred at

the same time as did the run on asset-backed commercial paper in August 2007. Further, the

peak in returns to risky asset classes happened at the same time as the near-bankruptcy of

the investment bank Bear Stearns. Finally, the decline in relative returns prior to August 2008

and the sudden spike in September 2008 (not shown in the Figures) matched market conditions

around the Lehman’s bankruptcy. Indeed, common indicators of market distress during the

financial crisis, such as the LIBOR-OIS spread, exhibited similar time-series patterns as did

the returns on risky asset classes of money market funds. Based on the above evidence, we

conclude that the start of the financial crisis in August 2007, provided money market funds the

opportunity to invest in riskier assets.



2.2.2   Tale of two funds: Reserve Primary Fund and Columbia Cash Reserves

We illustrate possible reactions to this change with an example of two funds: the Reserve Primary

Fund (RPF) and the Columbia Cash Reserves (CCR). Between the two, RPF was particularly

well known in the industry because of its owner, Bruce Bent, the founder of the first money

market fund in the 1970s. Until July 2007, both funds had about $25 billion of assets under

management and charged similar management fees. In what follows we present the evolution of

each fund’s returns, fund assets, and holdings over the period from July 2006 to August 2008.

   In Figure 2, we present the returns on both funds relative to the industry average. Prior to

August 2007, the returns roughly matched the industry average. However, starting in August

2007, the relative returns on the two funds diverged sharply: Relative to the industry average,

the return on RPF increased by about 50 basis points, while at the same time the return on

CCR decreased by about 30 basis points. The return differential triggered significant money

flows: RPF tripled its assets under management, from $20 billion in August 2007 to $60 billion

in August 2008, while CCR’s asset value declined, from $30 billion to $20 billion.

   The observed differences in both returns and fund flows were largely a consequence of the

differences in the underlying fund portfolios, especially after August 2007. Figure 3 shows that

                                               16
RPF increased its holdings of risky assets from 0% to 60% while it reduced its exposure to

safe Treasury Bills and repurchase agreements from 40% to 10%. In contrast, CCR actually

decreased its holdings of risky assets slightly and kept the same level of safe Treasury Bills and

repurchase agreements.

   We argue that the difference in the risk taking between RPF and CCR can be attributed to

the differential ability of their sponsors to provide implicit guarantees after August 2007. While

RPF was managed by an independent mutual fund company with almost no equity, CCR was

managed by a mutual fund company sponsored by Bank of America whose equity, as of January

2007, equaled $57.1 billion dollars. As a result, it seems plausible that CCR was more likely

to obtain sponsor support for its fund. As it turns out, the underlying difference was a crucial

determinant of how each of the funds chose its own risk levels and how each of them absorbed

the shocks related to bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers.



2.2.3   Collapse of the Reserve Primary Fund and money market fund runs

One of the important assets among RPF’s holdings was commercial paper issued by Lehman

Brothers. According to quarterly SEC filings, RPF had no holdings of Lehman’s commercial

paper prior to August 2007, but by November 2007 the fund had purchased $375 million in

Lehman’s commercial paper. By May 2008, the fund additionally increased its Lehman’s hold-

ings to $775 million, which at that time accounted for about 1% of its holdings.

   On September 15th, 2008, Lehman Brothers declared bankruptcy. Its failure triggered a

panic in financial markets and lead to a credit market freeze. As a direct result of the bankruptcy,

the net asset value of RPF fell below $1 per share. The revelation of the fund’s exposure to

Lehman’s risk triggered an immediate run on the fund. On September 16, 2008, the fund was

forced to pay out $10.8 billion in redemptions and faced about $28 billion of further withdrawal

requests. The fund’s sponsor did not have sufficient financial resources to guarantee payments

and was forced to halt redemptions. The run on RPF quickly spread to other funds. Within

a week, institutional investors reduced their investments in money market funds by more than

                                                17
$172 billion. Among others, the sponsor of CCR, Bank of America, set aside $600 million to

support its money market funds, which helped stabilize CCR’s operations.

    Eventually, many funds got distressed and the consequences of the industry collapse became

dire. To stop the run on funds, on September 19, 2008, the U.S. Department of the Treasury

announced an explicit deposit insurance covering all money market investments made prior to

Lehman’s bankruptcy. This announcement stopped the run and redemption requests receded

shortly after. However, the announcement meant that the U.S. government had effectively

insured the credit risk of $3 trillion in fund assets holdings.



3    Data and Summary Statistics

Our study combines four data sources. First, we obtain data on the universe of taxable money

market funds from iMoneyNet, which cover the period from January 2005 to December 2009

and include weekly fund-level data on returns, expense ratios (charged and incurred), holdings

by asset class, and average maturities of fund holdings. Second, we complement the data using

information from CRSP Mutual Fund Survivorship Bias Free Mutual Fund Database. Third, we

use COMPUSTAT to construct measures of sponsors’ support and collect information on fund

manager characteristics. Fourth, we collect data on no-action letters issued by the SEC—an

indication that a sponsor provided financial support to its fund. Altogether, we obtain a novel

data set that, to the best of our knowledge, has not been used in academic research before.

    Column (1) of Table 2 provides summary statistics for all prime institutional money market

funds (henceforth, prime funds) as of January 2007. Our sample includes 146 prime funds.

The average fund size is $6.1 billion and the average fund age is 12.7 years. We compute the

annualized spread as the fund return net of expenses minus the return on the three-month

Treasury Bills. The average spread is 22 basis points and the average expense ratio is 31 basis

points. In terms of asset holdings, prime funds hold 3.5% in U.S. Treasuries and agency-backed

debt, 11.2% in repurchase agreements, 3.1% in deposits, 13.3% in obligations, 22.2% in floating-

rate notes, 30.7% in commercial paper, and 16.0% in asset-backed commercial paper.

                                                 18
    Next, we divide fund sponsors into two groups based on their ability to provide implicit

guarantees. Our primary measure of the ability to provide guarantees is the fund sponsor’s

equity. We compute equity as total equity reported in COMPUSTAT minus intangibles. We

assign zero equity if we cannot match a fund sponsor to COMPUSTAT. We use other sources

to confirm that fund sponsors with zero equity are private companies that are small and do not

report to COMPUSTAT. In our robustness tests, we also use alternative measures of support,

such as the sponsor’s credit rating and whether a sponsor is affiliated with a commercial bank,

investment bank, or insurance company.

    Column (2) provides summary statistics for funds whose sponsors have equity values below

the median value as of January 2007. Column (3) provides summary statistics for funds whose

sponsors have equity values above the median value. We find that funds associated with both

high and low-capital sponsors have similar fund characteristics and average asset holdings. The

only difference is that funds sponsored by high-capital companies hold a slightly higher share of

floating-rate notes and repurchase agreements and fewer bank obligations, though the differences

are not statistically significant.




4     Empirical Strategy and Results

4.1    The choice of a sponsor’s type

Any credible assessment of the impact of implicit guarantees on risk taking must address the

problem that fund sponsors optimally choose whether to provide implicit guarantees. For exam-

ple, some sponsors may be better at incentivizing fund managers to take on less risk, hence may

be more willing to provide implicit guarantees. In this case, a simple comparison of funds spon-

sored by companies that provide implicit guarantees and funds sponsored by companies that do

not provide guarantees does not represent the counterfactual of interest—namely, the level of

risk taking for a given fund with and without implicit guarantees. In an ideal experiment, we

would like to randomly assign implicit guarantees to funds and then analyze the causal impact

                                               19
of the random assignment. In practice, funds might choose their types based on their relative

costs and benefits, which could include access to private information, diversification of income

revenues, incentive system for fund managers, and cross-selling of fund products.

      An important advantage of our setting is that money market funds played a negligible role

in most fund sponsors’ structures prior to Summer 2007. In particular, money market funds

typically constituted a small part of larger mutual fund families and the choice regarding the fund

family’s equity was likely independent of money market funds themselves. Since the inception

of money market funds in the 1970s, all funds paid similar returns and there was little scope for

exploiting private information or superior managerial ability. Indeed, money market funds were

considered a low-fee, low-cost business that invested in safe assets and was offered in conjunction

with other, more profitable funds. The level of sponsor’s equity was thus primarily driven by

the characteristics of the entire mutual fund family of which money market funds were only

minor consideration. In support of this claim, the summary statistics in Table 2 show that

funds sponsored by mutual fund families with low equity were similar to funds sponsored by

mutual fund families with high equity.

      Given that money market funds look similar on an ex-ante basis, our empirical strategy relies

on the differential response by sponsor’s type to an exogenous change in risk-taking opportu-

nities. Specifically, starting in August 2007, money market instruments became significantly

riskier, which allowed more scope in funds’ risk-taking choices. This change in riskiness of

the instruments provided money market funds, usually constrained in their risk choices, with

an opportunity to take on more risk.7 Even though money market instruments experienced

episodes of increased relative spreads in the past, it is fair to say that the change in risk-taking

opportunities was largely unanticipated, at least around the period of August 2007. Hence, it is

unlikely that the fund sponsor’s capital was chosen in anticipation of the change in risk-taking

opportunities.

      Instead, we argue that differences in the ability to provide implicit guarantees affected the
  7
    More generally, other studies, including Brunnermeier (2009), Gorton (2009), and Kacperczyk and Schnabl
(2010) have documented significant increases in the riskiness of other asset classes over the same period.


                                                    20
observed risk choices. To test this hypothesis, we proceed in four steps. First, we estimate the

impact of fund returns on fund flows, the relationship which speaks to the incentives of funds

to take on more risk. Next, we present evidence on the role of implicit guarantees in risk-taking

behavior. Further, we show that a fund sponsor’s equity was indeed a good predictor of which

funds received support from their sponsors during the market-wide run in September 2008.

Finally, we provide a series of additional tests that support our baseline empirical results.

   In all regressions, we pay particular attention to differences across sponsor types prior to

August 2007. If sponsor type were not chosen with regard to risk taking of money market funds,

then we should not observe any impact of implicit guarantees prior to August 2007. Hence, we

expect neither absolute differences nor differential trends by sponsor type before August 2007.



4.2     Expansion of risk-taking opportunities

4.2.1    Relative returns to money market instruments

We document the change in risk-taking opportunities using data on fund holdings and fund

returns. Specifically, we estimate the following regression model:


                       Spreadi,t+1 = αi + µt + βj Asseti,j,t + γXi,t + εi,t+1                   (1)


where Spread i,t+1 is the annualized return (spread) of a fund i in week t + 1, Asseti,j,t denotes a

fund i’s fractional holdings of asset category j at the end of week t, αi denote fund-fixed effects,

and µt denote week-fixed effects. The asset categories we consider include repurchase agree-

ments, bank deposits, bank obligations, floating-rate notes, commercial paper, and asset-backed

commercial paper. The omitted category is Treasury Bills and government agency debt. Xi,t is

a vector of fund-specific controls that includes the natural logarithm of fund size (Log(TNA)),

fund expenses (Expenses), fund age (Age), fund flows (Flows), and the natural logarithm of the

fund family size (Log(FamSize)). Our coefficients of interest are βj , which measure the return

of money market instrument j in week t + 1 relative to that of Treasury Bills and agency assets.

                                                21
   We estimate the regression model separately for the post-period from August 2007 to August

2008 and the pre-period from July 2006 to July 2007. The post-period starts with the beginning

of the subprime crisis in August 2007 and ends immediately before the market-wide run in

September 2008. We do not include observations during the run and the period thereafter

because subsequent government interventions significantly altered risk-taking incentives.

   Our estimation strategy is akin to estimating a standard difference-in-differences regression

model. Specifically, the difference in the coefficients of interest, βj , between the post and pre-

period is identical to the coefficient one would obtain from estimating such model. We choose to

report our estimation results separately for the pre and post-period because the results help us

validate our identification strategy which asserts no difference in risk taking in the pre-period.

For most results, we also report relevant coefficients from estimating the standard difference-

in-differences regression model to assess statistical significance of our findings. In all regression

models, we allow for the flexible correlation of error terms within funds by clustering the standard

errors at the fund level.

   Columns (1) and (2) of Table 3 report the pre and post-period results for the model without

fund-fixed effects. We find that risky asset classes experience significantly larger returns in the

post-period relative to those in the pre-period, whereas safe asset classes have similar returns

during both periods. For example, in the post-period, the return on a fund fully invested in

(risky) bank obligations would have been 85 basis points higher than the return on a fund fully

invested in (safe) Treasury and agency debt. The comparable differential in the pre-period

would have only been 13 basis points. We find similar effects for other risky asset classes, such

as floating-rate notes, commercial paper, and asset-backed commercial paper. In contrast, the

return on a fund fully invested in (safe) repurchase agreements would have been 13 to 15 basis

points higher than the return on a fund fully invested in Treasury and agency assets, both in

the pre and post-period. We obtain similar results for other safe asset classes.

   One possible concern with the results is that funds with large holdings of risky asset classes

might be also riskier along other unobserved dimensions. For example, these funds may choose



                                                 22
the most risky assets within an asset class such that we would overestimate the average impact

of holding riskier assets. To address this concern, we introduce fund-fixed effects, which account

for any unobserved time-invariant fund characteristics within the pre or post period.

       We find quantitatively and qualitatively similar results, as reported in columns (3) and (4).

For example, the return on a fund fully invested in bank obligations would have been 92 basis

points higher than the return on a fund fully invested in Treasury and agency assets. In contrast,

the comparable differential would have been only 17 basis points in the pre-period. Hence, our

findings are unlikely to be driven by unobserved fixed fund characteristics.

       Overall, these results suggest that money market funds did experience a large exogenous

expansion in risk-taking opportunities. The expansion was large in the sense that the returns

on risky asset classes relative to safe ones were five-fold larger after August 2007, compared

to before. Moreover, the expansion was likely exogenous to money market funds as it was

caused by financial distress among issuers of money market instruments and not by the funds

themselves. The issuers were directly exposed to the subprime crisis and their instruments

therefore commanded higher risk premia. Hence, starting in August 2007, funds were given a

choice of whether to invest in risky or safe assets.8



4.2.2      Flow-performance relationship

The main incentive for a fund to increase risk is to raise its income. This happens because risk

taking increases returns, which in turn translate into greater fund inflows. Given that money

market funds earn a fixed percentage of assets under management, fund inflows lead to a higher

fund income. This model of competition has been widely documented in studies of equity mutual

funds. These studies usually find that past performance is one of the strongest predictors of

fund flows to equity funds (e.g., Chevalier and Ellison (1997)).

   8
    We note that overall issuance of riskier asset classes declined over this period. For example, total asset-backed
commercial paper outstanding dropped by almost 50% from $1.3 trillion in August 2007 to $700 billion in August
2008. Importantly, our focus is on the variation in holdings across funds. While the majority of money market
funds decreased their holdings of risky asset classes, some funds, such as the Reserve Primary Fund, increased
their holdings.


                                                         23
   We therefore assess the benefits of investing in riskier asset classes by estimating the sensi-

tivity of fund flows to past returns using the following regression model:


                        F undF lowi,t+1 = α + βSpreadi,t + γXi,t + εi,t+1                        (2)


where FundFlow i,t+1 is the percentage increase in fund size from week t to week t + 1 accounting

for earned interest, Spread i,t and X are defined as in (1). Our coefficient of interest is β, which

measures the sensitivity of fund flows to fund past returns. We allow for correlation of error

terms within funds by clustering observations at the fund level.

   Table 4 reports the results. Columns (1) and (2) show the results separately for the pre

and post-period for the model without fund-fixed effects. We find that during the post-period

a one-standard-deviation increase in fund returns increases subsequent fund flows by 0.6% per

week, or equivalently a fund size by 32% per year. In contrast, we find no statistically significant

effect of fund past returns on fund flows during the pre-period. To rule out the possibility that

our results are driven by unobserved time-invariant fund-specific attributes correlated with fund

spreads, in columns (3) and (4), we additionally report the pre and post-period results for the

model with fund-fixed effects. The flow-performance relationship is even larger: by 2.6 times in

the post-period; again, we observe no impact on flows during the pre-period.

   The incentives to take risk may also be shaped by differences in flows that funds with different

levels of equity receive conditional on their performance. In particular, if funds sponsored by

companies with high capital receive more flows because they provide implicit guarantees, one

would expect them to be more willing to take relatively less risk since their compensation

relies to a lesser extent on their performance. We test this hypothesis by estimating the flow-

performance relationship while controlling for Log(Equity). If investors incorporate guarantees

in their investment decisions, we should expect the coefficient of Log(Equity) to be positive.

   We find that, conditional on fund performance, the level of the sponsor’s equity does not

affect fund flows. As before, we find a strong flow-performance relationship in the post-period

but not in the pre-period. Hence, our results are unlikely to be driven by different responses of

                                                24
flows to the levels of equity capital.

   We also examine whether the observed change in the sensitivity of flows to performance

depends on the sponsor’s ability to provide implicit guarantee. To this end, we extend our

empirical model in (2) by including interaction terms of fund spread and the natural logarithm

of a fund sponsor’s equity. We present the results in columns (5)-(6).

   For both subperiods, we find that the coefficients of the interaction terms are statistically

and economically insignificant. Hence, the benefits to having a greater fund performance in

terms of greater fund inflows do not differ significantly across the sponsors’ types.

   In sum, the results support our premise that there was little scope to increase fund returns

in the pre-period, but a large incentive to take on more risk in the post-period and the ability

to attract flows was not driven by the underlying differences in the scope of implicit guarantees.


4.3   Implicit guarantees and risk taking

We now study the response of different fund sponsors to the change in risk-taking opportunities.

In particular, we compare risk-taking behavior of funds sponsored by companies with high equity

to that of funds sponsored by companies with low equity capital. Our hypothesis is that firms

with higher equity are more likely to provide implicit guarantees to their money market funds

and the existence of such guarantees decreases the funds’ incentives to take on risk. To this end,

we estimate the following regression model:


                          Riski,t+1 = α + βLog(Equity)i + γXi,t + εi,t+1                      (3)


where Log(Equity)i is the natural logarithm of a fund sponsor’s total equity as of January

2007. Xit is a vector of control variables that is identical to the one we use in equation (1).

Our regression model also includes week-fixed effects, which account for any time differences in

aggregate fund flows or macroeconomic conditions driving the risk-taking decisions of different

fund sponsors. Since Log(Equity)i is specific to the fund sponsor, it is possible that risk taking

within the same sponsor may be correlated across its funds. To address this concern, we cluster

                                                25
standard errors at the sponsor level. Our coefficient of interest is β, which measures the impact

of a sponsor’s equity on risk taking.

   We use four measures of risk (Riskit ). The first measure is Spread, which is the weekly

fund return, net of the Treasury Bill rate. In the context of money market funds, spreads are a

good measure of risk because there is little scope for managerial skill, which makes fund returns

largely reflect its portfolio risk. One potential problem with using this measure, however, is

that it may vary over time even though managers may not make any active changes in the risk

profile of their portfolios, only because the returns on individual assets in the portfolio change.

This could also happen in our setting since the relative returns on individual assets changed

significantly between the pre and post-period.

   To account for such mechanical changes in portfolio riskiness, we propose three other mea-

sures. Our second measure is Holdings Risk, defined as a weekly fraction of risky assets in a

fund portfolio. Our definition of risky assets is motivated by the results in Table 2 and includes

obligations, floating-rate notes, commercial paper, and asset-backed commercial paper: All four

asset classes have significantly higher returns in the post-period than do the other asset classes.

   Our third measure, Concentration Risk, measures a tilt of money market funds towards spe-

cific asset classes. To the extent that individual asset classes might carry their own idiosyncratic

risk, concentrating funds in a few asset classes increases fund risk. Our measure of concentra-

tion follows that in Kacperczyk, Sialm and Zheng (2005) and is calculated as a sum of squared

weights of main asset classes in the fund portfolio. The low levels of the measure indicate low

concentration risk and high levels of the measure indicate high concentration risk.

   Our fourth measure, Maturity Risk, is the average maturity of assets in a fund portfolio,

observed weekly. In general, funds with greater maturities of their assets would be considered

more risky. We also studied implications of using the sensitivity of fund returns to changes

in Treasury Bill rates (akin to duration risk). The measure is obtained from the fund-level

time-series regression model in which the estimation is performed separately for the pre and

post-period. The results are qualitatively similar to the ones we report below.



                                                 26
   We begin with a nonparametric analysis of the observed effects. For each month between

July 2006 and August 2008, we estimate the coefficient β from the regression model (3) on

Log(Equity). Panel A of Figure 4 presents the results for Spread. We find no visible differences

in the impact of sponsors’ equity on spreads prior to August 2007 but, starting August 2007,

we observe a large negative effect of Log(Equity) on spread. Panel B reports the results for

Holdings Risk, Panel C for Concentration Risk, and Panel D for Maturity Risk. Again, we

observe a similar pattern in loadings on equity as for spread.

   We present the regression results in Table 5. For the post-period, we find that a one-standard-

deviation increase in a sponsor’s equity reduces fund spreads by 3.5 basis points, holdings risk

by 3.4 percentage points, concentration risk by 2.7 percentage points, and average maturity by

2.8 days. The results are statistically significant. They are also economically significant: A

one-standard-deviation increase in Log(Equity) corresponds to a 15% drop in spread relative to

the cross-sectional standard deviation of fund spread. The respective quantities for holdings

risk, concentration risk, and maturity risk account for 18%, 16%, and 23%. In contrast, we

find no statistically significant impact of equity on any of the risk measures in the pre-period.

These results suggest that implicit guarantees provided by fund sponsors reduce risk taking in

the post-period.




4.4   Evidence on redemptions and sponsor support


We estimate the effect of sponsors’ equity on the ex-post provision of implicit guarantees. Specif-

ically, we examine financial support provided by fund sponsors during the one-week period after

the start of the run in September 2008 but prior to the introduction of the Federal Deposit

Insurance of money market fund assets.

   We first test whether sponsors with more equity are more likely to offer financial support to

their money market funds. To this end, we estimate a regression model in which the response

                                                27
variable measures whether a fund sponsor provides support:


                        Supporti,t+1 = α + βLog(Equity)i + γXi,t + εi,t+1                       (4)


where Support takes a value of one if the fund sponsor offered support to its fund and zero,

otherwise. Information on fund support is based on the no-action letters filings from SEC and is

further appended with hand-collected data from newspaper accounts and individual funds’ press

releases. X is a vector of control variables that includes Log(TNA), Age, Expenses, Log(Family

Size). Our coefficient of interest is β.

   We present the estimation results in columns (1) and (2) of Table 6. Consistent with our

hypothesis, we find a positive and statistically significant effect of the sponsor’s equity on the

probability of receiving financial support: a one-standard deviation increase in sponsor’s equity

increases the likelihood of providing support by 12.5 percentage points. This finding confirms

our premise regarding the sponsor’s role in providing guarantees to the money market fund

industry.

   Subsequently, we assess the impact of implicit guarantees on fund redemptions. To this end,

we estimate the following regression model:



                     Redemptionsi,t+1 = α + βLog(Equity)i + γXi,t + εi,t+1                      (5)

where Redemptions is the change in a fund size between September 18 and September 25, 2008.

Log(Equity) and X are defined as before. Our coefficient of interest is β. We expect this

coefficient to be negative since investors are less likely to run on funds that receive financial

support from their sponsors.

   In Table 6, columns (3) and (4), we present the results from estimating the regression model

for the cross section of funds. We find a negative and statistically significant effect of sponsors’

equity on a subsequent size of redemptions.




                                                28
4.5     Do unobserved sponsors’ characteristics explain risk choices?

In our conceptual framework, we posit that the sponsor’s equity has a significant impact on

its funds’ risk-taking decisions. However, our effect might be driven not by differences in the

sponsor’s ability to provide guarantees, but rather by unobserved differences in investment styles

or manager ability across fund families, which in turn might be correlated with the sponsor’s

level of equity. For example, a fund sponsored by Fidelity Management Company, a low-capital

company, might be willing to take more risk than a fund sponsored, by Bank of America, a

high-capital company, due to its superior financial expertise or greater risk tolerance. To the

extent that the variation in style or risk aversion among funds is permanent, our difference-in-

differences estimator would account for any such differences. But, our empirical approach might

fail if the variation differentially affects risk taking in the pre and post-period. For example,

fund sponsors may differ in their reactions to any changes in the quantity of risk, or in their

propensities to take risk when risk-taking opportunities arise.


4.5.1    Evidence from retail money market funds

Although we believe such differences are not a priori obvious, we conduct a more direct test,

in which we identify the coefficients of interest off the differences between institutional and

retail funds. To the extent that the fund sponsors offer both retail and institutional fund

portfolios to their investors, one would imagine that both types of portfolios, within the same

fund sponsor, should have similar levels of risk as long as their risk-taking behavior is governed by

sponsor-specific characteristics. However, retail investors react much less to differences in return

differentials across funds; therefore, we expect a much smaller effect for retail funds. Hence,

even though sponsors of retail and institutional funds have the same unobserved characteristics,

we expect a difference in their risk taking in the post-period.

   We begin our analysis with estimating the flow-performance relationship for retail funds,

separately for the pre and post-period, with and without fund-fixed effects. Panel A of Table 7

presents the results. Consistent with our premise, we find that the flow-performance relationship

                                                 29
is quite weak for the sample of retail funds in both periods. The effect is also not driven by the

ability of fund sponsors to provide support. Hence, the risk-taking incentives for retail funds

are smaller than they are for institutional funds.

   Building on this result, we further compare risk taking across fund sponsors, separately for

institutional and retail funds using the setting of Table 5. Our primary interest is on the post-

period estimation. We present the results in Panel B of Table 7. In the table, the results for

institutional funds mirror those in Table 5 and are presented merely for ease of comparison.

   The results for the two groups of funds are quite striking. While we observe statistically

and economically significant differences with respect to equity for institutional funds, these

differences are almost zero for retail funds. For two out of four risk measures, the differences in

coefficients on Log(Equity) between retail and institutional funds are statistically significant at

the 5% level of statistical significance.

   Overall, the observed patterns in risk taking across funds with different scope of guarantees

are unlikely to be driven by differences among fund management companies along some unob-

served characteristics, such as managerial information quality, style, or risk aversion, that are

correlated with the level of sponsors’ capital.



4.5.2   Evidence from the government’s post-Lehman intervention

Another direct test of our identification strategy relies on yet another, exogenous change in the

importance of implicit guarantees. In particular, following the default of Lehman Brothers in

September 2008, the market experienced a run on the entire money market fund industry. Since

the likely consequences of this run were severe, the government decided to save the entire money

market industry and extend explicit guarantees to all money market funds and their investors.

Effectively, for the duration of the guarantee, which lasted over a year, this intervention elimi-

nated the need for implicit guarantees. Notably, given that the government did not rescue the

Reserve Primary Fund this guarantee was likely unexpected. Consequently, if the presence of

implicit guarantees drives the observed differences in risk taking, we should expect that any

                                                  30
pre-existing differences in risk-taking behavior among funds should be attenuated afterwards.

        To evaluate this hypothesis, we revisit the risk regression model in Table 5 and extend our

analysis to November 2009. We now consider three periods: July2006–July 2007, August 2007–

August 2008, and January 2009–November 2009. We do not include the data for the quarter

immediately following Lehman’s default because the process of implementing explicit guarantees

really did not take place until the end of 2008.9 Also, many financial markets were very illiquid

right after the default, so any adjustment of risk on the side of the funds was quite difficult

to accomplish. Our empirical strategy involves estimating the risk-taking regression model

using a difference-in-differences approach, in which Log(Equity) is interacted with two indicator

variables: Post, equal to one for the period August 2007–August 2008, and zero, otherwise; and

Post-Lehman equal to one for the period January 2009–November 2009, and zero, otherwise.

In line with our hypothesis, we should observe a zero effect of Log(Equity) in the pre-period, a

negative effect in the post-period, and again a zero effect in the post-Lehman period.

        We report the results in Table 8. Consistent with our hypothesis, we find that the coefficient

of Post-Lehman is close to zero for three out of four measures of risk. This result suggests that

the role of implicit guarantees has become negligible once the government rolled out an explicit

support for all funds, which confirms that implicit guarantees played an important role in the

post-period.



5        Additional Evidence

In this section, we provide additional results that offer support to our main hypothesis.


5.1       Alternative measures of implicit guarantees

In our analysis, we use Log(Equity) to measure the ex-ante likelihood of providing implicit

guarantees to a money market fund. One can think of this measure as a strength of a sponsor’s
    9
    Duygan-Bump, Parkinson, Rosengren, Suarez and Willen (2010) and Kacperczyk and Schnabl (2010) discuss
the workings and exact timing of different government interventions.


                                                    31
balance sheet. Another way to think of financial strength is to consider the ability of a fund

sponsor to provide financial support at a very short notice. This could be done by moving

resources from other parts of the company or by raising capital externally. In this section, we

explore the robustness of our results to proxies that reflect the alternative ways of measuring a

sponsor’s financial strength.

       Our first measure proxies for the ability to channel resources from other parts of the company

quickly. We argue that fund sponsors with banking and insurance divisions might be more likely

to offer implicit guarantees to their funds because they have access to retail deposits and short-

term funding markets, which allows them to access resources at a short notice to support funds

in distress.10 An example of such a company would be Bank of America. In contrast, fund

sponsors without banking or insurance divisions have little access to such resources as they

exclusively focus on managing funds on behalf of their clients. An example of such a company

would be Reserve Primary.

       Our second measure of financial strength is a fund sponsor’s credit rating. The reason why

credit rating might be a good proxy for our purpose is that fund sponsors with a good credit

standing may be more able to access short-term funding markets and as such they may have

more capacity to provide support.

       We repeat our analysis in Table 5 using two following variables. Conglomerate is an in-

dicator variable equal to one if a fund sponsor includes other non-fund divisions (commercial

and investment banking or insurance), and zero if a fund sponsor is an independent mutual

fund company. Likewise, Credit Rating is an indicator variable equal to one if the fund sponsor

has a credit rating of AA or higher and zero, otherwise. Empirically, both Conglomerate and

Credit Rating are positively correlated with Equity which supports our view that they are good

proxies for the strength of a sponsor’s support. Consistent with our hypothesis, we expect funds

sponsored by conglomerates, or by companies with better credit ratings, to take less risk.

       We present the results in Table 9 for all measures of risk, separately for the pre and post-
  10
   This effect is even stronger if banks receive additional deposit inflows during times of financial distress, as
documented by Gatev and Strahan (2006).


                                                       32
period. Panel A presents the results for the specification with Conglomerate, and Panel B for

the specification with Credit Rating. Consistent with our hypothesis, we find that companies

with greater diversity or with better credit ratings take on less risk on average, and especially

so during the post-period. The results are both statistically and economically significant. This

finding lends further support to our general prediction that fund sponsors’ capacity to provide

implicit guarantees determines risk-taking decisions of their money market funds.




5.2       Do differences in managerial compensation explain risk choices?


A possible explanation for our results could be that fund managers or fund management compa-

nies with more equity have different compensation levels; as such, they have different incentives

to take on risk. For example, if managers of funds sponsored by high-equity companies had

lower compensation levels, one could imagine that such managers would have greater incentives

to take risk to increase their funds’ assets under management. We evaluate this hypothesis

formally by relating the value of a fund’s compensation to Log(Equity) of its fund sponsor. We

use two different measures of compensation: Total Compensation, calculated as a product of

fund size and its expense ratio, Expenses which is a percentage fee charged by the fund on its

assets.

   The results of this estimation, presented in Panel A of Table 10, do not support the hypothesis

that differences in risk can be attributed to differences in managerial compensation. If anything,

we observe the opposite effect: High-equity funds on average have higher compensation levels,

though this result is statistically insignificant and economically small. More generally, this result

suggests that firms with an ability to extend support do not charge additional fees for providing

guarantees to their fund investors, which is consistent with our view that fund flows are fairly

unresponsive to the guarantee provision.

                                                 33
5.3   Controlling for reputation costs of a fund family

Another reason why we find the relationship between a sponsor’s equity and its funds’ risk taking

could be due to differences in reputation costs among fund families. In particular, money market

funds which are part of larger fund families may be less likely to take on risk simply because they

face potentially higher reputation costs due to runs on the entire fund family. To the extent that

these reputation costs correlate with fund sponsorship we could obtain our results. We evaluate

this possibility by estimating the regression model in (3) with additional controls for reputation

costs of the fund family:



                  Riski,t+1 = α + βLog(Equity)i + γReputation + θX + εi,t+1                     (6)

where Reputation denotes potential reputation costs. We measure reputation cost using ratios

of the size of prime money market funds within a fund family to the size of other styles within

family: equity, bonds, balanced, and other styles. We also consider relative-size ratios of prime

funds to all money market funds and retail funds to all money market funds.

   We present the estimation results in Panel B of Table 10 for Spread in the post-period sample.

Controlling for various reputation cost variables does not significantly alter the qualitative and

quantitative aspects of our analysis. The regression coefficients of Log(Equity) remain negative

and statistically significant at the 1% level of statistical significance. Also, the coefficients of

various reputation cost controls are small and statistically insignificant. Hence, our results are

unlikely to be explained by differences in reputation costs among different fund sponsors.



5.4   Do differences in career concerns explain risk choices?

We also examine whether differences in risk between different sponsors’ types can be explained

by differences in career concerns of the fund managers in these companies. We proxy for the

degree of such career concerns with the managers’ tenure inside their fund companies. For

example, Chevalier and Ellison (1997) argue that young managers may have greater incentives

                                                34
to take on risk. To the extent that such young managers work for funds sponsored by companies

with low equity, one could explain differences in risk taking using the career-concerns story.

   We evaluate this possibility by directly controlling for manager tenure in the regression

model in Table 5. We report the results in Panel C of Table 10. We find no support for the

career-concerns hypothesis. If anything, the risk-taking results become slightly stronger, both

statistically and economically, against the alternative explanation.



5.5   Further robustness

In our last robustness test, we examine whether our findings are sensitive to the following three

screens of the sample. First, the workings of money market funds often depend on the size of

the fund company. Anecdotally, large funds are often considered to be more concerned with

active risk choices, while smaller funds are often considered to be simple cash-parking vehicles

that do not engage in active risk-management strategies. Hence, one would expect our results

to be stronger for large funds. To this end, we estimate the regression model in Table 5 for the

subsample of funds with assets under management over $10 billion, the value which is close to

the average size of money market funds in our sample. Panel D of Table 10 presents the results

for the post-period. We find that the risk effect indeed becomes stronger, though not by much.

   The second concern with our results relates to our motivating example. In particular, the

case of the Reserve Primary Fund constitutes one of the most extreme risk-shifting behaviors

among all fund sponsors. To the extent that RPF is sponsored by a company with no equity,

our results might be driven by just one observation: the Reserve Primary Fund. To ensure the

robustness of our results, we exclude the fund from our sample and re-estimate the regression

model in Table 5 on the restricted sample. Panel E of Table 10 presents the results for the

post-period. We find no significant difference in magnitude of the coefficients of Log(Equity),

which suggests that our results are not merely driven by the RPF observation.

   Finally, we assess whether the results on risk taking can be explained by the possible differ-

ences in volatility of fund net flows. To the extent that such volatility proxies for differences in

                                                35
investors’ risk aversion and is possibly correlated with sponsors’ equity, including volatility of

flows in our risk regression models should affect the coefficient of equity. Our measure of volatil-

ity is based on the time series of weekly fund flows over the preceding six-month period. The

results, presented in Panel F of Table 10, suggest that any cross-sectional differences in volatil-

ity of flows are unlikely to explain our results. The coefficient of Log(Equity) is not affected by

the inclusion of the volatility variable; if anything, it actually becomes slightly stronger. More

broadly, the results suggest that any potential differences in the risk aversion of fund investors

are unlikely to explain our results, which is consistent with our earlier evidence on institutional

vs. retail funds.



6    Concluding Remarks

We study the impact of implicit guarantees on risk taking by money market mutual funds.

Using the change in relative risks of money market instruments as an exogenous shock to the

risk-taking opportunities of the funds, we find that funds sponsored by companies with little

ability to provide support took on more risk relative to funds sponsored by companies with

greater ability to provide such support starting August 2007, but not before. Consistent with

our explanation, we further show that funds whose sponsors have more equity experienced

smaller outflows and were more likely to provide financial support during a market-wide run in

September 2008.

    We view our setting as a unique laboratory in which to study the microeconomic foundations

of financial bailouts. Recent financial literature (e.g., Freixas, Loranth and Morrison (2007);

Panageas (2010)) investigates the impact of government guarantees on risk-taking incentives.

We argue that some of the macro effects may also have their counterparts at the individual firm

level though the direction of the effects may actually reverse.

    We want to emphasize one possible difference between ours and previous studies. While

prior settings largely focus on interventions in which guarantors do not have a direct stake in the

company (e.g., government), in our study, guarantors have a stake in the company. What makes

                                                36
such a setting potentially interesting and novel is that incentive problems related to asymmetric

information and moral hazard, typically present in the context of external guarantors, might be

significantly altered in the presence of internal guarantors. We anticipate more exciting research

to be done along these lines.




References
Acharya, Viral, Philipp Schnabl, and Gustavo Suarez, “Securitization Without Risk
   Transfer,” 2009. Working Paper NYU.

Bernardo, Antonio E. and Ivo Welch, “Liquidity and Financial Market Runs,” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 2004, 119, 135–158.

Brunnermeier, Markus, “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-08,” Journal of
   Economic Perspectives, 2009, 23(1), 77–100.

Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, “Payoff Complementarities and Financial
   Fragility: Evidence from Mutual Fund Outflows,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2010,
   97(2), 239–262.

Chevalier, Judith and Glenn Ellison, “Risk Taking by Mutual Funds as a Response to
   Incentives,” Journal of Political Economy, 1997, 105(6), 1167–1200.

Christoffersen, Susan E. K., “Why Do Money Fund Managers Voluntarily Waive Their
    Fees?,” Journal of Finance, 2001, 56(3), 1117–1140.

     and David K. Musto, “Demand Curves and the Pricing of Money Management,” Review
    of Financial Studies, 2002, 15(5), 1499–1524.

Cornett, Marcia, Jamie McNutt, Philip Strahan, and Hassan Tehranian, “Liquid-
   ity Risk Management and Credit Supply in the Financial Crisis,” Journal of Financial
   Economics, 2011, forthcoming.

Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmstrom, “Opacity and the Optimality of
   Debt for Liquidity Provision,” 2009. Yale Working Paper.

Diamond, Douglas W. and Philip H. Dybvig, “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liq-
   uidity,” Journal of Political Economy, 1983, 91, 401–419.

Duygan-Bump, Burcu, Patrick M. Parkinson, Eric S. Rosengren, Gustavo A.
   Suarez, and Paul S. Willen, “How Effective Were the Federal Reserve Emergency
   Liquidity Facilities? Evidence from the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market
   Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility,” 2010. Federal Reserve Working Paper.

                                               37
Esty, Benjamin C., “Organizational Form and Risk Taking in the Savings and Loan Industry,”
    Journal of Financial Economics, 1997, 44, 22–55.

FINRA, “Treasury’s Guarantee Program for Money Market Mutual Funds: What You Should
   Know,” July 2010.

Freixas, Xavier, Gyongyi Loranth, and Alan D. Morrison, “Regulating Financial Con-
    glomerates,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 2007, 16, 479–514.

Gatev, Evan and Phillip Strahan, “Banks advantage in supplying liquidity: theory and
   evidence from the commercial paper market,” Journal of Finance, 2006, 61(2), 867–892.

Gennaioli, Nicola and Andrei Shleifer, “What Comes to Mind,” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 2010, 125 (4), 1399–1433.

    ,       , and Robert Vishny, “Neglected Risks, Financial Innovation, and Financial
    Fragility,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2011, forthcoming.

Gerardi, Kristopher, Andreas Lehnert, Shane Sherlund, and Paul Willen, “Making
   Sense of the Subprime Crisis,” Brookings Paper on Economic Activity, 2008, Fall, 69–145.

Gopalan, Radhakrishnan, Vikram Nanda, and Amit Seru, “Affiliated Firms and Finan-
   cial Support: Evidence from Indian Business Groups,” Journal of Financial Economics,
   2007, 86 (3), 759–795.

Gorton, Gary, “Information, Liquidity, and the (Ongoing) Panic of 2007,” American Economic
   Review Papers and Proceedings, May 2009, 99 (2), 567–572.

     and Andrew Metrick, “Haircuts,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 2009, 92,
    507–519.

Group, The Squam Lake, “Reforming Money Market Funds,” 2011. Working Paper.

Jarrow, Robert, Li Li, Mark Mesler, and Donald van Deventer, “CDO Valuation: Fact
    and Fiction,” 2007. Kamakura Corporation Paper.

Kacperczyk, Marcin and Amit Seru, “Fund Manager Use of Public Information: New
   Evidence on Managerial Skills,” Journal of Finance, 2007, 62 (2), 485–528.

     and Philipp Schnabl, “When Safe Proved Risky: Commercial Paper During the Finan-
    cial Crisis of 2007-2009,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2010, 24(1), 29–50.

    , Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, “On the Industry Concentration of Actively Managed
    Mutual Funds,” Journal of Finance, 2005, 60, 1983–2012.

Keeley, Michael C., “Deposit Insurance, Risk, and Market Power in Banking,” American
   Economic Review, 1990, 80 (5), 1183–1200.

                                            38
Kelly, Bryan, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, “Too-Systemic-To-Fail:
    What Option Markets Imply About Sector-wide Government Guarantees,” 2011. Working
    Paper, New York University.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, “Amplification Mechanisms in Liquidity Crises,” American Eco-
    nomic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2010, 2 (3) (2), 1–33.

    and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, “The Aggregate Demand for Treasury Debt,” 2010.
    Working Paper, Kellogg School.

Massa, Massimo and Zahid Rehman, “Information Flows within Financial Conglomerates:
   Evidence from the Banks-Mutual Funds Relationship,” Journal of Financial Economics,
   2008, 89(2), 288–306.

Panageas, Stavros, “Bailouts, the Incentive to Manage Risk, and Financial Crises,” Journal
   of Financial Economics, 2010, 95(3), 296–311.

Ritter, Jay R. and Donghang Zhang, “Affiliated Mutual Funds and the Allocation of Initial
    Public Offerings,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2007, 86(2), 337–368.

Saunders, Anthony, Elizabeth Strock, and Nickolaos G. Travlos, “Ownership Structure,
   Deregulation, and Bank Risk Taking,” Journal of Finance, 1990, 45 (2), 643–654.




                                           39
                                   Table 1: Summary Statistics of Institutional Prime Money Market Funds

This table provides information for the 20 largest institutional money market funds ranked by assets under management in January 2007. Fund
Name is the name of the fund, Assets is Assets under Management (in $ Billion), Sponsor Name is the name of the fund sponsor, Equity is total
equity of the sponsor (in $ billion), Congl. indicates whether the fund sponsor is affiliated with a commercial bank, investment bank, or insurance
company, and Rating is the fund sponsor’s S&P credit rating (NR indicates that a fund has no S&P rating).
                                          Fund                                                           Sponsor
                                                                  Assets
              Name                                                                   Name                Equity Congl. Rating
                                                              (in $ Billion)
              JPMorgan Prime Money Market Fund                     88.4              JP Morgan            55.8       Y         A+
              Columbia Cash Reserves                               41.3              Bank of America      57.1       Y        AA-
              BlackRock Liquidity                                  34.4              Blackrock            -0.4       N         A+
              Fidelity Institutional Money Market Fund             27.7              Fidelity              0.0       N        NR
              Goldman Sachs FS Prime Obligations                   27.1              Goldman Sachs        30.1       Y        AA-
              Morgan Stanley Institutional Liquidity               26.3              Morgan Stanley       32.0       Y         A+
              Dreyfus Institutional Cash                           25.5              Dreyfus               5.0       Y         A+
              Columbia Money Market Reserves                       22.0              Bank of America      57.1       Y        AA-
              Federated Prime Obligations                          22.0              Federated             0.0       N        NR
              AIM STIT Liquid Assets                               21.5              AIM Advisors          0.0       N        NR
              Merrill Lynch Premier Fund                           19.8              Blackrock            -0.4       N        A+
              DWS Money Market Series                              18.6              Deutsche Bank        32.2       Y        AA-
              Northern Institutional Diversified Assets            17.3              Northern Trust        3.4       Y        AA-
              Merrill Lynch Institutional Fund                     17.3              Blackrock            -0.4       N        A+
              Reserve Primary Fund                                 16.9              Reserve Primary       0.0       N        NR
              Citi Institutional Liquid Reserves                   16.8              Legg Mason           -0.3       N        AA+
              Fidelity Prime Fund                                  16.7              Fidelity              0.0       N        NR
              Fidelity Money Market Trust                          16.6              Fidelity              0.0       N        NR
              Dryden Core Investment Fund                          16.0              Prudential           21.7       Y         A
              Evergreen Institutional Money Market Fund            15.8              Wachovia             29.7       Y        A+




                                                                        -40-
               Table 2: Summary Statistics of Institutional Prime Money Market Funds
Our sample covers all U.S. institutional prime money market funds registered with the Securities and
Exchange Commission as of 1/1/2007. We aggregate all share classes by fund. Equity measures tangible
equity of the fund sponsor. Low (High) Equity includes all the funds with tangible equity below (above)
the median value of equity. The fund characteristics are assets under management (TNA), spread, fund
age, and annual expenses. The holdings include the percentage of fund assets invested in U.S. Treasury
and agency-backed paper, repurchase agreements, bank deposits, bank obligations, floating-rate notes,
commercial paper and asset-backed commercial paper. The fund sponsor characteristics are the share of
sponsors that are affiliated with a conglomerate and the share with a credit rating of “AA” or higher.
     Sponsor Capital                             All         Low Equity            High Equity
                                                 (1)              (2)                  (3)
     Fund Characteristics
       TNA ($mil)                                6,052             5,074             7,031
                                               (10,367)           (7,555)           (12,547)
        Spread (annualized %)                     0.22              0.21              0.22
                                                (0.43)             (0.22)            (0.56)
        Age (years)                               12.7              14.0              11.4
                                                 (6.4)              (6.8)             (5.7)
        Annual Expenses (%)                       0.31              0.34              0.28
                                                (0.19)             (0.20)            (0.20)
     Holdings
       U.S. Treasury & Agency                     3.5                3.6                3.4
                                                 (8.6)              (8.2)              (8.9)
        Repurchase Agreements                    11.2               11.6               10.7
                                                (15.5)             (15.3)             (15.7)
        Bank Deposits                             3.1                2.5                3.7
                                                 (5.3)              (4.7)              (5.8)
        Bank Obligations                         13.3               15.6               11.0
                                                (13.9)             (16.2)             (10.6)
        Floating-Rate Notes                      22.2               18.8               25.7
                                                (17.0)             (16.6)             (16.9)
        Commercial Paper                         30.7               34.2               27.1
                                                (23.8)             (25.0)             (22.1)
        Asset-backed CP                          16.0               13.6               18.4
                                                (17.1)             (15.1)             (18.6)
     Fund Sponsor
       Conglomerate                              0.57               0.20               0.93
                                                (0.50)             (0.41)             (0.25)
        Rating >=AA                              0.38               0.09               0.47
                                                (0.49)             (0.50)             (0.29)
     Observations                                146                73                 73


                                                 -41-
                                       Table 3: Return by Asset Class

The sample is all institutional prime money market funds. The dependent variable is the spread computed
as the weekly return minus the Treasury bill rate. Holdings variables are the share of assets invested in
repurchase agreements, bank deposits, bank obligations, floating-rate notes, commercial paper, and asset-
backed CP (omitted category is U.S. Treasury and agency). Fund Characteristics are fund assets, expense
ratio, fund age, fund flows, and fund family size. All regressions include week-fixed effects. Columns (3)
and (4) include fund-fixed effects. Columns (1) to (3) are restricted to the period 8/1/2007-8/31/2008
(Post period). Columns (2) and (4) are restricted to the period 7/1/2006-7/31/2007 (Pre period). Standard
errors are clustered at the fund level. ***, **, * represent 1%, 5%, and 10% significance, respectively.

                                                                  Spreadi,t+1
         Period                                   Post        Pre           Post         Pre
                                                   (1)        (2)             (3)        (4)
         Asset Class
              Repurchase Agreementsi,t          0.131*      0.148***      0.374**       0.240*
                                                (0.075)      (0.035)      (0.154)      (0.123)
              Bank Depositsi,t                   0.154      0.185***       0.133       0.289**
                                                (0.253)      (0.043)      (0.248)      (0.132)
              Bank Obligationsi,t              0.853***     0.130***     0.923***        0.172
                                                (0.076)      (0.035)      (0.164)      (0.113)
              Floating-Rate Notesi,t           0.811***     0.209***     0.773***       0.212
                                                (0.073)      (0.036)      (0.218)      (0.136)
              Commercial Papert                0.565***     0.135***     0.636***      0.279**
                                                (0.073)      (0.031)      (0.219)      (0.125)
              Asset-backed CPi,t               0.765***     0.169***     0.784***      0.271**
                                                (0.077)      (0.029)      (0.181)      (0.132)
         Fund Characteristics
              Log(TNA)i,t                         0.005       0.002        0.032*       -0.005
                                                 (0.004)     (0.001)       (0.017)     (0.008)
              Expense Ratioi,t                 -0.895***   -0.978***        -0.283    -0.547***
                                                 (0.030)     (0.011)       (0.287)     (0.138)
              Agei,t                             -0.002      -0.007*     -0.077***     -0.033*
                                                 (0.010)     (0.004)       (0.022)     (0.018)
              Flowsi,t                            0.028     0.020***       -0.016      0.023**
                                                 (0.025)     (0.008)       (0.021)     (0.012)
              Log(FamSize)i,t                     0.006     0.003**          0.006     0.003**
                                                 (0.005)     (0.001)       (0.005)     (0.001)
              Constant                          1.195***    0.086***      1.430***    -0.169***
                                                 (0.007)     (0.002)       (0.013)     (0.004)
         Week-Fixed Effects                         Y           Y              Y           Y
         Fund-Fixed Effects                         N           N              Y           Y
         Observations                             7,717       7,585          7,717       7,585
         R-squared                                 0.93        0.82           0.95       0.83


                                                    -42-
                                  Table 4: Performance and Fund Flows
The sample is all institutional prime money market funds. Columns (1), (3), and (5) are restricted to the
period from 8/1/2007 to 8/31/2008 (Post period). Columns (2), (4), and (6) are restricted to the period
from 7/1/2006-7/31/2007 (Pre period). The dependent variable is net fund flow computed as the
percentage change in total net assets from time t to time t+1. The independent variables are the weekly
annualized spread from t to t-1, fund assets, expense ratio, fund age, and fund family size. In columns (5)
and (6), additional independent variables are the sponsor’s equity and the interaction of the weekly spread
and the sponsor’s equity. All columns include week-fixed effects. Columns (3) and (4) include fund-
fixed effects. For columns (1)-(2) and columns (3)-(4), we report the coefficient of the interaction of the
weekly spread and a post period indicator variable from a difference-in-differences estimation. For
columns (5)-(6), we report the coefficient of the triple-interaction of weekly spread, a post period
indicator variable, and equity from a difference-in-differences estimation. The standard errors are
clustered at the fund level (double-clustered at fund-level and week for difference-in-difference
estimation). ***, **, * represent 1%, 5%, and 10% significance, respectively.

                                                                Fund Flowi,t+1
Period                             Post             Pre        Post        Pre           Post             Pre
                                    (1)              (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)             (6)
Spreadi,t                         0.010**            -0.001   0.026***       -0.001      0.020**           -0.007
                                   (0.004)          (0.003)     (0.010)     (0.004)       (0.009)         (0.012)
Log(Equity)i*Spreadi,t                                                                    -0.001            0.001
                                                                                         (0.001)          (0.001)
Log(Equity)i                                                                                0.002        0.000
                                                                                          (0.001)        0.000
Log(TNA)i,t                     -0.002***     -0.001*** -0.088***         -0.074***    -0.003***    -0.002***
                                   (0.001)         0.000   (0.007)           (0.015)      (0.001)      (0.001)
Expense Ratioi,t                     0.000    -0.018***     -0.055            -0.059      -0.004    -0.020***
                                   (0.005)       (0.005)   (0.043)           (0.088)     (0.007)       (0.006)
Agei,t                               0.000        -0.001    -0.004            -0.003       0.001            0.000
                                   (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.006)           (0.010)     (0.001)          (0.001)
Log(FamSize)i,t                      0.000      0.001**                                    0.000          0.001*
                                   (0.001)         0.000                                 (0.001)           0.000

Week-Fixed Effects                      Y                Y           Y            Y            Y               Y
Fund-Fixed Effects                      N                N           Y            Y            N               N
Observations                        7,725            7,592       7,725        7,592        7,725           7,592
R-squared                            0.02             0.01        0.11         0.07         0.02            0.01
Spreadi,t*Postt                           0.011**                  0.028***
                                          (0.005)                   (0.010)
Spreadi,t*Postt* Log(Equity)i                                                                   -0.002
                                                                                                (0.001)



                                                       -43-
                                                    Table 5: Sponsor’s Capital and Risk Taking
The sample is all institutional prime money market funds. The dependent variables are: the weekly annualized spread (Spread); the fraction of
assets held in risky assets (Holdings Risk); the sum of squared asset shares (Concentration Risk), and average asset maturity (Maturity Risk).
Log(Equity) is the natural logarithm of the fund sponsor’s equity. All other independent variables are defined in Table 3. All regressions include
week-fixed effects. Columns (1), (3), (5), and (7) are for the period from 8/1/2007 to 8/31/2008 (Post period) and columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) are
for the period from 7/1/2006 to 7/31/2007 (Pre period). We report the coefficient of the interaction of equity and Post from the corresponding
difference-in-differences estimation at the bottom of the table. The standard errors are clustered at the fund level (double-clustered at fund-level
and week for difference-in-difference estimation). ***, **, * represent 1%, 5%, and 10% significance, respectively.

                                             Spreadi,t+1             Holdings Riski,t+1         Concentration Riski,t+1         Maturity Riski,t+1
Period                                Post                 Pre      Post          Pre            Post          Pre             Post          Pre
                                       (1)                 (2)       (3)          (4)             (5)           (6)             (7)          (8)
Log(Equity)i                       -0.019***             0.000    -0.018**         0.002         -0.015*        -0.003       -1.542*         -0.646
                                    (0.006)            (0.002)     (0.008)        (0.010)        (0.009)        (0.011)      (0.792)         (0.630)
Log(TNA)i,t                         0.022**           0.004***     0.017*          0.008         -0.004         -0.013         0.150          0.506
                                    (0.010)            (0.001)     (0.010)        (0.013)        (0.007)        (0.011)      (0.697)         (0.668)
Expense Ratioi,t                   -0.825***         -0.980***     0.153*         0.194*          0.060          0.087       10.392*         9.799*
                                    (0.058)            (0.013)     (0.082)        (0.104)        (0.061)        (0.092)      (5.558)         (5.040)
Agei,t                               -0.005             -0.008      -0.002         0.000          0.010          0.015         0.003         -0.960
                                    (0.020)            (0.005)     (0.023)       (0.021)         (0.019)        (0.019)      (1.379)         (1.155)
Flowi,t                             -0.056*            0.019**      -0.041      -0.101***        -0.026         -0.035        -1.337        -5.630**
                                    (0.031)            (0.008)     (0.028)        (0.030)        (0.024)        (0.024)      (1.828)         (1.511)
Log(FamSize)i,t                     0.021**           0.005**        0.013         0.015         -0.005         -0.001        1.108*          0.581
                                    (0.010)            (0.002)     (0.011)       (0.013)         (0.008)        (0.011)      (0.633)         (0.592)

Week-Fixed Effects                      Y                Y            Y              Y              Y                 Y         Y              Y
Observations                          7,717            7,585        7,717          7,585          7,717             7,585     7,717          7,585
R-squared                             0.89             0.81         0.11           0.07           0.052             0.064      0.13           0.89
Log(Equity) i*Postt                          -0.019***                   -0.020***                        -0.012*                     -0.896**
                                              (0.006)                     (0.007)                         (0.006)                      (0.403)

                                                                        -44-
                           Table 6: Post-Lehman Support and Redemptions

The sample is all institutional prime money market funds active in August 2008. The dependent variable
in columns (1) and (2) is an indicator variable equal to one if the fund’s sponsor filed a no-action letter
with the SEC in the week after the Lehman bankruptcy ((9/18/2010-9/25/2010), and zero otherwise. The
dependent variable in columns (3) and (4) is total redemptions (fund outflows) in the period in the week
after the Lehman bankruptcy. All independent variables are as in Table 5. Standard errors are clustered at
the sponsor level. ***, **, * represent 1%, 5%, and 10% significance, respectively.

                                                      Support               Redemptions
            Sample                                All        >10bn         All      >10bn
                                                  (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)
                       Log(Equity)i            0.065***     0.091*      -0.016**     -0.031**
                                                (0.024)     (0.049)      (0.006)      (0.011)
                       Log(TNA)i,t               0.000       -0.068     0.025***      0.000
                                                (0.018)     (0.150)      (0.006)     (0.046)
                       Expense Ratioi,t         -0.039       -0.011     -0.042*      -0.103
                                                (0.064)     (0.221)     (0.024)      (0.075)
                       Agei,t                    0.151       0.413      -0.108**     -0.171*
                                                (0.172)     (0.258)      (0.047)     (0.082)
                       Log(FamSize)i,t          -0.055       -0.522      -0.039       -0.084
                                                (0.068)     (0.414)      (0.033)     (0.083)
                       Constant                 -0.692       -2.176       0.149      1.209**
                                                (0.431)     (2.249)      (0.145)     (0.512)

            Observations                          140         30           140          30
            R-squared                            0.180       0.319        0.257       0.322




                                                   -45-
                                    Table 7: Institutional vs. Retail Funds
The primary sample is retail prime money market funds. In Panel A, we examine the flow-performance
relationship for retail prime money market funds (similar to Table 4). The sample is all retail prime
money market funds. The dependent variable is net fund flow computed as the percentage change in total
net assets from time t to time t+1. The independent variables are the weekly spread in period from t to t-1,
fund assets, expense ratio, fund age, and fund family size (coefficients not shown in the table). In columns
(5) and (6), additional independent variables are the sponsor’s equity and the interaction of the weekly
spread and the sponsor’s equity. All columns include week-fixed effects. Columns (3) and (4) include
fund-fixed effects. Columns (1), (3), and (5) are for the period from 8/1/2007 to 8/31/2008 (Post period).
Columns (2), (4), and (6) are for the period from 7/1/2006 to7/31/2007 (Pre period). . For columns (1)-
(2) and columns (3)-(4), we report the coefficient of the interaction of the weekly spread and a post period
indicator variable from a difference-in-differences estimation. For columns (5)-(6), we report the
coefficient of the triple-interaction of weekly spread, a post period indicator variable, and equity from a
difference-in-differences estimation. The standard errors are clustered at the fund level (double-clustered
at fund-level and week for difference-in-difference estimation). ***, **, * represent 1%, 5%, and 10%
significance, respectively.



                                  Panel A: Flow-Performance Relationship
                                                              Fund Flowi,t+1
         Period                           Post       Pre      Post    Pre         Post       Pre
                                           (1)       (2)       (3)     (4)         (5)       (6)
         Spreadi,t                        0.002   0.001   0.003   0.002   0.004             0.005
                                         (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002) (0.004)           (0.004)
         Log(Equity)i*Spreadi,t                                                  0.000     0.000
                                                                                 0.000     (0.001)
         Log(Equity)i                                                            0.000    -0.001*
                                                                                 0.000     0.000

         Controls                           Y         Y        Y         Y         Y         Y
         Week-Fixed Effects                 Y         Y        Y         Y         Y         Y
         Fund-Fixed Effects                 N         N        Y         Y         N         N
         Observations                     5,872     6,018    5,872     6,018     5,872     6,018
         R-squared                        0.043     0.024    0.117     0.065     0.044     0.024
         Spreadi,t*Postt                       0.001               0.002
                                              (0.003)             (0.003)
         Spreadi,t*Postt* Log(Equity)i                                                 0.000
                                                                                      (0.001)




                                                   -46-
In Panel B, we compare risk taking of institutional and retail money market funds from 8/1/2007 to 8/31/2008 (Post period). The dependent
variables are: the weekly annualized spread (Spread); the fraction of assets held in risky assets (Holdings Risk); the sum of squared risky asset
shares (Concentration Risk), and average maturity (Maturity Risk). The independent variables are defined in Table 5. All regressions include
week-fixed effects. Columns (1), (3), (5), and (7) are restricted to retail funds and columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) are restricted to institutional funds.
We report the coefficient of the interaction term of equity and an indicator variable for institutional funds from the corresponding difference-in-
differences estimation at the bottom of the table. The standard errors are clustered at the fund level (double-clustered at fund-level and week for
difference-in-difference estimation). ***, **, * represent 1%, 5%, and 10% significance, respectively. . ***, **, * represent 1%, 5%, and 10%
significance, respectively.

                                                       Panel B: Sponsor’s Capital and Risk-Taking
                                                Spreadi,t+1           Holdings Riski,t+1  Concentration Riski,t+1         Maturity Riski,t+1
                                           Retail Institutional      Retail Institutional Retail Institutional           Retail Institutional
                                            (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)       (5)          (6)               (7)        (8)
            Log(Equity)i                   -0.003      -0.019***     0.006          -0.018**   -0.008        -0.015*      1.04       -1.542*
                                          (0.014)       (0.006)     (0.015)         (0.008)    (0.017)       (0.009)    (1.012)      (0.792)

            Controls                         Y             Y           Y           Y             Y              Y          Y           Y
            Week-Fixed Effects               Y             Y           Y           Y             Y              Y          Y           Y
            Observations                    5,869        7,717        5,866     7,717           5,866         7,717       5,866      7,717
            R-squared                       0.873         0.89         0.18      0.11           0.131         0.052       0.094      0.13
            Log(Equity)i*Institutionalt              -0.016               -0.024**                       -0.007               -2.575***
                                                    (0.012)                (0.013)                       (0.015)               (0.995)




                                                                             -47-
                    Table 8: Capital and Risk Taking After Government Guarantee
The sample is all institutional prime money market funds. We estimate the same difference-in-differences
regression as in Table 5 for the period from July 2006 to November 2009. We drop the month of the
Lehman bankruptcy and the quarter immediately after the Lehman bankruptcy to focus on risk taking
after a short adjustment period. We interact our main variable of interest with an indicator variable for the
Post period (July 2007 to August 2008) and the Post-Lehman period (January 2009 to November 2009).
The regressions include the control variables specified in Table 5 (coefficients not shown). Standard
errors are double-clustered at the sponsor-level and week. ***, **, * represent 1%, 5%, and 10%
significance, respectively.

                               Spreadi,t+1   Holdings Riski,t+1   Concentration Riski,t+1   Maturity Riski,t+1
                                  (1)              (2)                    (3)                     (4)

Log(Equity)i                      0.000           0.002                  -0.003                  -0.646
                                (0.002)          (0.009)                 (0.011)                 (0.623)
Log(Equity)i*Postt             -0.019***        -0.020***               -0.012**                -0.896**
                                (0.006)          (0.007)                 (0.006)                 (0.403)
Log(Equity)i*Post-Lehmant        -0.011           0.008                 0.018**                  -0.083
                                (0.013)          (0.009)                 (0.009)                 (0.647)

Controls                            Y                Y                      Y                       Y
Week-Fixed Effects                  Y                Y                      Y                       Y
Observations                     21,084           21,084                 21,084                  21,084
R-squared                         0.938            0.139                  0.088                   0.159




                                                    -48-
                   Table 9: Sponsor’s Financial Strength and Risk Taking – Robustness

 We estimate the regression model in Table 5, replacing the variable Log(Equity) with two alternative
 measure of sponsor’s financial strength. In Panel A, we measure financial strength using an indicator
 variable, Conglomerate, equal to one if a fund sponsor is affiliated with a commercial banking,
 investment banking, or insurance, and zero otherwise. In Panel B, we measure financial strength using
 an indicator variable, Credit Rating, equal to one if the sponsor has a credit rating of AA or higher and
 zero, otherwise. All regressions include the same control variables as in Table 5 (coefficients now
 shown). We report the coefficient of the interaction term of the financial strength variable and an
 indicator variable for the post period the corresponding difference-in-differences estimation at the bottom
 of the table. The standard errors are clustered at the fund level (double-clustered at fund-level and week
 for difference-in-difference estimation).. ***, **, * represent 1%, 5%, and 10% significance, respectively.

                                                Panel A: Conglomerate
                               Spreadi,t+1          Holdings Riski,t+1     Concentration Riski,t+1      Maturity Riski,t+1
Period                      Post         Pre         Post      Pre          Post         Pre            Post       Pre
                             (1)          (2)         (3)      (4)           (5)         (6)             (7)       (8)
Conglomeratei,t           -0.052**     -0.004       -0.057* -0.013 -0.060**              -0.025        -2.188       -1.25
                           (0.025)     (0.005)      (0.031) (0.031) (0.030)              (0.035)       (2.725)     (2.012)

Controls                     Y           Y             Y         Y            Y             Y             Y         Y
Week-Fixed Effects           Y           Y             Y         Y            Y             Y             Y         Y
Observations               7,717       7,585         7,717     7,585        7,717         7,585         7,717     7,585
R-squared                  0.904       0.975         0.104     0.067        0.062         0.067         0.097     0.083
Conglomeratei,t*Postt          -0.047**                 -0.044**                    -0.035*                  -0.938
                                (0.023)                  (0.022)                    (0.021)                 (1.764)


                                                Panel B: Credit Rating
                            Spreadi,t+1          Holdings Riski,t+1      Concentration Riski,t+1      Maturity Riski,t+1
         Period           Post        Pre         Post       Pre          Post         Pre            Post       Pre
                           (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)           (5)         (6)             (7)       (8)
Rating >=AA              -0.121** -0.001 -0.106** -0.003 -0.099**                      -0.050        -7.785       -3.929
                          (0.047) (0.004) (0.049) (0.064) (0.045)                      (0.047)       (5.254)     (5.263)

Controls                    Y         Y             Y         Y             Y              Y           Y          Y
Week-Fixed Effects          Y         Y             Y         Y             Y              Y           Y          Y
Observations              7,717     7,585         7,717     7,585         7,717          7,585       7,717     7,585
R-squared                 0.906     0.975         0.111     0.066         0.063          0.069       0.122      0.09
Credit Ratingi,t*Postt       -0.120***                -0.102                       -0.049                 -3.856
                              (0.044)                 (0.071)                     (0.057)                 (2.537)




                                                         -49-
                             Table 10: Alternative Explanations – Robustness
In Panel A, the dependent variable is the weekly managerial compensation, defined as a product of fund
size and its expenses (total compensation) or as a percentage value of fund assets charged as expenses.
The independent variables are defined in Table 5. All regressions include week-fixed effects. Columns (1)
and (3) are restricted to the period 8/1/2007-8/31/2008 (Post period) and columns (2) and (4) are
restricted to the period 7/1/2006-7/31/2007 (Pre period). In Panel B, the sample is all institutional prime
money market funds from August 2007 to August 2008 (Post period). The dependent variable is the
weekly annualized fund spread. Independent variables are Log(Equity), the ratio of prime funds assets
relative to equity funds assets, bond fund assets, balanced fund assets, and total fund assets, respectively.
All other controls are as in Table 5. In Panel C, the dependent variables are: the weekly annualized
spread (Spread); the fraction of assets held in risky assets (Holdings Risk); the concentration of the fund
assets (Concentration Risk); and the value-weighted average maturity of fund assets (Maturity Risk). The
independent variables are the natural logarithm of tangible equity of the fund sponsor and the natural
logarithm of the portfolio manager tenure at the fund. All other controls are as in Table 5. In Panel D, we
repeat the estimation in Table 5 for funds with assets under management over $10 billion. In Panel E, we
eliminate the Reserve Primary Fund in the estimation of Table 5. In Panel F, we repeat the estimation in
Table 5 and control for the quarterly standard deviation of fund flows.

                                    Panel A: Managerial Compensation
                                  Total Compensationi,t+1                Expensesi,t+1
                                  Post              Pre               Post              Pre
         Log(Equity)i            -0.034           -0.037             -0.005            -0.01
                                (0.039)           (0.035)           (0.011)           (0.011)

         Controls                  Y                   Y                   Y                Y
         Observations            7,723               7,596               7,723            7,596
         R-squared               0.91                 0.92                0.16            0.18




                                                    -50-
                           Panel B: Controlling for Sponsor Characteristics

                                                             Spreadi,t+1 (Post)
                                (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
 Log(Equity)i               -0.018*** -0.019*** -0.019*** -0.019*** -0.019*** -0.019***
                             (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)
 Prime/Equity Fund Assets     0.006
                             (0.009)
 Prime/Bond Fund Assets                 0.000
                                       (0.001)
 Prime/Balanced Fund Assets                       0.000
                                                  0.000
 Prime/Other Fund Assets                                    0.033*
                                                           (0.017)
 Prime/Money Funds                                                    0.026
                                                                     (0.072)
 Retail/Money Funds                                                             0.025
                                                                               (0.048)

 Controls                          Y            Y             Y            Y            Y            Y
 Observations                    7,603        7,717         6,982        7,717        7,717        7,717
 R-squared                       0.91         0.91          0.91         0.91         0.91         0.91


                                       Panel C: Management Tenure
                                                                         Concentration
                         Spreadi,t+1          Holdings Riski,t+1                               Maturity Riski,t+1
                                                                            Riski,t+1
       Period           Post       Pre      Post           Pre        Post           Pre         Post        Pre
                         (1)       (2)       (3)           (4)         (5)           (6)          (7)        (8)
Log(Equity)i         -0.022***    0.000 -0.025***        -0.010     -0.019*        -0.014     -1.723**     -0.763
                      (0.006)    (0.002)  (0.008)        (0.007)    (0.010)       (0.011)      (0.785)     (0.678)
Tenurei,t              -0.002     0.000   -0.004         -0.002      -0.002        -0.001      -0.144      -0.123
                      (0.002)     0.000   (0.003)        (0.002)    (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.134)     (0.121)

Controls                 Y           Y           Y          Y          Y             Y           Y           Y
Week-Fixed Effects       Y           Y           Y          Y          Y             Y           Y           Y
Observations           2,183       1,683       2,183      1,683      2,183         1,683       2,183       1,683
R-squared              0.965       0.994       0.172      0.217      0.133         0.276       0.262       0.223
Log(Equity)i*Postt        -0.022***               -0.015**                   -0.005                -0.960**
                           (0.006)                 (0.007)                   (0.006)                (0.429)
Tenurei,t*Postt             -0.002                 -0.002                    -0.001                 -0.020
                           (0.002)                 (0.002)                   (0.001)                (0.119)



                                                  -51-
                                      Panel D: Large Funds (>$10 billion)

                              Spreadi,t+1     Holdings Riski,t+1 Concentration Riski,t+1 Maturity Riski,t+1
   Period                   Post         Pre    Post     Pre        Post        Pre        Post      Pre
                             (1)         (2)     (3)     (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)      (8)
   Log(Equity)i          -0.022*** 0.001 -0.021* -0.009           -0.013      -0.015     -2.225** -0.694
                          (0.005)     (0.001) (0.011) (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.011)     (0.989) (0.926)

   Controls                  Y          Y         Y         Y            Y           Y            Y         Y
   Week-Fixed Effects        Y          Y         Y         Y            Y           Y            Y         Y
   Observations            2,183      1,683     2,183     1,683        2,183       1,683        2,183     1,683
   R-squared               0.965      0.994     0.172     0.217        0.133       0.276        0.262     0.223
   Log(Equity)i*Postt         -0.023***             -0.012*                   0.002                -1.530**
                               (0.006)              (0.006)                  (0.006)                (0.613)

                                   Panel E: Excluding Reserve Primary Fund
                          Spreadi,t+1      Holdings Riski,t+1 Concentration Riski,t+1            Maturity Riski,t+1
Period                  Post         Pre    Post       Pre    Post          Pre                  Post        Pre
                         (1)         (2)     (3)       (4)     (5)          (6)                   (7)        (8)
Log(Equity)i         -0.019***        0   -0.018** 0.002 -0.015           -0.003               -1.531*     -0.646
                      (0.006)     (0.002) (0.008) (0.010) (0.009)         (0.011)              (0.775)     (0.630)

Controls                  Y          Y          Y         Y           Y             Y             Y           Y
Week-Fixed Effects        Y          Y          Y         Y           Y             Y             Y           Y
Observations            7,640      7,529      7,640     7,529       7,640         7,529         7,640       7,529
R-squared               0.909      0.975      0.096     0.063       0.058         0.064         0.131       0.088
Log(Equity)i*Postt         -0.019***             -0.020***                  -0.012*                  -0.885**
                            (0.006)               (0.007)                   (0.006)                   (0.389)

                               Panel F: Controlling for Volatility of Fund Flows
                            Spreadi,t+1        Holdings Riski,t+1    Concentration Riski,t+1     Maturity Riski,t+1
Period                    Post         Pre      Post       Pre         Post        Pre            Post        Pre
                           (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)          (5)         (6)            (7)        (8)
 Log(Equity)i           -0.019***        0 -0.019**        0          -0.015*           -0.004 -1.652**        -0.72
                           (0.006) (0.002)   (0.008) (0.009)           (0.009)         (0.010)     (0.731)   (0.569)

Controls                   Y          Y          Y          Y           Y              Y            Y          Y
Week-Fixed Effects         Y          Y          Y          Y           Y              Y            Y          Y
Observations               7,682     7,552       7,682     7,552        7,682          7,552        7,682     7,552
R-squared                   0.91     0.975       0.145     0.119        0.074          0.108        0.171     0.129
Log(Equity)i*Postt         -0.020***              -0.021***                -0.013*                   -0.987**
                             (0.006)               (0.008)                 (0.007)                    (0.404)



                                                       -52-
                                                       Figure 1: Assets Holdings and Spread
We implement the regression in Table 3 for the period from January 2006 to August 2008. Each point represents the three-month average of
coefficients on the interaction between month-fixed effects and an indicator variable for repurchase agreements (Repo), bank deposits (Deposits),
bank obligation (Obligation), floating rates notes (FRNS), commercial paper (CP), and asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP), and respectively.
Each point represents the return relative to the omitted category (Treasury bills and agency debt) measured in percentage points.

                                       1.4
                                                                                                                                                                                              Pre                         Post

                                       1.2


                                         1
   Spread Relative to Treasuries (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Repos
                                       0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Deposits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Obligation
                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FRNS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CP
                                       0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ABCP


                                       0.2


                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Oct-07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Nov-07




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mar-08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Apr-08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Aug-08
                                                                                                                               Oct-06
                                                                                                                                        Nov-06




                                                                                                                                                                            Mar-07
                                                                                                                                                                                     Apr-07




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Aug-07
                                                                Mar-06
                                                                         Apr-06




                                                                                                             Aug-06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jan-08
                                                                                                                                                          Jan-07




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sep-07




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Feb-08
                                              Jan-06




                                                                                                                      Sep-06




                                                                                                                                                                   Feb-07
                                                       Feb-06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec-07




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          May-08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jun-08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jul-08
                                                                                  May-06




                                                                                                                                                 Dec-06




                                                                                                                                                                                              May-07
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jun-07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jul-07
                                                                                           Jun-06
                                                                                                    Jul-06




                                       -0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                       -53-
                    Figure 2: Relative Performance and Assets: RPF vs. CCR
This figure plots weekly total assets and the industry-adjusted spread of the Reserve Primary Fund
(Panel A) and Columbia Cash Reserves (Panel B) from January 2006 to August 2008. The industry-
adjusted spread is computed as a difference between each individual fund’s spread and the value-
weighted average spread of all institutional prime funds.

                                                Panel A: Reserve Primary Fund (RPF)
                50                                                                                       70

                45
                                                                                                         60
                40

                35                                                                                       50

                30
  basispoints




                                                                                                         40               Assets




                                                                                                              $ billion
                25                                                                                                        Return
                                                                                                         30
                20

                15                                                                                       20
                10
                                                                                                         10
                    5

                     0                                                                                   0
                    6/2/2006    10/2/2006    2/2/2007    6/2/2007     10/2/2007    2/2/2008   6/2/2008


                                              Panel B: Columbia Cash Reserves (CCR)
                        0                                                                                50

                                                                                                         45
                     -5
                                                                                                         40
                    -10
                                                                                                         35
                    -15
                                                                                                              $ billion




                                                                                                         30
      basispoints




                                                                                                                          Assets
                    -20                                                                                  25               Return
                                                                                                         20
                    -25
                                                                                                         15
                    -30
                                                                                                         10
                    -35
                                                                                                         5

                    -40                                                                                  0
                     6/2/2006    10/2/2006    2/2/2007    6/2/2007     10/2/2007   2/2/2008   6/2/2008



                                                                    -54-
                               Figure 3: Assets Holdings: RPF vs. CCR
This figure plots weekly holdings of the Reserve Primary Fund (Panel A) and the Columbia Cash
Reserves Fund (Panel B) from January 2007 to August 2008. U.S. + Repos is the share of assets
invested in U.S. Treasures, U.S. agency-debt, and repurchase agreements. ABCP is the share invested in
asset-backed commercial paper. Other is the share invested in other securities: bank obligations and
floating rates notes.

                                   Panel A: Reserve Primary Fund (RPF)
    90%

    80%

    70%

    60%
Percent




    50%
                                                                                                   U.S. +
                                                                                                   Repos
    40%
                                                                                                   ABCP
    30%

    20%                                                                                            Other

    10%

          0%
           1/4/2007    5/4/2007        9/4/2007           1/4/2008       5/4/2008


                                  Panel B: Columbia Cash Reserves (CCR)
     100%

          90%

          80%

          70%

          60%
Percent




                                                                                               ABCP
          50%
                                                                                               US & Repo
          40%                                                                                  Other
          30%

          20%

          10%

           0%
            1/5/2007   5/5/2007         9/5/2007          1/5/2008    5/5/2008



                                                   -55-
                             Figure 4: Implicit Guarantees and Risk Taking
Each of the four panels below plots interaction coefficients from an OLS regression. The dependent
variable is the respective risk measure: spread, holdings risk, concentration, and maturity. The main
independent variable is the interaction of the fund sponsor’s equity and monthly indicator variables. We
control for all other variables defined in Table 5.

                                            Panel A: Spread

 0.02
                                              Pre      Post
 0.01

    0

 -0.01

 -0.02

 -0.03

 -0.04

 -0.05

 -0.06

 -0.07

 -0.08




                                        Panel B: Holdings Risk
                                             Pre           Post
   0.03

   0.02

   0.01

         0

  -0.01

  -0.02

  -0.03

  -0.04

  -0.05




                                                    -56-
         Panel C: Concentration Risk
0.03


0.02


0.01


   0


-0.01


-0.02


-0.03


-0.04


-0.05




           Panel D: Maturity Risk



  1.00



  0.00



 -1.00



 -2.00



 -3.00



 -4.00




                    -57-
