                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                      HEALTH AND MORTALITY DELTA:
       ASSESSING THE WELFARE COST OF HOUSEHOLD INSURANCE CHOICE

                                            Ralph Koijen
                                      Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
                                           Motohiro Yogo

                                        Working Paper 17325
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17325


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011

The authors acknowledge financial support from Netspar, and Koijen acknowledges financial support
from the European Research Council (grant 338082). The Health and Retirement Study is sponsored
by the National Institute on Aging (grant U01- AG009740) and is conducted by the University of Michigan.
For comments and discussions, we thank three referees, Peter Bossaerts, Jiajia Cui, Frank de Jong,
Liran Einav, Michael Gallmeyer, Ben Heijdra, Deborah Lucas, Robin Lumsdaine, Alexander Michaelides,
Olivia Mitchell, Theo Nijman, Radek Paluszynski, Sam Schulhofer-Wohl, Kenneth Singleton, Pascal
St-Amour, Mogens Steffensen, and Mark Warshawsky. We also thank seminar participants at APG,
Australian National University, Columbia University, Erasmus University, Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Financial Engines, Georgetown University, Georgia
State University, Maastricht University, New York University, Northwestern University, Princeton
University, Tilburg University, University of Chicago, University of Minnesota, University of New
South Wales, University of Technology Sydney, University of Tokyo, University of Utah, Vanderbilt
University, 2011 Netspar International Pension Workshop, 2011 SED Annual Meeting, 2011 UBC
Summer Finance Conference, 2011 Conference on Economic Decisionmaking, 2012 AEA Annual
Meeting, 2012 Utah Winter Finance Conference, 2012 LAEF Conference on Health and Mortality,
2012 Wharton Conference on Household Portfolio Choice and Investment Decisions, 2012 NBER
Summer Institute Economics of Household Saving Workshop, 2012 EFA Annual Meeting, 2012 Systemic
Risk Conference: Economists Meet Neurologists, 2012 NBER-Oxford Saïd-CFS-EIEF Conference
on Household Finance, 2012 Q-Group Fall Seminar, 2013 NBER Personal Retirement Challenges
Meeting, and 2014 AFA Annual Meeting. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Ralph Koijen, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Motohiro Yogo. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Health and Mortality Delta: Assessing the Welfare Cost of Household Insurance Choice
Ralph Koijen, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Motohiro Yogo
NBER Working Paper No. 17325
August 2011, Revised December 2015
JEL No. D14,D91,G11,I13

                                              ABSTRACT

We develop a pair of risk measures, health and mortality delta, for the universe of life and health insurance
products. A life-cycle model of insurance choice simplifies to replicating the optimal health and mortality
delta through a portfolio of insurance products. We estimate the model to explain the observed variation
in health and mortality delta implied by the ownership of life insurance, annuities including private
pensions, and long-term care insurance in the Health and Retirement Study. For the median household
aged 51 to 57, the lifetime welfare cost of market incompleteness and suboptimal choice is 3.2% of
total wealth.


Ralph Koijen                                          Motohiro Yogo
London Business School                                Department of Economics
Regent's Park                                         Princeton University
London NW1 4SA                                        26 Prospect Avenue
United Kingdom                                        Princeton, NJ 08540
rkoijen@london.edu                                    and NBER
                                                      myogo@princeton.edu
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 W 4th Street, Suite 9-120
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
svnieuwe@stern.nyu.edu
Retail ﬁnancial advisors and insurance companies oﬀer a wide variety of insurance products
that includes life insurance, annuities, and long-term care insurance. They oﬀer each of
these products in a full range of maturities and payout structures. Examples include term life
insurance with guaranteed term up to 30 years, universal and whole life insurance, immediate
annuities, and deferred annuities whose income is deferrable for a year or longer. This variety
begs for a risk measure that allows households to assess the degree of complementarity
and substitutability between various products and ultimately choose an optimal portfolio of
products. Such risk measures already exist in other parts of the retail ﬁnancial industry.
For example, beta measures an equity product’s exposure to aggregate market risk, while
duration measures a ﬁxed-income product’s exposure to interest rate risk. The existence
of these risk measures, based on sound economic theory, has proven to be tremendously
valuable in quantifying and managing ﬁnancial risk for both households and institutions.
    In this paper, we develop a pair of risk measures for the universe of life and health
insurance products, which we refer to as health and mortality delta. Health delta measures
the diﬀerential payoﬀ that a product delivers in poor health, while mortality delta measures
the diﬀerential payoﬀ that a product delivers at death. A life-cycle model of insurance
choice implies optimal consumption as well as optimal health and mortality delta, which
are determined by household preferences and state variables (i.e., age, birth cohort, health,
and wealth). An optimal portfolio of insurance products, not necessarily unique, aggregates
health and mortality delta over individual products to replicate the optimal health and
mortality delta predicted by the life-cycle model.
    Using our risk measures, we assess how close the observed demand for private insurance
is to the optimal demand, given the provision of public insurance through Social Security
and Medicare. For each household in the Health and Retirement Study, we calculate the
health and mortality delta implied by its ownership of term and whole life insurance, annu-
ities including private pensions (i.e., deﬁned beneﬁt plans), and long-term care insurance.
We estimate household preferences, allowing the bequest motive to vary across households,
to minimize the welfare cost implied by the deviations of observed demand from the opti-
mal demand predicted by the life-cycle model. We achieve sharp identiﬁcation of relative
risk aversion, the average bequest motive, and the complementarity of consumption and
health. Insurance choice, which embeds the desired path of wealth in future health states,
is much more informative than the realized path of savings for identifying these preference
parameters.
   The life-cycle model explains 68% of the variation in observed health delta and 83% of
the variation in observed mortality delta. Consistent with economic intuition, we ﬁnd that
married households and those with living children have stronger bequest motives. We also


                                              2
ﬁnd stronger bequest motives for more educated and wealthier households. Overall, these
household characteristics explain 66% of the variation in bequest motives.
   Although the life-cycle model explains most of the variation in observed health and
mortality delta across households, it fails to explain the variation within a household over
time. The model prescribes that households decrease their health and mortality delta over the
life cycle by rebalancing from life insurance to annuities. Observed health and mortality delta
are much more persistent than the predictions of the life-cycle model, due to the default path
of annuitization from private pensions and the lack of rebalancing. We uncover a new puzzle
that is distinct from the “annuity puzzle,” which concerns the low level of annuitization
relative to a life-cycle model with no bequest motive. The unexplained within-household
variation in the degree of annuitization, rather than the average level of annuitization, is
puzzling from the perspective of life-cycle theory.
   For each household, we estimate the welfare cost of deviations from the optimal demand,
which we interpret as the joint cost of market incompleteness (due to private information,
borrowing constraints, or other frictions outside the model) and suboptimal choice. For the
median household aged 51 to 57, the lifetime welfare cost is 3.2% of total wealth, deﬁned
as the sum of ﬁnancial and housing wealth and the present value of future income minus
out-of-pocket health expenses. Our estimate is an order of magnitude larger than the welfare
cost of underdiversiﬁcation in stock and mutual fund portfolios (e.g., Calvet, Campbell, and
Sodini (2007) estimate it to be 0.5% of disposable income for the median Swedish household).
Most of the welfare cost is explained by the deviations from optimal mortality delta, instead
of the deviations from optimal health delta. In other words, choices over life insurance and
annuities have a much larger welfare impact than choices over long-term care insurance.
   This paper is not the ﬁrst attempt to understand the demand for life insurance (Bernheim
(1991), Inkmann and Michaelides (2012)), annuities (Brown (2001), Inkmann, Lopes, and
Michaelides (2011)), or long-term care insurance (Brown and Finkelstein (2008), Lockwood
(2013)). Relative to the previous literature, an important methodological contribution is
to examine insurance choice comprehensively as a portfolio-choice problem, instead of one
product at a time. By collapsing insurance choice into a pair of risk measures, we explicitly
account for the complementarity and substitutability between various products. In partic-
ular, annuities and private pensions can partially substitute for long-term care insurance,
by insuring that households have suﬃcient income to cover late-life health expenses as long
as they live. Therefore, one cannot study the demand for long-term care insurance without
simultaneously thinking about annuities and private pensions.
   The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section I, we develop a life-cycle
model in which households face health and mortality risk and choose from a complete set of


                                              3
insurance products that includes life insurance, annuities, and supplemental health insurance.
In Section II, we derive the optimal demand for insurance and a key formula for measuring
the welfare cost of deviations from the optimal demand. In Section III, we calibrate the life-
cycle model based on the Health and Retirement Study. In Section IV, we estimate household
preferences and compare the observed demand to the optimal demand predicted by the life-
cycle model. We also estimate the welfare cost of deviations from the optimal demand.
In Section V, we illustrate how a portfolio of existing insurance products can replicate the
optimal health and mortality delta predicted by the life-cycle model. Section VI concludes
with practical implications of our study for retail ﬁnancial advisors and insurance companies.


              I.   A Life-Cycle Model with Health and Mortality Risk

     We develop a life-cycle model in which a household faces health and mortality risk that
aﬀects life expectancy, health expenses, and the marginal utility of consumption or wealth.
The household can accumulate ﬁnancial and housing wealth and also purchase a complete
set of insurance products that includes life insurance, annuities, and supplemental health
insurance.
    Complete markets is a natural starting point, given the rich menu of insurance products
that retail ﬁnancial advisors and insurance companies already oﬀer. In Section V, we show
that a realistic portfolio of existing insurance products replicates the optimal health and
mortality delta predicted by a calibrated version of the life-cycle model. Even if actual
markets are incomplete, our framework is a useful benchmark for quantifying the importance
of market incompleteness that may arise for various reasons, including private information
and borrowing constraints.

A.    Health and Mortality Risk

     In our model, health refers to any information that is veriﬁable through medical under-
writing that involves a health examination and a review of medical history. For tractability,
we do not model residual private information, such as self-assessments of health, that could
aﬀect the demand for insurance. In Section IV, however, we show that residual private
information does not explain much of the observed demand for insurance.

                             A.1. Health Transition Probabilities

     A household consists of an insured and other members who share common resources. The
insured lives for at most T periods and dies with certainty in period T + 1. In each period
t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, the insured’s health is in one of three states, indexed by ht ∈ {1, 2, 3}. The

                                                4
health states are ordered so that ht = 1 corresponds to death, ht = 2 corresponds to poor
health, and ht = 3 corresponds to good health.
   Our empirical framework is based on three states because this is the minimum number
necessary to model both health and mortality risk. The three-state model can be interpreted
as a discrete-time analog of a continuous-time model in which a continuous process drives
health risk and a jump process drives mortality risk. As we discuss in Section III, we limit our
estimation sample to households that have adequate health insurance coverage, and hence,
whose primary out-of-pocket health expense is nursing home care. This limits potential
heterogeneity in health insurance coverage that would require additional health states.
   The insured’s health evolves from period t to t + 1 according to a Markov chain with a
3 × 3 transition matrix πt . We denote the (i, j)th element of the transition matrix by

                                    πt (i, j) = Pr(ht+1 = j|ht = i).                            (1)

Conditional on being in health state i in period t, πt (i, j) is the probability of being in health
state j in period t + 1. Death is an absorbing state, so πt (1, 1) = 1. Let ei denote a 3 × 1
vector with the ith element equal to one and the other elements equal to zero. We deﬁne an
n-period transition probability as

                                                              
                                                              n−1
                                       πtn (i, j)   =   ei         πt+s ej .                   (2)
                                                              s=0


Conditional on being in health state i in period t, πtn (i, j) is the probability of being in health
state j in period t + n.
    We deﬁne an n-period mortality rate as
                              
                                              ei πt e1       if n = 1
                 pt (n|i) =        
                                     n−2                                .                      (3)
                                  ei s=0 πt+s 0 e2 e3 πt+n−1 e1 if n > 1

Conditional on being in health state i in period t, pt (n|i) is the probability of being alive in
period t + n − 1 but dead in period t + n. We also deﬁne an n-period survival probability as

                                        qt (n|i) = 1 − πtn (i, 1).                              (4)

Conditional on being in health state i in period t, qt (n|i) is the probability of being alive in
period t + n.




                                                        5
                                 A.2.     Out-of-Pocket Health Expenses

       The household has employer-provided health insurance while working and Medicare in
retirement, which cover basic health expenses. However, the household may face out-of-
pocket health expenses not covered by basic health insurance, for which it can purchase
supplemental health insurance. For example, Medicare does not cover nursing home care,
for which the household could purchase long-term care insurance.
    In the absence of supplemental health insurance, the household faces an out-of-pocket
health expense Mt in each period t.1 The distribution of out-of-pocket health expenses
depends on age and health, where Mt (j) denotes the realization for health state j. Naturally,
poor health is associated with higher out-of-pocket health expenses. We assume that end-of-
life health expenses are incurred in the last period prior to death. There is no health expense
at death, so Mt (1) = 0.

B. Insurance Products

   The household can accumulate ﬁnancial and housing wealth, which earns gross interest R.
In addition, the household can purchase life insurance, annuities, and supplemental health
insurance of all maturities.

                                            B.1. Life Insurance

       Let ½t (j) denote an indicator function that is equal to one if the insured is in health state
j in period t. Term life insurance of maturity n issued in period t pays out a death beneﬁt
(normalized to one) of

                                        DL,t+s (n − s|ht+s ) = ½t+s (1)                                     (5)

per unit upon death of the insured in any period s ∈ {1, . . . , n}. Following the usual notation
in the term structure literature, the argument n − s in equation (5) denotes the number of
periods until maturity. In each period t, the maximum possible maturity is T − t because
the insured dies with certainty in period T + 1. For our purposes, universal or whole life
insurance is a special case of term life insurance with the maximum maturity.
   The pricing of life insurance depends on the insured’s age and health at issuance of the
policy.2 Naturally, younger and healthier individuals with longer life expectancy pay a lower
   1
     To focus on insurance choice, we abstract from the endogenous choice of health expenditure (see Picone,
Uribe, and Wilson (1998), Yogo (2009), and Hugonnier, Pelgrin, and St-Amour (2013)).
   2
     The insurer could charge a premium that is independent of health in a pooling equilibrium (e.g., group life
insurance). In that case, we would have to solve for a pooling price at which the insurer breaks even, given the


                                                       6
premium. Conditional on being in health state ht in period t, the price of n-period life
insurance per unit of death beneﬁt is

                                                         
                                                         n
                                                           pt (s|ht )
                                        PL,t (n|ht ) =                     ,                              (6)
                                                         s=1
                                                                 RLs

where RL ≤ R is the discount rate. The pricing of life insurance is actuarially fair when
RL = R, while RL < R implies a markup.

                                       B.2. Deferred Annuities

    A deferred annuity of maturity n issued in period t pays out a constant income (normal-
ized to one) of
                                                    
                                                                0              if s < n
                          DA,t+s (n − s|ht+s ) =                                                          (7)
                                                          1 − ½t+s (1)         if s ≥ n

per unit in each period s ∈ {1, . . . , T − t} that the insured is alive. In each period t, the
maximum possible maturity is T − t because the insured dies with certainty in period T + 1.
For our purposes, an immediate annuity is a special case of deferred annuities with the
minimum maturity (i.e., n = 1).
   The pricing of annuities depends on the insured’s age and health at issuance of the
policy.3 Naturally, younger and healthier individuals with longer life expectancy pay a
higher premium. Conditional on being in health state ht in period t, the price of an n-period
annuity per unit of income is

                                                         
                                                         T −t
                                                              qt (s|ht )
                                        PA,t (n|ht ) =            s
                                                                           ,                              (8)
                                                         s=n
                                                                 RA

where RA ≤ R is the discount rate.
aggregate demand for a given product. This extension of our framework is conceptually straightforward but
computationally challenging. We refer the reader to a related literature that studies the welfare implications
of pooled pricing and private information in annuity (Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf (2010)) and health
insurance markets (Einav, Finkelstein, and Cullen (2010), Bundorf, Levin, and Mahoney (2012)).
   3
     In the U.S., annuities can be purchased without medical underwriting at a price that depends only
on gender and age. However, those with a serious health condition can purchase medically underwritten
annuities at a lower price that reﬂects their impaired mortality.




                                                      7
                             B.3. Supplemental Health Insurance

   Supplemental health insurance of maturity n issued in period t covers

                      DH,t+s (n − s|ht+s ) = ½t+s (2)(Mt+s (2) − Mt+s (3))                     (9)

per unit in each period s ∈ {1, . . . , n} that the insured is in poor health. Insofar as health
expenses include nursing home stays and home health care, we also interpret this product
as long-term care insurance. A unit of this product represents full coverage, equating health
expenses across all health states in which the insured is alive. In each period t, the maximum
possible maturity is T − t because the insured dies with certainty in period T + 1.
   The pricing of supplemental health insurance depends on the insured’s age and health
at issuance of the policy. Naturally, younger and healthier individuals with lower expected
health expenses pay a lower premium. Conditional on being in health state ht in period t,
the price of n-period supplemental health insurance per unit of coverage is

                                         
                                         n
                                           π s (ht , 2)(Mt+s (2) − Mt+s (3))
                                               t
                        PH,t (n|ht ) =                     s
                                                                               ,              (10)
                                         s=1
                                                          RH

where RH ≤ R is the discount rate.

C. Health and Mortality Delta for Insurance Products

   For each insurance product i = {L, A, H} of maturity n in period t, we deﬁne its health
delta per unit as

    Δi,t (n) = Pi,t+1 (n − 1|2) + Di,t+1 (n − 1|2) − (Pi,t+1 (n − 1|3) + Di,t+1 (n − 1|3)).   (11)

Health delta measures the diﬀerential payoﬀ that a policy delivers in poor health relative to
good health in period t + 1. Similarly, we deﬁne its mortality delta per unit as

                δi,t (n) = Di,t+1 (n − 1|1) − (Pi,t+1 (n − 1|3) + Di,t+1 (n − 1|3)).          (12)

Mortality delta measures the diﬀerential payoﬀ that a policy delivers at death relative to
good health in period t + 1.
    Figure 1 illustrates the relation between the payoﬀs of a policy and its health and mor-
tality delta. In Section III, we estimate the payoﬀs based on the Health and Retirement
Study, which is not essential for the purposes of this illustration. The solid line represents
the payoﬀs of a policy in the three possible health states in the subsequent period. Health


                                                   8
delta is the payoﬀ of a policy in poor health relative to good health, which is minus the slope
of the dashed line if the horizontal distance between good and poor health is one. Mortality
delta is the payoﬀ of a policy at death relative to good health, which is minus the slope of
the dotted line if the horizontal distance between good health and death is one.
   Long-term life insurance and supplemental health insurance have positive health delta,
while deferred annuities have negative health delta. In other words, long-term life insurance
is a substitute for supplemental health insurance in terms of health delta. This is because
the expected payoﬀ from long-term life insurance increases in poor health when the insured
has shorter life expectancy, just like supplemental health insurance. In contrast, deferred
annuities are complements of supplemental health insurance in terms of health delta. This
is because the expected payoﬀ from deferred annuities decreases in poor health when the
insured has shorter life expectancy, which is the opposite of supplemental health insurance.
    Life insurance has positive mortality delta, while deferred annuities and long-term health
insurance have negative mortality delta. In other words, deferred annuities and long-term
health insurance are complements of life insurance in terms of mortality delta. This is
because deferred annuities and long-term health insurance lose their value entirely at death,
which is the opposite of life insurance. Therefore, deferred annuities and long-term health
insurance are both eﬀective ways to transfer wealth to future states in which the insured
remains alive and faces high health expenses.
   Figure 1 highlights the importance of studying insurance products together, instead of
one at a time. Long-term life insurance not only insures mortality risk, but also has positive
exposure to health delta. Deferred annuities not only insure longevity risk, but also have
negative exposure to health delta. Finally, long-term health insurance not only insures health
risk, but also has negative exposure to mortality delta.

D. Budget Constraint

   In each period t that the insured is alive, the household starts with ﬁnancial wealth At
and a stock of owner-occupied housing Gt−1 . The housing stock evolves according to the law
of motion

                                   Gt = (1 − δ)Gt−1 + It ,                                (13)

where δ ∈ [0, 1) is the depreciation rate and It is gross investment in period t. Housing
investment can be negative as long as Gt ≥ 0. For simplicity, we assume that the relative price
of housing is Q = 1/R. We also abstract from transaction costs and borrowing constraints
that pin down the portfolio choice between ﬁnancial assets and housing (see Cocco (2005),


                                              9
Yao and Zhang (2005), Yogo (2009), and Nakajima and Telyukova (2012)).
   Let Ft denote the face value of bonds with price 1/R per unit. Similarly, let Bi,t (n) ≥ 0
denote the face value for each insurance product i of maturity n with price Pi,t (n) per unit.
The household’s savings in period t is

                                           Ft                 
                                                               T −t
                At + Yt − Mt − C t − QIt =    +                       Pi,t (n)Bi,t (n).   (14)
                                           R
                                                     i={L,A,H} n=1


The household receives income Yt , pays health expenses Mt , consumes C t , and spends QIt
on housing. The household saves the wealth remaining after these expenditures in bonds,
life insurance, annuities, and supplemental health insurance. By substituting out housing
investment through equation (13), we can rewrite equation (14) as

                                         Ft + Gt             
                                                              T −t
                 At + Yt − Mt − Ct =             +                   Pi,t (n)Bi,t (n),    (15)
                                            R
                                                     i={L,A,H} n=1


where

                                         At = At + Gt−1                                   (16)

is wealth inclusive of housing and
                                          
                                               1−δ
                                Ct = C t + 1 −              Gt−1                          (17)
                                                R

is consumption inclusive of the service ﬂow from owner-occupied housing.
   We model a mortgage or a home equity loan as a short position in bonds. We also assume
that the household can borrow from its savings in insurance products at a gross interest rate
R. Thus, a loan from insurance products is a short position in bonds, which is a simple
way to model actual features of these products. The premiums on long-term life insurance
and long-term care insurance are typically paid as constant periodic payments, instead of
a lump-sum payment up front. Periodic payments are essentially equivalent to borrowing
against the value of the policy because the present value of the periodic payments is equal
to the value of the policy at issuance. Whole life insurance typically has an explicit option
to borrow from the cash surrender value of the policy. Finally, households can take out a
loan from annuities in a deﬁned contribution plan.




                                              10
     The intertemporal budget constraint is

                                             
                                              T −t
             At+1 = Ft + Gt +                        (Pi,t+1 (n − 1) + Di,t+1 (n − 1))Bi,t (n).   (18)
                                 i={L,A,H} n=1


That is, wealth in the subsequent period is equal to the value of bonds and housing plus
the (realized and expected) payoﬀs from life insurance, annuities, and supplemental health
insurance. Let At+1 (j) denote wealth if health state j is realized in period t+1. In particular,
wealth that is bequeathed if the insured dies in period t + 1 is

                                                                
                                                                T −t
                                At+1 (1) = Ft + Gt +                   BL,t (n).                  (19)
                                                                n=1


That is, wealth at the insured’s death is equal to the value of bonds and housing plus
the death beneﬁt from life insurance. The household must have nonnegative wealth at the
insured’s death (i.e., At+1 (1) ≥ 0).

E.    Objective Function

   The household maximizes expected utility over consumption while alive and the bequest
upon death. The household’s objective function in health state ht ∈ {2, 3} is

                      Ut (ht ) = ω(ht )γ Ct1−γ + β πt (ht , 1)ω(1)γ At+1 (1)1−γ
                                                                         1/(1−γ)
                                    
                                    3
                                                                1−γ
                                +         πt (ht , j)Ut+1 (j)                                     (20)
                                    j=2


with terminal value

                                     UT (hT ) = ω(hT )γ/(1−γ) CT .                                (21)

    The parameter β ∈ (0, 1) is the subjective discount factor. The parameter γ > 1 is
relative risk aversion, or the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution. The health
state-dependent utility parameter ω(ht ) ≥ 0 allows the marginal utility of consumption or
wealth to vary across health states. The presence of a bequest motive is parameterized as
ω(1) > 0, in contrast to its absence ω(1) = 0. In Section IV, we allow the bequest motive to
vary across households. Consumption and health are complements if the marginal utility of
consumption is lower in poor health, which is parameterized as ω(2) < ω(3). For example,
the marginal utility of housing services may decrease with physical disability. Otherwise,


                                                       11
consumption and health are substitutes if ω(2) > ω(3).
   Our view is that housing is more similar to bonds than insurance products because its
payoﬀs do not depend on the realized health state. The payoﬀs from housing only depend on
the resale value to a third-party buyer or the collateral value to a third-party lender, which
are independent of the household’s health outcomes. In our language, housing has zero
health and mortality delta, just like bonds. For this reason, we model bonds and housing as
perfect substitutes. By altering the objective function (20) so that nonhousing consumption
and housing are imperfect substitutes, one could allow the marginal utility of housing to
decrease more rapidly in poor health than that of nonhousing consumption. This would
make housing a better hedge for poor health than bonds and more similar to insurance
products (Davidoﬀ (2010)).


                         II.   Optimal Demand for Insurance

     We derive the optimal demand for insurance under complete markets. When markets are
complete, there are potentially many combinations of insurance products that achieve the
same consumption and wealth allocations. Therefore, we characterize the unique solution
to the life-cycle problem in terms of optimal consumption as well as optimal health and
mortality delta. We then derive a key formula for measuring the welfare cost of deviations
from the optimal demand.

A.    Optimal Health and Mortality Delta

   We deﬁne health delta in period t as the diﬀerence in realized wealth between poor and
good health in period t + 1:

                                  Δt = At+1 (2) − At+1 (3).                              (22)

Similarly, we deﬁne mortality delta in period t as the diﬀerence in realized wealth between
death and good health in period t + 1:

                                   δt = At+1 (1) − At+1 (3).                             (23)




                                              12
PROPOSITION 1: The solution to the life-cycle problem under complete markets is
                                                                   
                                       
                                       T −t
                                            Et [Yt+s − Mt+s |ht ]
               Ct∗ =ct (ht ) At +                                       ,                  (24)
                                           s=0
                                                    Rs
                           1/γ
                                       
                     (βR)        Ct∗ω(2)        ω(3)
               Δ∗t =                       −
                       ω(ht )      ct+1 (2) ct+1 (3)
                        T −t                                               
                         Et+1 [Yt+s − Mt+s |2] − Et+1 [Yt+s − Mt+s |3]
                     −                                                        ,            (25)
                         s=1
                                                   Rs−1
                                                       
                                                        T −t
                 ∗   (βR)1/γ Ct∗            ω(3)             Et+1 [Yt+s − Mt+s |3]
                δt =               ω(1) −            +                             .       (26)
                       ω(ht )              ct+1 (3)     s=1
                                                                     R s−1



The average propensity to consume in health state ht ∈ {2, 3} is
                                                                                 −1
                            πt (ht , 1)(βR)1/γ ω(1)  πt (ht , j)(βR)1/γ ω(j)
                                                            3
             ct (ht ) = 1 +                        +                                   ,   (27)
                                     Rω(ht )         j=2
                                                          Rω(ht )ct+1 (j)

with terminal value cT (hT ) = 1.

Proof: See Appendix A.

    The optimal policy equates the marginal utility of consumption or wealth across all future
health states (Yaari (1965)). The expression for optimal health delta Δ∗t shows that three
forces drive the household’s desire to insure poor health relative to good health. First,
the household would like to deliver relatively more wealth to the health state in which the
marginal utility of consumption is high, determined by the relative magnitudes of ω(2) and
ω(3). Second, the household would like to deliver relatively more wealth to the health state
in which the average propensity to consume is low, determined by the relative magnitudes
of ct+1 (2) and ct+1 (3). Naturally, the household consumes more slowly out of wealth in good
health, which is associated with longer life expectancy. Finally, the household would like to
deliver relatively more wealth to the health state in which lifetime disposable income (i.e.,
income minus out-of-pocket health expenses) is low. Naturally, the household has lower
lifetime disposable income in poor health, which is associated with shorter life expectancy,
higher health expenses, and potentially lower income.
   The same three forces also explain the expression for optimal mortality delta δt∗ . First,
the household would like to deliver relatively more wealth to death if the bequest motive
ω(1) is high. Second, the household would like to deliver relatively more wealth to death
if the average propensity to consume in good health ct+1 (3) is high. Finally, the household


                                                    13
would like to deliver relatively more wealth to death if lifetime disposable income is high in
good health.

B. Optimal Portfolio of Insurance Products

PROPOSITION 2: Given an optimal consumption policy, a feasible portfolio policy that sat-
isfies the budget constraint (15) is optimal if it satisfies the equations

                                                 
                                                  T −t
                               Δ∗t   =                   Δi,t (n)Bi,t (n),                (28)
                                         i={L,A,H} n=1

                                                 
                                                  T −t
                                δt∗ =                    δi,t (n)Bi,t (n).                (29)
                                         i={L,A,H} n=1


Proof: We substitute the intertemporal budget constraint (18) into the deﬁnitions of optimal
health and mortality delta (i.e., equations (22) and (23)). We then use the deﬁnitions of
health and mortality delta for each insurance product (i.e., equations (11) and (12)) to derive
equations (28) and (29).

   Proposition 2 shows that health and mortality delta are suﬃcient for constructing an
optimal portfolio of insurance products. Health delta Δi,t (n) measures the marginal contri-
bution that insurance product i of maturity n has to the overall health delta. A portfolio,
not necessarily unique, that satisﬁes equation (28) delivers the optimal amount of wealth to
poor health in period t + 1. Similarly, mortality delta δi,t (n) measures the marginal contri-
bution that insurance product i of maturity n has to the overall mortality delta. A portfolio,
not necessarily unique, that satisﬁes equation (29) delivers the optimal amount of wealth to
death in period t + 1.
   A common view in the life-cycle literature is that the household can simply accumulate
ﬁnancial and housing wealth to “self-insure” late-life health expenses (Hubbard, Skinner,
and Zeldes (1994)). However, this result relies on an unrealistic modeling assumption that
excludes insurance products from the investment opportunity set. Proposition 2 implies that
a portfolio of only bonds and housing without insurance products is optimal only if optimal
health and mortality delta are equal to zero. By Proposition 1, optimal health and mortality
delta are equal to zero only in the knife-edge case that the utility weight on poor health ω(2)
is suﬃciently low and the bequest motive ω(1) is suﬃciently high that the desired path of
wealth is identical across all future health states.




                                                   14
C. Welfare Cost of Deviations from Optimal Health and Mortality Delta

   Suppose that the household’s demand for insurance were to deviate from the optimal
demand in Proposition 1. We estimate the welfare cost of such deviations from the optimal
demand through a second-order Taylor approximation around the known value function
under complete markets.

PROPOSITION 3: Let Vt∗ denote the value function associated with the optimal path
{Δ∗t+s−1 (i), δt+s−1
               ∗
                     (i)}ns=1 of health and mortality delta under complete markets. Let Vt de-
note the value function associated with an alternative path {Δt+s−1 (i), δt+s−1 (i)}ns=1 of health
and mortality delta that satisfies the budget constraint. The welfare cost of deviations from
optimal health and mortality delta is

        Vt
Lt (n) =     −1
        Vt∗
               3 
        1 
            n
                      ∂ 2 Lt (n)                  ∗          2    ∂ 2 Lt (n)                 ∗
      ≈                          (Δ  t+s−1 (i) − Δt+s−1 (i))   +              (δt+s−1 (i) − δt+s−1 (i))2
        2 s=1 i=2 ∂Δt+s−1 (i)2                                   ∂δt+s−1 (i)2
                                                                                        
                  ∂ 2 Lt (n)                        ∗                         ∗
        +2                          (Δt+s−1 (i) − Δt+s−1 (i))(δt+s−1 (i) − δt+s−1 (i)) ,            (30)
             ∂Δt+s−1 (i)∂δt+s−1 (i)

where the expressions for the second partial derivatives are given in Appendix A.

Proof: See Appendix A.

   The observed demand for insurance may deviate from the optimal demand for two rea-
sons. First, markets may be incomplete due to private information, borrowing constraints,
or other frictions outside the model. Second, the observed demand may be suboptimal, given
the complexity of the portfolio-choice problem and the lack of academic guidance. Because
these two hypotheses are not mutually exclusive and diﬃcult to distinguish based on the
available data, we do not quantify their relative importance. Instead, we focus on estimating
the joint cost of market incompleteness and suboptimal choice in this paper.


                          III.   Calibrating the Life-Cycle Model

    We calibrate the life-cycle model based on the Health and Retirement Study, which is
a representative panel of older households in the U.S. since 1992. This household survey is
uniquely suited for our study because it contains household-level data on health outcomes,
health expenses, income, and wealth as well as ownership of life insurance, annuities, private
pensions, and long-term care insurance. Some of these critical variables are missing in other


                                                  15
household surveys such as the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and the Survey of Consumer
Finances.
   We calibrate the life-cycle model so that each period corresponds to two years, matching
the frequency of interviews in the Health and Retirement Study. The life-cycle model starts
at age 51, corresponding to the youngest age at which households enter the survey. We
assume that the primary respondent dies with certainty at age 111, so there are 30 periods
(60 years) in total. We set the riskless interest rate to 2% annually, which is the average real
return on the one-year Treasury note during our sample period. Our remaining measure-
ment assumptions in this section are consistent with our maintained assumption of complete
markets.

A.   Estimation Sample

   We focus on households whose primary respondent is male and aged 51 or older at the
time of interview. We also require that income as well as ﬁnancial and housing wealth are
positive. Finally, we limit our sample to households that have adequate health insurance
coverage, and hence, whose primary out-of-pocket health expense is nursing home care. To
do so, we ﬁrst eliminate households whose primary respondent is on Medicaid. We then
select only those households whose primary respondent has employer-provided or individual
health insurance. For households aged 65 and older, this criterion includes those that have
supplemental coverage through Medicare Advantage (Part C), Medicare Part D, Medigap,
or long-term care insurance. However, it excludes households that are solely on traditional
Medicare (Parts A and B). Overall, this criterion eliminates 17% of otherwise eligible house-
holds at age 51, and 29% of otherwise eligible households at age 65. We believe that the
uniformity of health insurance coverage within the resulting sample trades oﬀ favorably
against a narrower concept of health risk and a smaller sample size. We refer the reader to
an earlier version of the paper (Koijen, Nieuwerburgh, and Yogo (2011)), in which we did
not limit the sample based on health insurance coverage.
    Life insurance is written on the life of an insured, while resources such as income and
wealth are shared by the members of a household. Because the primary respondent is typi-
cally married at the time of ﬁrst interview, we must make some measurement assumptions
when mapping the data to the life-cycle model. We measure health outcomes and the owner-
ship of life insurance, annuities including private pensions, and long-term care insurance for
only the primary respondent. We measure health expenses, income, and wealth at the house-
hold level. These measurement assumptions are consistent with the life-cycle model insofar
as the budget constraint holds for the household, and the primary respondent purchases life
insurance to leave a bequest for surviving members when he dies.

                                              16
B. Definition of the Health States

   In Table I, we estimate a probit model to predict how future mortality depends on doctor-
diagnosed health problems, its interaction with age, and cohort dummies. Doctor-diagnosed
health problems are statistically signiﬁcant predictors of future mortality. For example, the
marginal eﬀect of cancer on the mortality rate is 10.43 with a t-statistic of 7.10. This means
that males with cancer are 10.43 percentage points more likely to die within two years,
holding everything else constant. Past age 51, each additional 10 years in age is associated
with a 2.28 percentage point increase in the mortality rate. Younger cohorts are less likely
to die, compared with the oldest cohort of males born prior to 1911. Based on the estimated
probit model, we predict the mortality rate for the primary respondent at each interview.
   Mortality rates and health expenses are not perfectly correlated, and they both contain
important information about true unobserved health. We therefore deﬁne three health states
based on both factors.

  1. Death.

  2. Poor health: The predicted mortality rate is higher than the median conditional on
     age and birth cohort. In addition, out-of-pocket health expenses are higher than the
     median conditional on age, birth cohort, and the ownership of long-term care insurance.

  3. Good health: Alive and not in poor health.

Our deﬁnition of poor health conditions on age and birth cohort because mortality rates and
health expenses vary signiﬁcantly across these groups. In Appendix C, we show that our
results are robust to an alternative deﬁnition of poor health in which out-of-pocket health
expenses must be higher than the 75th percentile conditional on age, birth cohort, and the
ownership of long-term care insurance.

C. Description of the Sample

   To verify our deﬁnition of the health states, Panel A of Table II reports the prevalence of
doctor-diagnosed health problems and diﬃculty with activities of daily living by age group
and health state. Within each age group, males in poor health are more likely to have
doctor-diagnosed health problems. For example, among males aged 65 to 78, 28% of those
in poor health have had cancer, which is higher than 11% of those in good health. Older
males, especially those in poor health, are more likely to have diﬃculty with activities of
daily living. For example, among males aged 79 and older, 24% of those in poor health have
some diﬃculty dressing, which is higher than 13% of those in good health.

                                             17
   Panel B of Table II reports health care utilization by age group and health state. Within
each age group, males in poor health are more likely to have used health care in the two
years prior to the interview. For example, among males aged 79 and older, 14% of those in
poor health have stayed at a nursing home, which is higher than 5% of those in good health.
This is consistent with the fact that males in poor health have higher out-of-pocket health
expenses than those in good health.
    Panel C of Table II reports the ownership rates of life insurance, annuities including
private pensions, and long-term care insurance by age group and health state. Among males
aged 51 to 64, 72% of those in poor health and 71% of those in good health own term
life insurance. Although the ownership rate for life insurance decreases in age, it remains
remarkably high for older males. Among males aged 65 to 78, 55% of those in poor health
and 59% of those in good health receive annuity income from a private source that is not
Social Security. For the same age group, only 18% of those in good health and 20% of those
in poor health own long-term care insurance.
    Panel D of Table II reports the face value of life insurance, annuity and pension income,
and ﬁnancial and housing wealth by age group and health state. Among males aged 51 to
64 that own term life insurance, the median face value is $78.4k for those in poor health and
$81.0k for those in good health. Among males aged 65 to 78, the median annual annuity
and pension income is $11.9k for those in poor health and $12.8k for those in good health.
For the same age group, median ﬁnancial and housing wealth is $233.9k for those in poor
health and $257.6k for those in good health.

D. Health and Mortality Risk

                           D.1. Health Transition Probabilities

   After deﬁning the three health states, we estimate the transition probabilities between
the health states using an ordered probit model. The outcome variable is the health state
at two years from the present interview. The explanatory variables are dummies for present
health and 65 or older, a quadratic polynomial in age, log income, the interaction of the
dummies with the age polynomial and log income, and cohort dummies.
   Figure 2 reports the estimated transition probabilities by age and birth cohort, which
are the predicted probabilities from the ordered probit model. The 10 lines in each panel
represent the 10 cohorts in our sample, and the discontinuity at age 65 arises from the dummy
for 65 or older, which accounts for potential changes in household behavior that arise from
eligibility for Social Security and Medicare. The transition probability to death increases
rapidly in age, especially conditional on being in poor health. The transition probabilities


                                             18
also vary signiﬁcantly across cohorts, with the older cohorts more likely to transition into
death or poor health.
    To better understand the health dynamics implied by the estimated transition probabil-
ities, Panel A of Table III reports the long-run health transition probabilities (i.e., equation
(2)) for males born between 1936 and 1940 and in good health at age 51. The probability
of dying prior to age 65 is 0.24, and the probability of being in poor health at age 65 is
0.22. Panel B reports the average life expectancy conditional on age and health for the same
group. Males in poor health at age 65 are expected to live 17 more years, which is shorter
than the 20 years for those in good health.

                               D.2. Out-of-Pocket Health Expenses

       In Appendix B, we estimate a panel regression model of out-of-pocket health expenses
on dummies for present health and 65 or older, a quadratic polynomial in age, log income,
and the interaction of the dummies with the age polynomial and log income. Our measure
of out-of-pocket health expenses is comprehensive, including nursing home and end-of-life
health expenses. We exclude households that own long-term care insurance in our estimation
because the relevant measure in the life-cycle model is out-of-pocket health expenses in the
absence of additional coverage.
    Panel C of Table III reports out-of-pocket health expenses by age and health for males
born between 1936 and 1940. For comparison, Panel D reports average income by age, which
includes Social Security but excludes annuities and private pensions.4 Households in poor
health at age 51 have out-of-pocket health expenses of $2.3k per year, which is higher than
$0.4k for those in good health. Out-of-pocket health expenses increase rapidly in old age (De
Nardi, French, and Jones (2010)). Households in poor health at age 93 have out-of-pocket
health expenses of $22.1k per year, which is higher than $3.6k for those in good health.
Since income at age 93 is $17.7k per year, households in poor health must cover part of their
health expenses through savings.
   We use the estimated models for health transition probabilities and out-of-pocket health
expenses to simulate paths of out-of-pocket health expenses over the life cycle. Figure 3
reports the distribution of realized out-of-pocket health expenses for males born between
1936 and 1940 and in good health at age 51. The distribution of lifetime out-of-pocket
health expenses has wide range and positive skewness, much like the wealth distribution.
Lifetime out-of-pocket health expenses have a long right tail that can exceed $250k, which
   4
    In Appendix B, we estimate a panel regression model of income on a dummy for 65 or older, a quadratic
polynomial in age, and the interaction of the dummy with the age polynomial. Our speciﬁcation does not
include present health and its interaction with the age polynomial because we ﬁnd that those coeﬃcients are
statistically insigniﬁcant.


                                                    19
represents a health catastrophe. Households would have to accumulate signiﬁcant wealth
to “self-insure” this tail, which is less eﬃcient than insurance through deferred annuities or
long-term care insurance that have survival-contingent payoﬀs.
   Panel E of Table III reports the present value of future disposable income (i.e., income
minus out-of-pocket health expenses) by age and health. Households in good health at age
93 have −$30.1k in lifetime disposable income because the present value of future health
expenses exceeds the present value of future income. A younger household can insure this
late-life risk by purchasing deferred annuities or long-term care insurance.

E.   Additional Measurement Assumptions

                                 E.1. Pricing of Insurance

   We do not observe the premiums that households pay for life insurance, annuities, and
long-term care insurance. Therefore, our baseline calibration assumes that insurance is
actuarially fair conditional on age, birth cohort, and health. That is, we set the dis-
count rate on insurance products to be the same as the riskless interest rate of 2% (i.e.,
RL = RA = RH = R). Insurance may not be actuarially fair in practice for various reasons
including private information, imperfect competition, regulation, and ﬁnancial frictions (Koi-
jen and Yogo (2015)). In Appendix C, we show that our results are robust to an alternative
calibration in which insurance is more expensive than actuarially fair.
   The impact of private information on the pricing of insurance is ambiguous because
adverse selection on health may be oﬀset by advantageous selection on another dimension
of private information such as preferences (de Meza and Webb (2001)). In life insurance
markets, Cawley and Philipson (1999) ﬁnd no evidence for private information. Although
the pricing of annuities depends on gender age only, Finkelstein and Poterba (2004) ﬁnd
evidence for separation along contract dimensions such as payout structure. In long-term
care insurance markets, Finkelstein and McGarry (2006) ﬁnd no signiﬁcant relation between
insurance ownership and future long-term long-term care utilization, consistent with the
absence of private information. However, they argue that private information about health
may be oﬀsetting unobserved preferences for insurance. Given the ambiguous nature of both
the theoretical predictions and the empirical ﬁndings, the absence of private information is
a natural starting point for our baseline calibration.

                                 E.2. Insurance Coverage

   Because we do not observe the maturity of term life insurance, we need a measurement
assumption to map it to the life-cycle model. We assume that term life insurance matures

                                             20
in two years and that whole life insurance matures at death. This assumption is motivated
by the fact that (annually renewable) group policies account for a large share of term life
insurance. In Appendix C, we show that our results are robust to an alternative calibration in
which term life insurance has long-term coverage until age 65. We also assume that annuity
income starts at age 65, which is the full Social Security retirement age, and terminates at
death. Finally, we assume that the ownership of long-term care insurance corresponds to
owning one unit of short-term supplemental health insurance in the life-cycle model. Thus,
a household that owns long-term care insurance is fully insured against uncertainty in health
expenses for the subsequent period.
   Conditional on ownership, households report the face value of term and whole life insur-
ance. Measurement error in the face value of these policies could contaminate our estimates
of health and mortality delta. In Appendix B, we estimate a panel regression model of the
face values of term and whole life insurance on dummies for present health and 65 or older,
a quadratic polynomial in age, log income, and the interaction of the dummies with the age
polynomial and log income. Instead of the observed face values, we use the predicted values
with household ﬁxed eﬀects under the assumption that measurement error is transitory. We
apply the same procedure to annuity and pension income.
   We model all payoﬀs from insurance products to be real. We normalize the death beneﬁt
of life insurance and annuity income to be $1k per unit in 2005 dollars. Modeling nominal
payoﬀs for insurance products would introduce inﬂation risk, which is beyond the scope of
this paper. Moreover, a cost-of-living-adjustment rider that eﬀectively eliminates inﬂation
risk is sometimes available for life insurance, annuities, and long-term care insurance. In the
data, we deﬂate the face value of life insurance as well as pension and annuity income by the
consumer price index to 2005 dollars.

F. Health and Mortality Delta Implied by Household Insurance Choice

   For each household at each interview, we calculate the health and mortality delta implied
by its ownership of term and whole life insurance, annuities including private pensions, and
long-term care insurance. The household’s health delta is determined by positive health
delta from whole life insurance and long-term care insurance, which is oﬀset by negative
health delta from annuities including private pensions. The household’s mortality delta is
determined by positive mortality delta from term and whole life insurance, which is oﬀset
by negative mortality delta from annuities including private pensions.
   Figure 4 reports the health and mortality delta for each household-interview observation,
together with the mean and standard deviation by age. Average health delta is negative
throughout the life cycle. This implies that annuities have a dominant eﬀect on the average

                                              21
household’s health delta. Average mortality delta is positive for younger households and
negative for older households. This implies that life insurance has a dominant eﬀect on
younger households’ mortality delta, while annuities have a dominant eﬀect for older house-
holds. The cross-sectional variation in mortality delta is signiﬁcantly higher than that in
health delta throughout the life cycle.
    When we calculate the health delta for each household based solely on its ownership
of annuities including private pensions, this partial delta explains 98% of the variation in
the overall health delta. When we calculate the mortality delta for each household in a
similar way, this partial delta explains 56% of the variation in the overall mortality delta. In
addition, Panel C of Table II reports that private pensions, rather than the active purchase of
individual annuities, account for most of private annuitization. Together, these facts imply
that most of the variation in observed health and mortality delta is driven by heterogeneity
in the ownership of private pensions and the default path of annuitization conditional on
ownership


                    IV.    Explaining Household Insurance Choice

     We ﬁrst estimate household preferences based on the observed demand for insurance.
We then compare the observed demand to the optimal demand predicted by the life-cycle
model. Finally, we estimate the welfare cost of deviations from the optimal demand.

A.    Estimation Methodology

    Proposition 1 shows that the subjective discount factor is not separately identiﬁed from
relative risk aversion since it enters through the term (βR)1/γ . Therefore, we calibrate the
subjective discount factor to β = 0.96 annually, which is a common practice in the life-cycle
literature. We also normalize the utility weight for good health to ω(3) = 1. We estimate
the remaining preference parameters, which are relative risk aversion, the bequest motive,
and the utility weight for poor health. For convenience, we denote these parameters as
θ = [γ, ω(1), ω(2)].
   Heterogeneity in bequest motives is a natural explanation for the signiﬁcant variation in
observed mortality delta across households. In other words, households with higher mortality
delta in Figure 4 simply have stronger bequest motives, and those with lower mortality delta
have weaker bequest motives. Therefore, we model the bequest motive as heterogeneous
across households, but constant within a household over time. As we discuss in Section III,
most of the variation in observed mortality delta arises from heterogeneity in the ownership
of private pensions. Therefore, a positive relation between mortality delta and the bequest


                                              22
motive means that households with weaker bequest motives tend to have jobs with private
pension beneﬁts.
   For each household i ∈ {1, . . . , I}, let j = 1, . . . , Ji denote its observations at diﬀerent
interviews. Let Li,j (θ) denote the per-period welfare cost for household i at interview j,
implied by equation (30) for n = 1. We estimate household preferences through a two-step
procedure. In the ﬁrst step, we estimate average preferences by minimizing the average
per-period welfare cost:

                                         1 1 
                                            I      Ji
                                                      Li,j (θ).                               (31)
                                         I i=1 Ji j=1

We do so through continuous-updating generalized method of moments:

                                 θ = arg min m(θ) W(θ)−1 m(θ),                              (32)
                                            θ


where

                                             1 1 
                                                I      Ji
                                                          ∂Li,j (θ)
                                  m(θ) =                                                      (33)
                                             I i=1 Ji j=1 ∂θ

is the moment function and

                                    1 1 
                                       I      Ji
                                                 ∂Li,j (θ) ∂Li,j (θ)
                             W(θ) =                                                           (34)
                                    I i=1 Ji j=1 ∂θ          ∂θ

is the weighting matrix. As we show in Appendix A, the welfare cost Li,j (θ) is known in
closed form, so we can calculate its derivative numerically.
    In the second step, we estimate the bequest motive for each household i by minimizing
the average per-period welfare cost:

                                               1 
                                                   Ji
                           ω
                           i (1) = arg min           Li,j (
                                                            γ , ωi (1), ω
                                                                         (2)).               (35)
                                        ωi (1) Ji
                                                  j=1


Finally, we estimate a linear regression model of the logarithm of estimated bequest motives
ω
i (1) on household characteristics such as age, marital status, the presence of children, and
ﬁnancial and housing wealth. This last step is a simple diagnostic to describe the conditional
distribution of bequest motives and assess whether it is consistent with economic intuition.




                                                   23
B. Estimating Household Preferences

   Table IV reports our estimates of household preferences. Our estimate of relative risk
aversion is 2.17 with a standard error of 0.01. Our point estimate is somewhat lower, and our
standard error is much smaller than previous estimates based on the Health and Retirement
Study. In particular, our point estimate is in the lower range of the conﬁdence interval in
De Nardi, French, and Jones (2010), which is estimated from the realized path of savings
instead of insurance choice (i.e., the desired path of wealth in future health states). Our
point estimate is also lower than that in Barsky et al. (1997), which is based on survey
responses to hypothetical income gambles. Higher risk aversion would imply higher welfare
cost of insurance choice because Proposition 3 shows that the welfare cost is approximately
linear in relative risk aversion.
    Our estimate of the utility weight for poor health is 0.74 with a standard error of 0.01. The
top panel of Figure 4 explains why we ﬁnd that consumption and health are complements.
Average health delta is negative throughout the life cycle because few households own long-
term care insurance, and many more own annuities or private pensions. These ownership
patterns reveal that the average household desires to deliver less wealth to poor future health
states, which must be justiﬁed through a low marginal utility of consumption in poor health.
Put diﬀerently, we should see a lot more demand for long-term care insurance if consumption
and health were less complementary. Finkelstein, Luttmer, and Notowidigdo (2013) also
ﬁnd evidence for complementarity of consumption and health, based on the relation between
realized permanent income (a proxy for consumption) and health instead of insurance choice
(i.e., the desired path of consumption in future health states).
   The average bequest motive from the ﬁrst-step estimation is 5.20 with a standard error of
0.03. In other words, the average household has a strong bequest motive that is equivalent
to more than ﬁve periods (10 years) of consumption. The presence of a bequest motive
is consistent with the survey evidence (Laitner and Juster (1996), Ameriks et al. (2011)).
The bottom panel of Figure 4 shows why we ﬁnd such a strong bequest motive. Average
mortality delta is positive for younger households because many own life insurance, and
only slightly negative for older households because many do not own annuities or private
pensions. As emphasized by Bernheim (1991) and Brown (2001), an intentional bequest
motive can simultaneously justify a strong demand for life insurance and a weak demand for
annuities. The fact that our sample includes married men, who may want to leave wealth
for a surviving spouse, partly explains why we ﬁnd such a strong bequest motive.
    Figure 5 reports the distribution of estimated bequest motives from the second-step
estimation. The distribution of bequest motives has wide range and positive skewness, much
like the wealth distribution. In particular, 64% of households have bequest motives that

                                               24
are less than ﬁve periods (10 years) of consumption, and 91% of households have bequest
motives that are less than 10 periods (20 years) of consumption.
   In Table V, we estimate a linear regression model of the logarithm of estimated bequest
motives on household characteristics. Consistent with economic intuition, married house-
holds and those with living children have stronger bequest motives. More educated and
wealthier households also have stronger bequest motives. The bequest motive increases by
53% per 100% increase in ﬁnancial and housing wealth. Overall, these household character-
istics explain 66% of the variation in bequest motives.
   The remaining 34% of the variation in bequest motives may be explained by unobserved
characteristics (Fang and Kung (2012)). Yet another possibility is that household-speciﬁc
bequest motives capture some variation in observed mortality delta due to market incom-
pleteness or suboptimal choice, rather than preference heterogeneity. Two patterns in Ta-
ble V suggest this possibility. First, the bequest motive is negatively related to self-reported
health status, which suggests that adverse selection explains some of the variation in ob-
served mortality delta. Second, the bequest motive is positively related to age, which is
counter to economic intuition that it weakens over the life cycle.

C. Observed versus Optimal Demand for Insurance

    The top panel of Figure 6 is a scatter plot of the observed health delta for each household-
interview observation against the optimal health delta predicted by the life-cycle model. The
bottom panel is an analogous scatter plot for mortality delta. If the life-cycle model were
perfect, the slope of the regression line would be one, and the R2 would be 100%. Although
the life-cycle model is not perfect, it has signiﬁcant explanatory power. For health delta, the
slope of the regression line is 0.68, and the R2 is 68%. For mortality delta, the slope of the
regression line is 0.99, and the R2 is 83%.
   The 45-degree line in the top panel of Figure 6 divides the sample into two groups. Above
the 45-degree line are households that have too much whole life insurance or long-term care
insurance at their stage of the life cycle, with a health delta that is higher than the optimal
health delta. Below the 45-degree line are households that have too much annuities or private
pensions, with a health delta that is lower than the optimal health delta.
   The 45-degree line in the bottom panel of Figure 6 also divides the sample into two
groups. Above the 45-degree line are households that are under-annuitized at their stage
of the life cycle, with a mortality delta that is higher than the optimal mortality delta.
Below the 45-degree line are households that are over-annuitized, with a mortality delta
that is lower than the optimal mortality delta. This ﬁgure uncovers a new puzzle that
is distinct from the “annuity puzzle.” The unexplained within-household variation in the

                                              25
degree of annuitization, rather than the average level of annuitization, is puzzling from the
perspective of life-cycle theory.
   In Table VI, we estimate a panel regression model with household ﬁxed eﬀects to explain
the deviations from optimal health and mortality delta. Our explanatory variables are
dummies for present health and 65 or older, a quadratic polynomial in age, log ﬁnancial and
housing wealth, and the interaction of the dummies with the age polynomial and log ﬁnancial
and housing wealth. We control for ﬁnancial and housing wealth to identify variation in age
that is independent of variation in household resources over the life cycle. The positive and
signiﬁcant coeﬃcients on age mean that the life-cycle model fails to explain the variation in
health and mortality delta within a household over time. To resolve this puzzle, the bequest
motive would have to strengthen over the life cycle, which is counter to economic intuition.
   As we discuss in Section V, the model prescribes that households, especially those younger
than 65, decrease their health and mortality delta over the life cycle by rebalancing from
life insurance to annuities. Observed health and mortality delta are much more persistent
than the predictions of the life-cycle model, due to the default path of annuitization from
private pensions and the lack of rebalancing. Households may not be able to rebalance due
to market incompleteness that may arise for various reasons, including private information
and borrowing constraints. Alternatively, households may not rebalance due to suboptimal
choice.

D. Welfare Cost of Household Insurance Choice

                              D.1. Per-Period Welfare Cost

   We now estimate the per-period welfare cost of household insurance choice by apply-
ing Proposition 3 for n = 1. Conceptually, the per-period welfare cost assumes that the
household deviates from the optimal health and mortality delta in the present period, then
follows the optimal path for the remaining lifetime. While the per-period welfare cost is
not our primary measure of interest, we can estimate it based on the observed health and
mortality delta alone, without an auxiliary model for predicting the path of future health
and mortality delta.
   Panel A of Table VII reports the median per-period (two-year) welfare cost by age group.
The per-period welfare cost for households aged 51 to 57 is precisely estimated to be 0.03%
of total wealth. Through equation (30) for n = 1, we can decompose this welfare cost into
the sum of three parts. The deviations from optimal health delta account for 0.01% of the
welfare cost, as do the deviations from optimal mortality delta. The interaction between
health and mortality delta explains the remainder of the welfare cost, which is 0.01%. The


                                             26
per-period welfare cost is virtually constant in age, which implies that the life-cycle model
ﬁts uniformly well across age.

                                D.2. Lifetime Welfare Cost

   We now estimate the lifetime welfare cost of household insurance choice by applying
Proposition 3 for n = T − t. This is essentially a present-value calculation that accumulates
the per-period welfare cost over the life cycle. This calculation requires an auxiliary model
for predicting the path of future health and mortality delta. In Appendix D, we estimate
such a model based on the joint transition probabilities for health and insurance ownership.
   Panel B of Table VII reports the median lifetime welfare cost by age group. The lifetime
welfare cost for households aged 51 to 57 is 3.21% of total wealth with a standard error of
0.27%. By the homogeneity of preferences, this is a large welfare cost that is equivalent to
a 3.21% reduction in lifetime consumption. To put our estimate into perspective, Calvet,
Campbell, and Sodini (2007) ﬁnd that the welfare cost of underdiversiﬁcation in stock and
mutual fund portfolios is 0.51% of disposable income for the median Swedish household.
Through equation (30) for n = T − t, we can decompose this welfare cost into the sum
of three parts. The deviations from optimal health delta account for 0.46% of the welfare
cost, while the deviations from optimal mortality delta account for 3.52%. The interaction
between health and mortality delta explains the remainder of the welfare cost, which is
−0.77%. The lifetime welfare cost is higher for younger households, for which the per-period
welfare cost accumulates over a longer expected lifetime.


               V.   Optimal Portfolio of Existing Insurance Products

   In this section, we illustrate how a portfolio of existing insurance products can replicate
the optimal health and mortality delta predicted by the life-cycle model. Our illustration is
for a male born between 1936 and 1940 and in good health at age 51. The household faces the
health transition probabilities, out-of-pocket health expenses, and income that are reported
in Table III. The household’s initial wealth is $95.4k at age 51, which is chosen to match
average ﬁnancial and housing wealth for this cohort. In addition to bonds, the household
can save in short-term life insurance, deferred annuities, and long-term care insurance (i.e.,
short-term supplemental health insurance). Figure 1 reports the health and mortality delta
for these insurance products at age 51. The household’s preference parameters are those
that we estimate in the Health and Retirement Study, reported in Table IV.
    Panel A of Table VIII reports the optimal health and mortality delta, which we calculate
through Proposition 1. The optimal health delta is −$1.9k at age 51, which implies that the


                                             27
household desires an additional $1.9k in good health relative to poor health at age 53. As
equation (25) shows, three oﬀsetting forces determine the optimal health delta. First, the
household has preference for consumption in good health over poor health (i.e., ω(2) < ω(3)
in Table IV), which lowers the optimal health delta. Second, the household saves less in poor
health because of shorter life expectancy (i.e., ct+1 (2) > ct+1 (3)), which lowers the optimal
health delta. Third, the household has lower lifetime disposable income in poor health,
which raises the optimal health delta. The ﬁrst two forces more than oﬀset the third, so the
optimal health delta is overall negative at age 51.
    The optimal mortality delta is $268.3k at age 51, which implies that the household desires
to leave an additional $268.3k at death relative to good health at age 53. As equation (26)
shows, three oﬀsetting forces determine the optimal mortality delta. First, the household has
preference for bequest over consumption in good health (i.e., ω(1) > ω(3) in Table IV), which
raises the optimal mortality delta. Second, the household must save for future consumption
in good health (i.e., ct+1 (3) < 1), which lowers the optimal mortality delta. Third, the
household has higher lifetime disposable income in good health, which raises the optimal
mortality delta. The ﬁrst and third forces more than oﬀset the second, so the optimal
mortality delta is overall positive at age 51.
  Panel B of Table VIII reports a portfolio of life insurance, deferred annuities, and long-
term care insurance that replicates the optimal health and mortality delta, which we calculate
through Proposition 2. The optimal portfolio at age 51 consists of 293.1 units of life insurance
(i.e., death beneﬁt of $293.1k), 5.8 units of deferred annuities (i.e., income of $5.8k per
period), no long-term care insurance, and 68.1 units of bonds. Panel C reports the cost of
the optimal portfolio, which is the sum of $7.1k in life insurance, $22.8k in deferred annuities,
and $65.5k in bonds.
   The top panel of Figure 7 shows that the optimal health delta has a slightly U-shaped
proﬁle over the life cycle. To replicate the optimal health delta, the household needs long-
term care insurance at age 86 and older when out-of-pocket health expenses start to increase
rapidly. Since one unit of long-term care insurance eliminates all uncertainty in health
expenses in the subsequent period, the positions reported in Panel B of Table VIII imply that
the household demands only partial coverage throughout the life cycle. Full coverage is not
optimal because consumption and health are complements, and the shorter life expectancy
in poor health naturally oﬀsets the higher health expenses.
    The bottom panel of Figure 7 shows that the optimal mortality delta decreases over the
life cycle. To replicate the optimal mortality delta, the household needs life insurance when
young to generate positive mortality delta, then shifts to deferred annuities when old to
generate negative mortality delta. The optimal position in deferred annuities increases from


                                               28
5.8 units at age 51 to 32.7 units at age 93. A practical implication of Figure 7 is that an
insurance company may want to package life insurance and deferred annuities into a product
that automatically replicates the life-cycle proﬁle of optimal mortality delta, eliminating the
need for active rebalancing.
   Figure 7 shows the optimal health and mortality delta for a bequest motive of 5.20. To
understand the role of the bequest motive, the same ﬁgure shows the optimal health and
mortality delta under no bequest motive, holding the other preference parameters constant.
A weaker bequest motive shifts down the optimal mortality delta, which would imply higher
demand for deferred annuities. A weaker bequest motive also shifts down the optimal health
delta because it raises the average propensity to consume in poor health.
   In this illustration, the household is exposed to reclassiﬁcation risk because it has access
to only short-term insurance products. For example, a household in good health at age
51 has to pay a higher premium for life insurance and supplemental health insurance if its
health worsens at age 53. As emphasized by Cochrane (1995), the household can insure
reclassiﬁcation risk in a world with health state-contingent securities. Our illustration here
shows that an optimal portfolio of short-term insurance products essentially replicates health
state-contingent securities, thereby insuring reclassiﬁcation risk.


                                     VI.    Conclusion

   We ﬁnd large welfare costs of deviations from the optimal demand for insurance. We
have several reasons to suspect that this is a consequence of suboptimal choice for many
households. First, the variation in observed demand is mostly driven by heterogeneity in the
ownership of private pensions and the default path of annuitization conditional on ownership.
Second, we calibrate the life-cycle model to the Health and Retirement Study and ﬁnd that
a typical household can replicate the optimal health and mortality delta through existing
insurance products. Finally, there has been little academic guidance on optimal portfolio
choice for insurance products, unlike for equity and ﬁxed-income products. Due to the lack of
academic guidance, existing ﬁnancial calculators (available from insurance companies) make
recommendations for life insurance, annuities, and long-term care insurance in isolation,
instead of as a comprehensive ﬁnancial decision.
   To improve household insurance choice, retail ﬁnancial advisors and insurance companies
should report the health and mortality delta of their insurance products, just as mutual fund
companies already report the market beta of their equity products and the duration of their
ﬁxed-income products. We hope that these risk measures will facilitate standardization,
identify overlap between existing products, identify risks that are not insured by existing


                                              29
products, and ultimately lead to new product development. One such product that we ﬁnd
particularly promising is a life-cycle product that automatically shifts from life insurance to
annuities as a function of age, so that households achieve the optimal mortality delta over
the life cycle without active rebalancing. This product would be analogous to life-cycle funds
that automatically shift from equity to ﬁxed income as a function of age, which have proven
to be tremendously successful in the mutual fund industry.
   Smarter default plans for employer-provided insurance and retirement accounts is yet
another way to improve household insurance choice, especially for the ﬁnancially illiterate.
The default plan for group life insurance could start with a higher death beneﬁt for younger
employees and let it gradually decline to no coverage at retirement age. Deﬁned contribution
plans could annuitize a share of savings by default, thereby mimicking deﬁned beneﬁt plans.
Thus, a combination of group life insurance and annuitization through retirement accounts
could replicate the optimal mortality delta over the life cycle, without active decisions on
the part of employees. These simple changes to the default plan only aﬀect the allocation of
wealth across future health states and not necessarily the overall level of savings. Therefore,
these changes potentially improve welfare for free without additional cost to the employer.




                                              30
                                      REFERENCES

Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, Steven Laufer, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2011, The joy
 of giving or assisted living? Using strategic surveys to separate bequest and precautionary
 motives, Journal of Finance 66, 519–561.

Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro, 1997,
  Preference parameters and behavioral heterogeneity: An experimental approach in the
  Health and Retirement Study, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 537–579.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, 1991, How strong are bequest motives? Evidence based on estimates
  of the demand for life insurance and annuities, Journal of Political Economy 99, 899–927.

Brown, Jeﬀrey R., 2001, Private pensions, mortality risk, and the decision to annuitize,
  Journal of Public Economics 82, 29–62.

Brown, Jeﬀrey R., and Amy Finkelstein, 2008, The interaction of public and private insur-
  ance: Medicaid and the long-term care insurance market, American Economic Review 98,
  1083–1102.

Bundorf, M. Kate, Jonathan Levin, and Neale Mahoney, 2012, Pricing and welfare in health
  plan choice, American Economic Review 102, 3214–3248.

Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini, 2007, Down or out: Assessing
  the welfare costs of household investment mistakes, Journal of Political Economy 115,
  707–747.

Cawley, John, and Tomas Philipson, 1999, An empirical examination of information barriers
  to trade in insurance, American Economic Review 89, 827–846.

Cocco, João F., 2005, Portfolio choice in the presence of housing, Review of Financial Studies
  18, 535–567.

Cochrane, John H., 1995, Time-consistent health insurance, Journal of Political Economy
  103, 445–473.

Davidoﬀ, Thomas, 2010, Home equity commitment and long-term care insurance demand,
  Journal of Public Economics 94, 44–49.

de Meza, David, and David C. Webb, 2001, Advantageous selection in insurance markets,
  RAND Journal of Economics 32, 249–262.


                                              31
De Nardi, Mariacristina, Eric French, and John B. Jones, 2010, Why do the elderly save?
  The role of medical expenses, Journal of Political Economy 118, 39–75.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark R. Cullen, 2010, Estimating welfare in insurance
  markets using variation in prices, Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, 877–921.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Paul Schrimpf, 2010, Optimal mandates and the welfare
  cost of asymmetric information: Evidence from the U.K. annuity market, Econometrica
  78, 1031–1092.

Fang, Hanming, and Edward Kung, 2012, Why do life insurance policyholders lapse? The
  roles of income, health and bequest motive shocks, NBER Working Paper 17899.

Finkelstein, Amy, Erzo F. P. Luttmer, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo, 2013, What good
  is wealth without health? The eﬀect of health on the marginal utility of consumption,
  Journal of the European Economic Association 11, 221–258.

Finkelstein, Amy, and Kathleen McGarry, 2006, Multiple dimensions of private information:
  Evidence from the long-term care insurance market, American Economic Review 96, 938–
  958.

Finkelstein, Amy, and James Poterba, 2004, Adverse selection in insurance markets: Policy-
  holder evidence from the U.K. annuity market, Journal of Political Economy 112, 183–208.

Hubbard, R. Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes, 1994, The importance of
  precautionary motives in explaining individual and aggregate saving, Carnegie-Rochester
  Conference Series on Public Policy 40, 59–125.

Hugonnier, Julien, Florian Pelgrin, and Pascal St-Amour, 2013, Health and (other) asset
 holdings, Review of Economic Studies 80, 663–710.

Inkmann, Joachim, Paula Lopes, and Alexander Michaelides, 2011, How deep is the annuity
  market participation puzzle? Review of Financial Studies 24, 279–319.

Inkmann, Joachim, and Alexander Michaelides, 2012, Can the life insurance market provide
  evidence for a bequest motive? Journal of Risk and Insurance 79, 671–695.

Koijen, Ralph S.J., Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Motohiro Yogo, 2011, Health and mortality
 delta: Assessing the welfare cost of household insurance choice, NBER Working Paper
  17325.



                                           32
Koijen, Ralph S.J., and Motohiro Yogo, 2015, The cost of ﬁnancial frictions for life insurers,
 American Economic Review 105, 445–475.

Laitner, John, and F. Thomas Juster, 1996, New evidence on altruism: A study of TIAA-
  CREF retirees, American Economic Review 86, 893–908.

Lockwood, Lee M., 2013, Incidental bequests: Bequest motives and the choice to self-insure
  late-life risks, Working paper, Northwestern University.

Marshall, Samuel, Kathleen McGarry, and Jonathan S. Skinner, 2011, The risk of out-of-
 pocket health care expenditure at the end of life, in David A. Wise, ed., Explorations in
  the Economics of Aging, chapter 3, 101–128 (University of Chicago Press, Chicago).

Nakajima, Makoto, and Irina A. Telyukova, 2012, Home equity withdrawal in retirement,
  Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

Picone, Gabriel, Martı́n Uribe, and R. Mark Wilson, 1998, The eﬀect of uncertainty on
  the demand for medical care, health capital and wealth, Journal of Health Economics 17,
  171–185.

Yaari, Menahem E., 1965, Uncertain lifetime, life insurance, and the theory of the consumer,
  Review of Economic Studies 32, 137–150.

Yao, Rui, and Harold H. Zhang, 2005, Optimal consumption and portfolio choices with risky
  housing and borrowing constraints, Review of Financial Studies 18, 197–239.

Yogo, Motohiro, 2009, Portfolio choice in retirement: Health risk and the demand for annu-
  ities, housing, and risky assets, NBER Working Paper 15307.




                                             33
                                    Table I
          Predicting Future Mortality with Observed Health Problems
A probit model is used to predict death within two years of the present interview.
This table reports the marginal eﬀects on the mortality rate (in percentage points) with
heteroskedasticity-robust t-statistics in parentheses. The sample consists of males aged 51
and older in the Health and Retirement Study from 1992 to 2010. The omitted cohort
consists of males born prior to 1911.

                                                     Marginal
                Explanatory variable                   eﬀect     t-statistic
                Doctor-diagnosed health problems:
                  High blood pressure                     0.70      (1.64)
                  Diabetes                                4.49      (5.32)
                  Cancer                                 10.43      (7.10)
                  Lung disease                            6.07      (4.57)
                  Heart problems                          1.98      (3.39)
                  Stroke                                  3.62      (2.84)
                (Age − 51)/10                             2.28     (11.16)
                  × High blood pressure                  -0.03     (-0.18)
                  × Diabetes                             -0.61     (-2.85)
                  × Cancer                               -1.39     (-6.29)
                  × Lung disease                          0.03      (0.11)
                  × Heart problems                        0.08      (0.44)
                  × Stroke                               -0.02     (-0.08)
                Birth cohort:
                  1911–1915                              -1.24      (-3.77)
                  1916–1920                              -1.83      (-6.73)
                  1921–1925                              -2.56     (-10.94)
                  1926–1930                              -3.02     (-12.63)
                  1931–1935                              -3.34     (-10.54)
                  1936–1940                              -3.62      (-9.38)
                  1941–1945                              -3.11     (-10.29)
                  1946–1950                              -3.20     (-13.49)
                  1951–1955                              -2.84      (-9.99)
                Correctly predicted (%):
                  Both outcomes                             94
                  Death only                                66
                  Alive only                                94
                Observations                            38,913




                                            34
                                   Table II
       Health Problems, Health Care Utilization, and Insurance Ownership
Term life insurance refers to individual and group policies that have only a death beneﬁt. Whole
life insurance refers to policies that build cash value, from which the policyholder can borrow or
receive cash upon surrender. The sample consists of males aged 51 and older in the Health and
Retirement Study from 1992 to 2010.

 Age                                            51–64              65–78                 79–
 Health                                      Poor    Good      Poor       Good   Poor          Good
 Panel A. Doctor-Diagnosed Health Problems and Diﬃculty with Activities of Daily Living (%)
 High blood pressure                           57        30       67        47     65            47
 Diabetes                                      20         8       35        14     28            15
 Cancer                                         8         3       28        11     33            21
 Lung disease                                   7         3       19         6     22             7
 Heart problems                                23         9       54        22     74            35
 Stroke                                         5         2       15         5     31            10
 Some diﬃculty bathing                          3         1        5         2     21             9
 Some diﬃculty dressing                         6         3       10         5     24            13
 Some diﬃculty eating                           1         0        3         1     12             4
                                   Panel B. Health Care Utilization (%)
 Monthly doctor visits                          9         3       16         6     21            11
 Hospital stay                                 25        11       42        23     55            34
 Outpatient surgery                            22        16       28        23     27            26
 Nursing home stay                              0         0        2         1     14             5
 Home health care                               3         1       10         5     22            10
 Special facilities and services                8         4       11         6     16            10
 Prescription drugs                            80        51       95        77     97            86
                              Panel C. Insurance Ownership Rate (%)
 Term life insurance                           72        71       57        59     48            48
 Whole life insurance                          35        34       32        31     29            28
 Annuities including private pensions          45        48       55        59     58            63
 Annuities excluding private pensions           1         1        4         4      6             7
 Long-term care insurance                       8         9       18        20     18            18
 Panel D. Insurance Coverage Conditional on Ownership (median in thousands of 2005 dollars)
 Term life insurance                         78.4     81.0      22.8     23.2     10.7          10.0
 Whole life insurance                        42.8     42.8      23.2     23.3     16.6          15.0
 Annual annuity and pension income            0.0      0.0      11.9     12.8      9.0           9.4
 Financial and housing wealth               152.8    175.7     233.9    257.6    234.2         244.3
 Observations                               7,702   12,234     4,672   10,228    1,717         3,796




                                                    35
                                  Table III
         Health Dynamics, Out-of-Pocket Health Expenses, and Income
Panels A and B are based on the estimated model for health transition probabilities. Panels C
and D are based on the estimated models for out-of-pocket health expenses and income,
respectively. Panel E reports the present value of future disposable income, based on the
estimated health transition probabilities and a riskless interest rate of 2%. The reported
estimates are for males born between 1936 and 1940, with average income and in good
health at age 51

                                                  Age
                 Health       51     58      65     72     79    86      93
                    Panel A. Long-Run Health Transition Probabilities
                 Death      0.00   0.09    0.24    0.34 0.50 0.65      0.87
                 Poor       0.00   0.25    0.22    0.18 0.17 0.15      0.08
                 Good       1.00   0.65    0.54    0.48 0.34 0.20      0.05
                         Panel B. Remaining Life Expectancy (years)
                 Poor         26     22      17     13      9     6       4
                 Good         27     24      20     17     12     9       6
                 Mean         27     24      19     16     11     8       5
                          Panel C. Out-of-Pocket Health Expenses
                            (thousands of 2005 dollars per year)
                 Poor        2.3    2.9     3.5     4.0   6.1    9.6   22.1
                 Good        0.4    0.7     1.0     1.2   1.7    2.2    3.6
                 Mean        0.4    1.3     1.7     2.0   3.1    5.4   15.0
                   Panel D. Income (thousands of 2005 dollars per year)
                 Mean       56.1   48.4    30.6    25.2 20.7 18.8      17.7
                   Panel E. Present Value of Future Disposable Income
                               (thousands of 2005 dollars)
                 Poor      568.5 390.7 230.3 146.7 63.5 19.0 -23.8
                 Good      606.1 437.8 278.5 191.3 96.7 37.8 -30.1
                 Mean      606.1 424.6 264.4 179.3 85.7 29.7 -26.2




                                             36
                                    Table IV
                         Estimated Household Preferences
The subjective discount factor is calibrated to 0.96 annually, and the utility weight for
good health is normalized to one. The remaining preference parameters are estimated by
continuous-updating generalized method of moments with heteroskedasticity-robust stan-
dard errors in parentheses. The sample consists of males aged 51 and older in the Health
and Retirement Study from 1992 to 2010.

                    Parameter                        Symbol   Value
                    Subjective discount factor       β          0.96
                    Relative risk aversion           γ          2.17
                                                              (0.01)
                    Average bequest motive           ω(1)       5.20
                                                              (0.03)
                    Utility weight for poor health   ω(2)       0.74
                                                              (0.01)
                    Utility weight for good health ω(3)         1.00
                    Observations                              28,828




                                           37
                                       Table V
                            Explaining the Bequest Motive
A linear regression model is estimated to explain the logarithm of estimated bequest motives.
This table reports the coeﬃcients with heteroskedasticity-robust t-statistics in parentheses.
The sample consists of males aged 51 and older in the Health and Retirement Study from
1992 to 2010. The omitted categories for the dummies are no high school degree, white,
good self-reported health, and born prior to 1911.

                    Explanatory variable           Coeﬃcient   t-statistic
                    65 or older                         0.14       (2.19)
                    Poor health                        -0.01      (-0.30)
                    Married                             0.58      (11.95)
                    Has living children                 0.29       (5.03)
                    High school graduate                0.62      (10.57)
                      × Married                         0.05       (1.64)
                      × Has living children            -0.16      (-3.77)
                    College graduate                    1.44      (23.42)
                      × Married                        -0.14      (-3.83)
                      × Has living children            -0.16      (-3.65)
                    Black                              -0.48     (-10.71)
                    Hispanic and other                 -0.30      (-5.68)
                    Self-reported health status:
                      Poor                              0.33     (10.92)
                      Fair                              0.20      (7.30)
                      Very good                        -0.16     (-3.96)
                      Excellent                        -0.48     (-6.67)
                    (Age − 51)/10                       0.64      (6.92)
                      × 65 or older                    -0.22     (-2.63)
                      × Poor health                     0.02      (0.62)
                      × Married                        -0.10     (-2.42)
                      × Has living children            -0.06     (-1.31)
                      × High school graduate           -0.14     (-3.65)
                      × College graduate               -0.34     (-8.07)
                      × Black                           0.01      (0.25)
                      × Hispanic and other             -0.07     (-1.04)
                      × Poor                           -0.13     (-3.56)
                      × Fair                            0.01      (0.20)
                      × Very good                       0.02      (0.35)
                      × Excellent                       0.12      (1.61)




                                             38
                 Table V—Continued
Explanatory variable          Coeﬃcient    t-statistic
          2
(Age − 51) /100                    -0.06     (-1.26)
  × 65 or older                     0.08      (1.71)
  × Poor health                    -0.01     (-1.32)
  × Married                         0.01      (0.72)
  × Has living children            -0.01     (-0.69)
  × High school graduate            0.03      (2.82)
  × College graduate                0.05      (4.58)
  × Black                          -0.02     (-1.59)
  × Hispanic and other              0.01      (0.59)
  × Poor                            0.02      (1.95)
  × Fair                           -0.02     (-2.19)
  × Very good                       0.00      (0.24)
  × Excellent                      -0.01     (-0.45)
Log ﬁnancial and housing wealth     0.53     (21.29)
  × 65 or older                     0.02      (1.55)
  × Poor health                    -0.01     (-0.85)
  × Married                         0.01      (0.97)
  × Has living children            -0.05     (-2.69)
  × High school graduate           -0.05     (-3.85)
  × College graduate               -0.06     (-4.28)
  × Black                          -0.05     (-2.50)
  × Hispanic and other              0.06      (2.74)
  × Poor                            0.00      (0.18)
  × Fair                           -0.02     (-1.85)
  × Very good                      -0.01     (-0.33)
  × Excellent                       0.01      (0.58)
Birth cohort:
  1911–1915                         0.17       (5.12)
  1916–1920                         0.25       (7.58)
  1921–1925                         0.49      (15.22)
  1926–1930                         0.47      (14.14)
  1931–1935                         0.54      (15.78)
  1936–1940                         0.49      (14.23)
  1941–1945                         0.52      (14.43)
  1946–1950                         0.61      (16.58)
  1951–1955                         0.58      (14.46)
Constant                           -1.01     (-12.18)
R2                                  0.66
Observations                      28,464




                          39
                                   Table VI
      Explaining the Deviations from Optimal Health and Mortality Delta
A panel regression model with household ﬁxed eﬀects is estimated to explain the deviations
from optimal health and mortality delta. The optimal health and mortality delta are pre-
dicted by the life-cycle model with household-speciﬁc bequest motives. This table reports the
coeﬃcients with heteroskedasticity-robust t-statistics in parentheses. The sample consists of
males aged 51 and older in the Health and Retirement Study from 1992 to 2010.

          Explanatory variable                    Health delta    Mortality delta
          65 or older                         -47.15 (-19.88) -32.75 (-1.94)
          Poor health                           3.93   (2.76)   22.87   (2.04)
          (Age − 51)/10                         2.13   (1.81) 200.15 (18.45)
             × 65 or older                      8.98   (5.33) -163.58 (-12.62)
             × Poor health                      2.25   (4.19)    7.60   (1.73)
          (Age − 51)2 /100                      1.89   (2.55) -77.49 (-11.48)
             × 65 or older                     -4.10 (-5.22)    77.64 (11.33)
             × Poor health                     -0.59 (-4.16)    -2.11 (-2.07)
          Log ﬁnancial and housing wealth      -1.61 (-11.92)   -4.12 (-4.11)
             × 65 or older                      3.89 (23.42)     8.85   (6.99)
             × Poor health                     -0.44 (-3.54)    -2.08 (-2.15)
            2
          R                                     0.20             0.15
          Observations                        28,828           28,828




                                             40
                                     Table VII
                    Welfare Cost of Household Insurance Choice
The per-period welfare cost is based on the deviations from optimal health and mortality
delta. The lifetime welfare cost is based on the predicted path of future health and mortality
delta, described in Appendix D. The sample consists of males aged 51 and older in the
Health and Retirement Study from 1992 to 2010.

                                                            Age
                                      51–57   58–64    65–71   72–78    79–85     86–
             Panel A. Per-Period Welfare Cost (median in % of total wealth)
       Total cost                       0.03   0.03   0.03   0.02   0.02   0.02
                                      (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.15)
       Cost due to health delta         0.01   0.01   0.02   0.01   0.01   0.01
                                      (0.00) (0.01) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.26)
       Cost due to mortality delta      0.01   0.01   0.01   0.01   0.01   0.01
                                      (0.01) (0.01) (0.00) (0.01) (0.01) (0.18)
               Panel B. Lifetime Welfare Cost (median in % of total wealth)
       Total cost                       3.21   2.91   2.70   1.57   0.72   0.38
                                      (0.27) (0.19) (0.22) (0.22) (0.26) (0.49)
       Cost due to health delta         0.46   0.38   0.39   0.23   0.13   0.15
                                      (0.07) (0.04) (0.05) (0.06) (0.09) (0.39)
       Cost due to mortality delta      3.52   3.14   2.98   1.69   0.73   0.32
                                      (0.30) (0.21) (0.23) (0.24) (0.28) (0.51)




                                              41
                                      Table VIII
                        Optimal Portfolio of Insurance Products
Panel A reports the optimal health and mortality delta predicted by the life-cycle model
with the preference parameters in Table IV. Panel B reports a portfolio of short-term life
insurance, deferred annuities, long-term care insurance (i.e., short-term supplemental health
insurance), and bonds that replicates the optimal health and mortality delta. Short-term
policies mature in two years, and the income from deferred annuities starts at age 65. Panel C
reports the cost of the optimal portfolio in thousands of 2005 dollars, averaged across the
health distribution at the given age. The reported estimates are for males born between
1936 and 1940, with average income and in good health at age 51.

                                                           Age
                                      51      58     65      72      79      86      93
         Panel A. Optimal Health and Mortality Delta (thousands of 2005 dollars)
      Health delta                  -1.9  -5.9     -12.9   -16.4   -17.6   -14.7     6.3
      Mortality delta              268.3 132.1      27.3    -9.1   -39.4   -58.6   -86.0
                             Panel B. Optimal Portfolio (units)
      Life insurance               293.1 175.8 106.8 69.5 26.9     0.0   0.0
      Deferred annuities             5.8   7.9 10.1 11.9 13.5 15.4 32.7
      Long-term care insurance       0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.1   0.6
      Bonds                         68.1 165.1 208.6 228.2 248.6 260.0 240.6
            Panel C. Cost of the Optimal Portfolio (thousands of 2005 dollars)
      Life insurance                 7.1   6.4   4.7   3.6   2.4   0.0   0.0
      Deferred annuities            22.8 38.9 69.7 67.3 52.3 40.8 44.8
      Long-term care insurance       0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.9 13.0
      Bonds                         65.5 158.6 200.5 219.3 239.0 249.9 231.3
      Total cost                    95.4 203.9 274.9 290.2 293.6 291.6 289.1




                                             42
                                 Short−term life insurance                                           Long−term life insurance
                            1                                                                1
                                                Payoff
                    0.8                         Health delta                                0.8
                                                Mortality delta
   Payoff ($1k)




                                                                          Payoff ($1k)
                    0.6                                                                     0.6

                    0.4                                                                     0.4

                    0.2                                                                     0.2

                         0                                                                   0
                        Death              Poor               Good                          Death             Poor               Good
                                          Health                                                             Health
                                     Deferred annuity
                            5

                            4
             Payoff ($1k)




                            3

                            2

                            1

                         0
                        Death              Poor               Good
                                          Health
                                Short−term health insurance                                         Long−term health insurance
                            5                                                               30

                            4                                                               25
             Payoff ($1k)




                                                                             Payoff ($1k)




                                                                                            20
                            3
                                                                                            15
                            2
                                                                                            10
                            1                                                                5

                         0                                                                   0
                        Death              Poor               Good                          Death             Poor               Good
                                          Health                                                             Health


Figure 1. Health and mortality delta for insurance products. The solid line rep-
resents the payoﬀ of each policy for the three possible health states in two years, reported
in thousands of 2005 dollars. Short-term policies mature in two years (i.e., the frequency of
interviews in the Health and Retirement Study), while long-term policies mature at death.
The income from deferred annuities starts at age 65. The reported estimates are for males
born between 1936 and 1940, with average income and in good health at age 51.


                                                                     43
                              Poor health to death                                            Poor to good health
                  0.7                                                             0.7

                  0.6                                                             0.6

                  0.5                                                             0.5
    Probability




                                                                    Probability
                  0.4                                                             0.4

                  0.3                                                             0.3

                  0.2                                                             0.2

                  0.1                                                             0.1

                   0                                                               0
                    51   58     65     72   79       86   93                        51   58     65    72    79      86   93
                                      Age                                                            Age



                              Good health to death                                            Good to poor health
                  0.7                                                             0.7
                               Born −1910
                  0.6          1911−1915                                          0.6
                               1916−1920
                               1921−1925
                  0.5                                                             0.5
                               1926−1930
                               1931−1935
    Probability




                                                                    Probability




                  0.4          1936−1940                                          0.4
                               1941−1945
                  0.3          1946−1950                                          0.3
                               1951−1955
                  0.2                                                             0.2

                  0.1                                                             0.1

                   0                                                               0
                    51   58     65     72   79       86   93                        51   58     65    72    79      86   93
                                      Age                                                            Age


Figure 2. Estimated health transition probabilities. An ordered probit model is
used to predict the health state at two years from the present interview. The explanatory
variables are dummies for present health and 65 or older, a quadratic polynomial in age,
log income, the interaction of the dummies with the age polynomial and log income, and
cohort dummies. This ﬁgure reports the predicted transition probabilities at average income
by age and birth cohort. The sample consists of males aged 51 and older in the Health and
Retirement Study from 1992 to 2010.

                                                               44
                             0.4


                            0.35


                             0.3


                            0.25
              Probability




                             0.2


                            0.15


                             0.1


                            0.05


                              0
                                   0   100       200         300         400   500
                                             Thousands of 2005 dollars


Figure 3. Lifetime out-of-pocket health expenses. The estimated models for health
transition probabilities and out-of-pocket health expenses are used to simulate paths of out-
of-pocket health expenses over the life cycle. This ﬁgure reports the distribution of realized
out-of-pocket health expenses, discounted at a riskless interest rate of 2%. The reported
distribution is for males born between 1936 and 1940 and in good health at age 51.




                                                     45
                                                             Health delta
                                      300
                                              Mean
                                              ±1 standard deviation
              Observed delta ($1k)    200


                                      100


                                        0


                                     −100


                                     −200


                                     −300
                                         51   58       65           72        79   86   93
                                                                   Age



                                                            Mortality delta
                                      300


                                      200
              Observed delta ($1k)




                                      100


                                        0


                                     −100


                                     −200


                                     −300
                                         51   58       65           72        79   86   93
                                                                   Age


Figure 4. Observed health and mortality delta over the life cycle. Each dot in the
top (bottom) panel represents health (mortality) delta for a household-interview observation.
This ﬁgure also reports the mean and standard deviation by age, smoothed around a plus or
minus one-year window. The sample consists of males aged 51 and older in the Health and
Retirement Study from 1992 to 2010.



                                                              46
                               15




                               10
              Households (%)




                                5




                                0
                                    0   5   10        15        20   25   30
                                                 Bequest motive


Figure 5. Estimated bequest motives. The bequest motive is estimated for each
household to minimize the average per-period welfare cost. The sample consists of males
aged 51 and older in the Health and Retirement Study from 1992 to 2010.




                                                    47
                                                                  Health delta
                                             300
                                                            Slope = 0.68, R2 = 0.68
                                             200


                     Observed delta ($1k)    100


                                               0


                                            −100


                                            −200


                                            −300
                                              −300   −200    −100     0      100      200   300
                                                              Optimal delta ($1k)



                                                                 Mortality delta
                                             300
                                                            Slope = 0.99, R2 = 0.83
                                             200
                     Observed delta ($1k)




                                             100


                                               0


                                            −100


                                            −200


                                            −300
                                              −300   −200    −100     0      100      200   300
                                                              Optimal delta ($1k)


Figure 6. Observed versus optimal health and mortality delta. The optimal health
and mortality delta are predicted by the life-cycle model with household-speciﬁc bequest
motives. The sample consists of males aged 51 and older in the Health and Retirement
Study from 1992 to 2010.



                                                                   48
                                                   Health delta
                             300
                                     Optimal delta
                                     Life insurance
                             200     Deferred annuities
                                     Long−term care insurance
                             100     No bequest motive
              Delta ($1k)



                               0


                            −100


                            −200


                            −300
                                51   58      65          72         79   86   93
                                                        Age



                                                  Mortality delta
                             300


                             200


                             100
              Delta ($1k)




                               0


                            −100


                            −200


                            −300
                                51   58      65          72         79   86   93
                                                        Age


Figure 7. Optimal health and mortality delta over the life cycle. This ﬁgure
reports the optimal health and mortality delta predicted by the life-cycle model with the
preference parameters in Table IV. The sum of health (mortality) delta for short-term life
insurance, deferred annuities, and long-term care insurance (i.e., short-term supplemental
health insurance) equals the optimal health (mortality) delta. This ﬁgure also reports the
optimal health and mortality delta predicted by the life-cycle model with no bequest motive.
The reported estimates are for males born between 1936 and 1940, with average income and
in good health at age 51.
                                                   49
                          Appendix A.             Proofs of Propositions 1 and 3

Proof of Proposition 1: The household maximizes the objective function (20) subject to the
intertemporal budget constraint (18), which we rewrite as

                                                                   
                                                                   3
                                                                     πt (ht , j)
                                 At + Yt − Mt − Ct =                               At+1 (j).                 (A1)
                                                                   j=1
                                                                          R

The Bellman equation in period t is

        Vt (ht , At ) =               max                   ω(ht )γ Ct1−γ + β πt (ht , 1)ω(1)γ At+1 (1)1−γ
                          Ct ,At+1 (1),At+1 (2),At+1 (3)
                                                                              1/(1−γ)
                              
                              3
                          +         πt (ht , j)Vt+1 (j, At+1 (j))1−γ                    .                    (A2)
                              j=2


The proposition claims that the optimal health state-contingent wealth policies are

                              (βR)1/γ ω(1)Ct∗
              A∗t+1 (1) =                     ,                                                              (A3)
                                  ω(ht )
                              (βR)1/γ ω(j)Ct∗  Et+1 [Yt+s − Mt+s |j]
                                                           T −t
              A∗t+1 (j) =                     −                       for j ∈ {2, 3}.                        (A4)
                               ω(ht )ct+1 (j)   s=1
                                                        R s−1



The proof proceeds by backward induction.
   To simplify notation, we deﬁne total wealth as cash-on-hand plus the present value of
future disposable income:

                                                       
                                                       T −t
                                                            Et [Yt+s − Mt+s |ht ]
                                      Wt = At +                                         .                    (A5)
                                                       s=0
                                                                         Rs

Because the household dies with certainty in period T + 1, optimal consumption in period
T is CT∗ = WT .5 Thus, the value function in period T is

                                         VT (hT , AT ) = ω(hT )γ/(1−γ) WT .                                  (A6)
   5
    This comes from our assumption that there is no bequest motive in period T + 1. An alternative
assumption that there is a terminal bequest motive in period T + 1 would not materially aﬀect our results
since T + 1 corresponds to age 111 in our calibration.




                                                                  50
The ﬁrst-order conditions in period T − 1 are

             ω(hT −1 )γ CT∗−γ        γ ∗
                           −1 =βRω(1) AT (1)
                                             −γ


                              =βRω(j)γ (A∗T (j) + YT (j) − MT (j))−γ for j ∈ {2, 3}.          (A7)

These equations, together with equation (A1), imply the policy functions (24), (A3), and
(A4) for period T − 1. Substituting the policy functions into the Bellman equation, the value
function in period T − 1 is
                                                                        γ/(1−γ)
                                                        ω(hT −1 )
                       VT −1 (hT −1 , AT −1 ) =                                     WT −1 .   (A8)
                                                       cT −1 (hT −1 )

   Suppose that the value function in period t + 1 is
                                                                       γ/(1−γ)
                                                        ω(ht+1 )
                          Vt+1 (ht+1 , At+1 ) =                                    Wt+1 .     (A9)
                                                       ct+1 (ht+1 )

The ﬁrst-order conditions in period t are

    ω(ht )γ Ct∗−γ =βRω(1)γ A∗t+1 (1)−γ
                                                                      −γ
                    βRω(j)γ                 
                                            T −t
                                                 E   [Y
                                                  t+1 t+s  −  Mt+s |j]
                  =             A∗t+1 (j) +                                for j ∈ {2, 3}.    (A10)
                    ct+1 (j)γ               s=1
                                                        R s−1



These equations, together with equation (A1), imply the policy functions (24), (A3), and
(A4) for period t. Substituting the policy functions into the Bellman equation, the value
function in period t is
                                                                 γ/(1−γ)
                                                       ω(ht )
                                 Vt (ht , At ) =                            Wt .              (A11)
                                                       ct (ht )

Proof of Proposition 3: To simplify notation, let πt0 (ht , i) = ½t (i). Iterating forward on the




                                                       51
intertemporal budget constraint (A1),

                                        
                                        n−1 
                                            3
                                              π s (ht , i)t
           At + Yt − Mt − Ct =                                       (Ct+s (i) − Yt+s (i) + Mt+s (i))
                                        s=1 i=2
                                                              Rs
                                          n   3
                                                              πts−1 (ht , i)πt+s−1 (i, 1)
                                        +                                                 (δt+s−1 (i) + At+s (i))
                                          s=1 i=2
                                                                           Rs
                                           3  n−1
                                                 πt (ht , i)πt+n−1 (i, 2)
                                        +                                   (Δt+n−1 (i)                  + At+n (i))
                                          i=2
                                                            Rn
                                                                              
                                          πtn−1 (ht , i)πt+n−1 (i, 3)
                                        +                             At+n (i) .                                          (A12)
                                                       Rn

Iterating forward on the ﬁrst-order conditions (A10),
                     γ/(1−γ)
           ω(ht )
                                Vt∗−γ =(βR)n ω(1)γ (δt+n−1
                                                     ∗
                                                           (i) + A∗t+n (i))−γ
           ct (ht )
                                                                        γ/(1−γ)
                                                n        ω(2)
                                      =(βR)                                         Vt+n (2, Δ∗t+n−1 (i) + A∗t+n (i))−γ
                                                        ct+n (2)
                                                                        γ/(1−γ)
                                                n        ω(3)
                                      =(βR)                                         Vt+n (3, A∗t+n (i))−γ .               (A13)
                                                        ct+n (3)

We consider the following perturbations of health and mortality delta that satisfy the in-
tertemporal budget constraint:

                                   πt+n−1 (i, 2)∂Δt+n−1 (i) + ∂At+n (i) = 0,                                              (A14)
                                    πt+n−1 (i, 1)∂δt+n−1 (i) + ∂At+n (i) = 0.                                             (A15)

   We rewrite the value function under complete markets as
                                    
                                                                 
                                                                 n−1          
                                                                              3
 Vt (Δt+n−1 (i), δt+n−1 (i)) = ω(ht )γ Ct1−γ +                           βs         πts (ht , i)ω(i)γ Ct+s (i)1−γ
                                                                   s=1        i=2
                                        
                                        n           
                                                    3
                                    +         βs          πts−1 (ht , i)πt+s−1 (i, 1)ω(1)γ (δt+s−1 (i) + At+s (i))1−γ
                                        s=1         i=2
                                            
                                            3
                                    + βn            πtn−1 (ht , i)πt+n−1 (i, 2)Vt+n (2, Δt+n−1 (i) + At+n (i))1−γ
                                              i=2
                                                                                                        1/(1−γ)
                                     +πtn−1 (ht , i)πt+n−1 (i, 3)Vt+n (3, At+n (i))1−γ                              .     (A16)




                                                                    52
Taking the partial derivative of equation (A16) with respect to Δt+n−1 (i),

            ∂Vt (Δt+n−1 (i), δt+n−1 (i))
                                         = β n πtn−1 (ht , i)πt+n−1 (i, 2)Vtγ
                   ∂Δt+n−1 (i)
             × −πt+n−1 (i, 1)ω(1)γ (δt+n−1 (i) + At+n (i))−γ
                                               γ/(1−γ)
                                       ω(2)
             + (1 − πt+n−1 (i, 2))                      Vt+n (2, Δt+n−1 (i) + At+n (i))−γ
                                     ct+n (2)
                                       γ/(1−γ)
                               ω(3)
             −πt+n−1 (i, 3)                     Vt+n (3, At+n (i))−γ .                              (A17)
                              ct+n (3)

Evaluated at the optimal policy,

                                    ∂Vt (Δ∗t+n−1 (i), δt+n−1
                                                       ∗
                                                             (i))
                                                                  = 0.                              (A18)
                                            ∂Δt+n−1 (i)

Similarly, the partial derivative of equation (A16) with respect to δt+n−1 (i), evaluated at the
optimal policy, is

                                    ∂Vt (Δ∗t+n−1 (i), δt+n−1
                                                       ∗
                                                             (i))
                                                                  = 0.                              (A19)
                                            ∂δt+n−1 (i)

   The partial derivative of equation (A17) with respect to Δt+n−1 (i), evaluated at the
optimal policy, is

          ∂ 2 Vt (Δ∗t+n−1 (i), δt+n−1
                                ∗
                                      (i))
                                           = −γβ n πtn−1 (ht , i)πt+n−1 (i, 2)2 Vt∗γ
                   ∂Δt+n−1 (i)2
          × πt+n−1 (i, 1)ω(1)γ (δt+n−1
                                   ∗
                                          (i) + A∗t+n (i))−1−γ
                                              2γ/(1−γ)
            (1 − πt+n−1 (i, 2))2      ω(2)
          +                                              Vt+n (2, Δ∗t+n−1 (i) + A∗t+n (i))−1−γ
               πt+n−1 (i, 2)         ct+n (2)
                                     2γ/(1−γ)
                            ω(3)
          +πt+n−1 (i, 3)                       Vt+n (3, A∗t+n (i))−1−γ .                            (A20)
                           ct+n (3)

Substituting the ﬁrst-order conditions (A13), we have
                                                                                     (1+γ)/(1−γ)
         ∂ 2 Vt (Δ∗t+n−1 (i), δt+n−1
                               ∗
                                     (i))     γπtn−1 (ht , i)πt+n−1 (i, 2)2 ω(ht )
                                          = −
                  ∂Δt+n−1 (i)2                     β n/γ Rn(1+1/γ) Vt∗       ct (ht )
                                                                                      
               πt+n−1 (i, 1) (1 − πt+n−1 (i, 2))2 ct+n (2) πt+n−1 (i, 3)ct+n (3)
         ×                    +                                +                         .          (A21)
                    ω(1)              πt+n−1 (i, 2)ω(2)                   ω(3)

Similarly, the second partial derivative of the value function with respect to δt+n−1 (i), eval-


                                                    53
uated at the optimal policy, is
                                                                                     (1+γ)/(1−γ)
         ∂ 2 Vt (Δ∗t+n−1 (i), δt+n−1
                               ∗
                                     (i))     γπtn−1 (ht , i)πt+n−1 (i, 1)2 ω(ht )
                                          = −
                   ∂δt+n−1 (i)2                     β n/γ Rn(1+1/γ) Vt∗      ct (ht )
                                  2
                                                                                       
               (1 − πt+n−1 (i, 1))       πt+n−1 (i, 2)ct+n (2) πt+n−1 (i, 3)ct+n (3)
         ×                            +                        +                         .           (A22)
                 πt+n−1 (i, 1)ω(1)              ω(2)                      ω(3)

Finally, the partial derivative of equation (A17) with respect to δt+n−1 (i), evaluated at the
optimal policy, is
                                                                                            (1+γ)/(1−γ)
   ∂ 2 Vt (Δ∗t+n−1 (i), δt+n−1
                         ∗
                               (i))    γπtn−1 (ht , i)πt+n−1 (i, 1)πt+n−1 (i, 2) ω(ht )
                                    =−
       ∂Δt+n−1 (i)∂δt+n−1 (i)                     β n/γ Rn(1+1/γ) Vt∗             ct (ht )
                                                                                     
           1 − πt+n−1 (i, 1) (1 − πt+n−1 (i, 2))ct+n (2) πt+n−1 (i, 3)ct+n (3)
   × −                        −                              +                          .            (A23)
                 ω(1)                      ω(2)                         ω(3)

   Substituting the value function (A11) and dividing by Vt∗ , we obtain

         ∂ 2 Lt (n)          γπtn−1 (ht , i)πt+n−1 (i, 2)2 ω(ht )
                         = −
       ∂Δt+n−1 (i)2              β n/γ Rn(1+1/γ) ct (ht )Wt2
                                                                                      
            πt+n−1 (i, 1) (1 − πt+n−1 (i, 2))2 ct+n (2) πt+n−1 (i, 3)ct+n (3)
       ×                    +                                 +                          ,           (A24)
                 ω(1)               πt+n−1 (i, 2)ω(2)                      ω(3)
        ∂ 2 Lt (n)          γπtn−1 (ht , i)πt+n−1 (i, 1)2 ω(ht )
                        = −
       ∂δt+n−1 (i)2             β n/γ Rn(1+1/γ) ct (ht )Wt2
                                                                                      
            (1 − πt+n−1 (i, 1))2 πt+n−1 (i, 2)ct+n (2) πt+n−1 (i, 3)ct+n (3)
       ×                            +                         +                          ,           (A25)
              πt+n−1 (i, 1)ω(1)                ω(2)                        ω(3)
                ∂ 2 Lt (n)               γπ n−1 (ht , i)πt+n−1 (i, 1)πt+n−1 (i, 2)ω(ht )
                                   =− t
       ∂Δt+n−1 (i)∂δt+n−1 (i)                      β n/γ Rn(1+1/γ) ct (ht )Wt2
                                                                                          
               1 − πt+n−1 (i, 1) (1 − πt+n−1 (i, 2))ct+n (2) πt+n−1 (i, 3)ct+n (3)
       × −                         −                                 +                       .       (A26)
                       ω(1)                       ω(2)                          ω(3)

                      Appendix B.          Health and Retirement Study

   The Health and Retirement Study (HRS) is a panel survey designed to study the health
and wealth dynamics of the elderly in the U.S.. The data consist of ﬁve cohorts: the Study
of Assets and Health Dynamics among the Oldest Old (born before 1924), the Children of
Depression (born 1924 to 1930), the initial HRS cohort (born 1931 to 1941), the War Baby
(born 1942 to 1947), and the Early Baby Boomer (born 1948 to 1953). Many of the variables
that we use come from the RAND HRS (Version L), which is produced by the RAND Center
for the Study of Aging with funding from the National Institute on Aging and the Social
Security Administration. Whenever necessary, we use variables from both the core and exit

                                                    54
interviews to supplement the RAND HRS. The data consist of 10 waves, covering every two
years between 1992 and 2010.
    The HRS continues to interview respondents that enter nursing homes. However, any
respondent that enters a nursing home receives a zero sampling weight because these weights
are based on the non-institutionalized population of the Current Population Survey. There-
fore, the use of sampling weights would lead us to underestimate nursing home expenses,
which account for a large share of out-of-pocket health expenses for older households. Be-
cause nursing home expenses are important for this paper, we do not use sampling weights
in any of our analysis.
    Since the third wave, the survey asks bracketing questions to solicit a range of values for
questions that initially receive a nonresponse. Based on the range of values implied by the
bracketing questions, we use the following methodology to impute missing observations. For
each missing observation, we calculate the minimum and maximum values implied by the
responses to the bracketing questions. For each nonmissing observation, we set the minimum
and maximum values to be the valid response. We then estimate the mean and standard
deviation of the variable in question through interval regression, under the assumption of
log-normality. Finally, we ﬁll in each missing observation as the conditional mean of the
distribution in the bracketed range.

A.   Out-of-Pocket Health Expenses

   Out-of-pocket health expenses from the RAND HRS consist of the total amount paid for
hospitals, nursing homes, doctor visits, dentist visits, outpatient surgery, prescription drugs,
home health care, and special facilities. We measure out-of-pocket health expenses at the
household level as the sum of these expenses for both the male respondent and his spouse
(if married).
   Since the third wave, out-of-pocket health expenses at the end of life are available through
the exit interviews. Without end-of-life expenses, we would underestimate the true cost of
poor health in old age, especially in the upper tail of the distribution (Marshall, McGarry,
and Skinner (2011)). Out-of-pocket health expenses from the exit interviews consist of the
total amount paid for hospitals, nursing homes, doctor visits, prescription drugs, home health
care, other health services, other medical expenses, and other nonmedical expenses. For the
last core interview prior to death of the primary respondent, we add out-of-pocket health
expenses at the end of life from the exit interviews.
   We estimate the life-cycle proﬁle of out-of-pocket health expenses on the subsample of
households without long-term care insurance using a panel regression with household ﬁxed
eﬀects. We model the logarithm of real out-of-pocket health expenses as a function of

                                              55
dummies for 65 or older and poor health, a quadratic polynomial in age, log income, and
the interaction of the dummies with the age polynomial and log income. The dummy for
65 or older accounts for potential changes in household behavior that arise from eligibility
for Social Security and Medicare. We use the estimated regression model to predict out-of-
pocket health expenses in the absence of long-term care insurance by age, health, and birth
cohort.

B. Income

   Our measure of income includes labor income, Social Security disability and supple-
mental security income, Social Security retirement income, and unemployment or workers
compensation. It excludes pension and annuity income as well as capital income. We calcu-
late after-tax income by subtracting the federal income tax, estimated through the NBER
TAXSIM program (Version 9). Household income is the sum of income for both the male
respondent and his spouse (if married).
   We estimate the life-cycle proﬁle of income using a panel regression with household ﬁxed
eﬀects. We model the logarithm of real after-tax income as a function of a dummy for 65
or older, a quadratic polynomial in age, and the interaction of the dummy with the age
polynomial. We use the estimated regression model to predict income by age and birth
cohort.

C. Life Insurance

   The ownership and face value of life insurance come from the core interviews. Term life
insurance refers to individual and group policies that have only a death beneﬁt. Whole life
insurance refers to policies that build cash value, from which the policyholder can borrow
or receive cash upon surrender. In the ﬁrst to third waves, the face value of all policies is
the sum of the face value of term and whole life insurance. In the fourth wave, only the
face value of all policies, and not the breakdown between term and whole life insurance, is
available. In the ﬁfth to tenth waves, the face value of term life insurance is the diﬀerence
between the face values of all policies and whole life insurance.
   We estimate the life-cycle proﬁle of the face value of life insurance using a panel regression
with household ﬁxed eﬀects. We model the logarithm of the real face value of life insurance
as a function of dummies for 65 or older and poor health, a quadratic polynomial in age, log
income, and the interaction of the dummies with the age polynomial and log income. We
use the estimated regression model to predict the face value of life insurance by age, health,
and household ﬁxed eﬀects.


                                               56
D. Annuities Including Private Pensions

     We deﬁne the ownership of annuities including private pensions as either participation
in a deﬁned-beneﬁt plan at the present employer or positive pension and annuity income.
    We estimate the life-cycle proﬁle of pension and annuity income using a panel regression
with household ﬁxed eﬀects. We model the logarithm of real pension and annuity income as
a function of dummies for 65 or older and poor health, a quadratic polynomial in age, log
income, and the interaction of the dummies with the age polynomial and log income. We
use the estimated regression model to predict pension and annuity income by age, health,
and household ﬁxed eﬀects.

E.    Financial and Housing Wealth

   Household assets include checking, savings, and money market accounts; CD, government
savings bonds, and T-bills; bonds and bond funds; IRA and Keogh accounts; businesses;
stocks, mutual funds, and investment trusts; and primary and secondary residence. House-
hold liabilities include all mortgages for primary and secondary residence, other home loans
for primary residence, and other debt. Financial and housing wealth is total assets minus
total liabilities.
   We estimate the life-cycle proﬁle of ﬁnancial and housing wealth using a panel regression
with household ﬁxed eﬀects. We model the logarithm of real ﬁnancial and housing wealth
as a function of dummies for 65 or older and poor health, a quadratic polynomial in age, log
income, and the interaction of the dummies with the age polynomial and log income. We
use the estimated regression model to predict ﬁnancial and housing wealth by age, health,
and household ﬁxed eﬀects.

Appendix C.        Welfare Cost of Household Insurance Choice under Alternative
                                                  Assumptions

  In Table C.I, we assume that life insurance, annuities, and long-term care insurance are
more expensive than actuarially fair by calibrating their discount rates to be 0%, while the
riskless interest rate is 2%.
    In Table C.II, we assume that term life insurance matures at age 65 for households
younger than 65. For households older than 65, we continue to assume that term life insur-
ance matures in two years. This alternative assumption lengthens the maturity of term life
insurance relative to the baseline calibration in which it always matures in two years.
   In Table C.III, we redeﬁne poor health to be a state in which out-of-pocket health ex-
penses are higher than the 75th percentile conditional on age, birth cohort, and the ownership

                                             57
of long-term care insurance. The criterion for the predicted mortality rate remains at higher
than the median conditional on age and birth cohort. This alternative deﬁnition makes the
out-of-pocket health expenses in Panel C of Table III more extreme. Out-of-pocket health
expenses for households in poor health are $4.2k per year at age 51 and $38.5k per year at
age 93.
   In each of these cases, we reestimate household preferences and the welfare cost of house-
hold insurance choice, following the methodology described in Section IV. In Tables C.I and
C.II, we ﬁnd that the results are nearly identical to the benchmark case in Table VII. In
Table C.III, we ﬁnd that the lifetime welfare cost is slightly higher under the alternative
deﬁnition of poor health, which implies that our benchmark results are conservative.




                                             58
                                  Table C.I
     Welfare Cost of Household Insurance Choice under Actuarially Unfair
                                  Insurance
This table reports the welfare cost of household insurance choice under an alternative as-
sumption that insurance is more expensive than actuarially fair. The discount rates on life
insurance, annuities, and long-term care insurance are calibrated to 0% annually, while the
riskless interest rate is 2%. The sample consists of males aged 51 and older in the Health
and Retirement Study from 1992 to 2010.

                                                          Age
                                     51–57   58–64   65–71   72–78   79–85      86–
             Panel A. Per-Period Welfare Cost (median in % of total wealth)
       Total cost                      0.03   0.03   0.03   0.02   0.02   0.02
                                     (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.15)
       Cost due to health delta        0.01   0.01   0.02   0.01   0.01   0.01
                                     (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.25)
       Cost due to mortality delta     0.01   0.01   0.01   0.01   0.00   0.01
                                     (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.01) (0.16)
              Panel B. Lifetime Welfare Cost (median in % of total wealth)
       Total cost                      3.59   3.24   3.03   1.76   0.79   0.40
                                     (0.27) (0.20) (0.22) (0.23) (0.27) (0.48)
       Cost due to health delta        0.53   0.45   0.45   0.25   0.14   0.16
                                     (0.06) (0.04) (0.03) (0.04) (0.08) (0.38)
       Cost due to mortality delta     3.99   3.59   3.40   1.92   0.80   0.35
                                     (0.30) (0.22) (0.24) (0.25) (0.29) (0.50)




                                             59
                                 Table C.II
 Welfare Cost of Household Insurance Choice under Term Life Insurance with
                              Longer Maturity
This table reports the welfare cost of household insurance choice under an alternative as-
sumption that term life insurance matures at age 65 for households younger than 65. For
households older than 65, term life insurance matures in two years. The sample consists of
males aged 51 and older in the Health and Retirement Study from 1992 to 2010.

                                                         Age
                                     51–57   58–64   65–71   72–78   79–85     86–
             Panel A. Per-Period Welfare Cost (median in % of total wealth)
       Total cost                      0.03   0.03   0.02   0.02   0.01   0.02
                                     (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.15)
       Cost due to health delta        0.01   0.02   0.01   0.01   0.01   0.01
                                     (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.25)
       Cost due to mortality delta     0.01   0.01   0.01   0.01   0.00   0.01
                                     (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.01) (0.18)
              Panel B. Lifetime Welfare Cost (median in % of total wealth)
       Total cost                      3.22   2.87   2.74   1.60   0.71   0.39
                                     (0.27) (0.19) (0.22) (0.23) (0.27) (0.50)
       Cost due to health delta        0.43   0.34   0.34   0.20   0.13   0.16
                                     (0.07) (0.04) (0.04) (0.06) (0.09) (0.40)
       Cost due to mortality delta     3.53   3.14   3.03   1.71   0.73   0.33
                                     (0.30) (0.21) (0.24) (0.24) (0.28) (0.51)




                                             60
                                Table C.III
Welfare Cost of Household Insurance Choice under an Alternative Definition of
                                Poor Health
This table reports the welfare cost of household insurance choice under an alternative as-
sumption that poor health is a state in which out-of-pocket health expenses are higher than
the 75th percentile conditional on age, birth cohort, and the ownership of long-term care
insurance. The criterion for the predicted mortality rate remains at higher than the median
conditional on age and birth cohort. The sample consists of males aged 51 and older in the
Health and Retirement Study from 1992 to 2010.

                                                          Age
                                     51–57   58–64   65–71   72–78   79–85      86–
             Panel A. Per-Period Welfare Cost (median in % of total wealth)
       Total cost                      0.03   0.03   0.03   0.03   0.02   0.06
                                     (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.01) (0.37)
       Cost due to health delta        0.01   0.01   0.02   0.01   0.01   0.03
                                     (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.01) (0.38)
       Cost due to mortality delta     0.01   0.01   0.01   0.01   0.01   0.01
                                     (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.01) (0.31)
              Panel B. Lifetime Welfare Cost (median in % of total wealth)
       Total cost                      4.11   3.84   3.68   2.29   1.11   0.83
                                     (0.30) (0.23) (0.26) (0.29) (0.34) (0.67)
       Cost due to health delta        0.44   0.41   0.47   0.33   0.25   0.39
                                     (0.05) (0.04) (0.04) (0.07) (0.14) (0.59)
       Cost due to mortality delta     4.03   3.67   3.45   2.03   0.84   0.31
                                     (0.31) (0.23) (0.26) (0.27) (0.31) (0.56)




                                             61
         Appendix D.      Transition Probabilities for Insurance Ownership

    In Table D.I, we estimate a probit model to predict the ownership of a given policy at two
years from the present interview. The key explanatory variable is whether the household
is a present policyholder. Households aged 51 that are present policyholders of term life
insurance are 72 percentage points more likely to be a policyholder at the next interview.
Similarly, households aged 51 that are present policyholders of whole life insurance are 66
percentage points more likely to be a policyholder at the next interview. Households aged
51 that are present policyholders of annuities including private pensions are 93 percentage
points more likely to be a policyholder at the next interview. Finally, households aged 51
that are present policyholders of long-term care insurance are 20 percentage points more
likely to be a policyholder at the next interview.
    Based on the predicted probabilities from the probit model, we estimate the joint tran-
sition matrix for health and insurance ownership. For each household, we then calculate
the most likely path of future insurance ownership conditional on realized health. Finally,
we calculate the path of future health and mortality delta implied by the path of future
insurance ownership (i.e., {Δt+s−1 (i), δt+s−1 (i)}Ts=2
                                                     −t
                                                        in Proposition 3).




                                             62
                                          Table D.I
                            Predicting Future Insurance Ownership
A probit model is used to predict the ownership of a given policy at two years from the present interview.
This table reports the marginal eﬀects on the probability of insurance ownership (in percentage points) with
heteroskedasticity-robust t-statistics in parentheses. The sample consists of males aged 51 and older in the
Health and Retirement Study from 1992 to 2010. The omitted cohort consists of males born prior to 1911.

                                Term life          Whole life       Annuities including      Long-term
 Explanatory variable           insurance          insurance         private pensions      care insurance
 Policyholder                 71.72   (10.34)    66.22     (7.50)    92.75      (49.47)     19.88    (1.99)
 65 or older                  18.42    (1.42)   -16.82    (-1.31)    15.19       (1.36)     18.81    (2.62)
 Poor health                  20.74    (2.00)   -12.83    (-1.28)   -13.53      (-1.41)      9.27    (1.43)
 (Age − 51)/10                 2.75    (0.41)    -5.27    (-0.84)   -15.77      (-3.33)     -0.25   (-0.10)
    × Policyholder             6.46    (2.16)    -0.60    (-0.21)     0.39       (0.16)     12.85    (8.21)
    × 65 or older              4.13    (0.46)    26.29     (2.96)    13.08       (1.78)     -1.44   (-0.36)
    × Poor health             -0.86   (-0.28)     4.34     (1.42)    -0.20      (-0.08)     -1.20   (-0.88)
 (Age − 51)2 /100             -4.91   (-1.11)    -1.71    (-0.40)     9.26       (2.97)      1.91    (1.11)
    × Policyholder            -1.46   (-1.80)    -0.45    (-0.55)     1.04       (1.56)     -1.71   (-4.02)
    × 65 or older              3.84    (0.84)    -3.85    (-0.87)   -10.65      (-3.20)     -1.67   (-0.90)
    × Poor health             -0.17   (-0.20)    -1.16    (-1.33)    -0.13      (-0.18)      0.34    (0.83)
 Log income                    5.91    (6.01)     0.98     (1.22)     3.07       (4.29)      1.32    (3.80)
    × Policyholder            -3.26   (-3.40)     0.17     (0.19)    -7.35      (-9.50)      0.35    (0.81)
    × 65 or older             -2.69   (-2.90)    -1.03    (-1.17)    -1.18      (-1.49)     -1.21   (-2.88)
    × Poor health             -1.85   (-1.93)     0.95     (1.05)     1.17       (1.45)     -0.67   (-1.56)
 Birth cohort:
    1911–1915                  1.75    (0.39)   -11.10    (-3.33)     0.65        (0.18)     9.60   (2.06)
    1916–1920                 10.64    (2.71)   -15.02    (-5.25)    -2.87       (-0.79)     8.67   (1.93)
    1921–1925                 11.88    (3.00)   -16.16    (-5.57)    -5.48       (-1.47)    15.84   (2.98)
    1926–1930                 13.82    (3.42)   -19.64    (-7.16)    -7.04       (-1.82)    17.68   (3.24)
    1931–1935                 16.50    (4.04)   -21.15    (-7.09)   -11.72       (-3.00)    17.87   (3.48)
    1936–1940                 18.22    (4.35)   -25.79    (-8.56)   -16.06       (-4.11)    17.79   (3.65)
    1941–1945                 20.92    (5.54)   -24.94   (-10.59)   -17.32       (-4.41)    20.87   (3.58)
    1946–1950                 26.19    (8.18)   -25.81   (-13.22)   -21.48       (-5.57)    24.54   (3.78)
    1951–1955                 22.85    (6.76)   -25.00   (-16.51)   -26.65       (-7.11)    27.05   (3.84)
 Correctly predicted (%):
    Both outcomes                77                 85                  80                     91
    Policyholder only            80                 77                  81                     69
    Non-policyholder only        71                 89                  78                     94
 Observations                18,184             18,432              35,351                 34,769




                                                    63
