                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           ETHNIC INNOVATION AND U.S. MULTINATIONAL FIRM ACTIVITY

                                             C. Fritz Foley
                                             William R. Kerr

                                          Working Paper 17336
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w17336


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2011

Comments are appreciated and can be sent to ffoley@hbs.edu and wkerr@hbs.edu. We are grateful
to Olof Aslund, Lee Branstetter, Michael Clemens, Exequiel Hernandez, Sari Kerr, Joan Muysken,
Hillel Rapoport, Jasjit Singh, Bill Zeile, and seminar participants at the AFD-World Bank International
Migration and Development Conference, American Economic Association, Baruch Business School,
Centre for Economic Policy Research Transnationality of Migrants Conference, Census Bureau, Cleveland
Federal Reserve Board, Comparative Analysis of Enterprise [Micro] Data Conference, European Regional
Science Association, Harvard University, International Workshop on Immigration and Economic Growth,
MIT, National Bureau of Economic Research, Sloan Industry Studies, Sweden Conference on Immigration
and Labor Market Integration, and University of Connecticut CIBER Conference for insightful comments.
This research is supported by the Division of Research of the Harvard Business School. We thank
Debbie Strumsky and Bill Lincoln for data assistance. An earlier version of this paper was titled, "US
Ethnic Scientists and Foreign Direct Investment Placement." The statistical analysis of firm-level
data on U.S. multinational enterprises was conducted at the Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department
of Commerce, under arrangements that maintain legal confidentiality arrangements. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not reflect the official positions of the U.S. Department of Commerce.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by C. Fritz Foley and William R. Kerr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Ethnic Innovation and U.S. Multinational Firm Activity
C. Fritz Foley and William R. Kerr
NBER Working Paper No. 17336
August 2011
JEL No. F22,F23,J44,J61,O31,O32,O33,O57

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper studies the impact that immigrant innovators have on the global activities of U.S. firms
by analyzing detailed data on patent applications and on the operations of the foreign affiliates of U.S.
multinational firms. The results indicate that increases in the share of a firm's innovation performed
by inventors of a particular ethnicity are associated with increases in the share of that firm's affiliate
activity in their native countries. Ethnic innovators also appear to facilitate the disintegration of innovative
activity across borders and to allow U.S. multinationals to form new affiliates abroad without the support
of local joint venture partners. Thus, this paper points out that immigration can enhance the competitiveness
of multinational firms.


C. Fritz Foley
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
ffoley@hbs.edu

William R. Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu
1     Introduction

Immigrants to the U.S. play a particularly prominent role in science and engineering commu-

nities. In the 2000 Census of Populations, immigrants constituted 25% and 48% of the U.S.

workforce employed in science and engineering occupations with bachelor’s and doctorate ed-

ucations, respectively. Moreover, immigrants account for most of the recent growth in U.S.

scientists and engineers. This paper analyzes the impact these individuals have had on the

global operations of U.S. …rms by addressing three main questions. First, to what extent do

U.S. based innovators of a particular ethnicity enhance the competitiveness of U.S. multinational

…rms in countries associated with that ethnicity? Second, how do these immigrants in‡uence

the global distribution of the multinational’s research and development (R&D) and patenting

e¤orts? Finally, are U.S. multinationals that employ innovators of a particular ethnicity less

dependent on joint venture partners when forming new a¢ liates in countries associated with

that ethnicity?

    High-skilled immigrants are likely to have several attributes that could help U.S. multina-

tionals capitalize on foreign opportunities. Beyond language skills, well-educated immigrants

typically possess specialized knowledge about how to conduct business in their home countries.

They are likely to have a strong understanding of customer behavior there and to have insights

about what kinds of products would succeed. Furthermore, high-skilled immigrants often also

have relationships and are part of networks that can facilitate foreign market access. In order

to study these e¤ects of skilled immigrants, it is particularly useful to work with data that links

individuals of particular ethnicities to speci…c …rms.

    Such data are drawn from a variety of sources. In order to characterize the immigrant science

and engineering workforce of …rms, the analysis uses a measure based on one type of their output,

namely patents. More speci…cally, the analysis uses detailed …lings from the U.S. Patent and

Trademark O¢ ce for all patents granted from 1975-2008. These …lings include the names of the

inventors of each patent, their employer, and their location. In order to the measure the degree to

which innovative activity is performed by individuals from each of nine ethnic groups, procedures

                                                1
that make use of commercial databases of ethnic names assign probable ethnicities to innovators.

For example, innovators with the surnames Ming or Yu are assigned a high probability of being

of Chinese ethnicity, while innovators with the surnames Agrawal or Banerjee are assigned a

high probability of being of Indian ethnicity.

   In order to conduct tests of the relation between ethnic innovation and multinational …rm

activity, the analysis links data on inventors to data on the activities of U.S. multinational …rms

captured in the 1982, 1989, 1994, 1999, and 2004 Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad con-

ducted by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). These data include measures of the activity

of each of the foreign subsidiaries of multinationals with a U.S. parent, including measures of

assets, sales, employment, and employment compensation. The BEA data also contain informa-

tion on where multinationals perform R&D and measures of the ownership structure of foreign

a¢ liates.

   Tests that analyze panel data of parent-ethnicity observations reveal that increases in the

share of innovation performed by individuals of a certain ethnicity are associated with increases

in the share of multinational a¢ liate activity in their native countries. These tests include

parent-ethnicity …xed e¤ects so that responses are measured o¤ of time series variation in the

role played by innovators of a speci…c ethnicity at a speci…c …rm, and they include a …xed e¤ect

for each ethnicity-year to control for trends in the growth of distinct ethnicities. The results of

these tests are particularly pronounced for …rms that are likely to place high value on ethnic

innovators in the sense that these …rms are beginning to perform innovative activity in the home

countries of the innovators.

   The results also do not seem to merely capture the possibility that decisions to employ in-

novators of a certain ethnicity and to expand in countries associated with that ethnicity are

jointly determined. Measures of the share of ethnic innovation re‡ect shares in the years pre-

ceding the measures of a¢ liate activity. Furthermore, results hold in speci…cations that use a

measure of the predicted extent of ethnic innovation that is computed based on a …rm’s initial

level of ethnic innovation across U.S. cities and the subsequent growth in ethnic innovation by


                                                 2
city. This approach is similar to the supply-push immigration framework of Card (2001). Taken

together, the results on the relation between the share of innovation performed by an ethnicity

and the share of multinational …rm activity in the home countries of that ethnicity indicate that

immigration enhances the competitiveness of U.S. multinationals. The knowledge and cultural

sensitivities of these innovators thus appear to be valuable in helping multinationals unlock key

factors to succeeding in these markets.

      The data allow for exploration of where U.S. …rms conduct R&D and of the extent to which

U.S. based innovators team up with foreign innovators to generate patents. Linear probability

speci…cations that control for parent-ethnicity and ethnicity-year …xed e¤ects illustrate that …rms

with more patents generated by innovators of a particular ethnicity are more likely to conduct

R&D in the countries associated with that ethnicity. Similar speci…cations also reveal that …rms

with more patents generated by U.S. based innovators of a particular ethnicity are more likely

to collaborate with innovators based in countries associated with that ethnicity when generating

patents. Thus, the paper shows that ethnic innovators facilitate the disintegration of innovative

activity within multinational …rms across countries.

      Analysis of new a¢ liates reveals that U.S. multinationals are able to own larger shares of new

entities in countries that are home to …rms’ethnic innovators. Linear probability speci…cations

that include parent-year …xed e¤ects indicate that higher levels of patenting activity by inventors

of a particular ethnicity are associated with higher propensities to form new a¢ liates as wholly

owned or majority owned entities. Previous work indicates that one motivation for the use

of joint ventures is to gain access to a local partner who can provide information about local

demand and customs.1 The …ndings in this paper suggest that the input of ethnic innovators

makes the input of local partners less valuable and lowers entry barriers to foreign countries.

      These …ndings contribute to several literatures by illustrating the role …rms play in linking

immigration, foreign direct investment (FDI), and knowledge di¤usion. A signi…cant body of

research documents the e¤ects of immigration on other forms of international economic inter-
  1
      See, for example, Balakrishnan and Koza (1993) and Desai, Foley, and Hines (2004).



                                                       3
action.2 Ethnic networks have been shown to play important roles in promoting international

trade, investment, and cross-border …nancing activity, with recent work particularly emphasiz-

ing the role of educated or skilled immigrants.3 Much of this work uses aggregated data and

cross-sectional techniques, so the panel analysis of …rm-level data in this paper complements it

and identi…es key mechanisms in these linkages.

       Recent work also considers the possibility that social and ethnic ties facilitate transfers of

technology.4 Individuals who are geographically mobile appear to play a signi…cant role in these

kinds of transfers.5 Because this paper’s …ndings illustrate a mechanism by which knowledge is

transferred globally, it also adds to research on the role multinational …rms play in the interna-

tional di¤usion of knowledge.6 Finally, the results inform a growing body of work that analyzes

…rm decisions about whether to locate innovative activity in a single place or in multiple loca-

tions.7

       The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides details about the

data. Section 3 includes three parts; the …rst describes the analysis of how U.S. based ethnic

innovation shapes the share of a multinational’s activity in countries associated with that eth-

nicity. The second part describes the analysis of the extent to which ethnic innovators facilitate

the disintegration of innovative activity across borders. The third part presents the examination

of whether …rms that employ innovators of a certain ethnicity are less likely to use joint ventures

when they form new a¢ liates in countries associated with that ethnicity. Section 4 concludes.
   2
     Rauch (2001) reviews papers on the economic impact of ethnic networks, and Saxenian, Motoyama, and Quan
(2002) provide survey evidence on the cross-border linkages of science and engineering immigrants in particular.
   3
     Papers in this literature include Saxenian (2002, 2006), Arora and Gambardella (2005), Buch, Kleinert, and
Toubal (2006), Kugler and Rapoport (2007, 2011), Bhattacharya and Groznik (2008), Docquier and Lodigiani
(2010), Huang, Jin, and Qian (2010), Iriyama, Li, and Madhavan (2010), Hernandez (2011), and Javorcik et al.
(2011). Related work on trade includes Gould (1994), Head and Ries (1998), Rauch (1999), Rauch and Trindade
(2002), Kerr (2009), and Rangan and Sengul (2009). Clemens (2009) and Docquier and Rapoport (2011) provide
broader reviews.
   4
     Examples of this work include Agrawal, Cockburn, and McHale (2006), MacGarvie (2006), Oettl and Agrawal
(2008), Kerr (2008), Papageorgiou and Spilimbergo (2008), and Agrawal et al. (2011).
   5
     For evidence of this point, see Almeida and Kogut (1999), Rosenkopf and Almeida (2003), Nanda and Khanna
(2010), Choudhury (2010), and Hovhannisyan and Keller (2010).
   6
     Papers on this topic include Keller (2004), Veugelers and Cassiman (2004), Singh (2004, 2005, 2007), Mac-
Garvie (2005), Branstetter (2006), Alcacer and Chung (2007), and Nachum, Zaheer, and Gross (2008).
   7
     Recent work on this topic includes Zhao (2006), Singh (2008), Alcacer and Zhao (2011), and Zhao and Islam
(2011).




                                                       4
2     Data

This section describes the data employed, starting with the ethnic patenting data developed for

U.S. multinational …rms. The second part describes the BEA data on the foreign operations of

these …rms and the merger of the two data sources.

2.1    Data on Ethnic Innovators

Measures of the ethnicity of innovators employed at U.S. multinational …rms are created on the

basis of data on each patent granted by the United States Patent and Trademark O¢ ce between

January 1975 and May 2008. Hall, Ja¤e, and Trajtenberg (2001) provide extensive details about

these data, and Griliches (1990) surveys the use of patents as economic indicators of technological

advancement. Each patent lists at least one and often several inventors and includes information

on the location and employer of each inventor. These data are extensive, containing over eight

million inventors and four million granted patents during the sample period. Much of the analysis

below considers the impact of U.S. based innovators, and inventors are classi…ed as being based

in the U.S. if they are located in a U.S. city. Although the data are selected using a screen

related to the date of patent grants, the date of patent applications is used to identify the timing

of innovative activity.

    The immigration status of inventors is not listed on patents, but it is possible to determine

their probable ethnicity through their names. The matching approach exploits the fact that

people with particular …rst names and surnames are likely to be of a certain ethnicity and makes

use of two databases of ethnic names. The …rst was developed by the Melissa Data Corporation

for use in direct-mail advertisements and the second by LSDI, also for marketing purposes. The

process a¤ords the distinction of nine ethnicities: Anglo-Saxon, Chinese, European, Hispanic,

Indian, Japanese, Korean, Russian, and Vietnamese. When there is more than one inventor

associated with a patent, each individual is given an ethnicity assignment and then these are

averaged. The name match rate is 99%. Kerr (2007, 2010) provides details on the matching

process, lists frequent ethnic names, and provides multiple descriptive statistics and quality


                                                 5
assurance exercises.

   Table 1 displays the share of U.S. based innovation performed by ethnic innovators working

at public companies over the time periods that are analyzed in more detail in Section 3. The

Anglo-Saxon ethnic share declines from 81% of U.S. domestic patents for public …rms in the

1975-1982 period to 68% in the 2000-2004 period. This declining share is primarily due to the

growth in innovation among Chinese and Indian ethnicities, which increase from under 3% to

10% and 7%, respectively. The data also indicate that ethnic inventors are more concentrated

in high-tech industries than in other industries and that this gap has widened substantially

over the past three decades. Furthermore, while ethnic innovation was particularly prevalent

in pharmaceuticals and chemicals industries in the 1970s, ethnic contributions to innovation in

computers and electronics industries were particularly prevalent in the 2000s.

   The tests below exploit variation within …rms in the share of innovation performed by in-

ventors of a certain ethnicity and control for ethnicity-year …xed e¤ects. Therefore, the tests

depend on there being variation in evolution of ethnic innovation across …rms. Figure 1, which

is constructed from the patent database, illustrates that such heterogeneity exists among seven

large U.S. …rms that report earning foreign income in Compustat.8 Each line plots the share

of U.S. based innovation that is attributed to Chinese and Indian innovators for one of seven

large …rms. As indicated, there is substantial variation in the levels and changes of the share of

innovation performed by Chinese and Indian inventors across …rms.

   The analysis described below uses data on ethnic innovation aggregated to the …rm-ethnicity-

year level. The analysis calls for measures of ethnic innovation that precede the measures of the

outcomes of interest. Therefore, levels and shares of innovation performed by each ethnicity for

each …rm are calculated for each time period listed in Table 1. The years associated with each

period relate to the timing of patent applications. On average, slightly more than 50 patents

per …rm and time period are used to calculate these relative ethnic contributions.
   8
     In order to protect the con…dentiality of the BEA data, to which the patent data are linked, the names of
these …rms are not identi…ed.




                                                      6
2.2       Data on U.S. Multinational Firm Activity

Data on the activities of U.S. multinational …rms are drawn from the Survey of U.S. Direct

Investment Abroad conducted by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. U.S. direct investment

abroad is de…ned as the direct or indirect ownership or control by a single U.S. legal entity of at

least 10% of the voting securities of an incorporated foreign business enterprise or the equivalent

interest in an unincorporated foreign business enterprise. A U.S. multinational …rm includes the

U.S. legal entity that has made the direct investment, called the U.S. parent, and at least one

foreign business enterprise, called a foreign a¢ liate.9 The sample includes records drawn from

the 1982, 1989, 1994, 1999, and 2004 benchmark surveys. These surveys capture …nancial and

operating data for each foreign a¢ liate of each U.S. multinational, so it is possible to create a

panel of data on the assets, sales, employment, and employment compensation for each …rm in

each country. The BEA data also include information on the parent’s ownership share of each

a¢ liate, as well as the amount a¢ liates spend on R&D.

       A number of steps were taken to link the data on U.S. multinationals with the data on ethnic

innovators. Data on the CUSIPs of employers of ethnic innovators were taken from the NBER

Patent Citations Data File and have been manually updated to assign patents to subsidiaries

of major corporations and to account for major mergers and acquisitions.10 These CUSIPs

were matched with Employment Identi…cation Numbers (EINs) from Compustat. The BEA

data include EINs, and an automated merge was performed on the basis of these. Automated

matches were manually con…rmed and augmented with a visual comparison of …rm names. One

notable consequence of this process is that the matched sample only includes publicly listed

…rms because CUSIPs are used as the starting point.

       Much of the analysis below also aggregates the data on U.S. multinational …rm activity to the

…rm-ethnicity-year level. This requires relating ethnicities to countries. There is a one-to-one

mapping of ethnicity and country for …ve cases. Chinese, European, and Hispanic ethnicities each
   9
      As a result of con…dentiality assurances and penalties for noncompliance, BEA believes that survey coverage
is close to complete and levels of accuracy are high. Mataloni (1995) and Mataloni and Yorgason (2002) provide
further details on these FDI data.
   10
      Debbie Strumsky and Bill Lincoln performed portions of this update.


                                                       7
relate to more than one country. Chinese economies include Mainland China, Hong Kong, Macao,

Singapore, and Taiwan. European economies include Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland,

France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Sweden, and Switzerland.

Hispanic economies include Argentina, Belize, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican

Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay,

Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Spain, Uruguay, and Venezuela.

    The …nal sample has several limitations, but it o¤ers broad coverage of U.S. multinational ac-

tivity nonetheless. The …rms only include publicly listed entities that have been granted patents

during the sample period and have a foreign a¢ liate. Anglo-Saxon innovators and multinational

activity in Anglo-Saxon countries are removed from the sample because such innovators are less

likely to be recent immigrants and to have distinctive ties to countries associated with their

ethnicity. Although it is not possible to identify ethnic names associated with many countries

like Thailand or Saudi Arabia, the aggregated data cover 45 foreign countries. The …nal sample

includes 641 …rms which account for more than two-thirds of aggregate foreign a¢ liate sales

in each of the locations associated with non-Anglo Saxon ethnicities in each benchmark year.

Furthermore, these shares are higher in industries that intensively employ patenting. Table 2

presents descriptive statistics for the variables used in the analysis below.

3     Empirical Tests and Results

This section describes the empirical tests and presents the results. It contains three subsections.

The …rst presents analyses of the relation between the share of innovation performed by a partic-

ular ethnicity and the share of multinational a¢ liate activity that occurs in countries associated

with that ethnicity. The second, which includes two parts, explores the association between

ethnic innovation and the amount and location of innovative activity that U.S. multinationals

perform outside of the U.S. The third describes tests of whether U.S. multinationals own larger

shares of a¢ liates in countries that are home to …rms’ethnic innovators.




                                                 8
3.1      Ethnic Innovation and Shares of Multinational A¢ liate Activity

One of the questions this paper seeks to address is whether U.S. based innovators of a particular

ethnicity enhance the competitiveness of U.S. multinational …rms in countries associated with

that ethnicity. Several tests shed light on this question by examining the relationship between

the share of innovation performed in the U.S. by a certain ethnicity and the subsequent share of

a¢ liate activity that occurs in the countries of origin of those inventors. The basic estimating

equation takes the following form:


                                M N E%f et =   fe   +   et   +   EI%f et +   f et :                      (1)


The observations employed in this test relate to a particular …rm for a particular ethnicity in

a particular year. M N E%f et is a measure of the share of …rm f ’s foreign activity that occurs

in countries associated with ethnicity e in benchmark survey year t: Four measures of this

share are calculated using data on foreign a¢ liate assets, sales, employment, and employment

compensation. EI%f et measures the share of U.S. based innovation performed by individuals of

ethnicity e in the period leading up to benchmark survey year t: These periods span seven years

for the 1982 and 1989 benchmark years and …ve years for the 1994, 1999, and 2004 benchmark

years.   fe   and   et   are vectors of …rm-ethnicity and ethnicity-year …xed e¤ects. Standard errors

are clustered by ethnicity-year.

   Several features of this speci…cation are noteworthy. The …rm-ethnicity …xed e¤ects remove

time invariant di¤erences in the extent to which …rms invest in countries associated with a par-

ticular ethnicity and employ innovators of a particular ethnicity. The                parameter is therefore

identi…ed o¤ of changes in these …rm characteristics over the sample period. A potential con-

cern is that there appear to be secular trends in the shares of innovation performed by certain

ethnicities, as indicated in Table 1, and these might coincide with secular trends in the growth

of a¢ liate activity. Including ethnicity-year …xed e¤ects addresses this concern. Finally, …rm

speci…c changes in the scale of activity could generate coincident changes in the levels of ethnic

innovation and multinational a¢ liate activity. Measuring the extent of ethnic innovation and

                                                        9
the location of multinational a¢ liate activity using shares, as opposed to levels, addresses this

concern.

   Table 3 presents results of tests using speci…cation (1). The dependent variable in the …rst

column is the share of a¢ liate assets in countries associated with a particular ethnicity. The

0.1008 coe¢ cient in column 1 is statistically signi…cant and implies that a one standard deviation

increase in the share of innovation by individuals of a particular ethnicity is associated with a 2.3

percentage point increase in the share of multinational a¢ liate activity in the native countries of

the innovators. Consistent results are obtained for other measures of the distribution of a¢ liate

activity that are computed using data on sales, employment, and employment compensation, as

indicated in columns 2-4. Because the estimates that appear in columns 3 and 4 are of a similar

magnitude, the results suggest that changes in the share of ethnic innovation are not associated

with changes in the wage structures of foreign operations.

   These basic results are robust to a variety of checks. They do not depend on the inclusion

of any particular ethnicity; the results hold dropping each of the ethnicities. They also do not

appear to be a consequence of activity in particular industries where patenting is especially

prevalent. Removing …rms that are primarily engaged in the production of pharmaceuticals or

other chemicals; audio, video and communication equipment; or computer and o¢ ce equipment

does not overturn the results. The measured relationships also do not seem to be driven by the

recent rapid growth in innovative activity by individuals of Chinese or Indian ethnicity; removing

observations related to the 2004 benchmark survey does not a¤ect the results.

   The …ndings in Table 3 suggest that innovation by individuals of a particular ethnicity en-

hances the competitiveness of U.S. multinationals in countries associated with that ethnicity. If

this interpretation is correct, one would expect U.S. based ethnic innovation to have particularly

large e¤ects when …rms are also beginning to engage in innovative activity in countries associ-

ated with an ethnicity. U.S. based ethnic innovators could play a valuable role in facilitating

cooperation between innovators working in di¤erent locations and in identifying products and

services that could be developed further abroad to meet local demands. In order to identify such


                                                 10
situations, it is possible to use the patent data described above to isolate …rm-ethnicities for

which: 1) the …rms had previously applied for patents for innovations of U.S. based inventors

and 2) subsequently applied for patents for innovations involving inventors located in countries

of a particular ethnicity. This sample is labeled the sample of new foreign innovators.

   Table 4 presents the results of running speci…cation (1) on two subsamples, the sample of new

foreign innovators and other observations. The top panel presents results for the new foreign

innovator sample and the bottom panel for other observations. The 0.2155 coe¢ cient on the

Ethnic Share of U.S. Patents in the top panel is statistically signi…cant and much larger than

the 0.0551 insigni…cant coe¢ cient on this variable in the bottom panel. A similar pattern holds

across the panels for the speci…cations in columns 2-4. The results therefore indicate that the

association between U.S. based ethnic innovation and multinational a¢ liate activity are more

pronounced in situations where U.S. based ethnic innovations are arguably more valuable to the

…rms they work for.

   An additional and perhaps more fundamental concern that can be raised about the results

in Table 3 is that they may re‡ect omitted variable bias or reverse causality. In particular, …rms

might jointly make decisions about the use of ethnic innovators and about where to expand

internationally. Alternatively, conducting FDI abroad may lead to identi…cation of promising

scientists and engineers that are then brought to the U.S. to work. It is therefore desirable

to create an alternative measure of ethnic innovation that is more likely to exhibit exogenous

variation.

   One such measure can be computed using the patent data and is based on the initial distri-

bution of ethnic innovation across U.S. cities for speci…c …rms and the subsequent local growth

of ethnic innovation. This framework is based on the supply-push work of Card (2001), which

has also been applied in the immigration and patenting context by Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle

(2010) and Kerr and Lincoln (2010). The identi…cation builds o¤ the fact that immigrants of

di¤erent ethnicities tend to agglomerate in certain cities and the fact that rates of immigration

to the U.S. have di¤ered across ethnicities. For example, many Chinese immigrants settle in


                                               11
San Francisco, while many Hispanic immigrants settle in Miami. The immigration of Chinese

scientists and engineers to the U.S. is therefore more likely to in‡uence …rms in San Francisco

than …rms in Miami.

     More speci…cally, the Predicted Ethnic Share of U.S. Patents is computed by …rst calculating

ExpEIf et as follows:
                                        X               EI f;cet0   EI   f;cet        EIf;cet0   EI   f;et
                      ExpEIf et =            EIf;cet0                             +                           :   (2)
                                         c
                                                         EIcet0     EI   f;cet0       EIcet0     EI   f;et0

The …rst term in the expression following the summation captures the initial distribution of

ethnic innovation for a …rm. It is the count of patents applied for by …rm f in which the

inventor is based in city c and is of ethnicity e at time t0 , which is the …rst benchmark year the

…rm appears in the data. The analysis considers 281 cities de…ned as Metropolitan Statistical

Areas, and Kerr (2010) lists major cities and their inventor shares.

     The terms within the parentheses measure growth in patenting activity for …rms other than

…rm f . Taking this approach increases the likelihood that this measure of ethnic innovation

is exogenous. For cities in which a single …rm is responsible for a large share of patenting

activity, growth in local patenting by ethnicity for other …rms can exhibit irregular properties.

Therefore, the terms in parentheses calculate growth rates using a weighted average of city

speci…c and national growth in ethnic patenting for other …rms. The two weights are captured
     EI f;cet0            EIf;cet0
by    EIcet0
                 and      EIcet0
                                   .   These two weights sum to one, and the …rst is the share of the initial

patent counts attributable to …rms other than …rm f , while the second is the share attributable
                 EI   f;cet
to …rm f .       EI   f;cet0
                               is the local growth in patent applications …led by …rms other than …rm f for

patents in which the inventor is based in city c and is of ethnicity e in period t relative to t0 .
EI   f;et
EI   f;et0
             is a similar measure of growth, but it is measured across all cities and is not city speci…c.

As such, city speci…c growth gets more weight when a …rm is responsible for a smaller share of

total innovative activity in the city.

     The Predicted Ethnic Share of U.S. Patents is equal to ExpEIf et scaled by the total number

of patents …rm f is expected to apply for in year t, and it is thus a predicted share for each

ethnicity in each period. The predicted share for an individual ethnicity in …rm f increases over

                                                               12
the sample period if the initially observed ethnic innovation of the …rm occurred in cities that

subsequently experienced strong in‡ows of researchers of that ethnicity. The spatial distribution

of each …rm is held …xed at its initial level to avoid capturing …rms expanding into new cities to

take advantage of di¤erential growth in innovation.

   Table 5 presents the results of tests that make use of this alternative measure of ethnic in-

novation. As in the previous two tables, the speci…cations presented include …rm-ethnicity and

ethnicity-year …xed e¤ects, and standard errors are clustered by ethnicity-year. It is notewor-

thy that the …xed e¤ects absorb the impact of di¤erences in the initial distribution of ethnic

innovation for a …rm as well as the aggregate immigration trends of di¤erent ethnicities. The

identi…cation therefore comes from di¤erences in the extent to which …rms were exposed to

di¤erent growth in ethnic innovation across U.S. cities. The speci…cation in the …rst column

provides evidence that the Predicted Ethnic Share of U.S. Patents is positively correlated with

the Ethnic Share of U.S. Patents. The 0.1917 coe¢ cient on the Predicted Ethnic Share of U.S.

Patents indicates that the two measures are closely related, but it is less than one, implying that

factors besides growth in ethnic innovation across cities in‡uence how inventor compositions

evolve in large …rms.

   The dependent variables in the next four columns are the same ones considered in Table 3.

The coe¢ cients on Predicted Ethnic Share of U.S. Patents are positive in each of these speci…-

cations, and in three of the four speci…cations they have a similar or larger magnitude than the

coe¢ cients on the Ethnic Share of U.S. Patents reported in Table 3. The coe¢ cients are statis-

tically signi…cant in columns 3 and 4. The …ndings indicate that changes in ethnic innovation

related to plausibly exogenous changes in the growth of ethnic innovation across U.S. cities are

associated with changes in the distribution of U.S. multinational a¢ liate sales and employment.

Therefore, these results alleviate some concerns about the potential endogeneity of the Ethnic

Share of U.S. Patents in Table 3. The tests are not perfect, as a forward looking manager might

have located the …rm’s initial inventive facilities to attract innovators of a particular ethnicity

in anticipation of foreign expansion, for example. Nevertheless, this approach does show the


                                                13
robustness of Table 3’s results to several endogeneity concerns.

3.2       Ethnic Innovation and the Disintegration of Innovative Activity

Two pieces of analysis shed light on the role of ethnic innovators in breaking up innovative

activities across borders. The …rst piece examines a¢ liate R&D activity, and the second piece

considers the patenting of foreign innovations.

3.2.1       A¢ liate R&D Activity

Although U.S. multinationals perform a large share of their R&D within the U.S., this share

has been shrinking. According to the aggregate published BEA data, majority owned foreign

a¢ liates performed 6.4% of U.S. multinational R&D in 1982, but this ratio was 13.6% in 2004.

This globalization of R&D activities has received considerable recent attention in the academic

literature.11 While early foreign R&D e¤orts focused on re…ning products so they were suitable

for foreign markets and on accessing foreign technologies, recent e¤orts also attempt to tap

into the large supply of foreign scientists and engineers regardless of their knowledge of speci…c

foreign technologies.12 U.S. based ethnic innovators could be especially valuable in facilitating

the disintegration of inventive activity across countries.

       Linear probability speci…cations shed light on this possibility, and these take the following

form:

                              R&Df et =    fe   +   et   +   ln(EIf et ) +   f et :                (3)

R&Df et is a dummy variable equal to one if …rm f conducts R&D in countries of ethnicity e in

benchmark year t. Like speci…cation (1), this speci…cation includes …rm-ethnicity and ethnicity-

year …xed e¤ects. Because the dependent variable does not measure the share of R&D performed

in countries of a particular ethnicity but instead captures the extensive margin of R&D activity,

the measure of ethnic innovation is not measured as a share either. ln(EIf et ) is the log of the

count of the number of patents a …rm applies for in the period before the benchmark year for
  11
    See, for example, Dalton et al. (1999), Freeman (2006), Zhao (2006), and Puga and Tre‡er (2010).
  12
    Studies of these issues include Niosi (1999), von Zedtwitz and Gassmann (2002), Thursby and Thursby
(2006), and National Science Foundation (2010).


                                                     14
which the inventor is of ethnicity e. One concern that could be raised about this approach is

that ln(EIf et ) might re‡ect something about the overall scale of parent activity. Growing …rms

might increase employment of ethnic innovators and be more likely to conduct R&D abroad. To

address this possibility, tests include the log of parent R&D expenditures and the log of parent

sales.

   Table 6 presents the results. The 0.0192 coe¢ cient in column 1 implies that a one standard

deviation increase in the log of ethnic U.S. patents is associated with a 4.2 percentage point

increase in the likelihood of conducting R&D in countries associated with that ethnicity. This

e¤ect is sizeable given that the mean likelihood that a …rm conducts R&D in countries associated

with a particular ethnicity is 48%, implying a relative increase of 9%. The speci…cation in column

2 adds the log of parent R&D as a control. It attracts a positive and signi…cant coe¢ cient,

implying that …rms that conduct more R&D in the U.S. are more likely to conduct R&D abroad.

The coe¢ cient on the log of ethnic U.S. patents becomes somewhat smaller in this speci…cation,

but it remains statistically signi…cant. The speci…cation in column 3 also adds the log of parent

sales, and the coe¢ cient on the log of ethnic U.S. patents remains signi…cant in this test as well.

   Thus, the results in Table 6 indicate that U.S. based innovation by inventors of a certain

ethnicity facilitate R&D activity in countries associated with that ethnicity. Further evidence

of the manner in which ethnic innovators support the disintegration of inventive activity across

borders comes from the analysis of patent data.

3.2.2    Patenting Foreign Inventions

If ethnic innovators promote meaningful foreign R&D, this activity should result in patents that

list inventors located outside of the U.S. Speci…cations that take the following form consider this

possibility:



                       F oreignP atentf et =   fe   +    et   +   ln(EIf et ) +   f et :        (4)




                                                    15
F oreignP atentf et is a dummy equal to one if …rm f applies for at least one patent in which at

least one inventor is based in a country associated with ethnicity e in the period that precedes

benchmark year t.13 Other variables are de…ned as in speci…cation (3). To account for potential

scale e¤ects, some tests further control for a …rm’s total patent applications from the U.S., ex-

cluding the focal ethnicity. This latter variable includes Anglo-Saxon contributions that comprise

the majority of U.S. multinational innovation. The sample employed in this test di¤ers from

the samples used elsewhere. This sample is not restricted to …rm-ethnicity observations where a

foreign a¢ liate exists in the BEA data. Thus, the patent sample includes public U.S. …rms that

never conduct foreign operations, and it includes ethnicities within …rms where domestic ethnic

invention occurs but where foreign a¢ liate activity never occurs.

    Results of running this speci…cation appear in Table 7. In column 1, the log of ethnic U.S.

patents has a positive and signi…cant coe¢ cient, implying that changes in innovation by inventors

of a certain ethnicity are correlated with changes in the extent of innovative activity in countries

associated with that ethnicity. The coe¢ cient on the log of ethnic U.S. patents is smaller and

only marginally signi…cant when the speci…cation conditions on the log of …rm patents, as in

column 2. A one standard deviation increase in the log of ethnic U.S. patents is associated with

a 0.6% increase in the likelihood of a foreign patent in the region, a 14% relative increase from

the baseline probability.

    The speci…cations in the next two columns attempt to pinpoint more directly the mechanism

by which ethnic inventors facilitate the disintegration of innovative activity across borders by

analyzing two distinct types of patenting. The dependent variable used in column 3 is a dummy

equal to one if …rm f applies for at least one collaborative patent in which at least one inventor

is based in a country associated with ethnicity e and another listed inventor is located in the

U.S. The dependent variable used in column 4 is de…ned in a similar way, but it is equal to one

only if there are no U.S. based co-inventors for a patent.
  13
     One concern that could be raised about this analysis is that …rms are not required to patent foreign innovations
in the U.S. The inclusion of parent …rm-ethnicity and ethnicity-year …xed e¤ects alleviates this concern as the
…xed e¤ects control for any systematic di¤erences in patenting propensities on either of these dimensions.




                                                         16
   If U.S. based ethnic innovators support innovative activity abroad, one would expect to see a

larger coe¢ cient on the log of ethnic U.S. patents in the speci…cation for collaborative patenting

presented in column 3 than in the speci…cation for non-collaborative patents presented in column

4. The results indicate that this is the case. A one standard deviation increase in the log of

ethnic U.S. patents is associated with a 0.8% increase in the likelihood of a collaborative foreign

patent in the region, a 28% relative increase from the baseline probability. This evidence on

collaborative patenting highlights one way that U.S. based innovative workers can spur changes

in foreign activity. Thus, the results of analysis of foreign patenting are consistent with the

…ndings on a¢ liate R&D activity. They suggest that ethnic inventors in the U.S. promote

innovation activity abroad. Furthermore, they indicate that such foreign innovative activity

continues to require support of U.S. personnel.

3.3       Ethnic Innovations and A¢ liate Ownership Structure

If innovators of a certain ethnicity facilitate the expansion of U.S. multinationals and innovative

activity in countries associated with that ethnicity, they might also be associated with distinct

ownership choices for new a¢ liates in those countries. Prior work on ownership structure high-

lights the role local partners play in providing U.S. multinationals valuable market information.

This bene…t of shared ownership is weighed against higher coordination costs when multinational

…rms make ownership choices. Innovators of a particular ethnicity might make local partners

less valuable and allow multinationals to own larger shares of new a¢ liates in countries associ-

ated with that ethnicity. Ethnic innovators can often provide both codi…ed and tacit knowledge

that can substitute for the local expertise typically acquired through partnerships with local

…rms abroad. These informational advantages are often cited as a key advantage that diasporas

confer.

   Speci…cations that consider this possibility take the following form:

                   OW Nayet =    ft   +   ln(EIf et ) +   REST RICTyet +    aet :              (5)

The dependent variable measures the extent to which the parent owns the equity of a¢ liate a

                                                 17
located in country y associated with ethnicity e at time t. The analysis considers two measures

of ownership: a whole ownership dummy which is equal to one for a¢ liates that are wholly

owned by their parent and a majority ownership dummy which is equal to one for a¢ liates

that are at least 50% owned by their parent. To isolate new a¢ liates, the sample only includes

a¢ liates the …rst time they appear in the BEA benchmark surveys, and a¢ liates that appeared

in the …rst survey in the sample, which occurred in 1982, are excluded. 80% of new a¢ liates are

wholly owned by their parents, and 92% of new a¢ liates are majority owned. ln(EIf et ) is the

log of the count of the number of patents the …rm applies for in the period before benchmark

year t for which the inventor is of ethnicity e. Several countries limit the ownership stake that

can be held by U.S. multinationals during the sample period. Speci…cations include a measure

of these restrictions, REST RICT , to capture the impact of these restrictions and to compare

the relationship between restrictions and ownership choices with the relationship between ethnic

innovation and ownership choices. REST RICT is a dummy based on Shatz (2000), and it is

equal to one if both the acquisition and sectoral score are at least three in a particular country
                                                                                       14
and year. The speci…cation also includes parent-year …xed e¤ects                   f t.     The speci…cations are

linear probability models, and standard errors are clustered by parent-year.

    The results of these speci…cations appear in Table 8. The positive and signi…cant coe¢ cient in

the …rst column implies that …rms that have more innovation performed in the U.S. by inventors

of a certain ethnicity are more likely to wholly, as opposed to partially, own new a¢ liates

in countries associated with that ethnicity. The second column also includes the ownership

restriction dummy, and it has a negative coe¢ cient, indicating that ownership restrictions limit

the use of whole ownership, as one might expect. The results in column 2 imply that a one

standard deviation decrease in ethnic innovation is associated with a decrease in the use of whole

ownership that is about one half the size of the decrease associated with ownership restrictions.

    The next two columns present a similar analysis where the dependent variable is a dummy
  14
     Previous speci…cations include parent-ethnicity and ethnicity-year …xed e¤ects. There is not su¢ cient entry
within parent-ethnicities to identify e¤ects when parent-ethnicity …xed e¤ects are included. If ethnicity-year …xed
e¤ects are included, there is little variation in ownership restriction within ethnicity-years, yielding results that
do not allow for a comparison of the relationship between ownership restrictions and ownership structure and
the relationship between ethnic innovation and ownership structure.


                                                         18
for the use of majority ownership. The results are similar, but, relative to ownership restrictions,

ethnic innovators appear to be more strongly associated with majority ownership decisions than

whole ownership decisions. Thus, ethnic innovators appear to allow U.S. multinationals to

serve countries without the assistance of a local partner. Using ethnic innovators therefore

likely increases the ability of multinationals to enjoy the coordination bene…ts that come with

majority and whole ownership. These results support the view that high-skilled immigrants

possess knowledge and connections that aid …rms in navigating entry abroad.

4     Conclusion

This paper studies the e¤ects that immigrant scientists and engineers have on the global activities

of the …rms that employ them. The analysis uses detailed data on the names of inventors that

appear in patent applications to infer the ethnicity of U.S. based innovators. This information

is used in conjunction with detailed data on a¢ liates of U.S. multinationals.

    Tests reveal that increases in the share of innovation performed by inventors of a certain

ethnicity are associated with increases in the share of a¢ liate activity in countries related to

that ethnicity. This result is stronger for …rms that are more likely to value ethnic innovators;

more speci…cally, it is stronger when …rms are beginning to engage in innovative activity abroad,

and ethnic innovators could play a role in facilitating cooperation between innovators working

in di¤erent locations and in identifying products and services that could be developed further

to meet foreign demands. This result also holds in tests that use a measure of ethnic innovation

that exhibits plausibly exogenous variation. This result implies that innovators of a particular

ethnicity enhance the competitiveness of U.S. multinational …rms in countries associated with

that ethnicity.

    The data also illustrate that …rms with more innovative activity performed by inventors of

a certain ethnicity are more likely to conduct R&D in countries associated with that ethnicity.

Furthermore, they are more likely to collaborate with inventors located in such countries to

generate new patents. Recent literature points out that …rms are increasingly breaking up


                                                19
innovative activities across countries to perform di¤erent steps in settings where they can be

performed most e¢ ciently. The …ndings in this paper suggest that ethnic innovators facilitate

this change in the manner in which innovation occurs.

   Finally, tests show that U.S. multinational …rms rely less on joint venture partners when

forming new a¢ liates in countries that are home to the …rms’ethnic innovators. Joint ventures

typically entail substantial coordination costs and are subject to con‡icts over transfer pricing

issues and technology transfers. Ethnic innovators appear to make local partners less valuable

by providing insights about foreign markets that allow multinationals to majority or wholly own

foreign a¢ liates.

   Taken together, these results have implications for immigration policies. Many debates about

immigration focus on the potentially deleterious impact of low wage immigrants on the domestic

workforce. However, this paper points out that immigrants who are skilled enough to engage in

innovative activity generate bene…ts for …rms that are seeking to do business abroad. Immigrants

play a signi…cant role in science and engineering communities in the U.S., so these kinds of e¤ects

deserve consideration.




                                                20
References
 [1] Agrawal, Ajay, Iain Cockburn, and John McHale, "Gone But Not Forgotten: Knowledge
     Flows, Labor Mobility, and Enduring Social Relationships", Journal of Economic Geography
     6:5 (2006), 571-591.
 [2] Agrawal, Ajay, Devesh Kapur, John McHale, and Alexander Oettl, "Brain Drain or Brain
     Bank? The Impact of Skilled Emigration on Poor-Country Innovation", Journal of Urban
     Economics 69 (2011), 43-55.
 [3] Alcacer, Juan, and Wilbur Chung, "Location Strategies and Knowledge Spillovers", Man-
     agement Science 53:5 (2007), 760-776.
 [4] Alcacer, Juan, and Minyuan Zhao, "Local R&D Strategies and Multi-location Firms: The
     Role of Internal Linkages", Management Science (2011), forthcoming.
 [5] Almeida, Paul, and Bruce Kogut, "Localization of Knowledge and the Mobility of Engineers
     in Regional Networks", Management Science 45:7 (1999), 905-917.
 [6] Arora, Ashish, and Alfonso Gambardella, From Underdogs to Tigers? The Rise and Growth
     of the Software Industry in Brazil, China, India, Ireland, and Israel, (Oxford, UK: Oxford
     University Press, 2005).
 [7] Balakrishnan, Srinivasan, and Mitchell Koza, "Information Asymmetry, Adverse Selection
     and Joint-Ventures: Theory and Evidence", Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization
     20 (1993), 99-117.
 [8] Bhattacharya, Utpal, and Peter Groznik, "Melting Pot or Salad Bowl: Some Evidence from
     U.S. Investments Abroad", Journal of Financial Markets 11:3 (2008), 228-258.
 [9] Branstetter, Lee, "Is Foreign Direct Investment a Channel of Knowledge Spillovers? Ev-
     idence from Japan’s FDI in the United States", Journal of International Economics 68
     (2006), 325-344.
[10] Buch, Claudia, Jörn Kleinert, and Farid Toubal, "Where Enterprises Lead, People Follow?
     Links Between Migration and German FDI", European Economic Review 50:8 (2006), 2017-
     2036.
[11] Card, David, "Immigrant In‡ows, Native Out‡ows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts
     of Higher Immigration", Journal of Labor Economics 19:1 (2001), 22-64.
[12] Choudhury, Prithwiraj, "Internal Labor Markets and Knowledge Creation in Multination-
     als", Working Paper (2010).
[13] Clemens, Michael, "Skill Flow: A Fundamental Reconsideration of Skilled-Worker Migration
     and Development", United Nations Human Development Report (2009).
[14] Dalton, D.H., M.G. Serapio, and P.G. Yoshida. Globalizing Industrial Research and De-
     velopment (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce, Technology Administration,
     1999).
[15] Desai, Mihir, C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr., "The Costs of Shared Ownership:
     Evidence from International Joint Ventures", Journal of Financial Economics 73:2 (2004),
     323-374.


                                              21
[16] Docquier, Frédéric, and Elisabetta Lodigiani, "Skilled Migration and Business Networks",
     Open Economies Review 21:4 (2010), 565-588.
[17] Docquier, Frédéric, and Hillel Rapoport, "The Economics of the Brain Drain", Journal of
     Economic Literature, forthcoming (2011).
[18] Freeman, Richard, "People Flows in Globalization", Journal of Economic Perspectives 20:2
     (2006), 145-170.
[19] Gould, David, "Immigrant Links to the Home Country: Empirical Implications for U.S.
     Bilateral Trade Flows", Review of Economics and Statistics 76 (1994), 302-316.
[20] Griliches, Zvi, "Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey", Journal of Economic
     Literature 28:4 (1990), 1661-1707.
[21] Hall, Bronwyn, Adam Ja¤e, and Manuel Trajtenberg, "The NBER Patent Citation Data
     File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools", NBER Working Paper 8498 (2001).
[22] Head, Keith, and John Ries, "Immigration and Trade Creation: Econometric Evidence from
     Canada", Canadian Journal of Economics 31:1 (1998), 47-62.
[23] Hernandez, Exequiel, "Immigrant Social Capital and Firm Strategic Heterogeneity: E¤ects
     on Foreign Entry and Firm Performance", Working Paper (2011).
[24] Hovhannisyan, Nune, and Wolfgang Keller, "International Business Travel: An Engine of
     Innovation?", Working Paper (2010).
[25] Huang, Yasheng, Li Jin, and Yi Qian, "Does Ethnicity Pay? Evidence from Overseas
     Chinese FDI in China", Working Paper (2010).
[26] Hunt, Jennifer, and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle, "How Much Does Immigration Boost
     Innovation?", American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (2010), 31-56.
[27] Iriyama, Akie, Yong Li, and Ravi Madhavan, "Spiky Globalization of Venture Capital
     Investments: The In‡uence of Prior Human Networks", Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal
     4 (2010), 128-145.

[28] Javorcik, Beata, Ça¼
                        glar Özden, Mariana Spatareanu, and Cristina Neagu, "Migrant Net-
     works and Foreign Direct Investment", Journal of Development Economics 94:2 (2011),
     231-241.
[29] Keller, Wolfgang, "International Technology Di¤usion", Journal of Economic Literature
     42:3 (2004), 752-782.
[30] Kerr, William, "The Ethnic Composition of US Inventors", HBS Working Paper 08-006
     (2007).
[31] Kerr, William, "Ethnic Scienti…c Communities and International Technology Di¤usion",
     Review of Economics and Statistics 90:3 (2008), 518-537.
[32] Kerr, William, "Heterogeneous Technology Di¤usion and Ricardian Trade Patterns", HBS
     Working Paper (2009).
[33] Kerr, William, "The Agglomeration of US Ethnic Inventors", in Edward Glaeser (ed.)
     Economics of Agglomeration (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2010).

                                             22
[34] Kerr, William, and William Lincoln, "The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa Reforms
     and U.S. Ethnic Invention", Journal of Labor Economics 28:3 (2010), 473-508.
[35] Kugler, Maurice, and Hillel Rapoport, "International Labor and Capital Flows: Comple-
     ments or Substitutes?", Economics Letters 92:2 (2007), 155-162.
[36] Kugler, Maurice, and Hillel Rapoport, "Migration, FDI and the Margins of Trade", Working
     Paper (2011).
[37] MacGarvie, Megan, "The Determinants of International Knowledge Di¤usion as Measured
     by Patent Citations", Economics Letters 87:1 (2005), 121-126.
[38] MacGarvie, Megan, "Foreign Students and the Di¤usion of Scienti…c and Technological
     Knowledge to and from American Universities", Working Paper (2006).
[39] Mataloni, Raymond, "A Guide to BEA Statistics on U.S. Multinational Companies", Survey
     of Current Business 75 (1995).
[40] Mataloni, Raymond, and Daniel Yorgason, "Operations of U.S. Multinational Companies",
     Survey of Current Business 82 (2002).
[41] Nachum, Lilach, Srilata Zaheer, and Shulamith Gross, "Does it Matter Where Countries
     Are? Proximity to Knowledge, Markets and Resources, and MNE Location Choices", Man-
     agement Science 54:7 (2008), 1252-1265.
[42] Nanda, Ramana, and Tarun Khanna, "Diasporas and Domestic Entrepreneurs: Evidence
     from the Indian Software Industry", Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 19:4
     (2010), 991-1012.
[43] National Science Foundation, Science and Engineering Indicators (Arlington, VA: National
     Science Board, 2010).
[44] Niosi, Jorge, "The Internationalization of Industrial R&D: From Technology Transfer to
     the Learning Organization", Research Policy 28 (1999), 107-117.
[45] Oettl, Alexander, and Ajay Agrawal, "International Labor Mobility and Knowledge Flow
     Externalities", Journal of International Business Studies 39:8 (2008), 1242-1260.
[46] Papageorgiou, Chris, and Antonio Spilimbergo, "Learning Abroad and Technology Adop-
     tion", Working Paper (2008).
[47] Puga, Diego, and Daniel Tre‡er, "Wake Up and Smell the Ginseng: The Rise of Incremental
     Innovation in Low-Wage Countries", Journal of Development Economics 91:1 (2010), 64-76.
[48] Rangan, Subramanian, and Metin Sengul, "The In‡uence of Macro Structure on the For-
     eign Market Performance of Transnational Firms: The Value of IGO Connections, Export
     Dependence, and Immigration Links", Administrative Science Quarterly 54 (2009), 229-267.
[49] Rauch, James, "Networks Versus Markets in International Trade", Journal of International
     Economics 48:1 (1999), 7-35.
[50] Rauch, James, "Business and Social Networks in International Trade", Journal of Economic
     Literature 39:4 (2001), 1177-1203.



                                             23
[51] Rauch, James, and Vitor Trindade, "Ethnic Chinese Networks in International Trade",
     Review of Economics and Statistics 84:1 (2002), 116-130.
[52] Rosenkopf, Lori, and Paul Almeida, "Overcoming Local Search through Alliances and Mo-
     bility", Management Science 49:6 (2003), 751-766.
[53] Saxenian, AnnaLee, The New Argonauts (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2006).
[54] Saxenian, AnnaLee, "Transnational Communities and the Evolution of Global Production
     Networks: Taiwan, China and India", Industry and Innovation 9:3 (2002).
[55] Saxenian, AnnaLee, with Yasuyuki Motoyama and Xiaohong Quan, Local and Global Net-
     works of Immigrant Professionals in Silicon Valley (San Francisco, CA: Public Policy In-
     stitute of California, 2002).
[56] Shatz, Howard, "The Location of U.S. Multinational A¢ liates", Harvard University Disser-
     tation (2000).
[57] Singh, Jasjit, "Multinational Firms and International Knowledge Di¤usion: Evidence from
     Patent Citation Data", Best Paper Proceedings of 2004 Meeting of the Academy of Man-
     agement (2004).
[58] Singh, Jasjit, "Collaborative Networks as Determinants of Knowledge Di¤usion Patterns",
     Management Science 51:5 (2005), 756-770.
[59] Singh, Jasjit, "Asymmetry of Knowledge Spillovers between MNCs and Host Country
     Firms", Journal of International Business Studies 38:5 (2007), 764-786.
[60] Singh, Jasjit, "Distributed R&D, Cross-Regional Knowledge Integration and Quality of
     Innovative Output", Research Policy 37:1 (2008), 77-96.
[61] Thursby Jerry, and Marie Thursby, Here or There? A Survey on the Factors in Multina-
     tional R&D Location (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006).
[62] Veugelers, Reinhilde, and Bruno Cassiman, "Foreign Subsidiaries as a Channel of Interna-
     tional Technology Di¤usion: Some Direct Firm Level Evidence from Belgium", European
     Economic Review 48:2 (2004), 455-476.
[63] von Zedtwitz, Maximilian, and Oliver Gassmann, "Market versus Technology Drive in R&D
     Internationalization: Four Di¤erent Patterns of Managing Research and Development",
     Research Policy 31 (2002), 569-588.
[64] Zhao, Minyaun, "Conducting R&D in Countries with Weak Intellectual Property Rights
     Protection", Management Science 56:7 (2006), 1185-1199.
[65] Zhao, Minyaun, and Mazhar Islam, "Cross-Regional Ties within Firms: Promoting Knowl-
     edge Flow or Discouraging Knowledge Spillover", Working Paper (2011).




                                             24
Figure 1: Share of Innovation Attributed to U.S. Chinese & Indian Inventors




 Notes: Each line displays a measure of the extent to which innovation at one of seven large firms is performed by inventors of
 Chinese and Indian ethnicity. This measure is computed using data on patent applications in which inventors are based in the U.S.
 The Chinese and Indian share is computed by dividing the count of patents in which inventors appear to be of Chinese or Indian
 ethnicity by the total number of patents. The firm-level information in this figure was constructed from the patent database using
 data on firms that report earning foreign income in Compustat. In order to protect the confidentiality of the BEA data, to which the
 patent data are linked, the names of the firms are not identified.
                                                                                   Table 1
                                                             Ethnic Shares of Patenting Activity
                                                                                       Ethnicity of Inventors
                           Anglo-Saxon         Chinese         European         Hispanic       Indian        Japanese              Korean           Russian       Vietnamese

1975-1982                      81.3%             2.8%             8.3%            2.8%             2.5%             0.6%             0.5%            1.2%             0.1%
1983-1989                      78.5%             4.2%             7.8%            2.9%             3.5%             0.7%             0.6%            1.5%             0.2%
1990-1994                      76.4%             5.4%             7.3%            3.4%             4.2%             0.6%             0.6%            1.6%             0.5%
1995-1999                      72.8%             7.3%             6.5%            3.7%             5.8%             0.7%             0.7%            1.7%             0.7%
2000-2004                      68.0%             9.5%             6.2%            4.0%             7.3%             1.0%             1.1%            2.2%             0.8%
Chemicals                      74.1%             6.6%             8.1%            3.5%             4.5%             0.7%             0.8%            1.4%             0.3%
Computers                      70.7%             7.7%             6.3%            3.5%             7.3%             0.9%             0.7%            2.1%             0.8%
Pharmaceuticals                74.9%             6.0%             7.5%            4.2%             4.1%             0.7%             0.7%            1.4%             0.3%
Electrical                     73.2%             7.2%             7.0%            3.2%             5.0%             0.9%             0.8%            1.9%             0.7%
Mechanical                     81.3%             2.8%             7.6%            2.9%             2.8%             0.5%             0.5%            1.4%             0.2%
Miscellaneous                  81.3%             3.2%             7.2%            3.1%             2.7%             0.5%             0.4%            1.3%             0.3%
Notes: This table presents the share of patents in which inventors are of particular ethnicities, reside in the U.S. at the time of patent application, and work for a publicly
listed corporation. Inventor ethnicities are estimated through inventors' names using techniques described in the text. Patents are grouped by application years and major
technology fields.
                                                           Table 2
                                               Descriptive Statistics
                                                                                                                 Standard
                                                                                           Mean                  Deviation
Asset Share                                                                               0.1902                   0.2342
Sales Share                                                                               0.1947                   0.2255
Employment Share                                                                          0.1962                   0.2296
Employment Compensation Share                                                             0.1947                   0.2366
Ethnic Share of U.S. Patents                                                              0.0404                   0.0528
Predicted Ethnic Share of U.S. Patents                                                    0.0474                   0.0686
R&D Dummy                                                                                 0.4844                   0.4998
Log of Ethnic U.S. Patents (Table 6)                                                      0.0191                   2.2133
Log of Parent R&D                                                                        11.4432                   1.8534
Log of Parent Sales                                                                      14.8101                   1.5126
Firm Patenting Dummy--Any Patenting                                                       0.0418                   0.2000
Firm Patenting Dummy--Collaborative                                                       0.0284                   0.1660
Firm Patenting Dummy--Non-Collaborative                                                   0.0274                   0.1633
Log of Ethnic U.S. Patents (Table 7)                                                      -1.6580                  2.5981
Log of Firm Patents in U.S. Excluding Focal Ethnicity                                     0.9503                   2.0383
Whole Ownership Dummy                                                                     0.7992                   0.4006
Majority Ownership Dummy                                                                  0.9198                   0.2716
Log of Ethnic U.S. Patents (Table 8)                                                      0.8368                   2.2064
Restriction Dummy                                                                         0.2340                   0.4234
Notes: Asset Share, Sales Share, Employment Share, and Employment Compensation Share capture the share of affiliate
activity that occurs in countries associated with a particular ethnicity. Ethnic Share of U.S. Patents measures the firm's share of
patents that cover inventions that occurred in the U.S. and were filed by inventors of a particular ethnicity. Predicted Ethnic
Share of U.S. Patents is calculated by using the spatial distribution of a firm's initial inventor activity across cities and
subsequent city-by-city growth of ethnic inventor populations. R&D Dummy is a dummy equal to one for firms that incur
R&D expenditures within countries associated with a particular ethnicity. Log of Ethnic U.S. Patents is the log of the number
of patents that cover inventions that occurred in the U.S. and were filed by inventors of a particular ethnicity. The Table 6
measure is computed at the parent-ethnicity-year level where both ethnic patenting and affiliate activity exist, the Table 7
measure is computed at the parent-ethnicity-year level where ethnic patenting exists, and the Table 8 measure is computed at
the affiliate level and thus implicitly weights by the number of affiliates within a firm-ethnicity. Log of Parent R&D
Expenditures and Log of Parent Sales respectively measure the domestic R&D expenditures and sales of a parent firm. Firm
Patenting Dummy--Any Patenting is a dummy variable equal to one for firms that apply for at least one patent in which at least
one inventor is based in a country associated with a particular ethnicity in the years preceding a benchmark survey year. Firm
Patenting Dummy--Collaborative is a dummy variable equal to one for firms that apply for at least one patent in which at least
one inventor is based in a country associated with a particular ethnicity in the years preceding a benchmark survey year and if
the patent also lists an inventor located in the U.S. Firm Patenting Dummy--Non-Collaborative is defined similarly, but it is
only equal to one if there are no listed U.S. co-inventors. Log of Firm Patents in the U.S. Excluding Focal Ethnicity measures
the patents of a firm that list only U.S. inventors excluding contributions by the focal ethnic group. Whole Ownership Dummy
is a dummy equal to one for new affiliates that are wholly owned by their parent firms and zero for other new affiliates, and
Majority Ownership Dummy is a dummy equal to one for new affiliates that are at least 50% owned by their parent firms and
zero for other new affiliates. Ownership Restriction Dummy is based on Shatz (2000), and it is equal to one if both the
acquisition and sectoral score are at least three in a particular country and year.
                                                          Table 3
                                             Foreign Affiliate Activity
       Dependent Variable:                        Affiliate Activity in Countries Associated with an Ethnicity
                                                                                                                Share of
                                                                                         Share of
                                         Share of Assets         Share of Sales                               Employment
                                                                                        Employment
                                                                                                              Compensation

                                                 (1)                   (2)                    (3)                   (4)
Ethnic Share of U.S. Patents                  0.1008                 0.0772                 0.0733                0.0794
                                             (0.0413)               (0.0324)               (0.0404)              (0.0297)

Parent Firm x Ethnicity FE                      Yes                    Yes                   Yes                    Yes
Ethnicity x Year FE                             Yes                    Yes                   Yes                    Yes
Observations                                   5,474                  5,475                 5,472                  5,472
Notes: The dependent variables capture the share of affiliate activity that occurs in countries associated with a particular
ethnicity. The four columns respectively measure this share using affiliate assets, sales, employment levels, and
employment compensation, and the data used to compute these variables cover the years 1982, 1989, 1994, 1999, and 2004.
Ethnic Share of U.S. Patents measures the share of a firm's patents that cover inventions that occurred in the U.S. and were
filed by inventors of a particular ethnicity. U.S. ethnic patenting shares are computed using data from the five years prior to
the shares of affiliate activity, except in the cases of 1982 and 1989 when seven-year time spans are used. All non-Anglo-
Saxon ethnicities are included. The specifications are OLS specifications that include fixed effects for each parent firm-
ethnicity and for each ethnicity-year. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors that correct for clustering at the ethnicity-
year level appear in parentheses.
                                                         Table 4
                        Foreign Affiliate Activity: New Foreign Innovators
       Dependent Variable:                      Affiliate Activity in Countries Associated with an Ethnicity
                                                                                                       Share of
                                                                                    Share of
                                         Share of Assets     Share of Sales                          Employment
                                                                                  Employment
                                                                                                    Compensation
                                                (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)
                                                                   A. New Foreign Innovators
Ethnic Share of U.S. Patents                  0.2155                0.2547                0.1541                0.2491
                                             (0.0991)              (0.0852)              (0.0886)              (0.0653)

Parent Firm x Ethnicity FE                     Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes
Ethnicity x Year FE                            Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes
Observations                                  2,200                 2,201                  2,200                 2,200

                                                                      B. Other Observations
Ethnic Share of U.S. Patents                  0.0551                0.0084                0.0387               -0.0018
                                             (0.0550)              (0.0458)              (0.0560)              (0.0481)

Parent Firm x Ethnicity FE                     Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes
Ethnicity x Year FE                            Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes
Observations                                  3,274                 3,274                  3,272                 3,272
Notes: This table presents specifications like those in Table 3 for two subsamples. The New Foreign Innovators sample
isolates firm-ethnicities for which: 1) the firms had previously applied for patents for innovations of U.S. based inventors
and 2) subsequently applied for patents for innovations involving inventors located in countries of a particular ethnicity. The
Other Observations sample includes other observations.
                                                                      Table 5
                                   Foreign Affiliate Activity: Predicted Share Estimates
        Dependent Variable:                 Ethnic Share                Affiliate Activity in Countries Associated with an Ethnicity
                                           of U.S. Patents                                                                     Share of
                                                                                                            Share of
                                                                 Share of Assets     Share of Sales                          Employment
                                                                                                          Employment
                                                                                                                            Compensation
                                                 (1)                    (2)                   (3)                   (4)                    (5)
Predicted Ethnic Share of U.S.                 0.1917                 0.0403                0.1540                0.1492                 0.0713
Patents                                       (0.0716)               (0.0628)              (0.0607)              (0.0647)               (0.0577)

Parent Firm x Ethnicity FE                       Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Ethnicity x Year FE                              Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Observations                                    5,474                 5,474                  5,475                 5,472                 5,472
Notes: The first column presents the relationship between the predicted and actual values of the ethnic share of U.S. patents. The dependent
variables in the remaining columns capture the share of affiliate activity that occurs in countries associated with a particular ethnicity. Columns 2-5
respectively measure this share using affiliate assets, sales, employment levels, and employment compensation, and the data used to compute these
variables cover the years 1982, 1989, 1994, 1999, and 2004. Predicted Ethnic Share of U.S. Patents measures the expected share of patents that
cover inventions that occurred in the U.S. and were filed by inventors of a particular ethnicity. These shares are calculated by combining the
spatial distribution of a firm's initial inventor activity across cities with subsequent city-by-city growth of ethnic inventor populations. Own-firm
inventors are removed from the city growth through a procedure discussed in the text. All non-Anglo-Saxon ethnicities are included.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors that correct for clustering at the ethnicity-year level appear in parentheses.
                                              Table 6
                                   Foreign Affiliate R&D
       Dependent Variable:                                     R&D Dummy
                                               (1)                    (2)                   (3)
Log of Ethnic U.S. Patents                   0.0192                0.0155                 0.0141
                                            (0.0061)              (0.0064)               (0.0066)
Log of Parent R&D Expenditures                                     0.0336                 0.0241
                                                                  (0.0119)               (0.0153)
Log of Parent Sales                                                                       0.0262
                                                                                         (0.0209)

Parent Firm x Ethnicity FE                     Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Ethnicity x Year FE                            Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Observations                                  3,818                 3,645                 3,645
Notes: The dependent variable is a dummy equal to one for firms that incur R&D expenditures within
countries associated with a particular ethnicity, and it is measured in 1982, 1989, 1994, 1999, and
2004. Log of Ethnic U.S. Patents is the log of the parent firm's number of patents that cover
inventions that occurred in the U.S. and were filed by inventors of a particular ethnicity. It is
computed using data from the five years prior to the R&D measures, except in the cases of 1982 and
1989 when seven-year time spans are used. Log of Parent R&D Expenditures and Log of Parent Sales
respectively measure the domestic R&D expenditures and sales of a parent firm. All non-Anglo-
Saxon ethnicities are included. The specifications are OLS specifications that include fixed effects for
each parent firm-ethnicity and for each ethnicity-year. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors
that correct for clustering at the ethnicity-year level appear in parentheses.
                                                                Table 7
                                                Patenting Foreign Inventions
        Dependent Variable:                                                  Firm Patenting Dummy
                                                         Any Patenting                       Collaborative            Non-Collaborative
                                                  (1)                      (2)                        (3)                      (4)
Log of Ethnic U.S. Patents                      0.0115                   0.0024                     0.0031                  0.0005
                                               (0.0031)                 (0.0013)                   (0.0012)                (0.0011)
Log of Firm Patents in U.S.                                              0.0272                     0.0204                  0.0210
Excluding Focal Ethnicity                                               (0.0072)                   (0.0052)                (0.0061)

Parent Firm x Ethnicity FE                       Yes                      Yes                       Yes                      Yes
Ethnicity x Year FE                              Yes                      Yes                       Yes                      Yes
Observations                                    23,860                   23,860                    23,860                   23,860
Notes: The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is a dummy variable equal to one for firms that apply for at least one patent in which
at least one inventor is based in a country associated with a particular ethnicity in the years preceding a benchmark survey year. The
dependent variable in column 3 is a dummy variable equal to one for firms that apply for at least one patent in which at least one inventor
is based in a country associated with a particular ethnicity in the years preceding a benchmark survey year and if the patent also lists an
inventor located in the U.S. The dependent variable in column 4 is defined similarly, but it is only equal to one if there are no listed U.S.
co-inventors. Log of Ethnic U.S. Patents is the log of the parent firm's number of patents that cover inventions that occurred in the U.S.
and were filed by inventors of a particular ethnicity. Log of Firm Patents in the U.S. Excluding Focal Ethnicity measures the patents of a
firm that list only U.S. inventors excluding contributions by the focal ethnic group (including Anglo-Saxon contributions). All non-Anglo-
Saxon ethnicities are included. The specifications are OLS specifications that include fixed effects for each parent firm-ethnicity and for
each ethnicity-year. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors that correct for clustering at the ethnicity-year level appear in
parentheses.
                                                         Table 8
                                 Foreign Affiliate Ownership Structure
       Dependent Variable:                   Whole Ownership Dummy                      Majority Ownership Dummy
                                               (1)                   (2)                    (3)                   (4)
Log of Ethnic U.S. Patents                   0.0392                0.0344                0.0205                 0.0213
                                            (0.0071)              (0.0086)              (0.0081)               (0.0104)
Ownership Restriction Dummy                                       -0.1238                                      -0.0461
                                                                  (0.0248)                                     (0.0192)

Parent Firm x Year FE                          Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Observations                                  6,634                 4,300                 6,634                 4,300
Notes: The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is a dummy equal to one for new affiliates that are wholly owned by
their parent firms and zero for other new affiliates, and the dependent variable in columns 3 and 4 is a dummy equal to one
for new affiliates that are at least 50% owned by their parent firms and zero for other new affiliates. New affiliates are
identified in the years 1989, 1994, 1999, and 2004 as affiliates that were not present in the previous benchmark survey. Log
of Ethnic U.S. Patents is the log of the parent firm's number of patents that cover inventions that occurred in the U.S. and
were filed by inventors of a particular ethnicity. It is computed using data from the five years prior to the ownership
measures, except in the case of 1989 when a seven-year time span is used. The Ownership Restriction Dummy is based on
Shatz (2000), and it is equal to one if both the acquisition and sectoral score are at least three in a particular country and
year. All non-Anglo-Saxon ethnicities are included. The specifications are OLS specifications that include fixed effects for
each parent firm-year. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors that correct for clustering at the parent firm-year level
appear in parentheses.
