                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             ASSET LIQUIDITY AND INTERNATIONAL PORTFOLIO CHOICE

                                     Athanasios Geromichalos
                                         Ina Simonovska

                                        Working Paper 17331
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17331


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




We are grateful to Marco Bassetto, Jeffrey Campbell, Mariacristina De Nardi, Robert Feenstra, Guillaume
Rocheteau, Peter Rupert, Kevin Salyer, Christopher Waller, Randall Wright, and seminar participants
at the Princeton Macro Faculty Lunch, Wharton, NYU Trade Reading Group, SED 2011, Atlanta Fed,
SHUFE, HKUST, Midwest International Trade Spring 2011Meeting, First Meeting of the West Coast
Search and Matching Group, Organization of Markets Conference at UCSB, AEA 2011, UCSB, 2010
Search and Matching Conference at Penn, Philadelphia Fed, 2010Money, Payments and Banking Workshop
at Chicago Fed, and UC Davis for their feedback. This paper circulated under the title “Asset Liquidity
and Home Bias”. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Athanasios Geromichalos and Ina Simonovska. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Asset Liquidity and International Portfolio Choice
Athanasios Geromichalos and Ina Simonovska
NBER Working Paper No. 17331
August 2011, Revised November 2013
JEL No. E44,F15,F36,G11

                                              ABSTRACT

We study optimal portfolio choice in a two-country model where assets represent claims on future
consumption and facilitate trade in markets with imperfect credit. Assuming that foreign assets trade
at a cost, agents hold relatively more domestic assets. Consequently, agents have larger claims to domestic
over foreign consumption. Moreover, foreign assets turn over faster than domestic assets because the
former have desirable liquidity properties, but represent inferior saving tools. Our mechanism offers
an answer to a long-standing puzzle in international finance: a positive relationship between consumption
and asset home bias coupled with higher turnover rates of foreign over domestic assets.


Athanasios Geromichalos
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
ageromich@ucdavis.edu

Ina Simonovska
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
inasimonovska@ucdavis.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17331
1    Introduction

Agents’ international portfolio choices have been a major topic of research in macroeconomics
over the past two decades. The vast majority of papers emphasize the role that foreign as-
sets play in helping agents diversify domestic income risk. While the role of assets in hedging
risk is admittedly crucial, an equally important characteristic of assets, their liquidity, has been
overlooked by the literature. In this paper, we develop a multi-country model that features a
precise notion of asset liquidity, and we use it to reconcile a long-standing puzzle in interna-
tional finance as described in Tesar and Werner (1995) and Lewis (1999): a positive relationship
between consumption and asset home bias coupled with higher turnover rates of foreign over
domestic assets. More precisely, developed countries obey three empirical regularities. First, in
the average OECD country, agents’ portfolios are heavily biased toward domestic assets. Sec-
ond, economies that exhibit higher asset home bias also consume more domestic goods. Third,
turnover rates of foreign assets are significantly higher than those of domestic assets.
   To provide a concrete concept of asset liquidity, we employ a model in the tradition of
monetary-search theory, extended to include real assets and trade between countries. Agents
have access to alternating rounds of centralized, or Walrasian, markets and decentralized mar-
kets, where trade occurs in a bilateral fashion and credit is imperfect. In each country’s Wal-
rasian market, domestic and foreign agents can buy assets of that country at the ongoing market
price. More interestingly, agents can bring a portfolio of assets to each country’s decentralized
market and trade it for locally-produced goods. Hence, assets serve a double function. First,
they are claims to future consumption, as is standard in finance. Second, they serve as media of
exchange, as is standard in monetary theory. It is precisely this second function that captures
the notion of asset liquidity.
   Within this framework, we characterize equilibria in which different assets arise as media of
exchange in different types of bilateral meetings. Assuming that the net dividend from foreign
assets is lower (e.g. due to a higher cross-border relative to domestic dividend income tax),
domestic assets represent superior stores of value. Hence, in any exchange that involves only
domestic agents, local assets serve as means of payment. An interesting tradeoff arises when
agents choose which assets to bring to the foreign decentralized market to acquire consump-
tion goods. Foreign assets have greater purchasing power in that market (because they are local
to the producer), but market participation is not guaranteed. If agents’ trading opportunities
abroad are sufficiently frequent, then assets circulate as media of exchange locally; i.e. domestic
assets facilitate trade at home and foreign assets facilitate trade abroad, thus endogenizing the
common “currency area” assumption in international macroeconomics. At the other extreme,
if trading opportunities abroad are scarce, agents use their domestic assets to acquire consump-
tion goods both at home and abroad. Finally, in an intermediate case, either type of equilibrium
described above can arise, depending on other parameters that govern asset returns.

                                                 1
    To understand why our model can account for the three stylized facts, consider the empir-
ically relevant “currency area” regime. Since domestic assets yield a higher dividend, as long
as trading opportunities abroad are not much more frequent than at home, agents hold more
domestic over foreign assets. Hence, portfolios exhibit home bias. In turn, agents have larger
claims to domestic over foreign consumption goods. Hence, our suggested mechanism posi-
tively links asset and consumption home bias. Finally, agents hold foreign assets in order to ac-
quire consumption abroad, but they offload them at the first given opportunity. Hence, foreign
assets turn over faster than domestic assets. This result is very particular to our mechanism.
In the absence of the liquidity channel, the dividend differential between domestic and foreign
assets (or a similar per unit trading cost), which is necessary to generate consumption and asset
home bias, would yield lower turnover of foreign relative to domestic assets. Therefore, the
unique aspect of our model is the ability to capture the three stylized facts simultaneously.
    We use the tight link between consumption and asset home bias to assess the model’s quan-
titative ability to explain equity holding and turnover rate patterns observed in the data. We cal-
ibrate the model’s key parameters to match the import-to-GDP ratio, domestic equity turnover
rate, and difference in dividend income taxes between foreign (OECD) and home equities for
the US over the past decade. We then let the model endogenously generate asset portfolios and
turnover rates of foreign assets. The calibrated model predicts a home equity share of seventy-
two percent and a turnover rate for foreign equities that is 1.44 times higher than the rate for
domestic equities. These results favor well with the data. First, we document that US citizens
have held eighty-five percent of their wealth in domestic equities during the 1997-2007 period.
Second, Amadi and Bergin (2008) document that the turnover rate of foreign equities is 1.89
times as high as the domestic turnover rate for the US during the 1993-2001 period.1
   This paper relates to a large literature that attempts to understand equity holdings and
flows across borders. Heathcote and Perri (2007) use a standard international business cycle
framework and show that, when preferences are biased toward domestic goods, asset home
bias arises because endogenous international relative price fluctuations make domestic stocks
a good hedge against non-diversifiable labor income risk. Their model generates a tight link
between a country’s degree of openness to trade and level of asset diversification. This positive
link is also explored by Collard, Dellas, Diba, and Stockman (2009) in an endowment economy
with separable utility between traded and non-traded goods. In their model, an agent’s opti-
mal portfolio includes the entire stock of home firms that produce domestic non-traded goods
and a fully diversified portfolio of equities of firms that produce tradable goods. The authors
show that, if the share of non-traded goods in consumption is large, the model can generate
substantial portfolio home bias. Hnatkovska (2010) demonstrates that asset home bias and a
   1
     In Table 1, we document that equity home bias for the average OECD economy is seventy-four percent during
the same decade. Amadi and Bergin (2008) document that the turnover rate of foreign equities is at least twice as
high as the domestic turnover rate in Canada, Germany, and Japan during the same period.



                                                       2
high foreign asset turnover rate can arise in the presence of non-diversifiable non-traded con-
sumption risk when each country specializes in production, preferences exhibit consumption
home bias, and asset markets are incomplete. However, in this setting, domestic asset flows are
also high, thus yielding equally high turnover rates of domestic assets.
   Unlike the consumption-based models of home bias above, Amadi and Bergin (2008) offer
an explanation for the coexistence of asset home bias and a higher turnover rate of foreign over
domestic assets in a portfolio-choice model. Their mechanism relies on the existence of het-
erogeneous per-unit trading costs and homogenous fixed entry costs. While this mechanism
may be in part responsible for the observations in the data, we argue that there is considerable
room for an explanation that builds on a general-equilibrium consumption-based model like
ours. First, unlike Amadi and Bergin’s (2008), in addition to capturing the asset turnover rate
differentials, our model links consumption and asset home bias, which is a regularity observed
in the data. Second, in Section 7.2, we show evidence that more than half of cross-border port-
folio investments are made by or on the behalf of individual investors in a typical developed
economy such as the EU.
   This paper is conceptually close to Lagos (2010). The author revisits the equity premium
and risk-free rate puzzles through the lens of a model in which assets are valued as claims to
streams of consumption and for their ability to facilitate trade. He shows that risk-averse agents
are willing to hold the risk-free asset despite its lower yield, not only because this asset is safe,
but also because it endogenously arises as a superior medium of exchange. Thus, Lagos’s (2010)
liquidity channel offers a new means to rationalize standard asset-pricing puzzles in the finance
literature. In similar spirit, the present paper is the first to address a standard allocation puzzle
in international finance through a liquidity channel.
    Our paper falls into a growing literature that focuses on the liquidity properties of objects
other than fiat money. Lagos and Rocheteau (2008) assume that part of the economy’s physical
capital can be used as a medium of exchange along with money. Their goal is to study the issue
of over-investment and how it is affected by inflation. Geromichalos, Licari, and Suarez-Lledo
(2007) study the coexistence of money and a real financial asset as media of exchange, with
special focus on the relationship between asset prices and monetary policy. Lester, Postlewaite,
and Wright (2012) take this framework a step further and endogenize the acceptability (of var-
ious media of exchange) decisions of agents.
   Lastly, our paper relates to the literature of money-search models applied to international
frameworks. In their pioneering work, Matsuyama, Kiyotaki, and Matsui (1993) employ a
two-country, two-currency money-search model, with indivisible money and goods, and study
conditions under which the two currencies serve as media of exchange in different countries.
Wright and Trejos (2001) maintain the assumption of good indivisibility in Matsuyama et al,
but they endogenize prices using bargaining theory. Head and Shi (2003) also consider a
two-country, two-currency search model and show that the nominal exchange rate depends

                                                 3
on the stocks and growth rates of the two monies. Furthermore, Camera and Winkler (2003)
use a search-theoretic model of monetary exchange in order to show that the absence of well-
integrated international goods markets does not necessarily imply a violation of the law of one
price. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper in which assets, other than fiat money,
are endowed with liquidity properties, thus allowing us to bring the money-search literature
closer to questions related to international portfolio diversification.
    It should be pointed out that in Wright and Trejos (2001) and Head and Shi (2003) all valued
currencies are “international” currencies, i.e. they serve as media of exchange in all types of de-
centralized meetings. In contrast, our paper delivers clear implications regarding which assets
serve as means of payment in each market. For instance, in our “currency area” equilibrium,
assets facilitate trade only in their country of origin. This is true not because (local) sellers do
not accept foreign assets as means of payment, but rather because buyers rationally choose to
not bring their home assets in order to trade in the decentralized market abroad. Hence, the
paper’s ability to give rise to a “currency area” equilibrium is a contribution, not only to the
international macroeconomics, but also to the monetary-search literature.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the modeling en-
vironment. Section 3 discusses the optimal behavior of agents in the economy. Section 4 char-
acterizes the media of exchange that arise in a symmetric two-country model of international
trade in goods and assets. Section 5 describes the model’s predictions regarding asset and con-
sumption home bias as well as asset turnover rates, and it documents the three stylized facts.
Section 6 evaluates the quantitative ability of the liquidity mechanism to account for the ob-
servations in the data. Section 7 discusses the robustness of the theoretical and quantitative
results. Finally, Section 8 concludes.



2    Physical Environment

Time is discrete with an infinite horizon. Each period consists of two sub-periods. During the
first sub-period, trade occurs in decentralized markets (DM henceforth), which we describe in
detail below. In the second sub-period, economic activity takes place in traditional Walrasian or
centralized markets (CM henceforth). There is no aggregate uncertainty. There are two coun-
tries, A and B. Each country has a unit measure of buyers and a measure ξ of sellers who live
forever. The identity of agents (as sellers or buyers) is permanent. During the first sub-period,
a distinct DM opens within each country and anonymous bilateral trade takes place. We refer
to these markets as DMi , i = A, B. Without loss of generality, assume that DMA opens first.
Sellers from country i are immobile, but buyers are mobile. Therefore, in DMi , sellers who are
citizens of country i meet buyers who could be citizens of either country. During the second
sub-period, all agents are located in their home country.

                                                 4
    All agents discount the future between periods (but not sub-periods) at rate β ∈ (0, 1). Buy-
ers consume in both sub-periods and supply labor in the second sub-period. Their preferences,
which are independent of their citizenship, are given by U(qA , qB , X, H), where qi is consump-
tion in DMi , i = A, B, and X, H are consumption and labor in the (domestic) CM. Sellers
consume only in the CM and they produce in both the DM and the CM. Sellers’ preferences
are given by V(h, X, H), where the only new variable, h, stands for hours worked in the DM.
In line with Lagos and Wright (2005), we adopt the functional forms

                            U(qA , qB , X, H) = u(qA ) + u(qB ) + U(X) − H,
                                 V(h, X, H) = −c(h) + U(X) − H.

We assume that u and U are twice continuously differentiable with u(0) = 0, u′ > 0, u′ (0) = ∞,
U ′ > 0, u′′ < 0, and U ′′ ≤ 0. For simplicity, we set c(h) = h, but this is not crucial for any of our
results. Let q ∗ ≡ {q : u′ (q ∗ ) = 1}, i.e. q ∗ denotes the optimal level of production in any bilateral
meeting. Also, suppose that there exists X ∗ ∈ (0, ∞) such that U ′ (X ∗ ) = 1, with U(X ∗ ) > X ∗ .
   During the round of decentralized trade, sellers and buyers are matched randomly accord-
ing to a matching technology that is identical in both DM’s. Let B, S denote the total number
of buyers and sellers in a certain DM.2 The total number of matches in this market is given
by M(B, S) ≤ min{B, S}, where M is increasing in both arguments. Since only the aggregate
measure of buyers (as opposed to the individual measures of local and foreign buyers) appears
in M, the matching technology is unbiased with respect to the citizenship of the buyer. The
arrival rate of buyers to an arbitrary seller is aS = M(B, S)/S, and the arrival rate of sellers to
an arbitrary buyer is aB = M(B, S)/B. In both DM’s, S = ξ. Buyers get to visit the domestic
DM with probability σH ∈ (0, 1) and the foreign DM with probability σF ∈ (0, 1), so that in
both DM’s B = σH + σF . The relative magnitude of σF to σH captures the degree of economic
integration. In any bilateral meeting, the buyer makes a take-it-or-leave-it offer to the seller.
Any sale to a citizen of country j will count as imports of country j from country i.
  As mentioned earlier, during the second sub-period agents trade in centralized markets,
CMi , i = A, B. All agents consume and produce a general good or fruit which is identical in
both countries. Thus, the domestic and the foreign general goods enter as perfect substitutes
in the utility function. Agents are located in the home country and have access to a technology
that can transform one unit of labor into one unit of the fruit. Furthermore, we assume that
there are two trees, one in each country, that produce fruit, as in Lucas (1978). Shares of the tree
in country i are traded in CMi , but due to perfect financial integration, agents from country j
can place any order and buy shares of this tree at the ongoing price ψi . Let Ti > 0 denote the
total supply of the tree in country i and di the per-period dividend of tree i. Since in this paper
   2
    To avoid the possibility of confusion, variables indexed by the term B are related to “country B”. On the other
hand, variables indexed by the term B are related to “Buyers”.


                                                        5
we focus on symmetric equilibria, we assume that TA = TB = T > 0 and dA = dB = d > 0. T
and d are exogenously given and constant.
   Except from consuming the general good and trading shares of the trees in the CM’s, buyers
can also carry some claims into the decentralized round of trade and trade them for the good
produced by local sellers. Hence, assets serve not only as stores of value, but also as media
of exchange. The necessity for a medium of exchange arises due to anonymity and a double
coincidence of wants problem that characterizes trade in the DM’s (see Kocherlakota (1998) for
an extensive discussion). Assets can serve as media of exchange as long as they are portable,
storable, divisible, and recognizable by all agents. We assume that all these properties are sat-
isfied. As we explain in more detail below, we do not place any ad hoc restrictions on which
assets can serve where as means of payments.
    In the absence of any frictions in the physical environment, due to the symmetry assumption
made earlier, the model would predict that agents’ share of foreign assets in their portfolios is
anywhere between 0 and 100%. In order to derive sharper predictions, additional assumptions
are necessary. One friction that is very common in the international macroeconomics literature
is the so-called currency area assumption, which dictates that trading in country i requires the
use of that country’s currency (in our case the asset) as a medium of exchange. This assump-
tion is extremely appealing and empirically relevant. However, since our paper is in the spirit of
modern monetary theory, we consider such a restriction undesirable, and we insist that agents
should choose which assets to use as media of exchange.
   We now introduce the main friction of our model. We assume that whenever an agent from
country i holds one share of country j’s tree, j 6= i, she has a claim to d − κ units of fruit, with
κ ∈ (0, d). One can think of κ as a policy friction, such as a tax on foreign dividend income,
which is commonly observed across many countries (this is precisely how we interpret κ in the
quantitative exercise of Section 6). Alternatively, κ may capture an information friction or a
cost that agents have to pay in order to participate in the foreign asset market.3 Another way to
think about κ follows from a more literal interpretation of the Lucas tree model: when an agent
from country i holds one share of tree j, d units of fruit (general good) have to be physically
delivered from country j to its claimant in country i. Therefore, κ could also represent a trans-
portation cost. It is important to highlight that all the theoretical results presented in this paper
hold for arbitrarily small values of κ.
   Finally, the notion of liquidity employed in this paper draws upon the recent monetary-
search literature. Within that spirit, we assume that assets serve as means of payments in mar-
kets with imperfect credit.4 However, our mechanism intends to capture the broader notion of
assets as facilitators of trade. For example, sellers may require assets as collateral in order to
   3
    Similarly, Michaelides (2003) assumes that agents face a higher transaction cost when investing abroad.
   4
    This is in contrast with the finance literature, which typically relates the liquidity of an asset to the speed with
which it can be converted into consumption. See for example Duffie, Garleanu, and Pedersen (2005).



                                                           6
deliver goods to buyers.5 Alternatively, agents may rely on repurchase agreements to acquire
goods and services. As Lagos (2011) points out, contractual details aside, in all of these envi-
ronments assets effectively act as media of exchange in that they facilitate trade between sellers
and untrustworthy buyers.



3     Value Functions and Optimal Behavior

We begin with the description of the value functions in the CM. For a buyer from country
i = A, B, the Bellman’s equation is given by

             WiB (t) = max U(X) − H + βViB (t̂ )
                          
                         X,H, t̂
                                                
         s.t. X + ψi t̂ii + t̂ij + ψj t̂ji + t̂jj = H + (ψi + d)(tii + tij ) + (ψj + dκ )(tji + tjj ).

The state variables are summarized by t ≡ (tii , tij , tji , tjj ), where tij is the amount of asset i that
is used for trade in DMj , and variables with hats denote next period’s choices.6 We have also
defined dκ = d − κ. It can be easily verified that, at the optimum, X = X ∗ . Using this fact and
replacing H from the budget constraint into WiB yields

                   WiB (t) = U(X ∗ ) − X ∗ + (ψi + d)(tii + tij ) + (ψj + dκ )(tji + tjj )
                           + max −ψi t̂ii + t̂ij − ψj t̂ji + t̂jj + βViB (t̂ ) .
                                                                 
                                                                                                                    (1)
                                    t̂


Two observations are in order. First, since U is quasi-linear, the optimal choice of t̂ does not
depend on t, i.e. there are no wealth effects. Second, WiB is linear, and we can write

                        WiB (t) = ΛBi + (ψi + d)(tii + tij ) + (ψj + dκ )(tji + tjj ),

where the definition of ΛBi is obvious.
  We now focus on sellers. As it is standard in monetary models, carrying assets across peri-
ods of time comes at a cost (in the case of fiat money, the cost is just the nominal interest rate).
The only agents who are willing to incur this cost are the agents who benefit from the asset’s
liquidity, i.e. the buyers. Since in our model the identity of agents, as buyers or sellers, is fixed,
sellers will always choose to leave the CM with zero asset holdings. For a more detailed proof
   5
     This notion of liquidity is closely related to the concept of pledgeability, which was introduced to the literature
by Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and Holmström and Tirole (1998).
   6
     Hence, the buyer can bring any amount of local or foreign asset to the local DM , and the same is true for the
foreign DM . This modeling choice guarantees that the order in which the DM ’s open is inessential. If the buyer
was choosing some (t̂i , t̂j ), which she could bring to either DM , the amount of assets that she would choose to
trade in, say, DMi would crucially depend on whether she got/will get matched in DMj . That is, the buyer’s
behavior would depend on the order in which the DM ’s open. We consider this an undesirable feature.

                                                           7
of this result, see Rocheteau and Wright (2005).7 Noting that sellers also choose X = X ∗ in
every period, we can write the value function of a seller from country i = A, B as

                   WiS (ti , tj ) = U(X ∗ ) − X ∗ + (ψi + d) ti + (ψj + dκ ) tj + βViS (0, 0)
                                    ≡ ΛSi + (ψi + d) ti + (ψj + dκ ) tj .

Like in the buyers’ case, WiS is linear. Sellers leave the CM with zero asset holdings, but they
might enter this market with positive amounts of both assets, which they received as means of
payments in the preceding DM.
   We now turn to the terms of trade in the DM’s. As explained earlier, we place no restrictions
on which assets can be used as media of exchange. Consider meetings in DMi , and as a first case
let the buyer be a citizen of country i (a local) with asset holdings denoted by t. The solution
to the bargaining problem is a list (qi , xii , xji ), where qi is the amount of special good, xii is the
amount of asset i, and xji is the amount of asset j that changes hands. With take-it-or-leave-it
offers by the buyer, the bargaining problem is

                                           u(qi ) + WiB (tii − xii , tij , tji − xji , tjj ) − WiB (t)
                                                                                                      
                             max
                           qi ,xii ,xji

                             s.t. − qi + WiS (xii , xji ) − WiS (0, 0) = 0                                             (2)
                             and xii ≤ tii , xji ≤ tji .

Exploiting the linearity of the W ’s, we can re-write this problem as

                                            max [u(qi ) − (ψi + d)xii − (ψj + dκ )xji ]
                                          qi ,xii ,xji

                                            s.t.     qi = (ψi + d)xii + (ψj + dκ )xji
                                            and xii ≤ tii , xji ≤ tji .

The following lemma describes the bargaining solution in detail.
   7
     In Rocheteau and Wright (2005), the nominal interest rate is assumed to be strictly positive. Hence, holding
no money is the unique optimal choice for sellers. In our model, there will be a case in which the cost of carrying
the home asset is zero (this will never be the case for the foreign asset because of the friction κ). In this case, sellers
are indifferent between holding zero or some positive amount of the home asset. Nevertheless, holding zero asset
is always optimal. Moreover, if one assumes that there is a cost, c > 0, of participating in the asset markets, then
holding zero assets is the unique optimal choice for the seller, even for a tiny c.




                                                                   8
Lemma 1. Define πi ≡ (ψi + d)tii + (ψj + dκ )tji .
                                                         (
                                                             qi = q ∗ ,
                        If    πi ≥ q ∗ ,         then
                                                             (ψi + d)xii + (ψj + dκ )xji = q ∗ .
                                                         (
                                                             qi = πi ,
                        If    πi < q ∗ ,         then
                                                             xii = tii , xji = tji .

Proof. It can be easily verified that the suggested solution satisfies the necessary and sufficient
conditions for maximization.

    All that matters for the bargaining solution is whether the buyer’s asset balances, i.e. πi , are
sufficient to buy the optimal quantity q ∗ . If the answer to that question is yes, then qi = q ∗ , and
the buyer spends amounts of assets tii , tji such that πi = q ∗ . Notice that in this case tii , tji cannot
be pinned down separately.8 Conversely, if πi < q ∗ , the buyer gives up all her asset holdings
and purchases as much q as her balances allow.
   Now consider a meeting in DMi when the buyer is from j 6= i (a foreigner) with asset
holdings t. Again, denote the solution by (qi , xii , xji ). The bargaining problem to be solved is
the same as in (2), after replacing WiB with WjB . Using the linearity of the value functions, one
can write the bargaining problem as

                                     max [u(qi ) − (ψi + dκ )xii − (ψj + d)xji ]
                                   qi ,xii ,xji

                                     s.t.        qi = (ψi + d)xii + (ψj + dκ )xji
                                     and xii ≤ tii , xji ≤ tji .

Substituting for (ψi + d)xii + (ψj + d)xji from the constraint, we can re-write the objective as
u(qi ) − qi − κxji + κxii . Notice that for every unit of asset i that goes from the buyer to the seller,
two positive effects are generated. First, trade is facilitated, i.e. the seller produces q for the
buyer in exchange for the asset. Second, the social surplus increases because the asset goes to
the hands of the agent who has a higher valuation for it. The next Lemma describes the solution
to the bargaining problem in detail.
                             n                   o            n            o
                                            ψ+dκ                       ψ+d
Lemma 2. Define q(ψ) ≡ q : u (q) = ψ+d and q(ψ) ≡ q : u (q) = ψ+dκ , with q(ψ) > q ∗ >
                                   ′                             ′

q(ψ), for all ψ < ∞. The bargaining solution is the following
                               
                                qi = q(ψi ),
                               
                               
                 q(ψi )                     i)
    a) If tii ≥ ψi +d , then     xii = ψq(ψ
                                         i +d
                                               ,
                               
                               
                                x = 0.
                                            ji

   8
       This does not cause any indeterminacy issues because, as we show later, buyers set tji = 0.


                                                                9
                                     
                                      qi = tii (ψi + d),
                                     
                                     
                h               
                  q(ψj ) q(ψi )
    b) If tii ∈ ψi +d , ψi +d , then    xii = tii ,
                                     
                                     
                                      x = 0.
                                         j
                                                 
                                                  qi = q(ψj ),
                                                 
                                                 
                  q(ψj )
    c1) If tii < ψi +d and πi ≥ q(ψj ) , then       xii = tii ,
                                                 
                                                  x = q(ψj )−(ψi +d)tii .
                                                 
                                                     ji         ψj +dκ
                                                 
                                                  qi = πi ,
                                                 
                                                 
                  q(ψj )
    c2) If tii < ψi +d and πi < q(ψj ) , then       xii = tii ,
                                                 
                                                 
                                                  x =t .
                                                             ji    ji


Proof. See Appendix A.

    The solution is very intuitive. The buyer, citizen of j, should use only asset i whenever pos-
sible. If her asset-i holdings are unlimited, she should buy the quantity defined as q(ψ). This
quantity is larger than q ∗ , the maximizer of u(q) − q, because of the second positive effect of
using asset i described above (the wedge between the buyer’s and the seller’s valuation). In
similar spirit, if the buyer’s balances allow her to buy q(ψ) or more, she should not use any
amount of asset j for trade. Positive amounts of asset j will change hands, only if the asset-
i holdings are such that the buyer cannot purchase q(ψ). In that case, the buyer will use the
amount of asset j that, together with all of her asset-i holdings, buys the quantity q(ψ).
   Our last task in this section is to discuss the optimal portfolio choice of the buyer. To that
end, we first describe the buyer’s value function in the DM. Once this function has been estab-
lished, we can plug it into equation (1) and characterize this agent’s objective function. Define
pH ≡ aB σH and pF ≡ aB σF , i.e. pH is the probability of matching in the local DM, and pF is the
analogous expression for the foreign DM. Then, the value function for a buyer from country i
who enters the round of decentralized trade with asset holdings t = (tii , tij , tji , tjj ), is given by
                             n                                                                      o
             ViB (t) = pH pF u(qi ) + u(qj ) + WiB (tii − xii , tij − xij , tji − xji , tjj − xjj )
                                   n                                                 o
                                               B
                     + pH (1 − pF ) u(qi ) + Wi (tii − xii , tij , tji − xji , tjj )
                                   n                                                  o
                     + pF (1 − pH ) u(qj ) + WiB (tii , tij − xij , tji , tjj − xjj )
                      + (1 − pH )(1 − pF )WiB (t),                                                              (3)

where q, x are determined by the bargaining protocols described in Lemmata 1 and 2. It is
understood that (qi , xii , xji ) are functions of (tii , tji ) and (qj , xij , xjj ) are functions of (tij , tjj ).
   The next step is to lead eqution (3) by one period in order to obtain ViB (t̂ ). Then, plug the
latter into (1) and focus only on the terms that contain the control variables t̂ = (t̂ii , t̂ij , t̂ji , t̂jj ).


                                                        10
This is the objective function of the buyer from country i, and it can be written as

                                     JiB (t̂ ) = Ji,H
                                                  B                     B
                                                      (t̂ii , t̂ji ) + Ji,F (t̂ij , t̂jj ),                           (4)

where we have defined
                             h                      i     h                        i
        B
       Ji,H (t̂ii , t̂ji ) =  −ψi + β ψ̂i + d t̂ii + −ψj + β ψ̂j + dκ t̂ji
                                n                                                                           o
                           + βpH u(qi (t̂ii , t̂ji )) − ψ̂i + d xii (t̂ii , t̂ji ) − ψ̂j + dκ xji (t̂ii , t̂ji ) ,    (5)
                             h                      i     h                        i
        B
       Ji,F (t̂ij , t̂jj ) = −ψi + β ψ̂i + d t̂ij + −ψj + β ψ̂j + dκ t̂jj
                                n                                                                             o
                           + βpF u(qj (t̂ij , t̂jj )) − ψ̂i + d xij (t̂ij , t̂jj ) − ψ̂j + dκ xjj (t̂ij , t̂jj ) .    (6)

          B
The term Ji,n is the part of the objective that reflects the choice of assets to be traded in DMn ,
with n = H for home or n = F for foreign.
    Equation (4) highlights that the optimal choice of asset holdings to be traded in the home
and foreign DM ((t̂ii , t̂ji ) and (t̂ij , t̂jj ), respectively) can be studied in isolation. The term −ψi +
β(ψ̂i + d) represents the net gain from carrying one unit of the domestic asset from today’s CM
into tomorrow’s CM. Sometimes we refer to the negative of this term as the cost of carrying the
asset across periods. Similarly, −ψj + β(ψ̂j + dκ ) is the net gain from carrying one unit of the for-
eign asset across consecutive CM’s. In both (5) and (6), the second line represents the expected
(discounted) surplus of the buyer in each DM. The following Lemma states an important result
regarding the sign of the cost terms that appear in the agents’ objective functions.

Lemma 3. In any equilibrium, ψl ≥ β(ψ̂l + d), l = A, B.

Proof. This is a standard result in monetary theory. If ψl < β(ψ̂l +d) for some l, agents of country
l have an infinite demand for this asset, and so equilibrium is not well defined.

   According to the Lemma, the net gain from carrying home assets across periods is non-
positive and the net gain from carrying foreign assets across periods is strictly negative due to
the term κ. This result assigns an intuitive interpretation to the objective function established
above: a buyer wishes to bring assets with her in the DM in order to facilitate trade. However,
she faces a trade-off because carrying these assets is not free (equations (5) and (6)).9 We are
now ready to discuss the optimal portfolio choice of the buyer and, consequently, equilibrium.
   9
    Lemma 3 also clarifies our claim that it is always optimal for sellers to hold zero assets. In the case of foreign
assets, this is the unique optimal choice.




                                                                 11
4         Equilibrium in the Two-Country Model

We begin this section with a general definition of equilibrium and we explain why focusing on
symmetric, steady-state equilibria can make the analysis more tractable.

Definition 1. An equilibrium for the two-country economy is a list of solutions to the bargain-
ing problems in DMi , i = A, B described by Lemmata 1 and 2 and bounded paths of ψA , ψB ,
such that buyers maximize their objective function (described by (5) and (6)) under the market
clearing conditions l=A,B i=A,B tiAl = T = l=A,B i=A,B tiBl . The term tijl denotes demand
                   P        P                   P       P

of a buyer from country i for asset j to trade in DMl .

     In the remainder of the paper we focus on symmetric, steady-state equilibria. In our model,
pH , pF are the same in both countries. This fact, in combination with the strict concavity of
  B       B
Ji,H and Ji,F (which is standard in the Lagos-Wright model), implies the following: each buyer
has a certain (degenerate) demand for the home asset and a certain (degenerate) demand for
the foreign asset, but these demand functions do not depend on the agent’s citizenship. In
other words, tA AA
                   = tB
                      BB
                         , tA
                            AB
                               = tB
                                  BA
                                     , tA
                                        BA
                                           = tB
                                              AB
                                                 , and tA
                                                        BB
                                                           = tB
                                                              AA
                                                                 .10 Two important implications
follow. First, both assets have equal aggregate supply (T ) and aggregate demand. Therefore,
their equilibrium price has to be equal, ψA = ψB = ψ. Second, by the bargaining protocols, the
amount of special good that changes hands in any DM depends only on whether the buyer is a
local or a foreigner, but not on the label of the DM. These facts lead to the following definition.

Definition 2. A symmetric, steady-state equilibrium for the two-country economy can be sum-
marized by the objects {tHH , tHF , tF H , tF F , qH , qF , ψ}. The term tij is the equilibrium asset hold-
ings of the representative buyer (of any country) for asset i to be used for trade in DMj , with
i, j = H for home or i, j = F for foreign. For future reference also define the total home and
foreign asset holdings of buyers, tH = tHH + tHF and tF = tF H + tF F . The term qi stands for
the amount of special good that changes hands in any DM when the buyer is local (i = H) or
foreign (i = F ). Finally, ψ is the symmetric, steady-state equilibrium asset price. Equilibrium
objects are such that agents maximize their respective objective functions and markets clear.

         We now proceed to a more careful discussion of the optimal portfolio choice of buyers and,
consequently, equilibrium. Notice that the symmetric, steady-state version of Lemma 3 dictates
that ψ ≥ βd/(1 − β) ≡ ψ ∗ . The term ψ ∗ is the so-called fundamental value of the asset, i.e.
the unique price that agents would be willing to pay for one unit of this asset if we were to
shut down the DM’s (in which case the model would coincide with a two-country Lucas-tree
    10
   For example, tA AA
                       = tBBB
                               means that the demand for asset A of a buyer from A in order to trade in her local
DM is equal to the demand of a buyer from B for asset B used for trade in her local DM . The remaining equations
admit similar interpretations.


                                                       12
model). We will examine the choice of (tHH , tF H ) and (tHF , tF F ) separately, by looking at the
symmetric, steady-state versions of (5) and (6).

Lemma 4. A buyer’s optimal choice of asset holdings for trade in the local DM satisfies tF H = 0.
Moreover, if ψ > ψ ∗ , tHH solves

                           ψ = β(ψ + d) {1 + pH [u′ ((ψ + d)tHH ) − 1]} ,                           (7)

and if ψ = ψ ∗ , tHH ≥ q ∗ /(ψ + d).

Proof. See Appendix A.

    Lemma 4 reveals that buyers never carry foreign assets to trade in the local DM. The intu-
ition behind this result is straightforward. Recall from Lemma 1 that any combination of assets
for which (ψ +d)tHH +(ψ +dκ )tF H = π, for some given π, buys the same amount of special good.
Since the foreign asset has a higher holding cost, it is always optimal for the buyer to purchase
any desired quantity using tHH only. When the cost to carry assets falls to zero, optimality re-
quires that the buyer bring any amount of assets that buy her q ∗ in the local DM (this amount
maximizes the buyer’s surplus). By Lemma 1, any tHH ≥ (1 − β)q ∗ /d does that job.
   Next, we consider the optimal choice of assets used for trade in the foreign DM. There are
three scenarios (or regimes), that depend on the values of the following parameters: β, pF , and
κ/d. In the first scenario, regardless of asset prices, the agent uses only foreign assets to trade
in the foreign DM. In the second scenario, again regardless of asset prices, the agent chooses
tF F = 0 and trades in the foreign DM with her home asset. Finally, there is a third regime, in
which the agent uses either tHF or tF F as means of payment (except from a knife-edge case),
depending on asset prices. The following Lemma describes the details. Figure 1 summarizes
the parameter values that constitute the various regions described in Lemma 5.
                                                                           (1−2p )
Lemma 5. Case 1: Assume (pF , β) ∈ R1 , or (pF , β) ∈ R2 and κd > (1−p )(1−β)
                                                                            F
                                                                                ≡ κ̃. Then the buyer
                                                                         F
uses only the foreign asset as a medium of exchange in the foreign DM. The optimal tF F satisfies

                      ψ = β [(1 − pF )(ψ + dκ ) + pF (ψ + d) u′ ((ψ + d)tF F ))] .                  (8)

If ψ > ψ ∗ , then tHF = 0, and if ψ = ψ ∗ , then tHF ∈ R+ . Also, qF = (ψ + d)tF F .
    Case 2: Assume (pF , β) ∈ R4 . The buyer sets tF F = 0 and uses only the domestic asset as a medium
of exchange in the foreign DM. If ψ > ψ ∗ , then tHF satisfies

                      ψ = β [(1 − pF )(ψ + d) + pF (ψ + dκ ) u′ ((ψ + dκ )tHF )] ,                  (9)

with qF = (ψ + dκ )tHF . If ψ = ψ ∗ , then any tHF ≥ q(ψ ∗ )/(d/(1 − β) − κ) is optimal. In this case,
qF = q(ψ ∗ ).

                                                    13
   Case 3: Assume (pF , β) ∈ R3 , or (pF , β) ∈ R2 and κ/d ≤ κ̃. Also, define ψc ≡ β(1 − pF )(2d −
κ)/[1 − 2β(1 − pF )]. The following sub-cases arise: a) If ψ > ψc , then the optimal tHF , tF F , qF are as in
Case 1 above. b) If ψ < ψc , then the optimal tHF , tF F , qF are as in Case 2 above. c) In the knife-edge case
ψ = ψc , tHF , tF F > 0 and both (8) and (9) hold. The optimal choices tHF , tF F cannot be uniquely pinned
down, but qF is uniquely given by qF,c ≡ {q : u′(q) = (1 − pF )/pF }.

Proof. See Appendix A.


                        b
                          1


                                    R4
                              β= 1
                                2(1-pF)



                       0.5                                        R1
                                    R3
                                                  R2

                                            pF
                                      b=
                                           1-pF


                                                       0.5                     1    pF

                                Figure 1: Parameter Values and Regions

    Lemma 5 has an intuitive explanation. The term κ creates a “wedge” between the asset
valuations of a seller and a buyer who come from different countries. The buyer knows that
if she meets with a foreign seller, she will have higher purchasing power if she carries the for-
eign asset (which represents a home asset to the seller). On the other hand, meeting the seller
is not guaranteed, and if the buyer stays unmatched in the foreign DM, she will receive the
lower dividend associated with the foreign asset. A reverse story applies regarding the optimal
choice of tHF . If the buyer carries a large amount of the home asset and matches in the foreign
DM, she will have lower purchasing power because, for every unit of tHF that she passes to the
seller, the latter will receive a lower dividend in the forthcoming CM. Not surprisingly, when
pF is high, the buyer decides to carry out trades in the foreign DM using the foreign asset. On
the other hand, when it is less likely to match abroad (low pF ), the buyer prefers to carry her
home asset, even when trading in the foreign country. In intermediate cases, either regime can



                                                       14
arise, depending on the asset price, which affects the holding costs.11
    The relationship between the optimal tHF and tF F with pF is straightforward. What is per-
haps more surprising is the fact that, in R2 , the buyer chooses to trade with the foreign asset
when κ is relatively high. This might seem counterintuitive at first, given that a high κ means
a low dividend for a buyer who did not dispose of the foreign asset. But one should not forget
that a high κ also implies low purchasing power for the buyer, if she carries only tHF . These
forces have opposing effects. Whether it is optimal to trade with tHF or tF F depends on the
value of β. When κ is high, the buyer realizes that she might receive a lower dividend, but this
will happen tomorrow. On the other hand, when the buyer is trying to buy some q and pay with
tHF , the seller will receive a lower dividend in the current period’s CM, i.e. tonight. Thus, a
high κ dictates the use of tF F in foreign meetings, as long as agents are not very patient. As
an extreme case, consider points in R2 that are close to the origin, and suppose κ is very high.
Although pF is tiny, the buyer chooses to trade with tF F because, in this region, β is also tiny.
   So far we have analyzed the optimal behavior of agents for given (symmetric, steady state)
asset prices. To complete the model, we incorporate the exogenous supply of assets in the
analysis and treat ψ as an equilibrium object. For the reader’s convenience, before we state the
proposition that characterizes equilibrium, we repeat the definitions of some objects introduced
above, and we define a few new objects.12
                                                                          
                            ∗              ′            κ (1 − β)(1 − pF )
                           qF,1   ≡   q : u (q) = 1 +
                                                        d          pF
                                                                          
                            ∗            ∗           ′                d
                           qF,2   ≡ q (ψ ) = q : u (q) =
                                                              d − (1 − β)κ
                                                                                 
                                           ′      d(1 − 2pF ) − κ(1 − β)(1 − pF )
                           qH,c   ≡   q : u (q) =
                                                          pH [d − βκ(1 − pF )]
                                                          
                                           ′      1 − pF
                           qF,c   ≡   q : u (q) =
                                                     pF
                                               ∗    ∗
                                    (1 − β)(q + qF,1 )
                            T1∗   ≡
                                             d ∗
                                                q          q(ψ ∗ )
                                                                       
                            T2∗   ≡ (1 − β)       +
                                                d      d − κ(1 − β)
                                    1 − 2β(1 − pF )
                            Tc    ≡                    (q + qF,c ) < T2∗
                                    d − κβ(1 − pF ) H,c
  11
      An interesting point to notice is that in Case 3, for ψ in the neighborhood of ψc , the nature of the agent’s
optimal choice transforms fully. For ψ = ψc − ǫ, ǫ > 0, tF F = 0 and tHF > 0. But for ψ = ψc + ǫ, tHF = 0 and
the agent uses only foreign assets as a medium of exchange. Despite this dramatic change in the agent’s portfolio
composition, as ψ crosses the critical value ψc , the amount of special good purchased is continuous in ψ. To see
this point, just set ψ = ψc + ǫ in (8) and ψ = ψc − ǫ in (9). It is easy to show that, as ǫ → 0, qF → qF,c in both cases.
   12
      A comment on notation: when we write qF,1 ∗
                                                   , the asterisk refers to the fact that this is the highest value that qF
can reach and the number 1 refers to the case, in particular Case 1.




                                                            15
                                                 β(1 − pF )(2d − κ)
                                           ψc ≡
                                                   1 − 2β(1 − pF )
                                                     (1 − 2pF )
                                            κ̃ ≡
                                                 (1 − pF )(1 − β)

Proposition 1. For all parameter values, in equilibrium, tF H = 0. Moreover:
   a) If (pF , β) ∈ R1 , or (pF , β) ∈ R2 and κ/d ≥ κ̃, equilibrium is characterized by “local asset
dominance” and agents trade in the foreign DM using only foreign assets. Hence, tHF = 0, tH = tHH ,
and tF = tF F . If T ≥ T1∗ , then ψ = ψ ∗ , qH = q ∗ , qF = qF,1 ∗
                                                                     < q ∗ , and tH = T − qF,1
                                                                                           ∗
                                                                                               (1 − β)/d. If
T < T1∗ , then ψ > ψ ∗ , qH < q ∗ , and qF < qF,1
                                              ∗
                                                  . For any T in this region, ∂ψ/∂T < 0, ∂qH /∂T > 0, and
∂qF /∂T > 0.
    b) If (β, pF ) ∈ R4 , an “international asset” equilibrium arises and agents use their home assets in all
DM’s, i.e. tF F = 0, so tF = 0 and tH = T . If T ≥ T2∗ , then ψ = ψ ∗ , qH = q ∗ , and qF = q(ψ ∗ ) < q ∗ . If
T < T2∗ , then ψ > ψ ∗ , qH < q ∗ , and qF < q(ψ ∗ ). For any T in this region, ∂ψ/∂T < 0, ∂qH /∂T > 0,
and ∂qF /∂T > 0.
    c) If (β, pF ) ∈ R3 , or (β, pF ) ∈ R2 and κ/d < κ̃, a “mixed regime” equilibrium arises in the sense
that either local asset dominance or international asset could arise depending on T . If T > Tc , we are in
the international asset regime. For T ’s in this region, ψ ∈ [ψ ∗ , ψc ), qH ∈ (qH,c , q ∗ ], and qF ∈ (qF,c , qF,2
                                                                                                                ∗
                                                                                                                    ].
If T < Tc , we switch to a local asset dominance equilibrium and ψ > ψc , qH < qH,c , and qF < qF,c . In
the knife-edge case where T = Tc , buyers purchase qF = qF,c in the foreign DM using any combination
of home and foreign assets.

Proof. See Appendix A.

    A unique steady state equilibrium exists for all parameter values. Buyers never carry for-
eign assets in order to trade in their home DM. Under parameter values summarized as Case
1 in Lemma 5, an equilibrium with local asset dominance arises. Buyers choose to trade in the
foreign DM using the foreign asset only, because the positive effect (high purchasing power) of
holding foreign assets dominates the negative effect (low dividend). There exists a critical level
T1∗ that captures the liquidity needs of the economy. For T < T1∗ , increasing T helps buyers pur-
chase more special good in both DM’s. Hence, the marginal valuation of one unit of the claim
is higher than ψ ∗ , i.e. the price of the asset in a world where the Lucas-tree serves only as a
store of value. The difference ψ − ψ ∗ represents a liquidity premium because it reflects a premium
in the valuation of the asset that stems from its second role (as a medium of exchange). When
T ≥ T1∗ , the asset’s liquidity properties have been exploited (increasing T does not help buyers
purchase more good) and ψ = ψ ∗ . When this is true, the cost of carrying the home asset is zero,
                                                        ∗
so local buyers absorb all the excess supply, tH = T − qF,1 (1 − β)/d.
    A similar analysis applies when parameter values are as in Case 2 in Lemma 5. We refer
to this case as an international asset equilibrium because agents use their home asset as means

                                                         16
of payment everywhere in the world. The asset supply that captures the liquidity needs of the
economy is given by T2∗ . When T ≥ T2∗ , the asset price is down to its fundamental value and
qH , qF have reached their upper bounds. Notice that in this case, buyers do not purchase any
foreign assets in the CM, i.e. tF = 0 and tH = T . However, this does not mean that no agent
ever holds any foreign assets. Sellers from country i who got matched with foreign buyers get
payed with, and therefore hold some, asset j (which represents a home asset to the buyers).
This will be important in the next section where we will compute asset home bias.
   When parameter values are as in Case 3 in Lemma 5, we can end up with local asset dom-
inance or international asset equilibrium depending on T , which directly affects ψ. Equilibria
with local asset dominance arise if and only if T > Tc . When T is large, equilibrium prices
are relatively low, which means that the cost of carrying the asset is relatively low. When the
cost of carrying assets is low, the term κ becomes relatively more important. Recall from the
discussion of Lemma 5 that it is precisely when κ is relatively high that agents choose to use the
foreign asset in order to trade in the foreign DM (this becomes obvious when (β, pF ) ∈ R2 ). On
the other hand, if T is very small, the cost of carrying assets is large, so the term κ becomes less
relevant. For intermediate values of (β, pF ) (remember we are in Case 3), this leads the buyers
to optimally choose their home asset to trade in all DM’s.



5    Home Bias and High Turnover

In this section we use our model to revisit a well-known puzzle in the international finance
literature: the coexistence of equity and consumption home bias with a higher turnover rate
for foreign relative to domestic equities. To that end, we derive three predictions of our model
and we show that they are in line with observations in the data. These predictions include:
the existence of asset home bias, the positive correlation between asset and consumption home
bias, and the higher turnover rate of foreign over domestic assets. We focus on the local asset
dominance equilibrium, which is empirically relevant as it implies that countries constitute
“currency areas”. Moreover, the quantitative exercise in Section 6 confirms that US data suggest
parameter values that support this very equilibrium. For completeness, we treat the case of
international asset equilibrium in the accompanying Online Appendix, and we show that all
the theoretical results are preserved.



5.1 Preliminaries

In this section we establish some useful properties of the equilibrium values of qH , qF and tH , tF ,
which will lead us to our discussion of asset and consumption home bias as well as asset


                                                 17
turnover rates. For given ψ, the first-order conditions (7) and (8) implicitly define qH , qF as
functions of the probabilities pH , pF . We have
                                                                      
                                              ′          ψ − β(ψ + d)
                       qH   = qH (pH ) ≡ q : u (q) = 1 +                 ,
                                                          βpH (ψ + d)
                                                                            
                                              ′      ψ − β(ψ + dκ )(1 − pF )
                       qF   = qF (pF ) ≡ q : u (q) =                           .
                                                           βpF (ψ + d)

The produced quantities can be used to characterize the volumes of assets that change hands in
bilateral meetings. From the bargaining solution, we have

                                                       qH (pH )
                                           tH (pH ) =           ,
                                                        ψ+d
                                                       q (p )
                                            tF (pF ) = F F .
                                                       ψ+d

Lemma 6. a) If T < T1∗ , the following results hold: i) The functions qH (pH ), qF (pF ) and tH (pH ), tF (pF )
are strictly increasing. ii) For every pH = pF = p ∈ (0, 1), qH (p) > qF (p). iii) For any pF ∈ (0, 1),
define p̃H (pF ) ≡ {p : qH (p) = qF (pF )}. Then, p̃H (pF ) < pF , and for any pF ∈ (0, 1), pH > p̃H (pF )
implies qH (pH ) > qF (pF ). iv) For any pF ∈ (0, 1), pH > p̃H (pF ) implies tH (pH ) > tF (pF ).
   b) If T ≥ T1∗ , qH = q ∗ > qF,1
                                 ∗                         ∗
                                    = qF . Also, tH = T − qF,1                ∗
                                                               (1 − β)/d > qF,1  (1 − β)/d = tF .

Proof. See Appendix A.

   When the economy is liquidity constrained, i.e. T < T1∗ , the equilibrium quantity of special
good purchased in a certain DM, and the volume of the traded asset, are increasing in the
probability of visiting that DM. Since, qH (p) is strictly larger than qF (p), for all p ∈ (0, 1), agents
purchase greater amounts of the home special good, even when the probability of trading in the
local DM is smaller than the probability of trading in the foreign DM (but not much smaller).
Moreover, since trade in a certain DM is facilitated by the local asset, the condition which
guarantees that qH > qF (namely pH > p̃H (pF )), will also guarantee that tH > tF . On the other
hand, if T ≥ T1∗ , we have qH > qF and tH > tF , regardless of pH , pF .



5.2 Asset Home Bias

In this section, we derive sufficient conditions under which the model’s predicted asset portfo-
lio is biased toward domestic assets. The result is summarized in Proposition 2.

Proposition 2. a) Assume that T < T1∗ . For any pF ∈ (0, 1), let pH > p̃H (pF ). Then agents’ portfolios
exhibit home bias in the sense that the home asset share in the entire portfolio is greater than fifty percent.


                                                      18
Formally, the home asset share is

                                             2tH + pF tF
                                     HA =                > 0.5.                                 (10)
                                                 2T

b) Assume that T ≥ T1∗ . Agents’ portfolios exhibit home bias for any pH , pF . Formally,
                                                     
                                            1−β ∗
                                    2 T−     d
                                               qF,1       + pF 1−β
                                                                d
                                                                    ∗
                                                                   qF,1
                            HA =                                          > 0.5.                (11)
                                                 2T

Proof. See Appendix A.

     The details of the derivation of the asset home bias formula can be found in Appendix B. To
understand why the left-hand side of (10) represents the home asset share in the agents’ portfo-
lio, focus on the citizens of a certain country. In the denominator, T stands for the citizens’ total
asset holdings. It is multiplied by two because we account for asset holdings in both the DM
and the CM (we assume equal weight). The numerator represents the home asset holdings.
The term 2tH stands for the buyers’ asset holdings in the CM and in the DM. The term pF tF is
the amount of the home asset held by sellers who matched with foreign buyers. The formula in
(11) admits a similar interpretation.
  To understand the result, first consider the case in which T < T1∗ . Then, portfolios exhibit
home bias as long as trading opportunities at home are not significantly less abundant than
trading opportunities abroad. This follows directly from Lemma 6. Intuitively, when the econ-
omy is liquidity constrained, agents incur positive costs to hold the domestic and the foreign
asset. Hence, they choose the optimal mix of assets in anticipation of their purchasing needs for
special goods, which are governed by the trading opportunities. The higher the probability for
a successful match in a market, the higher the demand for the asset that facilitates trade there.
   When T ≥ T1∗ , agents purchase the quantities q ∗ and qF,1∗
                                                               . The term q ∗ is independent of the
                               ∗
matching probabilities, while qF,1 is rising in pF but never exceeds q ∗ . Hence, for the purpose of
acquiring special goods, the demand for foreign assets cannot exceed the demand for domestic
assets. Moreover, as soon as the liquidity needs of the economy are satisfied, asset prices fall
to fundamental values. Then, domestic assets become useful saving tools, while foreign assets
remain costly to hold. Hence, agents hold the domestic asset both as a saving tool and in order
to engage in trade at home, while they only acquire enough foreign assets to satisfy their pur-
chasing needs abroad.
    That agent portfolios are biased toward domestic assets is a well-known empirical regular-
ity. In their seminal paper, French and Poterba (1991) document that, in 1989, the five largest
economies held ninety percent of their wealth in domestic equities. Although home bias is
not as severe in recent decades, it does persist in the data. To document this fact, we rely on
“The External Wealth of Nations Mark II” database provided by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007).

                                                      19
This database combines countries’ national statistics with data from the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), the World Bank, and the Bank of International Settlements. In the database, for-
eign portfolio equity assets for a country represent the value of all holdings of shares of firms
headquartered abroad, where the stake does not exceed ten percent of the firm’s value.13 For-
eign portfolio equity liabilities for a country represent the value of similar holdings of domestic
firms by foreigners. The holdings for a given year represent positions as of December 31 of that
year and the values are converted into US dollars using end-of-period exchange rates.
   We combine these statistics with data on stock market capitalization from the World De-
velopment Indicators (WDI). We focus on twenty-seven OECD countries during the 1997-2007
period. To measure equity home bias, we employ a methodology similar to Collard, Dellas,
Diba, and Stockman (2009). First, we compute international diversification as follows

                                        Foreign Portfolio Equity Assets
Int’l Dvrsf. =                                                                                    .
                 Stock Mkt Cap + Foreign Portfolio Equity Assets - Foreign Portfolio Equity Liab.

Then, we capture equity home bias through the home equity share

                                             HE = 1 − Int’l Dvrsf.




                     Table 1: Average Home Equity Share of Portfolio, 1997-2007
 Country                 HE         Country           HE          Country                               HE
 Australia                 0.8374      Germany                   0.5951       Norway                    0.5493
 Austria                   0.4279      Greece                    0.9536       Poland                    0.9850
 Belgium                   0.5720      Hungary                   0.9450       Portugal                  0.7011
 Canada                    0.7432      Italy                     0.6364       Spain                     0.8589
 Chile                     0.8366      Japan                     0.8972       Sweden                    0.6290
 Czech Republic            0.8382      Korea, Republic of        0.9538       Switzerland               0.5659
 Denmark                   0.6218      Mexico                    0.9280       Turkey                    0.9772
 Finland                   0.7206      Netherlands               0.4018       United Kingdom            0.6906
 France                    0.7523      New Zealand               0.6502       United States             0.8531
                                       OECD Average              0.7452


       We report the home equity shares for all twenty-seven OECD countries in Table 1. The
typical developed country in our sample exhibits equity home bias, since average home eq-
uity shares over the period are in excess of the fifty-percent benchmark that characterizes a
  13
    This is the standard definition of equity portfolio investment in the finance literature. More concentrated own-
ership is recorded as foreign direct investment (FDI). The finance literature assumes that the motivation behind
such investments is different from typical portfolio investment.


                                                        20
fully-diversified portfolio in our model. The average domestic equity share among the OECD
countries is 74 percent. Moreover, the corresponding statistic for the US is as high as 85 percent.
Thus, it is reasonable to conclude that home bias is a stylized fact for developed economies in
recent decades.



5.3 Consumption and Asset Home Bias

In this model, consumption and asset home bias coexist. Proposition 3 states the result.

Proposition 3. Define CF , CT , and CH as the value of foreign (or imported) consumption, total con-
sumption, and consumption produced at home, respectively.
                                                                                          CH
   a) Assume T < T1∗ . For any pF ∈ (0, 1), let pH > p̃H (pF ). Then CH > CF , implying   CT
                                                                                               > 0.5.
                                                   CH
   b) Assume T ≥ T1∗ . For any pH , pF , we have   CT
                                                        > 0.5.

Proof. See Appendix B.

The details of the accounting of consumption can be found in Appendix B. For each agent in
the model, imported consumption consists of special goods bought from foreign sellers as well
as fruit obtained from abroad when net claims to foreign trees are positive. On the contrary, do-
mestic consumption includes special goods bought in domestic DM meetings as well as fruit
obtained not only when net claims to the domestic tree are positive, but also via work.
    Then, the results follow from Proposition 2 and Lemma 6. Suppose that the parameters are
restricted such that the economy exhibits asset home bias. Since, at the country level, more do-
mestic assets are held relative to foreign ones, net aggregate claims to foreign trees fall short of
net claims to domestic trees. With respect to the DM, Lemma 6 ensures that the quantity (and
value) exchanged (and consumed) in a domestic meeting exceeds the quantity (and value) ex-
changed in a foreign meeting. Thus, for any non-negative work effort, domestic consumption
exceeds imported consumption. Finally, Lemma 6 and Proposition 3 suggest that agents buy
more consumption goods from countries whose assets they hold in higher amounts. Thus, the
model yields the following testable prediction: bilateral imports are positively correlated with
bilateral asset positions.
    The above discussion demonstrates that consumption and asset home bias are intimately
related in the model. When the economy is liquidity constrained, asset and consumption home
bias arise as long as trading opportunities at home are not significantly less abundant than
trading opportunities abroad. The latter occurs if the probability with which agents visit the
domestic relative to the foreign market is higher. It is reasonable to argue that such parameter
restriction would hold if agents have a stronger preference for domestic goods, experience more
frequent positive shocks to domestic consumption, or simply possess superior information over

                                                    21
the quality of domestic goods. These assumptions are standard in the home bias literature (see
Heathcote and Perri (2007), Collard, Dellas, Diba, and Stockman (2009) and Hnatkovska (2010)).
Moreover, in the quantitative analysis in Section 6, we use US data to verify that the parameter
restrictions indeed hold.
   In contrast, when the liquidity needs of the economy are satisfied, consumption and asset
home bias coexist regardless of the relative trading opportunities in domestic and foreign mar-
kets. The key insight from this case is that domestic assets are useful saving tools, while foreign
assets are not due to the friction captured by the term κ. Hence, agents hold the domestic asset
both as a saving tool and in order to engage in trade at home, while they only acquire enough
foreign assets to satisfy their purchasing needs abroad. As is apparent in the next subsection,
this very mechanism lies at the heart of the model’s ability to reconcile the coexistence of asset
and consumption home bias with a higher turnover rate of foreign over domestic assets.
    The model’s prediction that consumption and asset home bias coexist is supported by a
large empirical literature. For example, Heathcote and Perri (2007) and Collard, Dellas, Diba,
and Stockman (2009) use recent data on developed countries to show that more open economies
(in terms of trade as a fraction of GDP) exhibit lower equity home bias. Rather than revisiting
the facts that these authors document, we opt to test the second prediction of our model that we
derive above—namely, bilateral imports are positively correlated with bilateral asset positions.
   To that end, we obtain bilateral portfolio equity holding data from the Coordinated Portfolio
Investment Survey (CPIS) database provided by the World Bank. The same definition of port-
folio equity asset for a country discussed in the previous subsection applies to this database.
Indeed, Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007) utilize this database, among others, in their compu-
tations of total external asset and liability positions for each country. The advantage of the
database is that it contains bilateral equity holdings for the set of OECD countries considered
above during the second half of the studied decade, 2002-2007. The disadvantage is that a num-
ber of positive bilateral observations are not made publicly available for security reasons. Thus,
domestic equity shares cannot be computed, since missing observations will bias home equity
shares upward. Consequently, we use the database to simply test whether there exists a posi-
tive correlation between bilateral imports and bilateral equity asset positions (for country-pairs
for which data are available).
   To compute bilateral equity holding shares, we combine the CPIS data with stock market
capitalization data from WDI. In a given year, we define an asset share for country i from coun-
try j to be the ratio between the value of country i’s holdings of shares of firms headquartered in
country j and country i’s stock market capitalization. This statistic is the empirical counterpart
to country i’s foreign asset share derived in the model—namely, the stock market capitalization
for country i represents its total asset supply, while i’s asset position in j represents i’s demand
for j-assets. We merge these statistics with annual bilateral imports of goods obtained from



                                                22
Stats.Oecd.14 To compute bilateral import shares, we use GDP data from Stats.Oecd. We define
an import share for country i from country j to be the ratio between the value of country i’s
imports from country j and country i’s GDP.
   Table 2 shows the cross-country correlation between bilateral equity holding and import
shares for the 2002-2007 period. The correlation ranges between 0.3581 and 0.4504 and it is
highly statistically significant. Hence, it is reasonable to conclude that bilateral equity holding
and import shares are positively correlated in the data. These results are supported by the ex-
isting literature. Aviat and Coeurdacier (2007) find that a 10% increase in bilateral trade raises
bilateral asset holdings by 6% to 7% in a simultaneous gravity-equations framework.


                  Table 2: Bilateral Import and Equity Holding Shares, 2002-2007

                                   year    correlation      p-value     # obs
                                   2002       0.4504        0.0000       570
                                   2003       0.3833        0.0000       584
                                   2004       0.3581        0.0000       602
                                   2005       0.3707        0.0000       593
                                   2006       0.3898        0.0000       617
                                   2007       0.3973        0.0000       614
                          Note: # obs = # available bilateral equity holding data points




5.4 Domestic and Foreign Asset Turnover Rates

The model’s predictions on asset and consumption home bias discussed above are shared with
the frameworks of Heathcote and Perri (2007), Collard, Dellas, Diba, and Stockman (2009), and
Hnatkovska (2010). However, the additional prediction that relates domestic and foreign asset
turnover rates discussed below is unique to the present model.

Proposition 4. Define the turnover rates of home and foreign assets as

                                     3pH tH + 2pF tF
                           T RH =                      , ∀T < T1∗ ,                                        (12)
                                       2tH + pF tF
                                                                 
                                        1−β          ∗         ∗
                                          d
                                              3p H
                                                   q   + 2p  q
                                                            F F,1
                           T RH    =                                , ∀T ≥ T1∗ ,                         (13)
                                             1−β ∗         1−β      ∗
                                     2 T − d qF,1 + d pF qF,1
  14
    We use the Grand Total Import statistic, which includes imports across all commodity categories. Bilateral
import data for the service sector are not available. In any case, including service trade should not affect our
results, since services are mostly non-tradable and they account for a tiny portion of overall trade.


                                                       23
                                                          2pF
                                            T RF =             , ∀T.                                           (14)
                                                        2 − pF

There exists a level of asset supply T̃ , with T1∗ ≤ T̃ < ∞, such that T ≥ T̃ implies T RF > T RH .

       Since the derivations of turnover rates are essential for the understanding of the Proposition,
we present the proof in the main text.

Proof of Proposition 4. Following Warnock (2002), we define the foreign turnover rate as the ra-
tio of the total volume of the foreign asset traded (sum of gross purchases and gross sales) by
the citizens of the domestic country (numerator) over the total volume of the foreign asset held
by the citizens of the domestic country (denominator).15 For theoretical consistency, we define
the domestic turnover rate as the ratio of the total volume of the domestic asset traded by the
citizens of the domestic country over the total volume of the domestic asset held by the citizens
of the domestic country. We continue to count asset holdings in both the CM and the DM,
assuming equal weights for the two markets. It is understood that we count asset holdings at
the end of each subperiod.
   a) Suppose T < T1∗ . T RF is given by (14). The numerator reflects all the trades of the foreign
asset carried out by the citizens of the domestic country.16 A measure pF of buyers match in
the foreign DM and exchange tF units of the foreign asset to acquire the special good. They
also purchase tF units of the foreign asset in the CM in order to re-balance their portfolios. The
denominator consists of the total holdings of the foreign asset, which amount to (2 −pF )tF . This
expression includes the holdings of buyers in both the CM and the DM, 2tF , net of the amount
given up by buyers of measure pF who matched abroad. Since the term tF appears in both the
numerator and the denominator, it cancels out, yielding the constant turnover rate in (14).
  T RH is given by (12). The numerator includes the amount of domestic assets that buyers
buy, pH tH , and sellers sell, pH tH + pF tF , in order to re-balance their portfolios in the CM after
successfully matching in the DM.17 In addition, the numerator reflects the amount of domes-
tic assets exchanged in the DM between sellers and domestic and foreign buyers, respectively,
pH tH + pF tF . The denominator corresponds to total domestic assets held, which can be found
in the numerator of the home-asset share expression in (10).
  15
      Warnock’s (2002) definition uses values rather than volumes, but the two are identical in the steady state of
our model. This is the standard definition of foreign turnover rate in the literature. For example, Tesar and Werner
(1995) and Amadi and Bergin (2008) follow the same convention.
   16
      To compute foreign turnover, we adopt the following accounting procedure: (i) In the DM , we count each
transaction only once, since the asset flows across national borders only once and the transaction would therefore
be recorded in the data only once; (ii) In the CM , we count both the amount of assets bought by the buyers and
the amount sold by the sellers because the asset flows across national borders twice. This is consistent with the
computation of foreign turnover in the data, where gross asset flows across borders are recorded.
   17
      For theoretical consistency, we apply the convention from above when we compute domestic turnover rates—
namely, we count transactions in the DM once and transactions in the CM twice. We discuss different method-
ologies applied by statisticians to compute domestic turnover in the data in the next subsection.

                                                        24
    b) Suppose T ≥ T1∗ . Clearly, T RF is still given by (14), but T RH differs. The logic of the
calculations is identical. The main difference lies in the denominator. When T ≥ T1∗ , not all
domestic asset holdings are used as media of exchange in the DM because they have desirable
saving properties. Following the same strategy as above and substituting asset holdings with
the corresponding quantities of special goods exchanged in the DM obtains (13). T RF is con-
stant, so it is unaffected by the asset supply. However, T RH is decreasing in T , for all T , and
T RH → 0 as T → ∞. Therefore, there exists T̃ , with T1∗ ≤ T̃ < ∞, such that T ≥ T̃ necessarily
implies T RF > T RH .

   As in Propositions 2 and 3, there are two distinct cases to consider. If T < T1∗ , the domestic
and foreign turnover rates are given by (12) and (14), respectively. However, unlike the home
asset and consumption shares, the domestic turnover rate is not monotone in the trading prob-
ability at home. Hence, an unambiguous ranking between domestic and foreign turnover rates
cannot be made in this case.
    In contrast, when T exceeds T1∗ , agents purchase the quantities q ∗ and qF,1
                                                                              ∗
                                                                                  , so increases in T
have no effect on the quantities of special goods bought. Instead, increases in the asset supply
raise the agents’ domestic asset holdings, but have no effect on the amounts of domestic assets
that change hands during a period, leading to a decrease in the turnover rate of the domestic
asset. Intuitively, when the liquidity needs of the economy are satisfied, domestic assets are
useful saving tools, while foreign assets are not due to the term κ. Hence, agents hold the do-
mestic asset as a saving tool and use it to trade at home, while they only acquire enough foreign
assets to satisfy their purchasing needs abroad. The domestic asset’s desirable saving property
results in a reduction in its turnover rate. On the other hand, agents offload foreign assets (to
foreign sellers) at the first given opportunity, which leads to a relatively higher turnover rate
of the foreign asset. Thus, the mechanism that drives the coexistence of asset and consumption
bias also yields a higher turnover rate of foreign over domestic assets.


5.4.1 Turnover Rates in the Data

In the theoretical analysis above, we adopted Warnock’s (2002) definition of the foreign turnover
rate, which is standard in the empirical literature. Given this definition, we constructed a
theoretically-consistent definition of the domestic turnover rate. However, since the existing
empirical literature has not considered the liquidity mechanism developed in this paper, it does
not report measures of the theoretically-consistent domestic turnover rate. Instead, Warnock
(2002) (and the literature in general) defines domestic turnover as the ratio of annual transac-
tions on a market to its capitalization. The market for which estimates are reported is the stock
exchange. However, as Amadi and Bergin (2008) point out, different stock exchanges in the US
follow different conventions to compute turnover. In particular, the NASDAQ double counts

                                                 25
every transaction (both the sale and the purchase of a stock), while the remaining exchanges
record the transaction only once. Consequently, the literature reports domestic turnover for the
entire US stock exchange as well as for stock markets excluding the NASDAQ.
   In order to relate to the empirical literature, we re-establish the turnover results using the
empirically-relevant definition of domestic turnover. In the model, the CM represents the
stock exchange. Its market capitalization is simply the total asset supply T . Following the
double-counting (NASDAQ) convention, the transactions that constitute the numerator are all
the trades (purchases and sales) of domestic claims by both domestic and foreign agents. Do-
mestic agents who successfully matched in the domestic DM re-balance their portfolios as fol-
lows: a measure pH of buyers buy tH units, and measures pH and pF of sellers sell tH and tF
units, respectively. In addition, a measure pF of foreign buyers who matched in the domestic
DM purchase tF units of the domestic asset. Hence, the empirically-relevant turnover rate of
home assets is

                             2(pH tH + pF tF )
                    T RH =                      ,                        ∀T < T1∗ ,
                                   T                 
                             2 1−β
                                d
                                    p H
                                        q ∗
                                            + p   q ∗
                                                F F,1
                    T RH =                                ,              ∀T ≥ T1∗ ,             (15)
                                        T

where the second line is obtained by substituting out the asset holdings using the appropriate
formulas for the liquidity-unconstrained case. Once again, the foreign turnover rate in (14) is
constant, so it is unaffected by the asset supply. On the other hand, if T ≥ T1∗ , T RH is decreasing
in T , and T R → 0 as T → ∞. Therefore, there exists T̃˜ , with T ∗ ≤ T̃˜ < ∞, such that T ≥ T̃˜
              H                                                      1
implies T RF > T RH .
  Naturally, the sufficient conditions derived above guarantee that foreign turnover exceeds
domestic turnover computed following the single-counting convention (namely, excluding the
NASDAQ). In that case the domestic turnover rate predicted by the model is exactly one half
of expression (15) above.
    Empirically, Tesar and Werner (1995) were the first to document considerably higher for-
eign over domestic turnover rates (as defined in this subsection) for the year 1989 for five major
economies: United States, Japan, Germany, United Kingdom, and Canada. Warnock (2002)
revised the authors’ estimates for the United States and Canada and in addition presented
new estimates for the pair of countries for the year 1997. The most up-to-date and compre-
hensive estimates of turnover rates are reported by Amadi and Bergin (2008). The authors
repeat Warnock’s (2002) exercise for the United States, Japan, Germany, and Canada during the
1993-2001 period employing two different datasets to estimate foreign equity positions, which
constitute the denominator in the foreign turnover formula, and two different conventions to
measure domestic turnover.
  Amadi and Bergin (2008) report their findings in Tables 1 and 2 of their paper. Across all


                                                     26
measures and datasets, foreign turnover rates exceed domestic turnover rates. It is this coex-
istence of higher foreign over domestic turnover rates with consumption and asset home bias
that puzzles the international finance literature. The magnitudes of the relative turnover rates,
however, vary with the dataset and convention employed. Focusing on the estimates that rely
on the International Financial Statistic (IFS) database provided by the IMF to measure foreign
equity positions, and therefore foreign turnover, the mean relative foreign-to-domestic turnover
rates during the 1993-2001 period for Canada, Germany, and Japan are 5.04, 2.45, and 2.26, re-
spectively. The corresponding ratios for the US are 1.89 and 1.35, where the former excludes the
turnover rate for NASDAQ from the domestic turnover measure.18 Therefore, it is reasonable
to conclude that foreign turnover rates are significantly higher than domestic turnover rates in
a typical developed economy.



6        Quantitative Analysis

To complete the analysis, we evaluate the quantitative importance of the novel liquidity mech-
anism. In particular, we ask the following two questions: (i) Are the sufficient conditions on
parameter values satisfied so that a typical developed economy exhibits consumption and asset
home bias as well as a higher foreign over domestic turnover rate? (ii) How do the predicted
asset home bias and foreign asset turnover rate compare to the observations in the data when
the model’s parameters are calibrated to match informative moments for a typical developed
economy? In order to answer these questions, we engage in a calibration exercise using data on
the US economy. In particular, we choose the key parameters in the model so as to match the
import-to-GDP ratio and the domestic equity turnover rate in the US over the past decade. We
then derive international asset portfolios and turnover rates of foreign assets predicted by the
model, and we discuss how these moments compare to actual data.



6.1 Calibration

In order to proceed with the quantitative exercise, we choose functional forms that are com-
mon in the modern monetary literature. We follow Lagos and Wright (2005) and let the util-
ity function in the decentralized market be u(q) = log(q + b) − log(b), which ensures that
u(0) = 0, as necessary in order to obtain a solution to the bargaining problem. Further, we
    18
    The authors repeat the computations using foreign equity positions obtained from the CPIS data for years
1997, 2001, and 2002. The mean relative foreign-to-domestic turnover rates across the three years for Canada,
Germany, and Japan are 4.16, 1.65, and 1.89, respectively. The corresponding ratios for the US are 1.70 and 1.05,
where the former excludes the turnover rate for NASDAQ from the domestic turnover measure.




                                                       27
let M(B, S) = min{B, S}, which means that, in any DM, the shortest end of the market is al-
ways matched.
   Next, we discuss a technical issue that arises in this adaptation of the Lagos and Wright
(2005) model in a multi-country/international trade environment. Recall that all agents con-
sume X ∗ in the CM. This parameter reflects the relative size of the CM compared to the DM.19
Since, in our model, all the interesting economic activity takes place in the DM, we would like
a relatively small X ∗ . However, if X ∗ is too small, agents who enter the CM with a lot of assets,
for example sellers who just traded in the DM, might be induced to work negative hours.
    To deal with this issue, in the quantitative exercise we assume that U(X) = X. Linear utility
is a sub-case of the quasi-linearity assumed throughout the paper. Therefore, all the desirable
properties of the value functions described earlier will continue to hold. Moreover, with linear
utility, agents are indifferent between working many hours and consuming more, or work-
ing few hours and consuming less. Although there is a continuum of consumption and labor
choices that are all optimal for the agent, different choices lead to different values of GDP, which
is essential for accounting. We take advantage of this indeterminacy and assume that the agent
always picks the pair of (optimal) X, H that involves the minimum amount of hours worked.
This guarantees that the size of the CM sector is the minimum possible.20
    With the functional forms in mind, we need to choose values for the following parame-
ters (b, β, d, T, ξ, σH , σF , κ). Notice a few points. First, as in any Lucas-tree model, the product
dT , which represents the total dividend in a country, determines all equilibrium real variables.
Thus, we need not take a stand on each one of these parameters individually. Consequently,
we fix d = 1, and calibrate T below. Second, below we will be choosing a parameter value for
σF in order to match the observed US import-to-GDP ratio. Since this statistic has been roughly
fifteen percent over the past decade, it is reasonable to expect that, in any equilibrium, σF will
never exceed σH . Thus, we normalize σH to unity and calibrate σF relative to σH . Third, recall
that, in the quantitative analysis, we let M(B, S) = min{B, S}. Moreover, we will let the mea-
sure of sellers ξ be 2. These two assumptions together imply that a buyer who gets to visit any
DM will be matched with certainty. Ex ante, the probability with which a buyer gets to visit
the foreign DM equals pF = σF , which is one of the key parameters of our exercise.
   Following Lagos and Wright (2005), we let b = 0.0001, which is positive, but small enough
to minimize deviations from the log utility function. We let β = 0.97, since we will work with
   19
      More precisely, a larger X ∗ implies that, for given asset holdings, agents will need to work more in the CM in
order to be able to consume their desired amount of general good. Suppose we are interested in the percentage of
total production that takes place in the CM . A higher X ∗ implies that the CM sector is relatively larger, since all
the hours agents work in order to reach X ∗ contribute to the CM production.
   20
      To see this point, consider an agent who enters the CM with assets whose value, in terms of the numéraire
good, is y. The no-wealth-effect property of W implies that this agent will choose an amount of assets to carry into
the next period’s DM independently of the value of y. For simplicity, let the market value of assets carried into
the next period be z. Because of linear utility, if y > z, the agent is equally happy between: (a) consuming y − z
units of the CM good and working zero hours or (b) consuming y − z + α, for any α ∈ R+ , and working α hours.
We assume that X = y − z and H = 0. If z > y, in a similar fashion we have X = 0 and H = z − y.

                                                         28
annual data. Finally, we set κ to 0.0483, which represents a tax rate on foreign (relative to do-
mestic) dividend income of 4.83%. We choose this value to match the additional tax rate on
dividend income (over the US rate of 15%) that US investors face on average across the twenty-
six OECD countries listed in Table 1 above.21
   We are left with the following two parameters: σF and T . These two parameters are the
most important ones in the model since they determine the type of equilibrium that arises. σF
governs whether the equilibrium will be of the local-asset-dominance type, in which case local
assets facilitate trade, or of the international-asset type, where agents rely on their respective
domestic asset to trade everywhere. Moreover, conditional on being in a particular type of equi-
librium, the value of T determines whether the economy is liquidity constrained or not, which
further governs equilibrium prices and allocations. Consequently, we let the US data tell us
what the values of these two parameters should be. In particular, we use the model’s equations
and the parameters discussed in previous paragraphs in order to find the unique values for σF
and T , so that the model matches the following two moments in the US data: import-to-GDP
ratio and domestic turnover rate.22

6.1.1 Benchmark Calibration

The first moment that we target in the calibration is the mean import-to-GDP ratio for the US
over the 1997-2007 period, which amounts to 0.1475.23 We derive imports and GDP for the
model in detail in Appendix B. The second moment that we target is the average domestic
turnover rate for the US stock market during the 1993-2001 period, computed excluding the
NASDAQ. This is the literature’s preferred estimate of domestic turnover. According to Table
1 in Amadi and Bergin (2008), the mean domestic turnover rate in the US was 0.72. The corre-
sponding equation in the model is expression (15) divided by two.
   Table 3 summarizes the benchmark calibration results. The calibrated model suggests a
value for σF of 0.6819, and, as explained earlier, we also have pF = σF = 0.6819. According
to Lemma 5, this parameter value places the model’s equilibrium in the local-asset-dominance
region. Thus, domestic assets facilitate trade at home only, which is consistent with the fact that
most countries in the world constitute independent “currency areas”.
   21
      We obtain dividend income tax data for US investors in each foreign country from Deloitte for the year 2013.
The foreign tax rates reflect tax treaties when applicable. The mean tax difference is 8.56% when tax treaties are
not accounted for. Under such calibration, our model generates even higher home bias.
   22
      In the model, all imports are consumed; therefore, imported consumption is equivalent to total imports. More-
over, GDP is straightforward to compute using the production approach. Thus, we follow Collard, Dellas, Diba,
and Stockman (2009) and we approximate consumption home bias by the import-to-GDP ratio. In the data, im-
ports include both consumption and intermediate goods. So, in order to directly measure consumption home
bias, one would need to obtain disaggregate US import data and categorize goods into consumption and non-
consumption goods. Then one would need to combine these data with total US consumption data in order to
compute the share of consumption that is imported. We opt to use import-to-GDP ratios instead, purely in order
to make our quantitative results comparable to the existing literature.
   23
      Data are from WDI.

                                                        29
     Table 3: Benchmark Calibration: Parameter Values and US Data Moments, 1993-2007
      Parameter    Moment                                                   Source
      N =2         # countries in sample                                    -
      b=0.0001     -                                                        Lagos and Wright (2005)
      d=1          normalization                                            -
      σH =1        normalization                                            -
      ξ=2          normalization                                            -
      κ=0.0483     foreign dividend income tax diff. = 4.83%                Deloitte
      β=0.97       annual real interest rate = 3%                           -
      σF =0.6819   import/GDP = 0.1475                                      WDI
      T =0.0701    domestic turnover rate (excl. NASDAQ) = 0.72             Amadi and Bergin (2008)


   Given that we are in Case 1 of Lemma 5, the properties of the equilibrium of the model are
summarized under part a) in Proposition 1. In particular, if asset supply is above the critical
level T1∗ , the economy is not liquidity constrained. This means that the asset price falls to the
fundamental value and quantities reach their upper bounds. The quantity exchanged in a lo-
cal meeting is given by q ∗ and the quantity exchanged in a foreign meeting is even lower and
        ∗
equals qF,1 , both of which are described in Definition 2 above. Using the parameter values dis-
cussed above, the critical asset supply value equals 0.06. The calibrated model suggests that the
level of asset supply necessary in order to match the domestic turnover rate in the US is 0.0701.
   Then, we can compute the equity portfolio and the foreign equity turnover rate predicted
by the model in the unconstrained, local-asset-dominance equilibrium. Maintaining the nota-
tion corresponding to this type of equilibrium, the domestic equity share of a country’s total
portfolio is given by

                                                   1−β            ∗
                                            2T +    R
                                                       (pF   − 2)qF,1
                                   HE1∗ =                               .
                                                        2T

Applying this formula, the calibrated model yields a US home equity share of seventy-two
percent. The corresponding statistic for the US data over the 1997-2007 period is eighty-five
percent. Thus, the liquidity channel alone can account for a large portion of the observed eq-
uity home bias in the US data.
    Furthermore, recall that the foreign asset turnover rate for this type of equilibrium is 2pF /(2−
pF ). Using the calibrated parameters, the model suggests that the foreign asset turnover rate is
1.03. The corresponding statistic in the US data is 1.36. Thus, the model generates a substantial
foreign turnover rate that compares favorably to the US data. In addition, the predicted foreign
turnover rate is 1.44 times higher than the domestic turnover rate. The corresponding ratio in
the US data amounts to 1.89 (or 1.70 in the shorter CPIS sample). Hence, the model accounts for
a large part of the turnover rate differentials in the US data. The intuition for this result lies in


                                                   30
the liquidity mechanism introduced in this paper. In equilibrium, domestic assets are held both
for the purpose of future consumption and trade in domestic decentralized markets. Foreign
assets, on the other hand, yield lower rates of return and hence they do not represent a useful
saving technology. Thus, buyers acquire them purely for the purpose of trading abroad in the
future and, if unlucky in the matching process, they use the first opportunity to liquidate them
in the upcoming centralized market.


6.1.2 Robustness

In this section, we test the model’s ability to account for the differences in turnover rates using
alternative measures of domestic turnover. To that end, we replace the second target above
with the average domestic turnover rate for the US stock market during the 1993-2001 pe-
riod, computed including the NASDAQ. According to Table 1 in Amadi and Bergin (2008), the
mean alternative domestic turnover rate in the US was 1.13. This statistic combines turnover
for the NASDAQ with the remaining stock exchanges in the US. Recall that the first turnover
rate is computed using the double-counting methodology, while the second follows the single-
counting methodology for transactions. In the model, the CM represents the entire stock ex-
change, so we cannot simultaneously apply the two different methodologies. We opt for the
most conservative calibration, which applies the double-counting methodology to the entire
stock exchange. Hence, the equation for domestic turnover in the model is expression (15).

           Table 4: Robustness: Parameter Values and US Data Moments, 1993-2007
      Parameter    Moment                                         Source
      N =2         # countries in sample                          -
      b=0.0001     -                                              Lagos and Wright (2005)
      d=1          normalization                                  -
      σH =1        normalization                                  -
      ξ=2          normalization                                  -
      κ=0.0483     foreign dividend income tax diff. = 4.83%      Deloitte
      β=0.97       annual real interest rate = 3%                 -
      σF =0.6819   import/GDP = 0.1475                            WDI
      T =0.0893    domestic turnover rate (incl. NASDAQ) = 1.13   Amadi and Bergin (2008)


    Table 4 summarizes the calibration results from the robustness exercise. The resulting value
of the asset supply, T , once again suggests that the economy is not liquidity constrained. The
resulting equity home share for the US rises to seventy-eight percent, since the US asset base
is now larger. Furthermore, the foreign turnover rate, which is uniquely pinned down by σF ,
remains at a high level of 1.03. However, the foreign-to-domestic turnover rate ratio falls to
0.92. Although the value falls short of the desired ratio of at least unity, the statistic compares

                                                31
well to the observation in the data which amounts to 1.35 (or 1.05 in the shorter CPIS sample).
   Overall, the model accounts for a large portion of the observed equity home bias in the US
data in the two exercises. Admittedly, the ratio of foreign to domestic turnover falls short of the
one observed in the US data, especially in the exercise that accounts for the NASDAQ. However,
the model makes a successful step toward reconciling the behavior observed in the data, as it
not only predicts high values of foreign turnover, but it is also the first to successfully generate
a higher foreign relative to domestic turnover rate, while maintaining a strong quantitative link
between consumption and asset home bias.



7        Discussion

7.1 Theory

In Sections 5 and 6, we documented three stylized facts, and we demonstrated that the model
proposed in this paper can reconcile them qualitatively and quantitatively. However, in order
to remain tractable, the model assumed away the risky nature of equity returns. We argue that
incorporating stochastic asset returns into the model will not affect the qualitative results.
   In order to feature a risk-sharing motive, a model needs to incorporate some curvature in
agents’ preferences. Given the assumed quasi-linear utility in the CM in our model, the un-
certainty has to be revealed before the DM opens, as shown in Lagos (2010) (this point is also
clarified in Section 11.3 of Nosal and Rocheteau (2011)). If our model features stochastic div-
idends, uncertainty will still affect agents’ portfolios through the assets’ property to facilitate
exchange in the DM, i.e. through the liquidity channel. Consider the simple case in which the
dividend processes for the two countries are i.i.d. over time, but negatively correlated in the
cross section. Then, agents still hold the foreign asset only for the purpose of trading in the
foreign DM.24 Hence, the spirit of Proposition 2 is still valid: as long as trading opportunities
abroad are not much more frequent than trading opportunities at home, the model will exhibit
asset home bias. A similar logic applies to the results that concern consumption home bias,
given the tight link between asset and consumption home bias in our framework. Moreover,
agents will continue to offload the foreign asset at their earliest opportunity because, in expec-
tation, the foreign asset remains a worse store of value. Hence, the liquidity channel remains
the key mechanism that allows the model to reconcile the three stylized facts concurrently.
   Moreover, our analysis is robust to the introduction of fiat money in the economy. In that
case, agents will hold assets as a store of value due to positive asset returns since fiat money
    24
    Notice, however, that the relative cost of holding the foreign over the domestic asset is lower than in the
benchmark deterministic economy due to the possibility that now the domestic asset may deliver a poor yield and
therefore be a worse trade facilitator.


                                                      32
has negative or zero return, depending on the rate of inflation.25 Suppose that we impose the
standard currency-area assumption in the model; namely, trade in DMi necessitates the use of
i’s currency. If it is costly to convert foreign assets into home currency, due to a spread in the
exchange rate, agents will hold i’s asset in order to trade in i’s currency. Hence, all of our re-
sults would be preserved. Moreover, since fiat money will serve as a medium of exchange in
the economy, the model would predict that total domestic assets—the sum of real assets and
fiat money—will turn over faster than total foreign assets. This is likely the case in the US,
where the velocity of money is high. We abstract from fiat currency considerations because the
valuation of fiat money is dependent on policy, which is beyond the scope of our paper.
       In sum, the theoretical results of this paper are robust to several extensions of the model.



7.2 Data

In the quantitative application of this paper, we focus on equities. This asset class has been the
focus of the existing empirical literature, and we utilize the same datasets that were employed
in these papers. Moreover, the puzzle that constitutes the coexistence of home bias in assets
and consumption with a higher foreign-relative-to-domestic asset turnover rate has been doc-
umented for equities only. One reason behind this is that data coverage for equities is by far
the largest in the cross section of countries and the time series relative to other capital markets.
For example, to compute the domestic turnover rate, one needs flows of assets among agents
on the domestic market, relative to a stock base. The computation is straightforward for equi-
ties because they are traded on centralized exchanges, so data on flows within national borders
are available. This is not the case for corporate bonds, which are typically traded in over the
counter markets.
   Furthermore, when linking the model to the data, we need to take a stand regarding the
characteristics of the agents who are holding/trading the equities. We recognize that there are
many market participants who hold and trade equities. According to Naess-Schmidt, Rytter,
Hansen, and Jensen (2012), in a typical developed economy such as the European Union, in-
dividuals constitute 23% of cross-border portfolio investors, which refers to investments with
ownership of less than 10%, while mutual funds (CIV’s) account for 31%.26 Hence, over half
of cross-border investments are made by or on the behalf of private agents. The remainder in-
clude banks, pension and insurance companies, and governments, all of which arguably face
different regulations/objective functions from individuals.
  25
     This idea is formalized in Geromichalos and Herrenbrueck (2012). The authors show that, although assets do
not serve directly as means of payment, they may still carry positive liquidity premia, because agents wish to hold
them as a hedge against inflation.
  26
     The report was prepared for the European Commission and is available at the following webpage:
http://ec.europa.eu/taxation customs/resources/documents/common/consultations/tax/venture capital/tax
crossborder-dividend-paym.pdf.


                                                        33
   We focus on individual investors and mutual funds that invest on their behalf. We assume
that there are no agency problems and that mutual funds hold portfolios that maximize in-
vestors’ objective functions. Thus, our model potentially speaks to roughly one half of the
equity holdings. An issue may arise with respect to equity flows however. In the model, agents
rebalance their portfolios for liquidity purposes. When agents’ portfolios are managed by mu-
tual funds, however, if individuals choose to rebalance their portfolios, the mutual fund may
carry out the operation within the boundaries of the firm, in which case the flows would not
be recorded in the data. This means that turnover rates would be underestimated in the data.
Conversely, if mutual funds follow active investment policies (chasing short-run returns), then
they likely rebalance asset portfolios more frequently than do individual agents for liquidity
purposes. In this case, the turnover rates would be overestimated in the data.
   Unfortunately, data on equity flows within or across countries that are differentiated by
assets’ country of origin and/or type of institution/agent do not exist. So, we are unable to
separately quantify these different channels. Instead, we simply take the existing literature’s
observation that foreign equities turn over faster than domestic ones at face value, and we
evaluate the calibrated model’s ability to quantitively account for the fact. Therefore, our quan-
titative results should be interpreted as quantifying the role that the liquidity channel alone
plays in accounting for the observed facts.



8    Conclusion

In this paper, we study optimal asset portfolio choice in a two-country search-theoretic model
of monetary exchange. We allow assets to not only represent claims on future consumption,
but to also serve as media of exchange. In the model, trading in a certain country involves the
exchange of locally produced goods for a portfolio of assets. Assuming that the net dividend
from foreign assets is lower due to a friction (such as a cross-border dividend income tax), we
provide sufficient conditions for the existence of two types of exchange regimes: local asset
dominance and international asset equilibrium.
   The model predicts that agents’ portfolios exhibit home bias as long as trading opportuni-
ties abroad are not much more frequent than at home. Since agents hold larger amounts of
domestic over foreign assets, they have larger claims to domestic over foreign consumption
goods. Hence, the mechanism positively links asset and consumption home bias. More im-
portantly, under additional parameter restrictions, foreign assets turn over faster than home
assets because, while the former have desirable liquidity properties, they yield lower future
consumption and are undesirable savings tools. Therefore, our theory offers an answer to a
long-standing puzzle in international finance: a positive relationship between consumption
and asset home bias coupled with higher turnover rates of foreign over domestic assets.

                                               34
Acknowledgements

We are grateful to Marco Bassetto, Jeffrey Campbell, Mariacristina De Nardi, Robert Feen-
stra, Guillaume Rocheteau, Peter Rupert, Kevin Salyer, Christopher Waller, Randall Wright,
and seminar participants at the 2013 CESIfo Area Conference on Global Economy, Royal Hol-
loway, Swiss National Bank, 2012 SCIIE International Economics Conference, Princeton, Whar-
ton, NYU, SED 2011, Atlanta Fed, SHUFE, HKUST, Midwest International Trade Spring 2011
Meeting, First Meeting of the West Coast Search and Matching Group, Organization of Markets
Conference at UCSB, AEA 2011, UCSB, 2010 Search and Matching Conference at Penn, Philadel-
phia Fed, 2010 Money, Payments and Banking Workshop at Chicago Fed, and UC Davis for
their feedback. Ina Simonovska thanks Princeton University for their hospitality and financial
support through the Peter B. Kenen fellowship. This paper circulated under the title “Asset
Liquidity and Home Bias”.



References

A MADI , A. A., AND P. R. B ERGIN (2008): “Understanding international portfolio diversification
  and turnover rates,” Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money, 18(2),
  191–206.

AVIAT, A., AND N. C OEURDACIER (2007): “The geography of trade in goods and asset hold-
  ings,” Journal of International Economics, 71(1), 22–51.

C AMERA , G., AND J. W INKLER (2003): “International monetary trade and the law of one price,”
   Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(7), 1531 – 1553.

C OLLARD , F., H. D ELLAS , B. D IBA , AND A. S TOCKMAN (2009): “Goods Trade and International
  Equity Portfolios,” The University of Adelaide School of Economics Working Paper, (14).

D UFFIE , D., N. G ARLEANU ,   AND   L. H. P EDERSEN (2005): “Over-the-Counter Markets,” Econo-
  metrica, 73(6), 1815–1847.

F RENCH , K. R., AND J. M. P OTERBA (1991): “Investor Diversification and International Equity
   Markets,” American Economic Review, 81(2), 222–26.

G EROMICHALOS , A., AND L. H ERRENBRUECK (2012): “Monetary Policy, Asset Prices, and Liq-
   uidity in Over-the-Counter Markets,” Discussion paper.

G EROMICHALOS , A., J. M. L ICARI , AND J. S UAREZ -L LEDO (2007): “Monetary Policy and Asset
   Prices,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 10(4), 761–779.

                                                35
H EAD , A., AND S. S HI (2003): “A fundamental theory of exchange rates and direct currency
   trades,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(7), 1555 – 1591.

H EATHCOTE , J., AND F. P ERRI (2007): “The International Diversification Puzzle Is Not As Bad
   As You Think,” Working Paper 13483, National Bureau of Economic Research.

H NATKOVSKA , V. (2010): “Home bias and high turnover: Dynamic portfolio choice with in-
  complete markets,” Journal of International Economics, 80(1), 113–128.

H OLMSTR ÖM , B.,   AND   J. T IROLE (1998): “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 106(1), pp. 1–40.

K IYOTAKI , N.,   AND   J. M OORE (1997): “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(2), 211–
  48.

K OCHERLAKOTA , N. R. (1998): “Money Is Memory,” Journal of Economic Theory, 81(2), 232–251.

L AGOS , R. (2010): “Asset prices and liquidity in an exchange economy,” Journal of Monetary
   Economics, 57(8), 913–930.

        (2011): “Asset Prices, Liquidity, and Monetary Policy in an Exchange Economy,” Journal
  of Money, Credit and Banking, 43, 521–552.

L AGOS , R., AND G. R OCHETEAU (2008): “Money and capital as competing media of exchange,”
  Journal of Economic Theory, 142(1), 247–258.

L AGOS , R., AND R. W RIGHT (2005): “A Unified Framework for Monetary Theory and Policy
   Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(3), 463–484.

L ANE , P. R., AND G. M. M ILESI -F ERRETTI (2007): “The external wealth of nations mark II:
   Revised and extended estimates of foreign assets and liabilities, 1970-2004,” Journal of Inter-
  national Economics, 73(2), 223–250.

L ESTER , B., A. P OSTLEWAITE , AND R. W RIGHT (2012): “Information, Liquidity, Asset Prices,
   and Monetary Policy,” Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

L EWIS , K. K. (1999): “Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption,” Journal of
   Economic Literature, 37(2), 571–608.

L UCAS , R OBERT E, J. (1978): “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,” Econometrica, 46(6), 1429–
   45.

M ATSUYAMA , K., N. K IYOTAKI ,       AND   A. M ATSUI (1993): “Toward a Theory of International
  Currency,” Review of Economic Studies, 60(2), 283–307.


                                                  36
M ICHAELIDES , A. (2003): “International portfolio choice, liquidity constraints and the home
   equity bias puzzle,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 28(3), 555–594.

N AESS -S CHMIDT, S., E. RYTTER , M. B. H ANSEN , AND H. N. J ENSEN (2012): “Taxation of cross-
  border dividend payments within the EU,” Copenhagen Economics, report.

N OSAL , E.,   AND   G. R OCHETEAU (2011): Money, payments, and liquidity. The MIT Press.

R OCHETEAU , G., AND R. W RIGHT (2005): “Money in search equilibrium, in competitive equi-
   librium, and in competitive search equilibrium,” Econometrica, 73(1), 175–202.

T ESAR , L. L., AND I. M. W ERNER (1995): “Home bias and high turnover,” Journal of International
   Money and Finance, 14(4), 467–492.

WARNOCK , F. E. (2002): “Home bias and high turnover reconsidered,” Journal of International
 Money and Finance, 21(6), 795 – 805.

W RIGHT, R., AND A. T REJOS (2001): “International Currency,” The B.E. Journal of Macroeco-
  nomics, 0(1).



A     Theory Appendix

Proof of Lemma 2. The term κ creates a wedge in the valuation of asset i between the seller (cit-
izen of i) and the buyer (citizen of j). A positive amount of asset j will change hands only if
all units of asset i have already been traded. Hence, the solution to the bargaining problem
follows directly from answering the following two questions: 1) If the buyer carried unlimited
amounts of asset i (which is foreign to him but local to the seller), what would be the optimal
level of q to be traded? 2) If the buyer carried zero units of asset i, what would be the optimal
level of q to be traded? It can be easily verified that the answer to the first question is given by
q(ψ) ≡ {q : u′ (q) = (ψ + dκ )/(ψ + d)}, which is clearly larger than q ∗ . Similarly, the answer to
the second question is given by q(ψ) ≡ {q : u′ (q) = (ψ + d)/(ψ + dκ )} < q ∗ .
   Given these observations, the suggested solution follows naturally. When tii ≥ q(ψj )/(ψi +
d), asset j never changes hands (cases a and b). If tii ≥ q(ψj )/(ψi + d)qi (case a), qi is equal to the
                                                                
optimum. However, if tii ∈ q(ψj )/(ψi + d), q(ψi )/(ψi + d) (case b), qi is bounded by the real
value of the buyer’s asset-i holdings, i.e. tii (ψi + d). If tii < q(ψj )/(ψi + d) (case c), some asset
j is traded as well. If the total asset balances are such that πi ≥ q(ψj ) (case c1), then the buyer
gives up all her asset i and enough asset j so that the quantity q(ψj ) can be purchased. On
the other hand, if πi < q(ψj ) (case c2), the buyer gives up all her asset holdings and purchases
qi = πi = (ψi + d)tii + (ψj + dκ )tji .


                                                  37
Proof of Lemma 4. Focus on the symmetric, steady-state version of (5). Pick any (t0HH , t0F H ), with
t0F H > 0 and define q 0 ≡ {q : (ψ + d)t0HH + (ψ + dκ )t0F H }, i.e. the quantity of the special good that
(t0HH , t0F H ) can buy. The buyer can purchase q 0 by setting tF H = 0 and increasing her domestic
asset holdings to t1HH = q 0 /(ψ + d). We claim that the buyer always achieves a higher value if
she purchases (the arbitrarily chosen) q 0 with asset holdings (t1HH , 0) rather than (t0HH , t0F H ). To
see this point notice that

           VHB (t1HH , 0) = [−ψ + β (ψ + d)] t1HH + βpH [u(q 0 ) − q 0 ],
        VHB (t0HH , t0F H ) = [−ψ + β (ψ + d)] t0HH + [−ψ + β (ψ + dκ )] t0F H + βpH [u(q 0) − q 0 ].

After some algebra, one can show that VHB (t1HH , 0) > VHB (t0HH , t0F H ) will be true if and only if
t1HH < t0HH + t0F H . Multiply the last expression by ψ + d and add and subtract the term κt0F H on
the right-hand side. Then, one can conclude that VHB (t1HH , 0) > VHB (t0HH , t0F H ) is true if and only if
κt0F H > 0, which is true by assumption. Thus, the optimal strategy for the buyer is to purchase
any desired q in the local DM by carrying only the domestic asset.
     When ψ = ψ ∗ , the cost of carrying home assets is zero. We have tHH ≥ q ∗ /(ψ + d), because
the buyer carries any tHH which is greater than the amount that buys her q ∗ .

Proof of Lemma 5. The description of the optimal choice of tHF is more complex than the one of
tF F for the following reason. If the buyer does not use foreign assets as media of exchange,
we know that tF F = 0. This is true because the cost of holding foreign assets is always strictly
positive. However, with home assets, if ψ = ψ ∗ , the buyer might want to hold some home assets
even if she is not using them to carry out transactions in the DM. To avoid these complications,
first we focus on the case where ψ > ψ ∗ . Once we have established which assets serve as means
of payments in the various cases, we let ψ = ψ ∗ and conclude the description of the optimal
choice of home assets.
    The symmetric, steady-state version of the buyer’s objective function, i.e. equation (6), is

      VFB (tHF , tF F ) = [−ψ + β (ψ + d)] tHF + [−ψ + β (ψ + dκ )] tF F
                      + βpF [u (qF (tHF , tF F )) − (ψ + d) xH (tHF , tF F ) − (ψ + dκ ) xF (tHF , tF F )] , (a.1)

where xH denotes the amount of domestic assets (with respect to the buyer’s citizenship) and
xF the amount of foreign assets that change hands in a DM meeting in the foreign country.
Since different asset holdings tHF , tF F lead to different expressions for the terms qF , xH and xF
(determined in Lemma 2), it is of no use to take first-order conditions in (a.1). Instead, we
look into different combinations of tHF , tF F holdings. We start by ruling out several regions of
asset holdings as strictly dominated. This allows us to narrow down the set of possibilities and
eventually take first-order conditions in the remaining relevant regions. Figure 2 depicts the


                                                      38
regions described in this proof. The proof proceeds in several steps.

                         tFF



                                                 I
                       q(y)
                       y+R
                                                 II
                       q(y)
                       y+R                   2              1
                          1
                         tFF             .             .
                                                                 III
                                    IV

                                                       1
                                                      tHF         q(y)             tHF
                                                                  y+Rk

                                             Figure 2: Regions

   Step 1: The optimal tHF , tF F can never be such that tF F > q(ψ)/(ψ + d). This represents
region I in Figure 2 and case (a) in Lemma 2. To see why this claim is true, just notice that for
any tHF , tF F in this region the buyer is already buying the highest possible quantity of special
good, namely q(ψ). Hence, increasing tF F has a strictly positive cost and no benefit.
    Step 2: The optimal tHF , tF F can never be such that tF F ∈ (q(ψ)/(ψ + d), q(ψ)/(ψ + d)] and
tHF > 0. This represents region II, excluding the vertical axis, in Figure 2 and case (b) in Lemma
2. To see why the claim is true, recall from Lemma 2 that for this region of asset holdings xH = 0.
Therefore, there is no benefit from carrying the home asset (but there is a cost). Hence, in this
region the objective function becomes

                 VFB (tHF , tF F ) = −βκtF F + βpF [u ((ψ + d)tF F ) − (ψ + dκ ) tF F ] .            (a.2)

The optimal tF F is determined by taking the first-order condition in (a.2).
   Step 3: The optimal tHF , tF F cannot lie in the interior of region III in Figure 2 (and case (c1) in
Lemma 2). To see why this is true, consider any point in the interior of region III, such as point
1 with coordinates (t1HF , t1F F ). The objective function for the buyer, evaluated at point 1, is

          VFB (t1HF , t1F F ) = [−ψ + β (ψ + d)] t1HF + [−ψ + β (ψ + dκ )] t1F F
                                                           q(ψ) − (ψ + d)
                                                                                            
                                                                                            1
                                            
                              + βpF u q(ψ) − (ψ + d)                           − (ψ + dκ ) tF F .    (a.3)
                                                               ψ + dκ


                                                            39
     Now consider the following experiment. Leave tF F unchanged, but reduce tHF so that the
buyer can still purchase q(ψ). This is represented by point 2 in the Figure, with coordinates
(t2HF , t2F F ) = (q(ψ) − (ψ + d)t1F F )/(ψ + dκ ), t1F F . The objective function evaluated at point 2 is
                                                         


                                                  q(ψ) − (ψ + d)t1F F
           VFB (t2HF , t2F F ) = [−ψ + β (ψ + d)]                     + [−ψ + β (ψ + dκ )] t1F F
                                                       ψ + dκ
                                                           q(ψ) − (ψ + d)
                                                                                           
                                                                                         1
                                             
                               + βpF u q(ψ) − (ψ + d)                       − (ψ + dκ ) tF F .       (a.4)
                                                               ψ + dκ

It follows from (a.3) and (a.4) that

                   VFB (t2HF , t2F F ) − VFB (t1HF , t1F F ) = [−ψ + β (ψ + d)] t2HF − t1HF ,
                                                                                           


which is strictly positive by Lemma 3 and the fact that t2HF < t1HF . Hence, the agent will never
choose a point (tHF , tF F ) in the interior of region III.
    Step 4: Finally consider the region of tHF , tF F represented by region IV (case (c2) of Lemma
2). The objective function in this region becomes

          VFB (tHF , tF F ) = [−ψ + β (ψ + d) (1 − pF )] tHF + [−ψ + β (ψ + dκ ) (1 − pF )] tF F
                           + βpF u ((ψ + dκ )tHF + (ψ + d)tF F )
                           = −a1 tHF − a2 tF F + a3 u (a4 tHF + a5 tF F ) ,                          (a.5)

where we defined a1 ≡ ψ − β (ψ + d) (1 − pF ), a2 ≡ ψ − β (ψ + dκ ) (1 − pF ), a3 ≡ βpF , a4 ≡ ψ + dκ ,
and a5 ≡ ψ + d. Notice that ai > 0 for all i, a1 < a2 , and a4 < a5 . The first order-conditions in
(a.5) with respect to tHF , tF F , are

                           −a1 + a3 u′ (a4 tHF + a5 tF F ) a4 ≤ 0, = 0 if tHF > 0,                   (a.6)
                           −a2 + a3 u′ (a4 tHF + a5 tF F ) a5 ≤ 0, = 0 if tF F > 0.                  (a.7)

Hence, the optimal choice of tHF , tF F is a corner solution, with the exception of the knife-edge
case in which a2 /a1 = a5 /a4 . If a2 /a1 > a5 /a4 , then tHF > 0 and tF F = 0. On the other hand, if
a2 /a1 < a5 /a4 , then tHF = 0 and tF F > 0.
    Using the definitions of the ai terms, one can show that a2 /a1 < a5 /a4 if and only if

                               β(1 − pF )(2d − κ) < ψ [1 − 2β(1 − pF )] .                            (a.8)

First, notice that if β ≥ 1/(2(1 − pF )) (region R4 in Figure 1), the condition in (a.8) can never
hold, since the left-hand side is positive. In this case, tF F = 0 and the value of tHF is given by
(a.6), which after replacing for the ai terms is equivalent to (9).



                                                        40
   From now on let β < 1/(2(1 − pF )). The condition in (a.8) becomes

                                      β(1 − pF )(2d − κ)
                                 ψ>                      ≡ ψc .                                 (a.9)
                                       1 − 2β(1 − pF )

Using the definition of ψc above and recalling the definition of the “fundamental value” of the
asset, ψ ∗ ≡ βd/(1 − β), one can show that ψ ∗ > ψc if and only if

                                κ(1 − β)(1 − pF ) > d(1 − 2pF ).                               (a.10)

After some algebra, it turns out that the inequality in (a.10) holds if either: i) pF ≥ 1/2 (region
R1 in Figure 1) or ii) pF < 1/2, β < pF /(1 − pF ) and κ/d > (1 − 2pF )[(1 − β)(1 − pF )]−1 ≡ κ̃ (the
values of β and pF described here are represented by region R2 in Figure 1). However, Lemma
3 indicates that any equilibrium price satisfies ψ ≥ ψ ∗ . Therefore, if ψ ∗ > ψc , the inequality in
(a.9) is always true. In this case, tHF = 0 and the value of tF F is given by (a.7). After replacing
for the ai terms, this is equivalent to (8).
    We are left with the case in which either β, pF fall in region R3 of Figure 1 or they fall in
region R2 and also κ/d ≤ κ̃. Here, ψ ∗ ≤ ψc , and there will exist equilibrium prices that can be
larger or smaller than ψc (this will be determined later when we introduce the supply of the
assets, T ). For ψ’s that are large enough, so that (a.9) holds, the optimal choice of the agent
satisfies tHF = 0, tF F > 0. For ψ ∈ [ψ ∗ , ψc ), we have tHF > 0, tF F = 0. In the knife-edge case
where ψ = ψc , we have tHF , tF F > 0, and both (a.6), (a.7) hold with equality. The choices of
tHF , tF F cannot be separately pinned down, but they are such that the quantity bought in the
DM satisfies u′ (qF ) = pF /(1 − pF ).
  Step 5: In this step we establish the statements of Lemma 5 for ψ > ψ ∗ (which we have as-
sumed so far). The case in which ψ = ψ ∗ is discussed in Step 6. Let us summarize the results
derived so far. From Step 1, we know that the agent will never choose tHF , tF F in region I. From
Step 2, we know that if the agent wishes to purchase qF > q(ψ), she will do so by using tF F only.
From Step 3, we know that points in the interior of region III are dominated by asset holdings
that purchase the same quantity, i.e. q(ψ), using fewer home assets. Finally, from Step 4, we
know that if the agent wishes to purchase qF ≤ q(ψ), she will do so by using either tF F or tHF ,
but not both, as a medium of exchange.
   Case 1: If parameter values are as in Case 1 of the lemma, the agent uses only tF F as a
medium of exchange. Hence, the objective function is given by (a.2), and the optimal choice of
tF F is described by (8).
     Case 2: Next, consider parameter values as in Case 2 of the lemma. This case is less straight-
forward than Case 1. We have shown (Step 4) that if the agent wishes to purchase some
qF ≤ q(ψ), she is better off by setting tF F = 0. But from Step 1 we also know that if qF > q(ψ)
the agent is better of using the foreign asset as a medium of exchange. To establish Case 2 of


                                                 41
the lemma, we need to exclude the latter possibility. Suppose, by way of contradiction, that the
agent wants to purchase qF > q(ψ) and, therefore, chooses tF F > 0. Under the contradictory
assumption, the quantity of special good purchased is
                                n                                                 o
                                                                             ′
                        qF (ψ) ≡ q : ψ = β [(1 − pF )(ψ + dκ ) + pF (ψ + d) u (q)] .                  (a.11)

    Notice three important facts. First, qF (ψ) is strictly decreasing in ψ. Second, q(ψ) is strictly
increasing in ψ. Third, we claim that qF (ψ ∗ ) < q(ψ ∗ ). To see why this is true, observe that

                                                             d
                                        u′ (q(ψ ∗ )) =               ,
                                                        d − κ(1 − β)
                                                            κ(1 − pF )(1 − β)
                                       u′ (qF (ψ ∗ )) = 1 +                   .
                                                                  dpF
                                                                                          
Our claim that qF (ψ ∗ ) < q(ψ ∗ ) will be true if and only if u′ (qF (ψ ∗ )) > u′ q(ψ ∗ ) , which is true if
and only if 1 + κ(1 − pF )(1 − β)/(dpF ) > d/[d − κ(1 − β)], which after some more manipulations
can be written as

                                               κ      (1 − 2pF )
                                                 <                  .                                 (a.12)
                                               d   (1 − pF )(1 − β)

Since here β ≥ pF /(1 − pF ), the right-hand side of (a.12) is greater than or equal to 1. Hence, the
inequality in (a.12) is always satisfied. Combining these three facts implies that qF (ψ) < q(ψ)
for all ψ, which is a straightforward contradiction to our assumption that the agent purchases
qF > q(ψ) and, therefore, chooses tF F > 0. Hence, the agent chooses to use only the home asset
as a medium of exchange, and (given that ψ > ψ ∗ ) the optimal tHF solves (9).
   Case 3: Finally, consider parameters such as in Case 3 of the lemma. We know that if the
agent wishes to purchase qF ≤ q(ψ), we have tF F > 0 if and only if ψ ≥ ψc . Using an argument
identical to the one we used in Case 2, one can show that the agent will never wish to purchase
qF > q(ψ).27 Thus, the analysis in Step 4 fully characterizes the optimal choice of the agent, and
Case 3 of the lemma follows directly.
   Step 6: We only need to conclude the description of the optimal choice of tHF when ψ = ψ ∗ .
In Case 1, the home asset is not used as a medium of exchange. If ψ = ψ ∗ , the cost of carrying
the home asset is zero. Hence, any tHF ∈ R+ is optimal. In Case 2, the buyer uses the home
asset as a means of payment. Thus, with ψ = ψ ∗ , she is willing to carry any amount of tHF that
allows her to buy the qF which maximizes the buyer’s surplus in the foreign DM. This quantity
is given by q(ψ ∗ ), implying that any tHF ≥ q(ψ ∗ )/(d/(1 − β) − κ) is optimal. Finally, in Case 3,
ψ = ψ ∗ means that ψ < ψc . Therefore, the optimal behavior of the buyer coincides with Case 2
described above.
  27
       This follows directly from (a.12), since the term on the right-hand side is just κ̃.



                                                             42
Proof of Proposition 1. The fact that tF H = 0 follows immediately from Lemma 4. The proofs for
parts (a), (b), and (c) are similar. Hence, we only prove part (a) in detail.
  The fact that agents use only foreign assets in order to trade in the foreign DM follows from
Lemma 5. Moreover, applying total differentiation in (7) and (8) yields

                                  ∂qH            d
                                       =                        < 0,
                                  ∂ψ     βpH (ψ + d)2 u′′(qH )
                                   ∂qF     d − κβ(1 − pF )
                                       =                        < 0.
                                   ∂ψ    βpF (ψ + d)2 u′′ (qF )

Since qH and qF are strictly decreasing in ψ, there exists a critical level of T , T1∗ , such that T ≥ T1∗
implies ψ = ψ ∗ , which in turn implies qH = q ∗ and qF = qF,1      ∗
                                                                        (the latter statement follows
from (7) and (8)). To find this critical level use a) the bargaining solutions (ψ + d)tHH = qH ,
(ψ + d)tF F = qF , evaluated at ψ = ψ ∗ , and b) the market clearing condition, which under the
specific parameter values becomes T = tHH +tF F . This yields T1∗ = (1−β)(q ∗ +qF,1
                                                                                ∗
                                                                                    )/d. If T > T1∗ ,
                                                                         ∗
the demand of foreigners for a certain asset is given by tF F = (1 − β)qF,1 /d. This allows them to
                                                                       ∗
purchase the maximum possible quantity of foreign special good, qF,1       . The rest of the supply,
                                                                  ∗
T , is absorbed by local buyers. Hence, tH = tHH = T − (1 − β)qF,1 /d.
  When T < T1∗ , agents are not buying the maximum possible amount of the special good.
Hence, in this range, ψ > ψ ∗ , qH < q ∗ , qF < qF,1
                                                 ∗
                                                     , and ∂ψ/∂T < 0, ∂qH /∂T > 0, ∂qF /∂T > 0. As
T → T1∗ , the liquidity properties of the asset are exploited; ψ reaches the fundamental value,
ψ → ψ ∗ , and qH , qF reach their upper bounds, namely qH → q ∗ and qF → qF,1
                                                                            ∗
                                                                              .

Proof of Lemma 6. a) Let T < T1∗ . i) The monotonicity of qH (pH ) and qF (pF ) follows from the
fact that u′′ < 0. The monotonicity of tH (pH ) and tF (pF ) follows trivially from the bargaining
solution. ii) For some pH = pF = p ∈ (0, 1), pH (p) > pF (p) will be true if and only if u′ (qH ) <
u′ (qF ). After some algebra, one can show that this is equivalent to 0 < κ(1 − p), which is
always true. iii) The fact that p̃H (pF ) < pF follows directly from parts (i) and (ii). Given the
definition of p̃H (pF ) and the fact that qH (pH ) is increasing, for any pF and pH > p̃H (pF ), we have
qH (p̃H (pF )) > qF (pF ). iv) The result follows directly from part (iii) and the bargaining solution.
    b) Let T ≥ T1∗ . The facts qH = q ∗ , qF = qF,1
                                                ∗                ∗
                                                    , tH = T − qF,1                      ∗
                                                                    (1 − β)/d, and tF = qF,1 (1 − β)/d are
already presented in Proposition 1. Also, q ∗ > qF,1     ∗                                             ∗
                                                            follows directly from the definition of qF,1  .
                ∗                ∗
To see why T − qF,1 (1 − β)/d > qF,1 (1 − β)/d, recall that here

                                       1−β  ∗        2(1 − β)
                           T > T1∗ =             ∗
                                            q + qF,1  >          ∗
                                                                qF,1 ,
                                        d                  d

where the last inequalty uses the fact that q ∗ > qF,1
                                                   ∗
                                                       . This concludes the proof.

Proof of Proposition 2. We prove that the expressions on the left-hand sides of (10) and (11) are
greater than 0.5. The derivation of these expressions is relegated to Appendix B.

                                                    43
    a) If for a given pF , pH > p̃H (pF ), the inequality in (10) follows immediately from Lemma 6.
    b) The left-hand side of (11) is bigger than 0.5 if and only if

                                          1−β ∗
                                    T >      q (2 − pF ) .
                                           d F,1
                                                      ∗                     ∗
This is always satisfied since, by Lemma 6, tH = T − qF,1 (1 − β)/d > tF = qF,1 (1 − β)/d.



B     Accounting Appendix

Although agents are ex-ante identical, their decisions in the CM, regarding how many hours to
work or whether they should visit the financial markets and re-balance their portfolios, depend
on whether they got matched in the local and/or foreign DM. In this Appendix, we focus on
the labor, consumption, and asset-holding decisions of the following seven groups: 1) sellers
who got matched with a local buyer (group 1), 2) sellers who got matched with a foreign buyer
(group 2), 3) sellers who did not get matched (group 3), 4) buyers who got matched in both
DM’s (group 4), 5) buyers who got matched only in the home DM (group 5), 6) buyers who got
matched only in the foreign DM (group 6), and 7) buyers who did not get matched (group 7).
    The measures of these groups are given by: µ1 = ξaS σH /(σH + σF ), µ2 = ξaS σF /(σH +
σF ), µ3 = ξ(1 − aS ), µ4 = σH σF a2B , µ5 = σH aB (1 − σF aB ), µ6 = σF aB (1 − σH aB ), and µ7 =
(1 − σH aB ) (1 − σF aB ). For future reference notice that µ1 = pH , µ2 = pF , µ4 = pH pF , µ5 =
pH (1 − pF ), µ6 = pF (1 − pH ), and µ7 = (1 − pH ) (1 − pF ).

Derivation of Home Assets Bias formulas in (10) and (11). We define asset home bias as the ratio of
the weighted sum of domestic asset holdings over the weighted sum of all asset holdings for all
citizens of a certain country. We count asset holdings in both the CM and the DM and assume
equal weights for the two markets. It is understood that we count asset holdings at the end of
the sub-periods. For example, an agent of group 4 enters the CM with no assets, but re-balances
her portfolio, so at the end of the CM she holds tH of the home asset and tF of the foreign asset.
On the other hand, an agent of group 1 enters the CM with some home assets, but she sells
these assets, so at the end of the CM she holds zero.
    a) First consider T ≤ T1∗ . Let the numerator of the asset home bias formula (weighted sum
of domestic asset holdings) be denoted by AH . Given the strategy described above,

                            AH = tH + pH tF + pF tF + (1 − pH ) tH .

    The first term is the total home asset holdings in the CM, i.e. tH times the total measure
of buyers (one). Sellers hold zero assets in the CM. The second term represents home asset


                                                44
holdings in the DM by sellers who got matched with local buyers. The third term represents
home asset holdings in the DM by sellers who got matched with foreign buyers. Recall that
we are describing the local asset dominance regime. Hence, foreign buyers pay sellers in local
assets. The last term represents home asset holdings in the DM by the buyers who did not get
matched in the local DM and, hence, hold some domestic assets (groups 6 and 7). After some
algebra one can conclude that AH = 2tH + pF tF .
   Following similar steps, one can show that the denominator of the asset home bias formula
(weighted sum of all asset holdings), is given by AT = 2 (tH + tF ). From market clearing, tH +
tF = T . Therefore, (10) follows immediately.
   b) Consider T > T1∗ . Now the cost of carrying home assets is zero. As a result, buyers carry
more assets than what they use in the DM as media of exchange. Therefore, agents from groups
4 and 5, who previously did not show up in the expression AH , will now carry some home asset
leftovers. The numerator of the asset home bias formula is
                                     
                            1−β ∗           1−β ∗        1−β ∗
              AH =     T−         qF,1 + pH       q + pF       q
                              d               d            d F,1
                                                                         
                               1−β ∗ 1−β ∗                           1−β ∗
                  + pH T −            q −      q     + (1 − pH ) T −    q     .
                                 d          d F,1                     d F,1

   The first term is the total home asset holdings in the CM (held by buyers whose measure is
one). The second term represents home asset holdings in the DM by sellers who got matched
with local buyers. The third term represents home asset holdings in the DM by sellers who got
matched with foreign buyers. The fourth term represents home asset holdings in the DM by
buyers who got matched in the local DM (groups 4 and 5). Finally, the fifth term stands for the
home asset holdings of buyers who did not trade in the local DM (groups 6 and 7). After some
algebra, we obtain
                                           
                                     1−β ∗        1−β ∗
                          AH = 2 T −    qF,1 + pF    q .
                                      d            d F,1

   One can also show that the denominator of the asset home bias formula is given by AT = 2T .
Hence, (11) follows immediately.

Proof of Proposition 3. a) Let CFi , CHi be the value of foreign and domestic consumption for the
typical agent in group i, i = 1, ..., 7, respectively. All consumption is denominated in terms of
the general good. Moreover, let H i denote the hours worked by the typical agent in group i,
i = 1, ..., 7. All agents consume X ∗ in the CM, so agents with many assets will work fewer
hours. Sometimes it will be useful to directly use the agents’ budget constraint and replace X ∗
                                                                       1     2      3
with more informative expressions. First, consider sellers. We have CH   = CH   = CH  = X ∗ and
CF1 = CF2 = CF3 = 0. Clearly, even sellers who matched with foreign buyers have no imported


                                               45
consumption, since in the local asset dominance regime, sellers get payed in local assets.
                                                                                     4
   Unlike sellers, buyers might also consume in the DM. For group 4, we have CH         = X∗ +
(ψ + d)tH = X ∗ + qH , where qF represents DM consumption. Also, CF4 = (ψ + d)tF = qF .
Group 5 does not match abroad, hence these agents carry some foreign assets into the CM,
which in turn implies that some of their CM consumption is imported. Clearly, CF5 = dκ tF .
                    5
On the other hand, CH  = H 5 + dtH .28 For group 6, all CM consumption (X ∗ ) is domestic and
all DM consumption, qF , is imported. Finally, group 7 consumes only in the CM. We have
 7
CH = H 7 − dtH and CF7 = dκ tF .
                                                                                i
   The analysis in the previous paragraph reveals that pH > p̃H (pF ), implies CH > CFi for all
groups except 6, for which the inequality could be reversed, depending on the magnitude of
X ∗ . To prove the desired result we contrast the domestic and foreign consumption for groups
2 and 6. CH > CF will be true if and only if 7i=1 µi CH
                                                      i
                                                        > 7i=1 µi CFi . Since CH
                                                                               i
                                                                                 > CFi holds for
                                              P            P

i = 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, the latter statement will be true as long as

                                         2       6
                                     µ2 CH + µ6 CH ≥ µ2 CF2 + µ6 CF6 .                                        (b.1)

                                                  2
From the budget constraint of group 2, we have CH   = X ∗ = H 2 + qF . Also, from the analysis
above, CF2 = 0. Hence, (b.1) holds if and only if

                         pF (H 2 + qF ) + pF (1 − pH ) X ∗ ≥ pF (1 − pH ) qF ⇔
                                  pF H 2 + pF (1 − pH ) X ∗ ≥ −pH pF qF ,

which is always true, since X ∗ , H i ≥ 0.
                            1      2       3
    b) Like in part (a), CH    = CH   = CH   = X ∗ and CF1 = CF2 = CF3 = 0. For group 4 CH
                                                                                         4
                                                                                            =
X ∗ + q ∗ and CF4 = qF,1
                     ∗
                         . For group 5 CM consumption (X ∗ ) can be broken down into domestic,
H 5 + dT − q ∗ − (1 − β)qF,1
                         ∗                              ∗
                             , and imported, dκ (1 − β)qF,1 /d. In the DM all consumption is domestic
                                 5
and equal to q ∗ . Hence, CH       = H 5 + dT − (1 − β)qF,1  ∗
                                                                and CF5 = dκ (1 − β)qF,1
                                                                                     ∗
                                                                                         /d. For group
6 all CM consumption (X ∗ ) is domestic and all DM consumption, qF,1
                                                                 ∗
                                                                     , is imported. Finally,
                                                                                       7
group 7 only consumes in the CM. From this group’s budget constraint, it follows that CH  =
  7               ∗        5             ∗
H + dT − (1 − β)qF,1 and CF = dκ (1 − β)qF,1 /d.
                                          i
    It is clear that for i = 1, 2, 3, 4, CH > CFi . For groups 5 and 7 the same argument is true, but it
is less obvious, hence we prove it formally below. For group 6 this argument need not be true.
                   5
Consider group 5. CH > CF5 will be true if and only if
                                                               κ
                                    H 5 + dT > (1 − β)qF,1
                                                       ∗
                                                             2−    .                                          (b.2)
                                                                d
  28
   To see this point, notice that this agent’s budget constraint is X ∗ + ψ (tH + tF ) = H 5 + (ψ + dκ ) tF or X ∗ =
H − ψtH + dκ tF , where dκ tF is imported CM consumption and H 5 − ψtH is domestic CM consumption. Since
  5
                                                              5
domestic DM consumption is given by (ψ + d) tH , we have CH     = H 5 + dtH .



                                                        46
But here T > T1∗ , which implies
                                                                    κ
      dT > (1 − β)(q ∗ + qF,1
                          ∗                     ∗
                              ) ⇔ dT > 2(1 − β)qF,1 ⇔ dT + H 5 > 2 −            ∗
                                                                        (1 − β)qF,1 .
                                                                     d

This confirms that the inequality in (b.2) holds true. Following similar steps establishes that
  7
CH  > CF7 . Hence, CH i
                          > CFi for all i, except possibly group 6. However, as in part (a), one can
                        2        6
easily verify that µ2 CH   + µ6 CH ≥ µ2 CF2 + µ6 CF6 , which implies that CH > CF also holds.




                                                47
