NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCIAL LITERACY, RETIREMENT PLANNING, AND HOUSEHOLD WEALTH
Maarten van Rooij
Annamaria Lusardi
Rob J. Alessie
Working Paper 17339
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17339

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2011

We would like to thank Carol Bertaut, Johannes Binswanger, Thomas Crossley, Michael Haliassos,
Lex Hoogduin, Peter Schotman, Federica Teppa, Joachim Winter and Peter van Els for their advice
and comments, and Audrey Brown for excellent editorial assistance. We also thank the staff of CentERdata
and, in particular, Corrie Vis for their assistance with the survey and the field work. The views expressed
in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of De Nederlandsche
Bank or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Maarten van Rooij, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob J. Alessie. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Literacy, Retirement Planning, and Household Wealth
Maarten van Rooij, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob J. Alessie
NBER Working Paper No. 17339
August 2011
JEL No. D12,D91,J26
ABSTRACT
There is ample empirical evidence documenting widespread financial illiteracy and limited pension
knowledge. At the same time, the distribution of wealth is widely dispersed and many workers arrive
on the verge of retirement with few or no personal assets. In this paper, we investigate the relationship
between financial literacy and household net worth, relying on comprehensive measures of financial
knowledge designed for a special module of the Dutch Central Bank Household Survey (DHS). Our
findings provide evidence of a strong positive association between financial literacy and net worth,
even after controlling for many determinants of wealth. Moreover, we discuss two channels through
which financial literacy might facilitate wealth accumulation. First, financial knowledge increases
the likelihood of investing in the stock market, allowing individuals to benefit from the equity premium.
Second, financial literacy is positively related to retirement planning, and the development of a savings
plan has been shown to boost wealth. Overall, financial literacy, both directly and indirectly, is found
to have a strong link to household wealth.

Maarten van Rooij
Dutch Central Bank
P. O. Box 98
1000 AB Amsterdam
The Netherlands
M.C.J.van.Rooij@DNB.NL
Annamaria Lusardi
George Washington School of Business
2201 G Street, NW
Washington, DC 20037
and NBER
alusardi@gwu.edu

Rob J. Alessie
University of Groningen
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 800
9700 AV Groningen
r.j.m.alessie@rug.nl

1. Introduction
Households hold very different amounts of wealth. Heterogeneity in lifetime earnings,
the willingness to leave bequests, motives for precautionary and other savings, and cross
sectional differences in time preferences, expectations about the future, health, longevity,
inheritances, and income shocks all contribute to the dispersion in wealth holdings and have
been researched extensively.1 The relationship between wealth accumulation and financial
literacy has received much less attention, mainly because of a dearth of information of
financial knowledge levels in the population. Recently, however, there has been burgeoning
research on the measurement of financial literacy and its effects on household behaviour (e.g.,
Van Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie, 2011a; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007a, 2008, 2009, 2011a;
Agnew, Szykman, Utkus and Young, 2007; Kimball and Shumway, 2006, among others). In
this paper, we report findings from an extensive set of questions designed to measure basic
and advanced financial knowledge and study the relationship between financial knowledge
and household wealth.
The relationship between financial literacy and household behaviour is important, as
individuals are increasingly being asked to take on responsibility for their financial well-being
and their retirement preparation. However, researchers have found that individuals do not
save enough for retirement (see, e.g., Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg, 2001).2 It is critical to
understand whether financial education affects saving behaviour and what types of
educational programs are most effective. The empirical evidence of the effect of financial
education and the provision of information on saving behaviour is mixed (Lusardi, 2004).
Moreover, even if studies find a significant impact of financial education on savings, we
usually do not have much information on the channel underlying this effect. Studies on the
impact of retirement seminars, for example, are typically not able to disentangle the
consequences of an increase in financial knowledge, if any, from behavioural effects due to
the provision of information—retirement seminars being part of a more comprehensive
initiative to increase financial awareness—or the importance of peer effects in raising saving
rates (Duflo and Saez, 2003). In our work, we isolate the effect of financial skills, investigate
whether financial literacy has an impact on wealth accumulation, and examine what
underlying channels are at work for financial literacy to have an effect on wealth.
1

See the references in the next section.
Using data from the Health and Retirement Study, Scholz, Seshadri and Khitatrakun (2006), however, find that
the overwhelming majority of US households do not “undersave” for retirement. This conclusion is based on a
comparison of actual wealth levels with “optimal” wealth levels. The optimal wealth levels are derived from an
expanded life cycle model that incorporates consumption by children, uncertain lifetimes, uninsurable earnings
and medical expenses, progressive taxation, government transfers, and pension and social security benefits.
2

2

The main contributions of this paper are the following: First, we provide evidence of a
positive association between financial literacy and wealth holdings after controlling for other
determinants of wealth, such as income, age, education, family composition, risk tolerance,
patience, and attitudes toward saving. Such a positive association cannot be immediately
interpreted as a causal effect because of omitted variables and/or simultaneity bias and
because of measurement error problems. We use instrumental variables estimation to assess
the causal effect of financial literacy on wealth accumulation. Finding suitable instruments is
a difficult task and we do not claim that our instruments irrefutably establish a causal effect of
financial literacy on household wealth.
The second contribution of the paper is that we identify and highlight two channels
through which financial literacy might facilitate wealth accumulation. First, a high level of
financial knowledge lowers the costs of gathering and processing information and reduces
barriers to investing in the stock market (Haliassos and Bertaut, 1995; Vissing-Jorgenson,
2004). Individuals with high financial literacy are found to be more likely to invest in the
stock market (Van Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie, 2011a). A reason for the positive correlation
between literacy and wealth accumulation might be that knowledgeable individuals take
advantage of the equity premium on stock investments. Second, financial literacy is found to
be positively associated with retirement planning behaviour (Lusardi, 1999; Lusardi and
Mitchell, 2007a, 2009, 2011b; Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy, 2003), and our empirical results
suggest that respondents with more confidence in their financial knowledge have a higher
propensity to plan. From this, we can intuit that a high level of financial knowledge reduces
planning costs, i.e., reduces the economic and psychological barriers to acquiring information,
doing calculations, and developing a plan. Our data show that once households calculate their
savings needs after retirement, they often follow through with setting up a retirement plan and
are successful in sticking to their plan (see also Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011b).
This paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we review the current literature on
both wealth accumulation and financial literacy. In Section 3, we present data and descriptive
statistics and explain how our measures of basic and advanced financial literacy are
constructed. In Section 4, we analyze the relationship between wealth and financial literacy,
after accounting for many determinants of wealth holdings. In Section 5, we present several
extensions to our regression analyses and discuss the robustness of our results. In Section 6,
we consider the two channels through which financial knowledge may exert an effect on
wealth accumulation: stock market participation and retirement planning activities. In

3

addition, we examine the economic relevance of the financial literacy–wealth relationship. In
Section 7, we conclude.

2. Literature Review
The simplest version of the life cycle consumption model without bequests and
uncertainty posits that households accumulate savings during their working careers up to their
retirement, and decumulate wealth thereafter (Modigliani and Brumberg, 1954). This type of
saving behaviour enables households to smooth their marginal utility of consumption over the
life cycle. However, there are many reasons why household consumption and wealth follow
patterns different than that predicted by the life cycle model, and the standard model can be
easily adjusted to account for these reasons (for an overview, see Browning and Lusardi,
1996). For example, studies have highlighted the role of precautionary saving motives
(Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes, 1995), longevity and bequests (Hurd, 1989), different
economic opportunities across cohorts (Kapteyn, Alessie and Lusardi, 2005), self-control
problems (Laibson, 1997; Benartzi and Thaler, 2004; Ameriks, Caplin, Leahy and Tyler,
2007), unexpected events (Venti and Wise, 2000; Lusardi, 2003), and health (Rosen and Wu,
2004). None of these studies have focused on the role of financial literacy in accumulating
wealth; however, more financially sophisticated individuals may face lower barriers to
gathering and processing information and thus be better equipped to both accumulate and
manage their savings.
Somewhat related to the subject of our study is the work by Chan and Stevens (2008)
who document that households base pension and retirement saving decisions upon limited and
sometimes incorrect pension knowledge.3 One may argue whether financial literacy affects
knowledge of pensions and Social Security benefits. Using data from a sample of older US
individuals, Gustman, Steinmeier and Tabatabai (2010) do not find any relationship between
basic cognitive skills (numeracy) and knowledge of retirement plan characteristics and Social
Security. While there is a positive relationship between pension wealth and knowledge,
Gustman, Steinmeier and Tabatabai (2010) argue that the causality is more likely to run from
pension wealth to pension knowledge than the other way around, and that the positive
numeracy–wealth relationship should not be taken as evidence that increasing cognitive skills
and numeracy will increase the wealth of households as they enter into retirement.

3

Many authors have documented that households are rather ill-informed about their Social Security benefits and
company pensions. See Gustman, Steinmeier, and Tabatabai (2008) and Van Els, Van den End, and Van Rooij
(2004) for evidence for the US and the Netherlands, respectively.

4

Bernheim (1995, 1998) was among the first to note that policymakers and researchers
might have overlooked the importance of financial literacy to explain savings and differences
in saving behaviour. Since then many studies have emphasised the role of financial
knowledge but, in the absence of specific literacy measures, resort to crude proxies (Calvet,
Campbell and Sodini, 2007; Vissing-Jorgenson, 2004). The disadvantage of these proxies is
that there is no way to disentangle the effect of financial literacy from the effect of the proxy
variable. For example, by using education as a measure of financial literacy, one is not able to
separate the independent effect of financial knowledge from the impact of the education level,
per se; in many regressions, education also serves as a proxy for lifetime income.
In the past few years researchers have increased their efforts to develop specific
measures of financial knowledge and have also investigated the relationship between financial
literacy and financial decision-making. Hilgert, Hogarth and Beverly (2003) developed a set
of true/false questions to measure financial knowledge and explored the relationship between
financial knowledge and money management. Lusardi and Mitchell (2011b) pioneered a
module to measure financial literacy that was part of the 2004 Health and Retirement Study
(HRS).4 They showed there is strong positive association between financial literacy and
retirement planning. More recently, Van Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie (2011a), Yoong (2011)
and Christelis, Jappelli and Padula (2010) showed that there is a positive relationship between
the decision to invest in stocks and specific measures of financial literacy and cognitive
ability.
An increasing number of studies document the prevalence of financial mistakes.
Agarwal, Driscoll, Gabaix and Laibson (2009) provide evidence of financial mistakes in the
loan market, with many households paying excessive fees or too-high interest rates on credit
card debt, home equity loans and mortgages (see also Moore, 2003). Calvet, Campbell and
Sodini (2007) show that in Sweden—a country that is often considered to have well-informed
investors—many households hold underdiversified portfolios or do not participate in financial
markets at all. Several authors have also stressed that the welfare costs of financial mistakes
are not negligible (Campbell, 2006; Calvet, Campbell and Sodini, 2007; Cocco, Gomes and
Maenhout, 2005).
This prevalence of financial mistakes might not come as a surprise, given the evidence
of limited financial literacy among households. This evidence is robust in different settings
and across different countries—many of which have responded by setting up financial
4
The questions designed for the US Health and Retirement Study have now been used in many other countries.
See Lusardi and Mitchell for an overview (2011c).

5

education programs (OECD, 2005; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011a). While the wide variation in
financial literacy initiatives offers opportunity to better understand effective design and
implementation of financial education programs, evaluations have, so far, been limited (Smith
and Stewart, 2008).
The impact of financial education on saving behaviour has been investigated, mostly
in the context of retirement seminars offered by US firms. Bernheim and Garrett (2003),
Lusardi (2004) and Clark and D’Ambrosio (2008) have documented positive effects of
retirement seminars in the workplace. Overall, however, the evidence is mixed, as other
studies have not been able to come up with significant, lasting effects (Duflo and Saez, 2003,
2004). Moreover, as attendance at retirement seminars is voluntary, it is possible that
participants are from a select group that is already more intrinsically motivated to remedy
insufficient savings. In addition, any beneficial effect of retirement seminars could be the
direct result of the provision of information on the need for retirement savings rather than of
an increase in financial literacy. This is especially likely as retirement seminars typically take
a few hours at most. The impact of financial education on savings in these studies might, for
example, work more indirectly through an effect on individual characteristics and the appetite
for saving. Bernheim, Garrett and Maki (2001) found positive effects of financial education
during high school on long-term savings, but these findings have been contradicted by more
recent work (Cole and Shastry, 2008).
In this paper, we do not evaluate financial education programs but focus directly on
the role of financial knowledge on wealth accumulation, and we disentangle these effects
from other personal traits related to a propensity to save, including risk tolerance and
patience.

3. Data
We have devised a special module for the annual DNB (De Nederlandsche Bank)
Household Survey (DHS), which includes a set of questions on financial knowledge as well
as a section on retirement planning activities. The questions have been answered by the
household panel run by CentERdata, a survey agency at Tilburg University specialising in
internet surveys. It is important to note that even though the Netherlands has an internet
penetration of about 80%, the selection of panel members is not dependent on their use of and
access to the internet. Households without a computer or an internet connection are provided
with the necessary equipment (e.g., a set-top box that enables participation through their
television). Attrition is dealt with by biannual refreshment samples that are drawn so as to
6

keep the panel representative of the Dutch population of 16 years of age and older
(individuals in hospitals, specialised care institutions or prisons are not included).5
Our questionnaire was administered to individuals who are in charge of their
household’s finances. It was fielded from 23 September to 27 September 2005 and repeated a
week thereafter for those households that had not yet responded. The response rate was 74.4%
(1508 out of 2028 households). The DHS contains a lot of information on income and work,
health, household debt and assets, and an extensive set of psychological questions on attitudes
with respect to saving and portfolio investments. We merge our module on financial literacy
with the 2005 data from the questionnaire on net worth. Since wealth regressions might be
sensitive to outliers, we trim the net worth variable and exclude the top and bottom 1% of the
net worth distribution.
Our final sample consists of 1091 households. Table A1 reports summary statistics of
some important background variables for the whole sample and the final sample (see
appendix A). The average age of respondents in the whole sample is 50.8 (ranging from 22 to
90 years); 51.5% of respondents are male; 56.8% are married or living with a partner; and
18.4% are retired. Comparison of the characteristics for the whole sample and the final
sample shows that elderly respondents report their asset and debt position more frequently,
but overall the composition of the sample remains fairly similar. Table A2 reports the median,
mean and standard deviation of household net worth, which includes all types of private
savings and investment accounts, housing wealth, other real estate, and durable goods, net of
mortgages and other financial debt. It is clear that the wealth distribution is wide even after
trimming the top and bottom 1% of the distribution.
3.1. The measurement of literacy6
The module that we have added to the DHS contains two sets of questions to assess
financial literacy. These questions were mostly designed using similar modules from the US
Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) and a variety of other surveys on financial literacy, but
a few questions are unique to our module.7
The first set of questions relates to basic financial literacy. Appendix B reports the
exact wording of the questions, which measure ability to perform simple calculations (the first
5
We use household weights to calculate the statistics reported in this paper to ensure representativeness of the
population..
6
See Van Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie (2011a) for a detailed description of the measurement of financial literacy
and its relationship to demographics.
7
For an analysis of the module on financial literacy in the 2004 HRS, see Lusardi and Mitchell (2011b). For a
review of financial literacy surveys across countries, see Lusardi and Mitchell (2007b, 2011c).

7

question), understanding of how compound interest works (second question), and
understanding of the effect of inflation (third question). We also designed questions to assess
knowledge of the time value of money (fourth question) and whether respondents suffer from
money illusion (fifth question). An understanding of these concepts is necessary for basic
day-to-day financial transactions and financial planning. Responses to these questions are
reported in Table 1A. Note that while many respondents answered some questions correctly,
only 40.2% of respondents provided the correct answer to all five questions (Table 1B).
Hence, while many respondents display some understanding of basic economic concepts,
basic financial literacy is not widespread among the Dutch population.
We designed the second set of questions to measure advanced financial knowledge.
Appendix B and Table 2A report the exact wording of the questions and document the
responses to the advanced literacy questions. Clearly, these are much more complex questions
that are devised to measure knowledge related to financial investments and portfolio choice.
The questions assess knowledge of financial assets, such as stocks, bonds and mutual funds;
the trade-off between risk and return; the understanding of risk diversification; the function of
the stock market; and the relationship between bond prices and interest rates.
Table 2A shows that the response pattern for the advanced questions is much different
than that for the basic literacy questions. Specifically, the number of correct answers is much
lower; only about a quarter of respondents know about the relationship between bond prices
and interest rates. Note that not only were respondents more likely to have given incorrect
answers to these questions, but they also stated that they do not know the answer more often.
For example, while 13% of respondents were incorrect about the main function of the stock
market, 20% stated they do not know the answer to this question. Table 2B shows that only
5% of respondents were able to answer all eleven advanced literacy questions correctly, while
the fraction of incorrect or ‘do not know’ responses on several questions is sizable. These are
important findings. For example, most life cycle models assume that consumers are well
informed and have the capacity to make complex decisions, such as determining the optimal
level of consumption over their lifetime. In fact, the findings presented in Tables 1A, 1B, 2A
and 2B show that financial literacy should not be taken for granted. These findings echo the
results found in US surveys, such as the Health and Retirement Study and the Survey of
Consumers, as well as findings from other countries (see Lusardi and Mitchell (2007a, 2011c)
for a review).
We summarise the information on financial literacy derived from the responses to our
two sets of questions into a financial literacy index. First, we perform a factor analysis on the
8

sixteen financial literacy questions. Consistent with the way we designed the financial literacy
survey, we find two main factors with different loading on the two sets of questions—the
simple literacy questions (first 5 questions) and the more advanced literacy questions
(remaining 11 questions). We therefore construct two literacy indices by performing a factor
analysis on the two sets separately. The first index is related to basic knowledge while the
second index measures more advanced financial knowledge. In constructing the indices, we
explicitly take into account the differences between incorrect and ‘do not know’ answers (see
Appendix C). It is important to use this information to differentiate between degrees of
financial knowledge (see Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011b). Details about the factor analysis and
descriptive statistics on the relationship between literacy and age, gender and education are
provided by Van Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie (2011a).

3.2 Wealth and literacy
We aim to explore a new explanation for the heterogeneity in wealth holdings;
specifically, the effects of financial literacy on wealth. First, we look at the bivariate
relationship between wealth and our two measures of financial literacy. Table 3 documents a
strong increase in median net worth at higher levels of both basic and advanced financial
literacy. Focusing on advanced financial literacy and dividing the financial literacy indices in
quartiles, we find that the median net worth of individuals in the top financial literacy quartile
amounts to € 185900, which is quadruple the median net worth of those in the bottom literacy
quartile (€ 46700). The differences in wealth across basic financial literacy quartiles are large,
although somewhat smaller than across advanced literacy quartiles. These simple correlations
suggest a strong, non-linear gradient between financial literacy and net worth.
Table 4 shows a similar pattern for several asset categories. Home ownership and
investments in stocks, mutual funds and bonds are much more common among those who
score high on the financial literacy indices. Nevertheless there are notable differences between
asset classes. While home ownership is not uncommon among individuals with low financial
literacy, investments in stocks or bonds are almost absent in this subgroup. This evidence
suggests that more financially literate households spread their wealth over a richer class of
assets and hold more diversified portfolios.

4. Wealth regressions
To further investigate the relationship between household wealth and financial
literacy, we start with a basic multivariate regression of total net worth on several controls and
9

extend this specification by successively including additional determinants of wealth. Tables
5A and 5B report the results. First, we run an OLS regression of total net worth on our
measure of basic financial literacy. Other control variables include gender, age and
educational attainment, household composition (marital status and the number of children
within the household), household net disposable income, and a dummy for whether the
respondent is retired. We also include a dummy for the self-employed to account for their
differences with respect to other households (Hurst and Lusardi, 2004).
Age and income appear to be strongly significant (Table 5A, column 1). Total net
worth increases with age, but because we are using cross-sectional data, we cannot
disentangle whether this is attributable to age or cohort effects. Nevertheless, this result is
consistent with panel data evidence suggesting that Dutch households hardly decumulate
private wealth after retirement (Kapteyn, Alessie and Lusardi, 2005; Alessie, Lusardi and
Kapteyn, 1999). To capture complex, possibly non-linear effects of income on wealth
accumulation, we include a polynomial for the natural logarithm of net disposable household
income with a linear, quadratic and cubic term. A one percent increase in household
income—measured at mean levels of the control variables—is associated with an increase in
total net worth of about € 1400.
Most importantly, we find there is a positive and statistically significant effect of basic
financial literacy on total net worth. A unit increase in basic literacy is associated with an
increase in wealth of about € 12000 (the basic literacy measure itself has a zero mean and a
standard deviation of one). Thus, respondents with higher basic knowledge are more likely to
accumulate wealth. Nevertheless, it is not immediately clear whether this is the result of better
financial decisions due, for example, to an ability to collect and process information at low
cost and effort or, alternatively, to the association with personal characteristics such as risk
aversion, time preference or overconfidence (see Christelis, Jappelli and Padula (2010) for a
discussion).
To further investigate these issues, we first examine the role of confidence in financial
knowledge in relation to actual financial knowledge. In addition to actual financial literacy,
the perception of one’s knowledge might assert an independent effect on financial outcomes,
albeit the direction of the effect is not clear cut, a priori. Individuals who are overly modest
about their knowledge might refrain from using new financial products and forego potential
financial benefits. Insofar as high confidence in one’s financial knowledge leads to less
conservative portfolio management, it could have a positive impact on net worth. On the other
hand, high-confidence individuals might buy products that they do not fully understand and
10

end up making financial mistakes with potentially serious consequences. In addition, the
literature on overconfidence offers arguments that individuals with too much trust in their
knowledge may be inclined to interpret and filter information in accordance with their beliefs
and might trade excessively (ending up with higher trading costs and lower net investment
returns). Barber and Odean (2000, 2001), for instance, provide evidence of overconfident
investors trading excessively and ending up with lower returns on their investments.
At the start of our survey, we ask respondents ‘How would you assess your
understanding of economics (on a 7-point scale; 1 means very low and 7 means very high)?’
Based upon this self-assessment, we construct a relative measure of overconfidence. The selfassessment and our basic financial literacy index are not directly comparable due to the use of
different scales but do provide information on the relative position of respondents within the
distribution of actual basic literacy and self-assessed literacy, respectively. We start with
grouping both variables into four categories and ranking the respondents accordingly from the
top category to the lowest group. Thereafter, we create a dummy for overconfidence that
equals one if the respondents’ self-assessed literacy ranking is higher than our classification
of basic financial literacy. Similarly, we construct a dummy for underconfidence when the
ranking on self-assessed literacy is lower than warranted by the actual measures of literacy.
Thereafter, we rerun the wealth regression, this time including the overconfidence and
underconfidence dummies (the reference group being the respondents with an assessment of
their literacy in line with their actual knowledge). Appendix C provides more detail on the
construction of the confidence measures. Our main interest is whether the effect of basic
financial ability on wealth accumulation is affected by the inclusion of these confidence
measures. The coefficient of basic financial literacy remains significant and increases
somewhat (Table 5A, column 2).8 The coefficient of overconfidence is negative but
insignificant. Underconfidence, however, has a significant negative impact on net worth.
Compared to individuals with correct assessment of their financial knowledge, underconfident
respondents do not seem to take full advantage of their knowledge, at least in relation to
savings.
Experimental evidence reveals that individuals with lower cognitive ability are likely
to be less risk tolerant and more impatient (Benjamin, Brown and Shapiro, 2006; Dohmen,
Falk, Huffman and Sunde, 2010). To test whether the effect of basic financial literacy is due

8

The number of observations has now decreased from 1091 to 1060 as, in constructing the measures for underand overconfidence, we omit respondents answering ‘do not know’ when asked to assess their economics
knowledge.

11

to an association with risk attitude, we include a measure of risk aversion. In the annual DHS
respondents are asked to indicate to what extent they agree with the statement, ‘Investing in
stocks is something I don’t do, since it is too risky’. The response scale runs from 1 to 7, with
1 indicating ‘complete disagreement’ and 7 ‘complete agreement’. Kapteyn and Teppa (2011)
show that this measure has more explanatory power in models of portfolio choice than
measures of risk tolerance based on a series of hypothetical choices between uncertain
streams of lifetime income, as proposed by Barsky, Juster, Kimball and Shapiro (1997). The
regression results in Table 5A (column 3)9 show that there is indeed an important role for risk
aversion in explaining wealth heterogeneity, but the coefficient of basic financial literacy is
virtually unaffected.10
We subsequently test whether financial literacy serves as a proxy for patience. We do
not have direct information on time preferences, but we include information on smoking and
drinking behaviour as a proxy for myopic behaviour, as is done in many other studies since
the work by Fuchs (1980) on the relationship between different types of health decisions and
patience. We use information on whether individuals smoke and how often, and on whether
they are heavy drinkers (defined as more than four alcoholic drinks on average per day). We
do not find any relationship between net worth and these proxies for time preference, and the
coefficient estimate of the basic financial literacy index changes only marginally (Table 5B,
column 1).
In the next step, we investigate whether basic financial ability could be a proxy for
advanced financial knowledge (as suggested by the results in Van Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie,
2011a) and include the measure of advanced financial literacy. Indeed the effect of advanced
literacy is strongly significant, reduces the coefficient estimate on basic financial capacity and
wipes out its significance (Table 5B, column 2). The coefficient of advanced literacy is higher
than the one of basic literacy index; a unit increase in advanced financial literacy raises
household net worth by € 24000. However, we need to be cautious about the interpretation of
the OLS estimates of financial literacy. While the basic financial literacy index touches upon
skills that individuals need on a daily basis, the advanced literacy index includes questions on
the workings of stocks, bonds and mutual funds, which are complex concepts beyond what is
9

The information on risk aversion and time preferences is available in the DHS modules on saving attitudes,
income and health. By merging different modules, the total number of observations in our regression is reduced
by 57 (even though we are able to retain some households by using information on time preferences and risk
tolerance from adjacent years).
10
As a robustness check we have included the Barsky et al. (1997) measure of risk tolerance, as it has proved to
be a valuable measure in other papers (e.g., Van Rooij, Kool and Prast, 2007), but it turned out to be
insignificant, confirming the results of Kapteyn and Teppa (2011).

12

needed to know to perform basic financial transactions. It is conceivable that the desire to
increase wealth may foster investing in financial knowledge; as a result, the OLS coefficient
could be biased upwards (simultaneity bias). Moreover it is conceivable that advanced
financial literacy is related to some unobserved variables that also affect wealth holdings.11
On the other hand, the advanced literacy index might be a noisy measure of actual advanced
financial knowledge and the coefficient of advanced financial literacy could be biased toward
zero (attenuation bias). Indeed Van Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie (2011a) provide evidence that
a slight variation in the wording of advanced literacy questions affects response patterns,
which suggests that respondents have a tendency to guess the answer to financial literacy
questions, in particular the complex ones.
To address the nexus of causality, we perform instrumental variables (IV) estimation.
We use economics education as an instrument for advanced financial literacy. This variable
measures exposure to education before entering the job market. It is based upon the answers
to the question ‘How much of your education was devoted to economics?’ with response
categories being ‘a lot’, ‘some’, ‘little’, and ‘hardly at all’. It has strong predictive power for
advanced financial literacy, as shown by the test on the relevance of the instruments in the
first stage regression (Table 5B, column 3). The F-value equals 13, clearly above 10—the
value that is often recommended as a rule of thumb to avoid the problem of weak instruments
(Staiger and Stock, 1997). We assume that this information is unrelated to the error term in
the wealth equation. We are aware that this criterion might not be met because of simultaneity
and/or omitted variable bias, and insofar as possible we have tried to address this issue by
adding other relevant control variables (see next section). Nevertheless the IV results should
be interpreted with caution.
The IV estimates show that the coefficient measuring the effect of financial literacy on
net worth remains significant at the 5% level and increases in magnitude with respect to the
OLS estimate. Overall, our estimates are in line with the hypothesis that financial literacy is
positively related to wealth accumulation, even after accounting for attitudes and preferences
that might be associated with an individual’s level of financial literacy.

5. Extensions
To investigate the robustness of our findings, we exploit the richness of the DHS
dataset and examine a variety of extensions and alternative specifications of the wealth
11
For the same reason our proxy for basic financial literacy could be an endogenous variable. However, the DHS
does not contain instruments for both financial literacy variables.

13

regressions.12 A potential concern with our instrument is that accumulating wealth and
becoming financially literate or being exposed to economics education are choice variables
that depend on a common unobserved factor or an omitted variable. One possible candidate
for a variable that drives literacy, education and wealth but is usually unavailable in wealth
regressions is ability, as some individuals are intrinsically more gifted and have better basic
cognitive skills than others. For this reason, we use the basic literacy variable in the wealth
regressions to control for cognitive ability.
Carefulness is an example of a common trait that perhaps has not yet been taken into
account. Careful individuals, who take many precautions to prevent bad things happening to
them, could be more likely to hold a buffer stock of savings and to invest in financial
education, as well, to lower the chance of facing financial difficulties. To explore this
possibility, we run two additional specifications, which include information from two separate
questions. Respondents were asked whether they consider themselves to be a ‘careful person’
and whether they ‘take many precautions’. The response scales run from 1 (completely
disagree) to 7 (completely agree). By merging this information with our data, we lose close to
300 observations. Due to the lower number of observations, the F-value of the joint
significance of our instruments (economics education) in the first stage regression decreases
to 6 but remains strongly significant. The inclusion of how careful respondents are does not
take away the effect of financial literacy on net worth. The advanced literacy coefficient
remains significant at the 5% confidence level and even increases in value.
Other potential drivers of wealth heterogeneity could be related to financial literacy
and might influence the relationship between financial literacy and the accumulation of
wealth. In this section we further exploit the richness of the DHS dataset to investigate
whether the importance of financial literacy is lessened once we control for alternative
explanations of the wealth dispersion. One potential explanation for wealth heterogeneity is
simply that households have different appetites for saving. Venti and Wise (1998, 2000)
conclude, for example, that unobserved heterogeneity in the propensity to save must be a
major driving factor for wealth inequality after having successively eliminated lifetime
earnings, chance events and investment choices as explanations for the wide differences in
wealth holdings. Our dataset does contain a direct proxy for the propensity to save, which is
measured by the responses to what respondents ‘do with money that is left over after having
paid for food, rent, and other necessities’. The response scale runs from 1 to 7, in which 1
means ‘I like to spend all my money immediately’ and 7 means ‘I want to save as much as
12

See Van Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie (2011b) for details.

14

possible’. Our estimates show that, across the board, a higher appetite for saving translates
into higher saving accumulation. However, the magnitude and significance of the coefficient
of advanced financial literacy is unaffected when this additional control for saving is added.
Self-control is indisputably an important factor in saving outcomes (Thaler, 1994). No
matter how much importance individuals attach to saving, if they have difficulties
withstanding short-term temptation and do not find ways to constrain their consumption
behaviour, they will not be able to save. The DHS question asking whether respondents ‘find
it difficult to control their expenditures’ (on a scale from 1 to 7, in which 1 means ‘very easy’
and 7 means ‘very difficult’) provide a way to measure self-control. We find that self-control
is a major determinant of wealth accumulation. The difference between those who have little
or no difficulty controlling their expenditures and those who recognise that this is a major
challenge is nearly € 90000 in net worth. The inclusion of self-control, however, does not
fundamentally affect the relationship between financial literacy and wealth accumulation.13
In addition to these extensions we incorporate a large number of variables that, based
upon the theoretical and empirical literature, could account for part of the variation in net
worth among households. To this end, we merge our data with information from other DHS
modules. We include several alternative health measures, respondent self-assessed probability
for survival until a certain age (to account for heterogeneity with respect to perceived
longevity), income uncertainty, expectations regarding housing prices, perceived likelihood of
future reduction in the generosity of the state pension, and expected replacement rate (based
upon state pension eligibility and mandatory employer company savings). All of these
variables are insignificant and do not affect the coefficient estimates of financial literacy on
wealth.14
We test the robustness of our results to other measures of wealth. Using net worth over
permanent income as a dependent variable (permanent income is calculated from an auxiliary
regression of income on a number of demographics), we attain estimation results which
corroborate the evidence of a positive and significant relationship between financial literacy
and wealth. Finally, we use alternative instrument sets using information about the financial
condition of siblings and knowledge of parents. While the financial condition and knowledge
of others are not under control of the respondent, witnessing financial problems of the oldest
sibling or parents may provide strong motivation to acquire financial knowledge (see Van

13

We have also accounted for a bequest motive and for planning horizons. Our main results are unchanged. See
Van Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie (2011b).
14
For brevity, estimates are not reported but are available upon request.

15

Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie, 2011a). Using these alternative instruments, we find that the IV
estimate for financial literacy remains strongly significant and increases somewhat in value,
while the estimates of the other coefficients do not change qualitatively. These extensions and
alternative empirical strategies show that the impact of financial literacy on net wealth is
robust.

6. Discussion
Many policymakers are concerned about the adequacy of retirement savings. When
households do not accumulate sufficient wealth, there are profound implications not only for
personal welfare but also for public policy, as low-savings households may lack a buffer to
deal with negative shocks and are more likely to become dependent on public support.
However, the debate on whether household savings are too low is still ongoing. Many studies
conclude that a large number of households have insufficient retirement savings. Other
studies suggest that for the majority of households, wealth accumulation is adequate, once
changing consumption needs over the life cycle are taken into account. From this perspective,
it is not clear that increasing financial literacy would necessarily result in higher saving rates.
An important question is whether financial education stimulates wealth accumulation
or whether the causality runs the other way. Gustman, Steinmeier and Tabatabai (2010) argue
that the causality might run from wealth to financial literacy. Individuals who accumulate a
lot of wealth also face an incentive to become financially knowledgeable and have the
opportunity to acquire knowledge by managing their portfolio. The results by Bernheim,
Garrett and Maki (2001), on the other hand, suggest that high school programs aimed at
increasing financial knowledge stimulate savings. If the direction of causality runs from
financial knowledge to increased savings, it is important to understand how financial literacy
translates into increased savings as it may be desirable to invest in financial education
initiatives if, for example, household savings are deemed too low. We discuss two possible
explanations related to the well-documented limited stock market participation puzzle and to
another puzzling fact of household finance, i.e., the lack of retirement planning.

6.1 Financial literacy and stock market participation
Economic theory dictates that (with the possible exception of a small proportion of
households) it is optimal to hold a portion of household wealth in the form of stocks
(Haliassos and Bertaut, 1995). Investing in the stock market provides an opportunity to take
advantage of the equity premium and to benefit from risk diversification. In fact, evidence on
16

the composition of household portfolios across countries shows that many households have no
stocks at all in their portfolios (Guiso, Haliassos and Jappelli, 2002). In our sample, about a
quarter of the households invest in stocks, either directly or indirectly via mutual funds.
Limited participation in stock markets is often traced back to transaction costs and the costs of
processing information, which create a threshold for entering the stock market (Haliassos and
Bertaut, 1995; Vissing-Jorgenson, 2004). In addition, it has been argued that households are
either simply unaware of the investment opportunities in the stock market or refrain from
investing in stocks due to a lack of trust (Guiso and Jappelli, 2005; Guiso, Sapienza and
Zingales, 2008).
An increase in financial literacy lowers information costs as well as decreases
impediments to participating in the stock market. Indeed, our work— relying on both OLS
and IV estimates—shows that the probability of owning stocks or mutual funds in the
Netherlands increases with the level of financial literacy (Van Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie,
2011a). Because financial knowledge increases stock ownership, high-knowledge individuals
have an opportunity to exploit the risk premium on equity investments, and doing so might
contribute to the positive effect of financial literacy on net worth. This is true regardless of the
fact that some households may in fact be better off not investing in the stock market due to
excessive trading or bad timing of transactions, as the financial literature shows that the vast
majority of households that invest in the stock market follow very passive investment
strategies (see, e.g., Ameriks and Zeldes, 2004).

6.2 Financial literacy and retirement planning
A second potentially important channel through which financial literacy impacts
wealth accumulation is via retirement and financial planning. As an example, the model by
Reis (2006) distinguishes inattentive consumers who do not plan and do not accumulate
wealth from those who do plan and thereby accumulate savings. Empirical evidence supports
the assertion that retirement planning affects wealth accumulation (Lusardi, 1999; Lusardi and
Mitchell, 2007a, 2009, 2011b; Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy, 2003). Planning is an inherently
complex task; for example, one needs to collect and process a lot of information. Thus, the
effect of financial literacy on total net worth might be related to the capacity to plan.15 Indeed,
15

Even if individuals rely on financial planners or advisors, they have to come up with a lot of information,
some of which is complex to retrieve and communicate (e.g., information on their preferences and the
uncertainty around the main scenario they foresee). At the same time, consumers have to be savvy enough to
understand the implications of the advice given by planners or advisors and to judge whether the suggested plans
fit their needs. Interestingly, a multivariate regression analysis reveals that financial literacy does not exert an

17

Lusardi and Mitchell (2009) offer convincing evidence of financial literacy fostering thinking
about retirement. In another study, Lusardi and Mitchell (2008, 2011b) document a positive
relationship between simple measures of financial knowledge and more specific measures of
retirement planning related to the calculation of saving needs after retirement. In the
following section, we take these two approaches a step further by relating retirement planning
to comprehensive measures of financial literacy.
Our survey module contains a series of questions on retirement planning that were
originally developed by Lusardi and Mitchell (2011b) for a module in the 2004 HRS. The first
question relates to the very first step in setting up a retirement plan: ‘Have you ever tried to
figure out how much your household would need to save for retirement?’ Of 1508
respondents, 564 answered affirmatively and are labelled ‘simple’ planners. Respondents who
answered ‘yes’ were given the follow-up question, ‘Have you developed a plan for retirement
saving?’ The majority of respondents seems to have developed some sort of a retirement
savings plan, as 161 plus 299 respondents answered ‘yes’ or ‘more or less’, respectively. Out
of this group of ‘serious’ planners, the large majority claims to have been successful planners,
in the sense that 169 plus 250 respond ‘always’ or ‘mostly’ to the third question: ‘How often
have you been able to stick to this plan’. The proportion of simple, serious and successful
planners is roughly comparable to that found for US households surveyed in the 2004 HRS,
although the latter is based on a sample of older households (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011b).
The weighted percentage of simple, serious and successful planners in our sample equals
34.6, 27.6, and 25.1 respectively.
Descriptive statistics on retirement planning and demographics are reported in Tables
6 and 7. As expected, there is a strong correlation with age. The closer individuals get to
retirement, the more likely they are to have started considering their retirement needs. We
find no differences in planning activities between men and women, while couples are more
likely to be successful in executing their plans. While there is not much evidence that
planning is related to education or basic literacy, there is a strong correlation of planning with
advanced financial literacy. The proportion of planners in the most literate group is almost
double the number for households with the lowest level of financial knowledge. Another
notable result is the role of confidence. Those who are very confident in their economics
knowledge are more likely to calculate how much they need to save for retirement purposes.

independent effect on the probability of consulting a financial intermediary. Illiterate households do however
rely significantly more on the advice of friends and acquaintances when making important financial decisions
(results are available upon request).

18

This suggests that concerns about knowledge and capacity to handle complex retirement
savings decisions prevent individuals from attempting to calculate retirement savings needs
and set up plans.
The relationship between financial literacy and simple retirement planning is
confirmed in a multivariate regression analysis including the same explanatory variables as
used previously (Table 8). We report both OLS and IV regressions, as we are cautious about
possible simultaneity bias; one could attain financial knowledge in the process of calculating
savings needs and developing and executing a retirement plan. However, conditionally upon
the validity of our instrument set, the IV estimates point to a downward bias in the OLS
estimates, potentially due to the problem of measurement error in the advanced financial
literacy index. A one standard deviation increase in financial literacy increases the probability
of planning for retirement by more than 20 percentage points.
One explanation why retirement planning may affect wealth is via its effect on selfcontrol. If consumers want to save but simply lack the discipline to do so, planning may help
consumers control their consumption (Ameriks, Caplin, Leahy and Tyler, 2006). Moreover,
research from psychology shows that people are more likely to achieve goals and translate
intentions into actions when they develop specific plans. 16
The relationship between financial literacy and planning is a pretty robust finding.
Alessie, Van Rooij and Lusardi (2011) use a different measure of planning (how much
individuals have thought about retirement) and a simple measure of financial literacy which
was collected in the DHS in 2010. Both the OLS and IV estimates continue to show a positive
and statistically significant effect of financial literacy on retirement planning.
Critics might argue that, in the Netherlands, it is not clear that financially
knowledgeable individuals will be induced to save more for retirement when comparing
expected retirement income with their spending needs.17 After performing this comparison,
individuals could find that they are currently holding excessive wealth and adjust their
savings downward, since the Dutch pension system is known to be relatively generous, and
the vast majority of employees save via mandatory defined benefit retirement plans with
compulsory contributions (Van Rooij, Kool and Prast, 2007). In fact, research shows that the
replacement rates provided by the Dutch mandatory pension system are, in many cases, lower
than expected by many employees and insufficient to provide the desired standard of living in
16

See Lusardi and Mitchell (2007a) for a more detailed discussion of the explanations why retirement planning
affects wealth.
17
Also for the US, the conclusion—drawn in many studies—that retirement savings are insufficient is not
undisputed (Scholz, Seshadri and Khitatrakun, 2006).

19

old age (Van Duijn, Lindeboom, Lundborg and Mastrogiacomo, 2009; Binswanger and
Schunk, 2008). This suggests that making retirement calculations and subsequently
developing targets for spending and saving might help households boost their wealth.

6.3 The cost of ignorance
The association between advanced financial literacy and wealth accumulation that we
have found is not only statistically significant but also quantitatively large. The net worth
difference associated with the difference in the 75th and 25th percentiles of the advanced
financial literacy index equals € 80000, i.e., roughly three and a half times the net disposable
income of a median household.18 This number provides a crude proxy for the economic
relevance of the financial literacy–wealth coefficient. Similar calculations show that higher
levels of financial literacy are associated with economically meaningful increases in the
propensity to participate in stock markets and to plan for retirement. An increase in advanced
financial literacy from the 25th to the 75th percentile for an individual with otherwise average
characteristics is associated with a 17 and 30 percentage point higher probability of stock
market participation and retirement planning, respectively.19 Large differences in financial
knowledge correlate with important differences in financial behaviour. While we have
addressed the concern of reverse causality to the extent possible within our dataset, we do not
claim that we have resolved the dispute about the direction of causality of the literacy–wealth
relationship. Nevertheless, our results show that if one is willing to believe that there is an
effect of literacy on financial behaviour, the potential benefits of financial education are
substantial, and the costs of financial ignorance are potentially large.
How do our findings compare to the economic effects reported in other studies?
Campbell (2006) argues that suboptimal refinancing among US home owners result in
mortgage rates that about 0.5–1% higher on average. Given the current size of the US
mortgage market, this is equivalent to $50–100 billion additional annual interest costs paid.
US investors are estimated to have foregone 0.67% of average annual equity return because of
fees, expenses and trading costs of active investment strategies in an attempt to beat the
market (French, 2008). This amounts to a total annual cost of about $100 billion that could
have been saved by passively following the market portfolio. Bovenberg, Koijen, Nijman and
Teulings (2007) calibrate a stylised life cycle savings model with portfolio investments.

18

In the calculations we use the coefficient and confidence interval for the effect of advanced financial literacy
on wealth from the preferred IV specification among the regressions in Table 5B (see column 3).
19
See also Van Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie (2011a).

20

Compared to an optimal investment strategy, their parameter choices yield a welfare loss of
3.5% for underdiversification and a 12% loss when individuals do not participate in the stock
market at all (either directly or indirectly via pension savings). Using different values for
several parameters of interest and comparing to a benchmark situation which takes borrowing
constraints into account, Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2005) report welfare losses of up to
4% from non-participation in the stock market. Calvet, Campbell and Sodini (2007) estimate
an actual annual return loss due to lack of participation in the stock market by Swedish
households that could be as large as 4.3%. Calvet, Campbell and Sodini (2007) also provide
estimates for the economic cost of under-diversification based upon the actual portfolio
composition of Swedish investors. For a median investor, the annual return loss due to underdiversification is 2.9% on the risky portfolio, which equals $129 or 0.5% of household
disposable income. However, for one in ten investors, these annual costs are as high as $1190
(4.5% of disposable income) or more.
These figures are not directly comparable to the estimated wealth–financial literacy
relationship in our regressions. First, the numbers reported are very specific to certain types of
portfolio behaviour. Second, they represent a flow of foregone returns, while wealth is a stock
variable. While recognizing that our calculations provide only crude approximations, the
effect of financial literacy could be substantial. Investing in financial education is attractive in
terms of wealth holdings insofar as these efforts boost financial knowledge. For the ultimate
impact on personal welfare, though, it makes a difference whether higher wealth holdings
come from improved wealth management, leading to the avoidance of financial mistakes and
to higher portfolio returns, or alternatively are the result of households being in a better
position to plan their expenses. The two channels that we have highlighted (stock market
participation and retirement planning) are examples of both mechanisms. That said, it is
important to realise that any effect of financial education on household wealth is not
immediate and may take time to materialise.

7. Concluding remarks
Financial literacy and its effect on economic decisions have become an important
topic. It is obvious that the management of wealth and portfolio choice requires more
sophisticated knowledge than it did two or three decades ago. Not only have households
become more and more responsible for their well-being but the landscape of financial markets
has changed dramatically, and these changes have been characterised by an increase in the
complexity of financial products. In this study, we use detailed measures for basic and more
21

advanced financial literacy, and we document evidence of an independent positive association
between financial literacy and wealth accumulation. The effect of financial literacy on
accumulated savings is robust across different specifications and continues to hold even after
we control for many other wealth determinants.
We have highlighted and documented evidence of two important channels that might
contribute to the relationship between wealth accumulation and financial literacy: financially
knowledgeable individuals are (1) more likely to invest in stocks and (2) have a higher
propensity to plan for retirement. We argue that this is because financial literacy lowers the
costs of collecting and processing information and reduces planning costs, thereby facilitating
the execution of financial decisions and bringing down economic and psychological
thresholds for stock market participation or retirement savings calculations and subsequent
development of retirement plans.
Our study is complementary to those by Bernheim, Garrett and Maki (2001) and
Bernheim and Garrett (2003) that have shown that financial education in the US (either in
high school or via workplace seminars) has a positive impact on savings but have not been
able to identify whether this effect is due to individual appetites for saving, provision of
information and supply of commitment devices, a broad improvement in financial literacy and
reduction of financial mistakes, or peer effects. Our work shows that financial literacy is
positively associated with wealth accumulation, but we cannot infer from this result that the
effect of financial education programs is indeed the result of an increase in financial literacy.20
To assess that finding, we need to be able to separate the impact of financial education on
financial ability and knowledge from other channels.

20

Interestingly, further analysis shows that peer effects might indeed play an important role in financial
behaviour, especially for those with less financial literacy as they are more likely to cite friends and relatives as
their most important source of advice on financial decisions (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011b; Van Rooij, Lusardi
and Alessie, 2011a).

22

References
Agarwal, S., J. Driscoll, X. Gabaix, and D. Laibson, 2009, The age of reason: Financial
decisions over the lifecycle with implications for regulation, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, Fall 2009, 51-101.
Agnew, J., L. Szykman, S. Utkus, and J. Young, 2007, Literacy, trust and 401(k) savings
behavior, Center for Retirement Research Working Paper, 2007-10, Boston.
Alessie, R., A. Lusardi, and A. Kapteyn, 1999, Saving after retirement: Evidence from three
different surveys, Labour Economics, 6, 277-310.
Alessie, R., M. van Rooij, and A. Lusardi, 2011, Financial literacy ad retirement preparation
in the Netherlands, forthcoming Journal of Pension Economics and Finance.
Ameriks, J., A. Caplin, and J. Leahy, 2003, Wealth accumulation and the propensity to plan,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 1007-1047.
Ameriks, J., A. Caplin, J. Leahy, and. T. Tyler, 2007, Measuring self-control problems,
American Economic Review, 97, 966-972.
Ameriks, J., and S. Zeldes, 2004, How do household portfolio shares vary with age?, mimeo,
Columbia Graduate School of Business.
Barber, B., and T. Odean, 2000, Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common stock
investment performance of individual investors, Journal of Finance, 55, 773-806.
Barber, B., and T. Odean, 2001, Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence, and common
stock investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 261-292.
Barsky, R., F. Juster, M. Kimball, and M. Shapiro, 1997, Preference parameters and
behavioral heterogeneity: An experimental approach in the Health and Retirement Study,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 537-579.
Benartzi, S., and R. Thaler, 2004, Save more tomorrow. Using behavioral economics to
increase employee saving, Journal of Political Economy, 112, 164-187.
Benjamin D., S. Brown, and J. Shapiro, 2006, Who is ‘behavioral’?: Cognitive ability and
anomalous preferences, mimeo, Harvard University.
Bernheim, D., 1995, Do households appreciate their financial vulnerabilities? An analysis of
actions, perceptions, and public policy. In: Tax Policy and Economic Growth, American
Council for Capital Formation, Washington, DC, 1-30.
Bernheim, D., 1998, Financial illiteracy, education and retirement saving. In: O. Mitchell and
S. Schieber (eds.), Living with Defined Contribution Pensions, University of Pennsylvania
Press, Philadelphia, 38-68.
Bernheim, D., D. Garrett, and D. Maki, 2001, Education and saving: The long-term effects of
high school financial curriculum mandates, Journal of Public Economics, 80, 435-565.

23

Bernheim, D., and D. Garrett, 2003, The effects of financial education in the workplace:
Evidence from a survey of households, Journal of Public Economics, 87, 1487-1519.
Bernheim, D., J. Skinner, and S. Weinberg, 2001, What accounts for the variation in
retirement wealth among U.S. households?, American Economic Review, 91, 832-857.
Binswanger, J., and D. Schunk, 2008, What is an adequate standard of living during
retirement?, CentER Discussion Paper, 82.
Bovenberg, L., R. Koijen, T. Nijman, and C. Teulings, 2007, Saving and investing over the
life cycle and the role of collective pension funds, De Economist, 155, 347-415.
Browning, M., and A. Lusardi, 1996, Household saving: Micro theories and micro facts,
Journal of Economic Literature, 34, 1797-1855.
Calvet, L., J. Campbell, and P. Sodini, 2007, Down or out: Assessing the welfare costs of
household investment mistakes, Journal of Political Economy, 115, 707-747.
Campbell, J., 2006, Household finance, Journal of Finance, 61, 1553-1604.
Chan, S., and A. Stevens, 2008, What you don’t know cannot help you: Pension knowledge
and retirement decision-making, Review of Economics and Statistics, 90, 253-266.
Christelis, D., T. Jappelli, and M. Padula, 2010, Cognitive abilities and portfolio choice,
European Economic Review, 54, 18-39.
Clark, R., and M. D’Ambrosio, 2008, Adjusting retirement goals and saving behavior: The
role of financial education. In: A. Lusardi (ed.), Overcoming the Saving Slump: How to
Increase the Effectiveness of Financial Education and Saving Programs, University of
Chicago Press.
Cocco, J., F. Gomes, and P. Maenhout, 2005, Consumption and portfolio choice over the lifecycle, Review of Financial Studies, 18, 490-533.
Cole, S., and G. Shastry, 2008, If you are so smart, why aren’t you rich? The effects of
education, financial literacy and cognitive ability on financial market participation, Working
paper, Wellesley College.
Duflo, E., and E. Saez, 2003, The role of information and social interactions in retirement
plan decisions: Evidence from a randomized experiment, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
118, 815-842.
Duflo, E., and E. Saez, 2004, Implications of pension plan features, information, and social
interactions for retirement saving decisions. In: O. Mitchell and S. Utkus (eds.), Pension
Design and Structure: New Lessons from Behavioral Finance, Oxford, Oxford University
Press, 137-153.
Dohmen, T., A. Falk, D. Huffman, and U. Sunde, 2010, Are risk aversion and impatience
related to cognitive ability?, American Economic Review, 100, 1238–1260.

24

French, K., 2008, The cost of active investing, Journal of Finance, 63, 1537-1573.
Fuchs, V., 1980, Time preference and health: An explorative study, NBER Working Paper,
539.
Guiso, L., and T. Jappelli, 2005, Awareness and stock market participation, Review of
Finance, 9, 537-567.
Guiso, L., M. Haliassos, and T. Jappelli, 2002, Household portfolios, MIT Press, Cambridge.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales, 2008, Trusting the stock market, Journal of Finance,
63, 2557-2600.
Gustman, A., T. Steinmeier, and N. Tabatabai, 2008, Do workers know about their pensions?
Comparing workers and employers’ pension information. In: A. Lusardi (ed.), Overcoming
the Saving Slump: How to Increase the Effectiveness of Financial Education and Saving
Programs, University of Chicago Press.
Gustman, A., T. Steinmeier, and N. Tabatabai, 2010, Financial knowledge and financial
literacy at the household level, NBER Working Paper, 16500.
Haliassos, M., and C. Bertaut, 1995, Why do so few hold stocks?, Economic Journal, 105,
1110-1129.
Hilgert, M., J. Hogarth, and S. Beverly, 2003, Household financial management: The
connection between knowledge and behavior, Federal Reserve Bulletin, 309-322.
Hubbard, R., J. Skinner, and S. Zeldes, 1995, Precautionary savings and social insurance,
Journal of Political Economy, 103, 360-399.
Hurd, M., 1989, Mortality risk and bequests, Econometrica, 57, 779-813.
Hurst, E., and A. Lusardi, 2004, Liquidity constraints, household wealth and
entrepreneurship. Journal of Political Economy, 112, 319–347.
Kapteyn, A., R. Alessie, and A. Lusardi, 2005, Explaining the wealth holdings of different
cohorts: Productivity growth and social security, European Economic Review, 49, 1361-1391.
Kapteyn, A., and F. Teppa, 2011, Subjective measures of risk aversion, fixed costs, and
portfolio choice, forthcoming Journal of Economic Psychology.
Kimball, M., and T. Shumway, 2006, Investor sophistication, and the participation, home
bias, diversification, and employer stock puzzles, mimeo, University of Michigan.
Laibson, D., 1997, Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
112, 443-477.
Lusardi, A., 1999, Information, expectations, and savings for retirement. In: H. Aaron (ed.),
Behavioral Dimensions of Retirement Economics, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution

25

Press and Russell Sage Foundation, 81-115
Lusardi, A., 2003, Planning and Saving for Retirement, Working Paper, Dartmouth College.
Lusardi, A., 2004, Saving and the effectiveness of financial education. In: O. Mitchell and S.
Utkus (eds.), Pension Design and Structure: New Lessons from Behavioral Finance, Oxford
University Press, 157-184.
Lusardi, A., and O. Mitchell, 2007a, Baby boomers retirement security: The role of planning,
financial literacy and housing wealth, Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 205-224.
Lusardi, A., and O. Mitchell, 2007b, Financial literacy and retirement preparedness: Evidence
and implications for financial education, Business Economics, 35-44.
Lusardi, A., and O. Mitchell, 2008, Planning and financial literacy: How do women fare?
American Economic Review, 98, 413-417.
Lusardi, A., and O. Mitchell, 2009, How ordinary consumers make complex economic
decisions: Financial literacy and retirement readiness, NBER Working Paper, 15350.
Lusardi, A., and O. Mitchell, 2011a, The outlook for financial literacy. In: A. Lusardi and O.
Mitchell, Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial
Marketplace. Forthcoming Oxford University Press.
Lusardi, A., and O. Mitchell, 2011b, Financial literacy and planning: Implications for
retirement wellbeing. In: A. Lusardi and O. Mitchell, Financial Literacy: Implications for
Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace. Forthcoming Oxford University Press.
Lusardi, A., and O. Mitchell, 2011c, Financial literacy around the world: an overview,
forthcoming Journal of Pension Economics and Finance.
Modigliani, F., and R. Brumberg, 1954, Utility analysis and the consumption function: An
interpretation of cross-section data. In: K. Kurihara (ed.), Post-Keynesian Economics, New
Brunswick, New Jersey, Rutgers University Press, 388-436.
Moore, D., 2003, Survey of financial literacy in Washington State: Knowledge, behavior,
attitudes and experiences, Technical report 03-39, Social and Economic Sciences Research
Center, Washington State University.
Organization for Economics Co-Operation and Development, 2005, Improving financial
literacy: Analysis of issues and policies, Paris, France.
Reis, R., 2006, Inattentive Consumers, Journal of Monetary Economics, 53, 1761-1800.
Rosen, H., and S. Wu, 2004, Portfolio choice and health status, Journal of Financial
Economics, 72, 457-484.
Scholz, J., A. Seshadri, and S. Khitatrakun, 2006, Are Americans saving “optimally” for
retirement?, Journal of Political Economy, 114, 607-643.

26

Smith, B., and F. Stewart, 2008, Learning from the experience of OECD countries: Lessons
for policy, programs, and evaluations. In: A. Lusardi (ed.), Overcoming the Saving Slump:
How to Increase the Effectiveness of Financial Education and Saving Programs, University
of Chicago Press.
Staiger, D., and J. Stock, 1997, Instrumental variables regression with weak instruments,
Econometrica, 65, 557-586.
Thaler, R., 1994, Psychology and savings policies, American Economic Review, 84, 186-192.
Van Duijn, M., M. Lindeboom, P. Lundborg, and M. Mastrogiacomo, 2009, Pension plans
and retirement replacement rates, Netspar Discussion Paper, 2009-57.
Van Els, P., W. van den End, and M. van Rooij, 2004, Pensions and public opinion: A survey
among Dutch households, De Economist, 152, 101-116.
Van Rooij, M., C. Kool, and H. Prast, 2007, Risk-return preferences in the pension domain:
Are people able to choose?, Journal of Public Economics, 91, 701-722.
Van Rooij, M., A. Lusardi, and R. Alessie, 2011a, Financial literacy and stock market
participation, Journal of Financial Economics, 101(2), 449-472.
Van Rooij, M., A. Lusardi, and R. Alessie, 2011b, Financial literacy, retirement planning, and
household wealth, Working Paper.
Venti, S. and D. Wise, 1998, The cause of wealth dispersion at retirement: Choice or chance?,
American Economic Review, 88, 185-191.
Venti, S. and D. Wise, 2000, Choice, chance, and wealth dispersion, NBER Working Paper,
7521.
Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2004, Perspectives on behavioral finance: Does “irrationality”
disappear with wealth? Evidence from expectations and actions. In: M. Gertler and K. Rogoff
(eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003, Cambridge, MIT Press.
Yoong, J, 2011, Financial illiteracy and stock market participation: evidence from the RAND
American Life Panel. In: A. Lusardi and O. Mitchell, Financial Literacy: Implications for
Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace. Forthcoming Oxford University Press.

27

Appendix A. Summary statistics of explanatory variables and net worth
Table A1. Summary statistics (mean) of explanatory variables
Weighted statistics
________________________________________________________________________________________
Explanatory variable
Definition
Whole Final
sample sample
_______________________________ ___________________________________________ _____ _______
Age dummies
age<=30
Respondent’s age falls within mentioned age
0.135 0.119
30<age<=40
category
0.205 0.187
40<age<=50
0.191 0.195
50<age<=60
0.211 0.212
60<age<=70
0.148 0.160
age>70
0.109 0.127
Education dummies
Lower intermediate and primary
Highest level of education completed by respondent 0.306 0.324
Intermediate vocational
0.198 0.190
Secondary pre-university
0.152 0.151
Higher vocational
0.223 0.222
University
0.121 0.113
Male
Respondent is male
0.515 0.531
Married
Respondent is married or cohabiting
0.568 0.567
Number of children
Number of children living within household
0.616 0.576
Retired
Respondent has retired
0.184 0.204
Self-employed
Respondent is self-employed
0.056 0.049
Net disposable household income (in € 1000)
24.6 23.8
Household income
High confidence in financial skills
Respondent is relatively overconfident
0.286 0.288
Low confidence in financial skills
Respondent is relatively underconfident
0.397 0.395
Risk aversion
Risk aversion 1 (completely disagree) Based upon the following question: To what extent 0.093 0.092
Risk aversion 2
0.104 0.106
do you agree or disagree with the statement
Risk aversion 3
‘Investing in stocks is something I don’t do, since it is0.094 0.094
Risk aversion 4
0.164 0.155
too risky’ (on a scale from 1 to 7, where 1 means
Risk aversion 5
0.099 0.093
‘completely disagree’ and 7 means ‘completely
Risk aversion 6
0.183 0.185
agree’)?
Risk aversion 7 (completely agree)
0.263 0.276
Smoking
Based upon the following two questions: 1) Do you
No
smoke cigarettes at all? (yes, I smoke every now and 0.735 0.748
Every now and then
then/yes, I smoke every day/no); and if smoke every 0.055 0.055
Daily (< 20 cigarettes)
day: 2) About how many cigarettes do you smoke a 0.139 0.136
Daily (>= 20 cigarettes)
0.071 0.062
day? (less than 20 cigarettes/at least 20 cigarettes)
Drinking (more than 4 glasses daily) Respondent has more than 4 alcoholic drinks a day 0.074 0.066
________________________________________________________________________________________
Note: All variables are 0-1 dummy variables, except the number of children within the household and net
household disposable income (thousands of euro). Whole (final) sample consists of 1508 (1091) households,
except for variables which have been obtained from the annual DHS files.

Table A2. Total household net worth statistics
Thousands of euro
________________________________________________________________
Total net worth
______________________________________
Median
Mean
Standard deviation
Total net worth
_______________________ _________ _________ _______________
before trimming (N=1116)
119.7
184.3
279.3
after trimming (N=1091)
119.7
167.1
189.0
________________________________________________________________

28

Appendix B. Wording of basic and advanced literacy questions

Basic financial literacy questions
1) Suppose you had € 100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 2% per year. After 5
years, how much do you think you would have in the account if you left the money to grow?
(i) More than € 102; (ii) Exactly € 102; (iii) Less than € 102; (iv) Do not know; (v) Refusal.
2) Suppose you had € 100 in a savings account and the interest rate is 20% per year and you
never withdraw money or interest payments. After 5 years, how much would you have on this
account in total? (i) More than € 200; (ii) Exactly € 200; (iii) Less than € 200; (iv) Do not
know; (v) Refusal.
3) Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1% per year and inflation was
2% per year. After 1 year, how much would you be able to buy with the money in this
account? (i) More than today; (ii) Exactly the same; (iii) Less than today; (iv) Do not know;
(v) Refusal.
4) Assume a friend inherits € 10000 today and his sibling inherits € 10000 3 years from now.
Who is richer because of the inheritance? (i) My friend; (ii) His sibling; (iii) They are equally
rich; (iv) Do not know; (v) Refusal.
5) Suppose that in the year 2010, your income has doubled and prices of all goods have
doubled too. In 2010, how much will you be able to buy with your income? (i) More than
today; (ii) The same; (iii) Less than today; (iv) Do not know; (v) Refusal.

Advanced financial literacy questions
6) Which statement describes the main function of the stock market?
(i) The stock market helps to predict stock earnings; (ii) The stock market results in an
increase in the price of stocks; (iii)The stock market brings people who want to buy stocks
together with those who want to sell stocks; (iv) None of the above; (v) Do not know; (vi)
Refusal.
7) What happens if somebody buys the stock of firm B in the stock market? (i) He owns a part
of firm B; (ii) He has let money to firm B; (iii) He is liable for firm B debt; (iv) None of the
above; (v) Do not know; (vi) Refusal.
8) Which statement about mutual funds is correct? (i) Once one invests in a mutual fund, one
cannot withdraw the money in the first year; (ii) Mutual funds can invest in several assets, for
example invest in both stocks and bonds; (iii) Mutual funds pay a guaranteed rate of return
which depends on their past performance; (iv) None of the above; (v) Do not know; (vi)
Refusal.
9)What happens if somebody buys a bond of firm B?(i) He owns a part of firm B; (ii) He has
lent money to firm B; (iii) He is liable for firm B’s debts; (iv) None of the above; (v) Do not
know; (vi) Refusal.

29

10) Considering a long time period (for example 10 or 20 years), which asset normally gives
the highest return: (i) Savings accounts; (ii) Bonds; (iii) Stocks; (iv) Do not know; (v)
Refusal.
11) Normally, which asset displays the highest fluctuations over time: (i) Savings accounts;
(ii) Bonds; (iii) Stocks; (iv) Do not know; (v) Refusal.
12) When an investor spreads his money among different assets, does the risk of losing
money (i) Increase; (ii) Decrease; (iii) Stay the same; (iv) Do not know; (v) Refusal.
13) If you buy a 10-year bond, it means you cannot sell it after 5 years without incurring a
major penalty. (i)True; (ii) False; (iii) Do not know; (iv) Refusal.
14) Stocks are normally riskier than bonds. (i) True; (ii) False; (iii) Do not know; (iv) Refusal.
15) Buying a company fund usually provides a safer return than a stock mutual fund. (i)True;
(ii) False; (iii) Do not know; (iv) Refusal.
16) If the interest rate falls, what should happen to bond prices: (i) Rise; (ii) Fall; (iii) Stay the
same; (iv) None of the above; (v) Do not know; (vi) Refusal.

30

Appendix C. Measuring literacy and confidence
Basic and advanced financial literacy
The construction of the basic and advanced literacy indices is explained in detail in a previous paper
(Van Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie, 2011a). In short, the basic literacy index is calculated from a factor
analysis based on five simple questions. For each question, we created a dummy variable equal to one
if the respondent provides the correct answer. The five questions measure numeracy and the
understanding of economic concepts (related to the workings of inflation and interest rates) that are
necessary in day-to-day transactions. The index of advanced literacy is based on eleven questions
related to more advanced concepts such as the understanding of stocks and bonds, the relationship
between risk and return, and the benefits of diversification. To account for the role of do not know
answers, we created two dummies variables for each question, measuring whether the question is
answered correctly and whether the respondent indicated that he or she did not know the answer,
respectively. The procedure we used takes into account the fact that we have used minor variations in
wording for three out of eleven questions to test the sensitivity of responses to these variations.

Overconfidence and underconfidence
At the beginning of our survey, we asked respondents to assess their own financial literacy. Table C1
reports the exact wording of the question and the distribution of responses. We grouped the bottom
three categories and the top two categories from the 7-point response scale to have four categories of
about equal size. We also divided the basic literacy index based on five simple economic questions
over four different groups, and thereby tried to mimic the size of the self-reported literacy groups. This
provides us with a relative ranking of self-reported literacy and one for measured basic literacy.
Respondents who rank themselves higher than the rank we obtain for their basic literacy are labelled
overconfident and those who rank themselves lower than the rank we obtain for their basic literacy are
labelled underconfident. Both variables are binary dummies taking the value one if the respondent is
overconfident or underconfident, respectively, and zero otherwise. In our sample, we have 404
overconfident respondents, 599 underconfident respondents, 464 respondents with an equal ranking
for actual and self-reported literacy, and 41 respondents with missing information because they did not
answer the self-assessed literacy question. The fact that we have many underconfident respondents is
related to the fact that we are not able to match the group sizes exactly, since the top category for basic
literacy is relatively large, containing 677 respondents (out of 1508) who answered all five questions
correctly.

31

Table C1. Self-assessed literacy
Number and percentage of respondents
____________________________________________________
How would you assess your understanding of economics (on a
7-point scale; 1 means very low and 7 means very high)?
____________________________________________________
N
%
_____________ _____________
1 (very low)
9
0.60
2
56
3.71
3
137
9.08
4
366
24.27
5
499
33.09
6
355
23.54
7 (very high)
45
2.98
Do not know
31
2.06
Refusal
10
0.66
_____________ _____________
Total
1508
100.00
____________________________________________________

32

Table 1A. Basic financial literacy
Weighted percentages of total number of respondents (N=1508)
____________________________________________________________________________
Numeracy
Interest
Inflation
Time value
Money
compounding
of money
illusion
___________ ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________
Correct
90.8
76.2
82.6
72.3
71.8
Incorrect
5.2
19.6
8.6
23.0
24.3
Do not know
3.7
3.8
8.5
4.3
3.5
____________________________________________________________________________
Note: Correct, incorrect, and do not know responses do not sum up to 100% because of refusals. See
Appendix B for the exact wording of the questions on basic financial literacy.

Table 1B. Basic literacy: Summary of responses
Weighted percentages of total number of respondents (N=1508)
____________________________________________________________________________
Number of correct, incorrect and do not know answers (out of five
questions)
_____________________________________________________________
None 1
2
3
4
All
Mean
_____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____
_____
Correct
2.3
2.8
6.7
15.1
32.8
40.2
3.94
Incorrect
45.2
35.7
13.6
4.4
1.1
0.0
0.81
Do not know
88.9
5.9
1.7
1.4
0.7
1.5
0.24
____________________________________________________________________________
Note: Categories do not sum up to 100% because of rounding and means do not sum up to 5 due to
refusals.

33

Table 2A. Advanced financial literacy
Weighted percentages of total number of respondents (N=1508)
____________________________________________________________________________________
Correct Incorrect DK
______ _______ ____
Which statement describes the main function of the stock market?
67.0
12.9
19.7
What happens if somebody buys the stock of firm B in the stock market?

62.2

25.7

11.0

Which statement about mutual funds is correct?

66.7

11.1

21.7

What happens if somebody buys a bond of firm B?

55.6

17.8

26.4

Considering a long time period (for example 10 or 20 years), which asset 47.2
normally gives the highest return: savings accounts, bonds or stocks?

30.1

22.3

Normally, which asset displays the highest fluctuations over time: savings 68.5
accounts, bonds or stocks?

12.7

18.4

When an investor spreads his money among different assets, does the risk 63.3
of losing money: increase, decrease or stay the same?

17.4

19.0

If you buy a 10-year bond, it means you cannot sell it after 5 years 30.0
without incurring a major penalty. True or False?

28.3

37.9

Stocks are normally riskier than bonds. True or False?1)

60.2

15.1

24.3

Buying a company fund usually provides a safer return than a stock 48.2
mutual fund. True or False?1)

24.8

26.6

If the interest rate falls, what should happen to bond prices: rise, fall or 24.6
37.1
37.5
stay the same? 1)
____________________________________________________________________________________
1) This question was phrased in two different ways. See Van Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie (2011a) for details.
Note: DK = ‘Do not know’; Correct, incorrect and DK responses do not sum up to 100% because of refusals. See
Appendix B for the exact wording of the questions on advanced financial literacy.

Table 2B. Advanced literacy: Summary of responses
Weighted percentages of total number of respondents (N=1508)
__________________________________________________________________________________
Number of correct, incorrect and do not know answers (out of eleven questions)
_________________________________________________________________________
None 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
All
Mean
____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____
____
Correct
7.6
5.1
5.2
6.4
7.3 10.0 11.1 11.3 10.8 10.6
9.8
5.0
5.93
Incorrect 18.7 20.2 19.8 16.8 10.4
7.1
4.7
1.6
0.6
0.1
0.0
0.0
2.33
DK
44.2 11.4
8.0
6.1
5.1
3.7
4.1
4.2
2.8
3.2
3.5
3.6
2.65
__________________________________________________________________________________
Note: DK = ‘Do not know’; Categories do not sum up to 100% because of rounding and means do not sum up to
11 due to refusals.

34

Table 3. Total net worth and financial literacy:
Thousands of euro (N=1091)
________________________________________________________________
Total net worth
______________________________________
Median
Mean
Standard deviation
Basic literacy quartiles
_______________________ _________ _________ _______________
1 (low)
43.9
117.2
162.3
2
98.8
150.2
164.7
3
111.2
156.5
173.6
4 (high)
142.8
195.7
209.3
Total net worth
______________________________________
Mean
Standard deviation
Advanced literacy quartiles Median
_______________________ _________ _________ _______________
1 (low)
46.7
100.1
121.2
2
82.0
129.3
151.0
3
112.4
167.5
181.4
4 (high)
185.9
236.3
228.4
________________________________________________________________

Table 4. Asset ownership and financial literacy
Weighted percentages (N=1116)
____________________________________________________________________________
% of households owning
__________________________________________________
Stocks
Mutual funds Bonds
Home
Basic literacy quartiles
_______________________ ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________
1 (low)
2.4
5.6
1.9
40.5
2
9.7
17.6
3.8
53.4
3
10.2
16.5
3.0
54.4
4 (high)
18.1
23.9
6.1
60.8

% of households owning
__________________________________________________
Mutual funds Bonds
Home
Advanced literacy quartiles Stocks
_______________________ ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________
1 (low)
2.0
6.5
1.4
44.6
2
5.0
11.8
1.2
44.8
3
14.2
18.5
5.0
56.0
4 (high)
25.2
33.1
8.8
70.9
____________________________________________________________________________

35

Table 5A. Total net worth and financial literacy: multivariate regressions
__________________________________________________________________________________________
(1)
(2)
(3)
OLS
OLS
OLS
__________________ __________________ ___________________
Basic financial literacy index
12328***
(3.42)
15804***
(3.37)
15712***
(3.08)
Age dummy (30<age<=40)
26904**
(2.25)
24581**
(2.02)
22398*
(1.69)
Age dummy (40<age<=50)
72269***
(5.42)
72359***
(5.34)
74986***
(5.20)
Age dummy (50<age<=60)
131181***
(8.71)
130456***
(8.49)
136511*** (8.33)
Age dummy (60<age<=70)
143929***
(7.01)
144246***
(6.94)
152902***
(7.25)
Age dummy (age>70)
166320***
(6.31)
161898***
(5.88)
168605***
(6.15)
Intermediate vocational education
18230
(1.37)
12666
(0.93)
12961
(0.92)
Secondary pre-university education
10709
(0.65)
2851
(0.18)
4714
(0.28)
Higher vocational education
25853*
(1.85)
22434
(1.59)
18835
(1.30)
University education
37059**
(1.98)
35853*
(1.88)
26112
(1.32)
Male
-7952
(0.81)
-10204
(1.02)
-20710**
(1.97)
Married
30905***
(2.72)
26639**
(2.29)
24494**
(2.08)
Number of children
10285*
(1.70)
11166*
(1.80)
10199
(1.59)
Retired
45437**
(2.16)
45454**
(2.11)
42855**
(2.03)
Self-employed
26205
(1.17)
25016
(1.12)
25300
(1.04)
Ln(household income)
-3277982*** (3.76) -3261105*** (3.72) -3062710*** (3.69)
Ln2(household income)
315864***
(3.71)
314721***
(3.67)
297871***
(3.67)
Ln3(household income)
-9676***
(3.51)
-9648***
(3.45)
-9179***
(3.48)
High confidence in financial skills
-10738
(0.79)
-9253
(0.66)
Low confidence in financial skills
-26368**
(2.15)
-21614*
(1.70)
Risk aversion dummy 2 (low)
-1181
(0.043)
Risk aversion dummy 3
-16204
(0.65)
Risk aversion dummy 4
-30789
(1.24)
Risk aversion dummy 5
-13917
(0.53)
Risk aversion dummy 6
-55402**
(2.41)
Risk aversion dummy 7 (very high)
-64013***
(2.85)
Constant
10880396*** (3.67) 10818615*** (3.65) 10088240*** (3.58)
Observations
1091
1060
1013
R-squared
0.32
0.32
0.34
p-value test age=0
0.00
0.00
0.00
p-value test education=0
0.26
0.27
0.61
p-value test income=0
0.00
0.00
0.00
p-value test confidence=0
0.10
0.24
p-value test risk aversion=0
0.00
__________________________________________________________________________________________
Note: Absolute value of robust t-statistics in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The dependent variable is net
worth in thousands of euro. The most risk tolerant, non-smoking and moderately drinking (4 alcoholic drinks or less a day)
respondents are the reference group.

36

Table 5B. Total net worth and financial literacy: multivariate regressions
__________________________________________________________________________________________
(1)
(2)
(3)
OLS
OLS
IV
__________________ __________________ ___________________
Advanced financial literacy index
23514*** (4.86)
67122**
(2.28)
Basic financial literacy index
16694*** (3.17)
9050
(1.64)
-5129
(0.45)
Age dummy (30<age<=40)
20743
(1.55)
24756*
(1.81)
32198**
(2.12)
Age dummy (40<age<=50)
76027*** (5.24)
77806*** (5.31)
81106*** (5.24)
Age dummy (50<age<=60)
136072*** (8.17)
134470*** (8.05)
131499*** (7.49)
Age dummy (60<age<=70)
151976*** (7.18)
150595*** (7.11)
148034*** (6.71)
Age dummy (age>70)
169144*** (6.16)
169701*** (6.17)
170733*** (6.08)
Intermediate vocational education 16282
(1.14)
12459
(0.87)
5368
(0.35)
Secondary pre-university education 5994
(0.35)
-1197
(0.07)
-14533
(0.76)
Higher vocational education
17733
(1.21)
11324
(0.77)
-563
(0.03)
University education
25821
(1.30)
16848
(0.84)
208
(0.01)
Male
-19907*
(1.84)
-26884**
(2.49)
-39823*** (3.01)
Married
22754*
(1.89)
24778**
(2.07)
28533**
(2.28)
Number of children
10687*
(1.66)
11424*
(1.79)
12790**
(1.99)
Retired
43503**
(2.06)
41651**
(1.98)
38215*
(1.78)
Self-employed
26025
(1.07)
24797
(1.03)
22520
(0.93)
Ln(household income)
-3066220*** (3.68) -3011077*** (3.57) -2908803*** (3.28)
Ln2(household income)
299340*** (3.66)
293782*** (3.57)
283474*** (3.30)
Ln3(household income)
-9261***
(3.48)
-9084*** (3.40)
-8754*** (3.17)
High confidence in financial skills -8685
(0.61)
-9829
(0.70)
-11951
(0.84)
Low confidence in financial skills -23286*
(1.83)
-19605
(1.55)
-12778
(0.94)
Risk aversion dummy 2 (low)
-3888
(0.14)
-8001
(0.29)
-15629
(0.57)
Risk aversion dummy 3
-21340
(0.86)
-23968
(0.97)
-28841
(1.17)
Risk aversion dummy 4
-35329
(1.41)
-33869
(1.36)
-31162
(1.23)
Risk aversion dummy 5
-16025
(0.60)
-19345
(0.74)
-25502
(0.99)
Risk aversion dummy 6
-57751**
(2.51)
-54037**
(2.37)
-47149**
(1.98)
Risk aversion dummy 7 (very high) -66105*** (2.93)
-60545*** (2.71)
-50234**
(2.07)
Smoking: every now and then
-20230
(1.22)
-18589
(1.15)
-15544
(0.95)
Smoking: daily (< 20 cigarettes)
-6861
(0.39)
-5978
(0.34)
-4339
(0.25)
Smoking: daily (>= 20 cigarettes) -20227
(0.73)
-21097
(0.76)
-22711
(0.82)
Drinking: daily (> 4 drinks)
-966
(0.04)
-1802
(0.08)
-3353
(0.15)
Constant
10066777*** (3.56) 9897789*** (3.45) 9584366*** (3.15)
Observations
1003
1003
1003
R-squared
0.34
0.35
0.32
p-value test age=0
0.00
0.00
0.00
p-value test education=0
0.64
0.81
0.84
p-value test income=0
0.00
0.00
0.00
p-value test confidence=0
0.18
0.30
0.56
p-value test risk aversion=0
0.00
0.01
0.48
p-value test smoking, drinking=0
0.74
0.77
0.83
F-statistic first stage regression
13.0
p-value exogeneity test
0.18
__________________________________________________________________________________________
Note: Absolute value of robust t-statistics in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The dependent variable is net
worth in thousands of euro. The most risk tolerant, non-smoking and moderately drinking (4 alcoholic drinks or less a day)
respondents are the reference group. The advanced literacy index has been instrumented using dummy variables indicating
how much the respondent’s education was devoted to economics. The reference group in this case consists of those
respondents whose education was devoted a lot to economics.

37

Table 6. Retirement planning across demographics
Weighted household percentages
______________________________________________________________________
Percentage of planners
________________________________
Simple
Serious
Successful
N
Education
________________________
_________ _________ _________
____
Primary
20.6
16.9
15.9
67
Preparatory intermediate voc.
37.3
27.6
25.1
345
Intermediate vocational
33.0
26.2
22.7
295
Secondary pre-university
33.1
26.6
23.1
207
Higher vocational
35.5
30.8
29.1
397
University
39.8
29.9
28.9
197
Pearson chi2(5)
p-value

9.50
0.09

3.37
0.64

4.75
0.45

______________________________________________________________________
Simple
Serious
Successful
N
Age
________________________
_________ _________ _________
____
21-30 years
24.8
18.5
14.9
179
31-40 years
30.0
23.0
21.8
306
41-50 years
34.6
27.1
24.8
333
51-60 years
45.4
36.7
34.0
311
61-70 years
34.8
28.4
25.3
217
71 years and older
34.4
28.9
27.0
162
Pearson chi2(5)
p-value

23.4
0.00

19.7
0.00

19.8
0.00

______________________________________________________________________
Simple
Serious
Successful
N
Gender
________________________
_________ _________ _________
____
Female
32.6
26.5
24.4
674
Male
36.6
28.4
25.7
834
Pearson chi2(1)
p-value

0.42
0.52

0.03
0.86

0.02
0.88

______________________________________________________________________
Simple
Serious
Successful
N
Marital status
________________________
_________ _________ _________
____
Single/divorced/widow
0.323
0.237
0.213
Married/living together
0.364
0.304
0.279
476
1032
Pearson chi2(1)
1.59
3.35
4.04
p-value
0.21
0.07
0.04
______________________________________________________________________
Note: Percentages may not sum up to 100 due to rounding.

38

Table 7. Retirement planning and financial literacy: some simple statistics
Weighted household percentages
__________________________________________________________________
Percentage of planners
______________________________
Simple
Serious
Successful
N
Basic literacy
________________________
________ ________ ________
____
1 (low)
31.9
23.8
21.7
217
2
33.7
27.9
22.9
284
3
31.4
26.4
24.0
350
4 (high)
38.1
29.5
28.2
657
Pearson chi2(3)
p-value

1.95
0.58

0.94
0.82

3.62
0.31

__________________________________________________________________
Simple
Serious
Successful
N
Advanced literacy
________________________
________ ________ ________
____
1 (low)
24.5
19.9
18.6
330
2
31.8
22.9
20.9
354
3
38.2
31.7
28.3
371
4 (high)
44.1
35.5
32.5
453
Pearson chi2(3)
p-value

32.6
0.00

22.9
0.00

20.6
0.00

__________________________________________________________________
Simple
Serious
Successful
N
Self-assessed literacy
________________________
________ ________ ________
____
1 (very low)
53.4
44.1
44.1
9
2
33.3
17.8
15.0
56
3
21.2
17.3
16.2
137
4
26.7
20.3
16.1
366
5
37.0
30.7
28.2
499
6
45.7
37.7
36.1
355
7 (very high)
51.4
42.7
41.5
45
Do not know
17.6
10.2
10.2
31
Refusal
27.2
13.9
13.9
10
Pearson chi2(8)
p-value

48.6
0.00

43.6
0.00

49.9
0.00

__________________________________________________________________
Note: Percentages may not sum up to 100 due to rounding.

39

Table 8. Retirement planning and financial literacy: multivariate regressions
_____________________________________________________________________________
OLS
IV
_________________ _________________
Advanced financial literacy index
0.072*** (4.13)
0.25***
(2.66)
Basic financial literacy index
0.031*
(1.79)
-0.026
(0.71)
Age dummy (30<age<=40)
0.026
(0.43)
0.056
(0.89)
Age dummy (40<age<=50)
0.084
(1.39)
0.097
(1.62)
Age dummy (50<age<=60)
0.18***
(2.99)
0.17***
(2.77)
Age dummy (60<age<=70)
0.16**
(2.16)
0.15**
(2.04)
Age dummy (age>70)
0.052
(0.62)
0.056
(0.69)
Intermediate vocational education
0.0029
(0.06)
-0.026
(0.49)
Secondary pre-university education
-0.0081
(0.15)
-0.062
(1.02)
Higher vocational education
-0.033
(0.74)
-0.080
(1.57)
University education
0.073
(1.31)
0.0064
(0.10)
Male
-0.061*
(1.79)
-0.11**
(2.55)
Married
-0.032
(0.87)
-0.017
(0.44)
Number of children
0.017
(0.92)
0.022
(1.20)
Retired
0.034
(0.54)
0.020
(0.32)
Self-employed
0.0090
(0.13)
-0.000095 (0.00)
Ln(household income)
-0.13
(0.05)
0.28
(0.09)
0.029
(0.12)
-0.012
(0.04)
Ln2(household income)
Ln3(household income)
-0.0013
(0.16)
0.000004 (0.00)
High confidence in financial skills
0.14***
(3.35)
0.13***
(2.98)
Low confidence in financial skills
-0.048
(1.30)
-0.021
(0.51)
Risk aversion dummy 2 (low)
0.0085
(0.13)
-0.022
(0.32)
Risk aversion dummy 3
0.023
(0.34)
0.0034
(0.05)
Risk aversion dummy 4
0.017
(0.27)
0.028
(0.43)
Risk aversion dummy 5
0.017
(0.24)
-0.0078
(0.11)
Risk aversion dummy 6
-0.052
(0.85)
-0.025
(0.38)
Risk aversion dummy 7 (very high)
-0.010
(0.17)
0.031
(0.48)
Smoking: now and then
-0.046
(0.69)
-0.034
(0.48)
Smoking: daily (1-20 cigarettes)
0.0100
(0.20)
0.017
(0.33)
Smoking: daily (> 20cigarettes)
-0.096
(1.30)
-0.10
(1.28)
Drinking: daily (> 4 glasses)
-0.024
(0.37)
-0.030
(0.46)
Constant
0.061
(0.01)
-1.20
(0.11)
Observations
1003
1003
R-squared
0.07
-0.01
p-value test age=0
0.01
0.06
p-value test education=0
0.38
0.32
p-value test income=0
0.46
0.78
p-value test confidence=0
0.00
0.00
p-value test risk aversion=0
0.84
0.93
p-value test smoking, drinking=0
0.68
0.71
F-statistic first stage regression
13.0
p-value exogeneity test
0.06
_____________________________________________________________________________
Note: Absolute value of robust t-statistics in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The dependent
variable is a 0-1 dummy indicating whether respondents have tried to calculate saving needs for
retirement. The most risk tolerant, non-smoking and moderately drinking (4 alcoholic drinks or less a day)
respondents are the reference group. The advanced literacy index has been instrumented using dummy
variables indicating how much the respondent’s education was devoted to economics. The reference group
in this case consists of those respondents whose education was devoted a lot to economics.

40

