                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  A MODEL OF THE CONSUMPTION RESPONSE TO FISCAL STIMULUS PAYMENTS

                                            Greg Kaplan
                                         Giovanni L. Violante

                                        Working Paper 17338
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17338


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




The authors received support from the National Science Foundation Award No. 1126039. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Greg Kaplan and Giovanni L. Violante. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal Stimulus Payments
Greg Kaplan and Giovanni L. Violante
NBER Working Paper No. 17338
August 2011, Revised January 2014
JEL No. D31,D91,E21,H31

                                            ABSTRACT

A wide body of empirical evidence finds that around 25 percent of fiscal stimulus payments (e.g.,
tax rebates) are spent on nondurable household consumption in the quarter that they are received. To
interpret this fact, we develop a structural economic model where households can hold two assets:
a low-return liquid asset (e.g., cash, checking account) and a high-return illiquid asset that carries a
transaction cost (e.g., housing, retirement account). The optimal life-cycle pattern of portfolio choice
implies that many households in the model are "wealthy hand-to-mouth": they hold little or no liquid
wealth despite owning sizeable quantities of illiquid assets. They therefore display large propensities
to consume out of additional transitory income, and small propensities to consume out of news about
future income. We document the existence of such households in data from the Survey of Consumer
Finances. A version of the model parameterized to the 2001 tax rebate episode yields consumption
responses to fiscal stimulus payments that are in line with the evidence, and an order of magnitude
larger than in the standard "one-asset" framework. The model's nonlinearities with respect to the size
of the rebate, its degree of phasing-out, and aggregate economic conditions have implications for policy
design.


Greg Kaplan
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
gkaplan@princeton.edu

Giovanni L. Violante
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street
New York, NY 10012-1119
and NBER
glv2@nyu.edu
1       Introduction
Fiscal stimulus payments (i.e., government transfers to households such as tax rebates)
are frequently used by governments to alleviate the impact of recessions on households’
welfare. In the last decade, this type of fiscal intervention was authorized by U.S.
Congress in the downturns of 2001 and 2008-09.1 Households received one-off payments
that ranged from $500 to $1,000, depending on the specific episode. In the aggregate,
these fiscal outlays amounted to $38B in 2001, $79B in 2008, and $60B in 2009, roughly
equivalent to 0.5% of annual GDP.

On the empirical side, substantial progress has been made in measuring the size of
household consumption responses to the tax rebate episodes of 2001 and 2008. Using
data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX), Johnson, Parker, and Soule-
les (2006, hereafter JPS), Parker, Souleles, Johnson, and McLelland (2011, hereafter
PSJM), and Misra and Surico (2013) cleverly exploit the randomized timing of the
receipt of payments to estimate the effects of the fiscal stimulus on consumption ex-
penditures. Shapiro and Slemrod (2003a, 2003b, 2009) substantiate these studies with
qualitative surveys on how consumers use their rebate.

This collective body of evidence convincingly concludes that around 25 percent of
rebates are spent by households on nondurables in the quarter that they are received.
This strong consumption response is measured relative to the (comparable, because of
the randomization) control group of households who are arguably aware of the rebate
but have not yet received their payment. Two crucial facts are encoded in this finding:
in the aggregate, 1) the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) out of the extra cash
is large; 2) the MPC out of the news of the extra cash is small.

In spite of this large body of empirical research, there are virtually no quantitative
studies of these episodes within dynamic structural models of household behavior. Such
a gap in the literature is troubling because thoroughly understanding the effectiveness
of tax rebates as a short-term stimulus for aggregate consumption is paramount for
macroeconomists and policy makers.2 Identifying the determinants of how consumers
respond to stimulus payments helps in choosing policy options and in assessing whether
the same fiscal instrument can be expected to be more or less effective under different
    1
     In the context of the latest downturn, Oh and Reis (2011) document that, contrary to common
belief, the large fiscal expansion of 2007-09 consisted primarily of growing social assistance, as opposed
to government purchases. Half of this expansion comprised discretionary fiscal stimulus transfers.
   2
     The JPS (2006) estimates feature prominently in the reports prepared by the Congressional Budget
Office (CBO, 2009) and the Council of Economic Advisors (CEA, 2010) documenting and forecasting
the macroeconomic effects of fiscal stimulus.


                                                    1
macroeconomic conditions.3

To develop a structural model that has some hope of matching this micro evidence, one
cannot rely on “off-the-shelf” consumption theory: the rational expectations, life-cycle,
buffer-stock model with one risk-free asset (Deaton, 1991; Carroll, 1992, 1997; Rios-
Rull, 1995; Huggett, 1996; for a survey, see Heathcote et al., 2009) predicts that the
MPC out of transitory income fluctuations, such as tax rebates, should be negligible in
the aggregate. In this standard one-asset model, the only agents whose consumption
would react significantly to the receipt of a rebate check are those who are constrained.
However, under parameterizations where the model’s distribution of net worth is in
line with the data, the fraction of constrained households is too small (usually below
10%) to generate a big enough response in the aggregate.4

We overcome this challenge by proposing a quantitative framework that can speak to
the data on both liquid and illiquid wealth, rather than on net worth alone. To do
this, we integrate the classical Baumol-Tobin model of money demand into a partial-
equilibrium version of the workhorse incomplete-markets life-cycle economy. In our
model, households can store wealth in two types of instruments: a liquid asset (e.g.,
cash, or bank account) and an illiquid asset (e.g., housing, or retirement wealth).
Households can also borrow through unsecured credit. The trade-off between liquid
and illiquid asset is that the latter earns an exogenously higher rate of return but can
be accessed only by paying a transaction cost. The model is parameterized to replicate
a number of macroeconomic, life-cycle, and cross-sectional targets.

Besides the usual small fraction of “poor hand-to-mouth” agents with zero net worth,
our model features a significant number of what we call “wealthy hand-to-mouth”
households. These are households who hold sizeable amounts of illiquid wealth, yet op-
timally choose to consume all of their disposable income during a pay-period. Examin-
ing asset portfolio and income data from the 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF)
through the lens of our two-asset model reveals that roughly 1/3 of US households fit
this profile. Although in our model these households act as if they are constrained,
    3
      JPS (2006) conclude their empirical analysis of the 2001 tax rebates with: “without knowing the
full structural model underlying these results, we cannot conclude that future tax rebates will necessarily
have the same effect.” (page 1607). Shapiro and Slemrod (2003a) conclude theirs with “key parameters
such as the propensity to consume are contingent on aggregate conditions in ways that are difficult to
anticipate.” (page 394)
    4
      Even the one-asset model can, under extreme parameterizations where many agents hold close to
zero net worth and are very often constrained, predict nontrivial consumption responses. This explains,
for example, the sizable MPC out of lump-sum tax cuts reported in some of Heathcote’s (2005)
experiments aimed at quantifying deviations from Ricardian neutrality in this class of economies.



                                                    2
they would not appear constrained from the viewpoint of the one-asset model, since
they own substantial net worth.

A natural question is: why would households with sizeable net worth optimally choose
to consume all of their randomly fluctuating earnings every period, instead of main-
taining a smooth consumption profile? The answer is that such households are better
off bearing the welfare loss rather than smoothing shocks because the latter option
entails either (i) frequently paying the transaction cost to tap into their illiquid asset;
or (ii) holding large balances of cash and foregoing the high return on the illiquid asset;
or (iii) obtaining credit at expensive interest rates. This explanation is reminiscent of
calculations by Cochrane (1989), and more recently by Browning and Crossley (2001),
who show that in some contexts the utility loss from setting consumption equal to
income, instead of fully optimizing, is second order.5

It is because of these wealthy hand-to-mouth households that our model is able to gener-
ate strong average consumption responses to fiscal stimulus payments: such households
do not respond to the news of the rebate, and have a high MPC when they receive
their payment. When we replicate, by simulation, the randomized experiment asso-
ciated with the tax rebate of 2001 within our structural model, we find consumption
responses between 11% and 25%, depending on the assumed information structure.
Values at the low end of this range are obtained under the assumption that every
household is fully aware of the policy one quarter ahead. Values at the high end cor-
respond to the case where all households act as if they did not expect the payment.
We set our baseline in between these two extremes, where half of households expect
the check from the government and half are surprised by it, and obtain a consumption
response around 15%, i.e., two thirds of the estimate in the micro data.6

The presence of wealthy hand-to-mouth households is also the crucial source of am-
plification relative to a plausibly calibrated one-asset model economy where average
consumption responses to the fiscal stimulus payments are less than 1%. This pro-
nounced amplification works through both the extensive and the intensive margin.
First, in our two-asset model there are many more hand-to-mouth consumers, consis-
tently with the SCF data. Second, the wealthy hand-to-mouth display larger MPCs
   5
     The model by Campbell and Hercowitz (2009) also generates “wealthy constrained” agents en-
dogenously, but through a different mechanism from ours: periodically, households discover they will
have a special consumption need T periods ahead (e.g., education of their kids). This induces them
to consume low amounts until they have saved enough for the special consumption need.
   6
     In line with this scenario, for the 2008 episode, Broda and Parker (2012) document that 60% of
households learned about the policy in the quarter before Treasury began disbursing payments.



                                                 3
out of tax rebates than their poor counterparts since they have higher wealth (tied in
the illiquid asset) and, therefore, higher desired target consumption.

Several key implications of the model are in agreement with the data. Misra and Surico
(2012) estimate the entire empirical distribution of consumption responses for 2001 and
document substantial heterogeneity: half of the population displays no response at all
and one fifth display responses over 50%. They also uncover high income households
at both ends of the distribution. Our model replicates these two findings because (i)
most of the model agents behave as PIH consumers and have MPCs close to zero,
but the wealthy hand-to-mouth have MPCs close to 50%, and because (ii) there are
many high-income households among the wealthy hand-to-mouth. Moreover, the model
implies a tight negative correlation between the size of the consumption response and
holdings of liquid wealth, as in the data, when the latter is properly measured (as, for
example, in Souleles, 1999, or Broda and Parker, 2012). Finally, the model features
a marked size-asymmetry in the consumption responses to small and large payments
(Hsieh, 2003): large rebates trigger many households to pay the transaction cost and
deposit the extra income into the illiquid asset, but when they adjust, households are
unconstrained and therefore save the bulk of their rebate.

In a series of experiments, we show how to use the structural model to quantify the
aggregate effects of fiscal stimulus payments and to improve the design of such policy
instruments. When we simulate the impact of the 2001 rebate on aggregate consump-
tion, we obtain values between 1/2 and 2/3 of previous estimates. The reason is that,
as we explain, the consumption response to tax rebates estimated through randomized
experiments is not a MPC out of the extra income, and hence using it directly to
compute the effect of the policy on aggregate consumption may be misleading.

The experiments contain two useful lessons for policy design. First, aggregate macroe-
conomic conditions affect the fraction of the rebate consumed in nontrivial ways. A
mild recession, such as the 2001 downturn, exacerbates households liquidity constraints
and amplifies the aggregate consumption response. Conversely, a mild expansion mutes
such response. However, a severe recession induces many households to (i) use expen-
sive unsecured credit, or (ii) tap into their illiquid account in order to make liquid assets
available to smooth consumption. As a result, fewer households are wealthy hand-to-
mouth when the rebate is paid, and so the effect of the stimulus on consumption can
be significantly reduced. Second, we compare budget-equivalent policies with various
degrees of phasing-out and show that, to achieve the strongest “bang for the buck,”
the rebate should be phased out around median income. A more targeted rebate has


                                             4
smaller effects because its size becomes large enough for the size-asymmetry to kick in,
and because it misses many “middle class” wealthy hand-to-mouth households.

Our model is related to four strands of literature. A pair of influential papers by
Campbell and Mankiw (1989, 1991) showed that some key aspects of the comovement
of aggregate consumption, income, and interest rates are best viewed as generated
not by a single forward-looking type of consumer, but rather by the coexistence of two
types: one forward-looking and consuming its permanent income (the saver); the other,
highly impatient, and following the “rule of thumb” of spending its current income (the
spender).7 Our model can be seen as a microfoundation for this spender-saver view
since, alongside standard buffer-stock consumers, it endogenously generates hand-to-
mouth households. However, most agents in this class are patient and own assets tied
up in illiquid vehicles, which critically changes some of the macreconomic implications
of the model. We return to this point in the Conclusions.

The closest forebears to our framework are Angeletos et al. (2001) and Laibson et al.
(2003). These two studies compare quantitatively the lifecycle portfolio allocation prop-
erties of two types of consumers: one with quasi-hyperbolic discounting and one with
geometric discounting. Relative to the model with standard preferences, with quasi-
hyperbolic consumers it is easier to generate both sizable borrowing through unsecured
credit (since credit provides funding for instant gratification) and saving predominantly
in illiquid assets (since illiquidity protects quasi-hyperbolic agents from future con-
sumption splurges). As a result, the MPC out of predictable income changes can be
large.8 Our exploration of the two-asset model sheds some new light on its mechanisms
and quantitative reach. We demonstrate that a plausibly calibrated environment with
geometric consumers can also yield large MPCs out of small transitory income changes
because it features enough wealthy hand-to-mouth households. Hyperbolic discounting
amplifies the key economic forces behind the strong (weak) demand for illiquid (liquid)
assets, but it is not strictly necessary. We explain how to use cross-sectional data on
household portfolios to measure such households and, therefore, discipline the model’s
parameterization. We apply the framework to quantitatively analyze a relevant policy
question that has so far not been addressed through structural modeling.
   7
    Recent examples of this model are Gali et al. (2007) and Justiniano et al. (2013).
   8
    Another framework which has the ability to generate a large MPC out of windfall income is
the “rational inattention” model (e.g., Reis, 2006). However, without the addition of some form of
transaction cost (or a mechanism to generate enough wealthy hand-to-mouth consumers), it cannot
display small consumption responses to news about future payments, a necessary condition to match
the evidence on tax rebates we discussed.




                                                5
While households in our model ride out small shocks, they withdraw from the illiquid
account to smooth out large falls in income. This rich adjustment pattern resembles
that described by Chetty and Szeidl (2007) in a theoretical model with ex-ante con-
sumption commitments, where the burden of moderate income shocks is only absorbed
by fluctuations in the “flexible” consumption good, whereas large shocks also induce ex-
post changes in the “commitment” good. Our model, where the illiquid asset (e.g., its
housing component) generates a consumption flow, features a similar source of excess
sensitivity in nondurable consumption.

Finally, a number of papers embed the Baumol-Tobin insight (i.e., the presence of a
frictional transaction technology) into portfolio choice models. Prominent recent ex-
amples are Alvarez, Atkeson and Kehoe (2002), Alvarez and Lippi (2009), Abel, Eberly
and Panageas (2009), and Alvarez, Guiso and Lippi (2010). Although our model is less
analytically tractable than most of this literature, it contains a number of additional
features, all of which are crucial for generating wealthy hand-to-mouth households and
empirically plausible rebate coefficients: endogenous non-durable consumption choices,
borrowing constraints, uninsurable risk in non-financial income, and a lifecycle saving
motive. Some examples of richer frameworks for quantitative analysis exist, but appli-
cations are essentially limited to financial issues and monetary policy.9 Our exercise
shows this is also a natural environment to quantitatively analyze fiscal policy.

The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we describe the 2001 tax
rebates and present the associated empirical evidence on consumption responses. In
Section 3, we outline our model and in Section 4 we document the presence of wealthy
hand-to-mouth consumers in the model and in the data. Section 5 describes our pa-
rameterization. Section 6 contains the quantitative analysis of the 2001 tax rebate. In
Sections 7 and 8, we perform a number of experiments that are useful to inform the
design of policy. Section 9 concludes.
    9
      For example, within incomplete-markets economies, Aiyagari and Gertler (1991) focus on the
equity premium; Erosa and Ventura (2002) revisit, quantitatively, the question of welfare effects of
inflation; Ragot (2011) studies the joint distribution of money and financial assets. Two recent papers
examine whether the existence of two assets featuring different return and liquidity characteristics
induces “excess sensitivity” in consumption. In Li (2009), a large MPC out of anticipated income
changes is obtained only for calibrations where households hold as little as one-twentieth as much
wealth as in the data. The model of Huntley and Michelangeli (2011) focuses exclusively on the
distinction between taxable and tax-deferred assets. As a result, the amplification in the MPC,
relative to the benchmark one-asset model, is very modest (2-4 pct points).




                                                  6
2      Empirical evidence on the 2001 tax rebate
The tax rebate of 2001 was part of a broader tax reform, the Economic Growth and
Tax Relief Reconciliation Act (EGTRRA), enacted in May 2001 by the US Congress.
The reform included a reduction in the federal personal income tax rate for the lowest
bracket (the first $12,000 of earnings for a married couple filing jointly and $6,000 for
singles) from 15% to 10% which was effective retroactively to January 2001. In order
to make this component of the reform highly visible during calendar year 2001, the
Administration paid an advance refund to taxpayers (informally called a tax rebate) for
money they would have received from the Treasury only upon filing their tax returns in
April 2002. The vast majority of the rebate checks were mailed between the end of July
and the end of September 2001, in a sequence based on the last two digits of the social
security number (SSN). This sequence featured in the news in June. Around the same
time, the Treasury mailed every taxpayer a letter informing them in which week they
would receive their check. The Treasury calculated that 92 million taxpayers received
a rebate check, with almost 80 percent of them receiving the maximum amount, ($600,
or 5% of $12,000, for married couples), corresponding to a total outlay of $38B, or
almost 0.4% of 2001 GDP.

From the point of view of economic theory, the tax rebate of 2001 has three salient
characteristics: (i) it is essentially a lump sum, since almost every household received
$300 per adult; (ii) it is anticipated, at least for that part of the population which
received the check later and that, presumably, had enough time to learn about the
rebate either from the news, from the Treasury letter, or from friends/family who had
already collected theirs; and (iii) the timing of receipt of the rebate has the feature of
a randomized experiment because the last two digits of a SSN are uncorrelated with
any individual characteristics.

Empirical evidence    JPS (2006) add a special module of questions to the Consumer
Expenditure Survey (CEX) that asks households about the timing and amount of their
rebate check. Among the various specifications estimated by JPS (2006) to assess the
impact of the rebate on consumption expenditures, we will focus on the most natural
one:
                              X
                     ∆cit =       β0s months + β10 Xi,t−1 + β2 Rit + εit              (1)
                              s

where ∆cit is the change in nondurable expenditures of household i in quarter t, months
is a time dummy, Xi,t−1 is a vector of demographics, and Rit is the dollar value of the
rebate received by household i in quarter t. The coefficient β2 , which we label the


                                              7
                  Table 1: Estimates of the 2001 Rebate Coefficient (β̂2 )
                                                   Strictly Nondurable                   Nondurable

 JPS 2006, 2SLS (N = 13, 066)                                  0.202 (0.112)             0.375   (0.136)
 Trim top & bottom 0.5%, 2SLS (N = 12, 935)                                              0.237   (0.093)
 Trim top & bottom 1.5%, 2SLS (N = 12, 679)                                              0.219   (0.079)
 MS 2011, IVQR (N = 13, 066)                                                             0.244   (0.057)
Notes: Strictly nondurables includes food (at home and away), utilities, household operations, public
transportation and gas, personal care, alcohol and tobacco, and miscellaneous goods. Nondurables
also includes apparel good and services, reading materials, and out-of-pocket health care expenditures.
JPS 2006: Johnson, Parker and Souleles (2006); MS 2011: Misra and Surico (2011). 2SLS: Two-Stage
Least Squares; IVQR: Instrumental Variable Quantile Regression.


“rebate coefficient,” is the object of interest. Identification comes from randomization
in the timing of the receipt of rebate checks across households. Since the size of the
rebate is potentially endogenous, JPS (2006) estimate equation (1) by 2SLS using, as
an instrument, an indicator for whether the rebate was received. Their key finding,
reproduced in Table 1, is that β2 is estimated between 0.20 and 0.37, depending on the
exact definition of nondurables.

Since the original estimates of JPS (2006), others have refined this empirical analysis.
Hamilton (2008) argues that, since the CEX is notoriously noisy, one should trim the
sample to exclude outliers; this procedure leads to smaller rebate coefficients. In Table
1, we report the 2SLS estimate that is obtained by dropping the top and bottom 0.5%
and 1.5% of the distribution of nondurable consumption growth from CEX. The rebate
coefficient drops to the range 22 to 24 percent, in line with Hamilton’s results. Misra
and Surico (2011) use quantile regression techniques to explicitly deal with heterogene-
ity in the consumption response across households. Their point estimate is, again,
around 0.24. Overall, properly accounting for outliers pushes the rebate coefficient
towards the low end of the original JPS estimates and, reassuringly, increases their
precision.

It is crucial to understand the exact meaning of the rebate coefficient β2 . Because
households who do not receive the check at date t (the control group) may still antici-
pate to receive it in the future and start spending early, β2 should be interpreted as the
fraction of the rebate consumed in the quarter it was received, net of the consumption
response of households in the control group, which in general is not zero. As a result
β2 is not the MPC out of the rebate, a point on which the existing literature is some-


                                                  8
what fuzzy. This qualification has two consequences. First, to be able to generate a
large value for β2 , a large MPC out of transitory shocks is only a necessary condition,
not a sufficient one. The model must also feature a low MPC out of the news of the
shock. In the absence of this second requirement, β2 would become small (it would
be the difference between two equally large numbers). Second, the estimate of β2 is
useful to draw inference on the impact of the policy on aggregate consumption solely
to the extent that its value is close to the true MPC. Only a structural model allows to
disentangle the true MPC from the rebate coefficient estimated through equation (1).


3     A life-cycle model with liquid and illiquid assets
Our framework integrates the Baumol-Tobin inventory-management model of money
demand into an incomplete-markets life-cycle economy. We first describe the full model;
next, we use a series of examples to highlight the economic mechanisms at work.


3.1     Model description
Demographics           The stationary economy is populated by a continuum of households,
indexed by i. Age is indexed by j = 1, 2, . . . , J. Households retire at age J w and
retirement lasts for J r periods.

Preferences        Households have an Epstein-Zin-Weil objective function defined recur-
sively by
                                         1−σ                      1
                                 
                                   φ 1−φ
                                                      1−γ  1−σ 1−σ
                    Vij = (1 − β) cij sij      + β{Ej Vi,j+1 } 1−γ                                (2)

where cij ≥ 0 is consumption of nondurables and sij ≥ 0 is the service flow from
housing for household i at age j. The parameter β is the discount factor, φ measures
the weight of nondurables relative to housing services in period-utility, γ regulates risk
aversion, and 1/σ is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution.10

Idiosyncratic earnings             In any period during the working years, household labor
earnings (in logs) are given by

                                     log yij = χj + αi + zij ,                                    (3)
  10
     Piazzesi et al. (2007) offer both (i) microevidence from CEX on the variation of housing expendi-
ture share across different household types, and (ii) time-series evidence on the relationship between
the aggregate expenditure share and the relative price of housing services. Both dimensions of the
data suggest an elasticity of substitution between nondurable and housing consumption very close to
one, which is the Cobb-Douglas case that we adopt in our preference specification.



                                                  9
where χj is a deterministic age profile common across all households, αi is a household-
specific fixed effect, and zij is a stochastic idiosyncratic component that obeys the
conditional c.d.f. Γzj (zj+1 , zj ).

Assets     Households can hold a liquid asset mij , and an illiquid asset aij . The illiquid
asset pays a gross financial return 1/q a , while positive balances of the liquid asset pay
a return 1/q m . When the household wants to make deposits into, or withdrawals from,
the illiquid account, it must pay a transaction cost κ.11 The trade-off between these
two saving vehicles is that the illiquid asset earns a higher return (in the form of capital
gain and consumption flow) but its adjustments are subject to the transaction cost.
Households start their working lives with an exogenously given quantity of each asset.

Illiquid assets are restricted to be always non-negative, aij ≥ 0. Because of the preva-
lence of housing among commonly held illiquid assets (see Section 5), we let the stock of
illiquid assets aij yield a utility flow with proportionality parameter ζ > 0. Households
are also free to purchase (or rent out) housing services hij ≥ −ζaij on the market.12
As a result, sij = ζaij + hij .

We allow borrowing in the liquid asset to reflect the availability of unsecured credit up
to an ad-hoc limit, mj+1 (yj ) expressed as a function of current labor earnings. The
interest rate on borrowing is denoted by 1/q̄ m and we define the function q m (mi,j+1 )
to encompass both the case mi,j+1 ≥ 0 and mi,j+1 < 0.

Government            Government expenditures G are not valued by households. Retirees
receive social security benefits p (χJ w , αi , ziJ w ) where the arguments proxy for average
gross lifetime earnings. The government levies proportional taxes on nondurable con-
sumption expenditures (τ c ) and on asset income (τ a , τ m ), a payroll tax τ ss (yij ) with
an earnings cap, and a progressive tax on labor income τ y (yij ). There is no deduction
for interest paid on unsecured borrowing. We denote the combined income tax liability
function as T (yij , aij , mij ). For retirees, the same tax function applies with yij taking
the value p (·). Finally, we let the government issue one-period debt B at price q g .

Household problem               We use a recursive formulation of the problem. Let sj =
(mj , aj , α, zj ) be the vector of individual states at age j. The value function of a house-
  11
     It is straightforward to allow for a utility cost or a time cost (proportional to labor income) rather
than a monetary cost of adjustment. We have experimented with both types of costs and obtained
similar results in both cases. See Kaplan and Violante (2011).
  12
     This assumption adds realism to the model. Technically, it is useful because, with our Cobb-
Douglas period utility specification, housing services are an essential consumption good and, without
a rental market, even the poorest households would be forced to pay the transaction cost in order to
deposit into the illiquid account and start enjoying a minimum amount of housing services.


                                                    10
                                       
        hold at age j is Vj (sj ) = max Vj0 (sj ) , Vj1 (sj ) , where Vj0 (sj ) and Vj1 (sj ) are the value
        functions conditional on not adjusting and adjusting (i.e., depositing into or withdraw-
        ing from) the illiquid account, respectively. This decision takes place at the beginning
        of the period, after receiving the current endowment shock, but before consuming.13

        Consider a working household with age j ≤ J w . If the household chooses not to adjust
        its illiquid assets because Vj0 (sj ) ≥ Vj1 (sj ), it solves the dynamic problem:
                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                    1−σ
                                                                                                     1−σ          1−γ  1−σ
                                 Vj0   (sj ) =        max                   (1 − β)       cφij s1−φ
                                                                                                ij           + β{Ej Vi,j+1 } 1−γ
                                                    cj ,hj ,mj+1

                             subject to     :
        (1 + τ c ) cj + q m (mj+1 ) mj+1 = yj + mj − T (yj, aj , mj ) − hj
                                        sj = hj + ζaj                                                                                (4)
                                  q a aj+1 = aj
                                        cj ≥ 0,           hj ≥ −ζaj ,            mj+1 ≥ −mj+1 (yj )
                                        yj = exp (χj + α + zj )

        where zj evolves according to the conditional c.d.f. Γzj .

        The household who adjusts its holding of illiquid assets because Vj0 (sj ) < Vj1 (sj )
        solves:
                                                                                               1−σ                      1
                                                                                       
                                                                                         φ 1−φ
                                                                                                            1−γ  1−σ 1−σ
                                  Vj1   (sj ) =            max                  (1 − β) cij sij      + β{Ej Vi,j+1 } 1−γ
                                                     cj ,hj ,mj+1 ,aj+1

                              subject to        :
(1 + τ c ) cj + q m (mj+1 ) mj+1 + q a aj+1 = yj + mj + aj − κ − T (yj, aj , mj ) − hj
                                         sj = hj + ζaj                                                                                     (5)
                                         cj ≥ 0,            hj ≥ −ζaj ,           mj+1 ≥ −mj+1 (yj ) ,               aj+1 ≥ 0
                                         yj = exp (χj + α + zj ) .

        The problem for the retired household of age j > J w is analogous, with pension benefits
        p (·) in place of earnings yj . Appendix E describes the computational algorithm used
        to solve this problem.

        Balanced budget             We impose that the government always respects its intertem-
          13
            Because of this timing, after the earnings shock the household can always choose to pay the
        transaction cost, access the illiquid account, and use all its resources to finance consumption. Hence,
        our model does not feature a cash-in-advance (CIA) constraint. See Jovanovic (1982) for an exhaustive
        discussion of the difference between models with transaction costs and models with CIA constraints.



                                                                   11
poral budget constraint
                Z                             XJ Z         XJ Z
   XJ                              1          c
G+                p (yJ w ) dµj + g − 1 B = τ        cj dµj +     T (yj, aj , mj ) dµj
       j=J w +1                    q             j=1          j=1
                                                                               (6)
where µj is the distribution of households of age j over the individual state vector sj .

Asset prices        Financial returns to the liquid and illiquid assets are exogenous. The
choice of abstracting from the equilibrium determination of returns is dictated by two
reasons. First, the total outlays from the 2001 rebate amounted to less than 0.1% of
aggregate net worth, surely not enough to move asset prices significantly. Second, 83%
of aggregate wealth is held by the top quintile of the distribution (Diaz-Gimenez et al.,
2011, Table 6), and the portfolio allocation of such households is unlikely to be affected
by a $500 check from the government.14


4      Hand-to-mouth households in model and data
In this section we first illustrate, by means of numerical examples, how hand-to-mouth
behavior arises endogenously in our model, even when agents hold positive illiquid
wealth. Next, we measure hand-to-mouth households in the SCF data.


4.1     Behavior in the model: the “wealthy hand-to-mouth”
We focus on a stylized version of the model with time-separable preferences (γ = σ),
without utility flow from illiquid assets (φ = 1, ζ = 0), with deterministic labor income
(zj = 0), and no taxes (T (·) = τ c = 0).

Two Euler equations        Consumption and portfolio decisions are characterized by
a “short-run” Euler equation (EE-SR) that corresponds to borrowing/saving in the
liquid asset, and a “long-run” Euler equation that corresponds to (dis)saving in the
illiquid asset (EE-LR).

In periods where the working household does not adjust:
                                                     β
                                  u0 (cj ) =                u0 (cj+1 ) .                     (EE-SR)
                                               qm   (mj+1 )

The slope of her consumption path is governed by β/q m (mj+1 ). For plausible parame-
terizations, when the household is in debt (mj+1 < 0) this slope is above one: the con-
  14
    In simulations, the aggregate stock of illiquid wealth increases by only 0.14% during the first year
of the transition, an amount hardly large enough to have an impact on the rate of return.


                                                    12
sumption path is increasing as the household saves his way out of expensive borrowing.
When the household is saving (mj+1 > 0) this slope is below one: consumption declines
over time because of impatience and the low return on cash. There are two kinks in
the budget constraints where equation (EE-SR) does not hold: mj+1 = −mj+1 (yj ) ,
the debt limit, and mj+1 = 0 if there is a wedge between the return on liquid saving
and the interest on unsecured credit (q̄ m < q m ). Households on the kinks are hand to
mouth, i.e., consume all their income.

During the working life, an agent will want to, eventually, save to finance retirement by
making infrequent deposits into the illiquid account. Given the fixed cost of adjusting,
households accumulate liquid funds and choose dates at which to add some or all of
their liquid holdings to the illiquid asset (the “cake-baking” problem). Across two such
adjustment dates N periods apart, consumption dynamics are dictated by
                                                        N
                                     0              β
                                    u (cj ) =                 u0 (cj+N ) .                    (EE-LR)
                                                    qa

Since β/q a > β/q m , consumption grows more (or falls less) across adjustment dates,
than between adjustments.15

During retirement, the household faces a “cake-eating” problem, where optimal deci-
sions closely resemble those in Romer (1986). Consumption in excess of pension income
is financed by making periodic withdrawals from the illiquid account. Between each
withdrawal, the household runs down its liquid holdings and consumption falls accord-
ing to (EE-SR). The withdrawals are timed to coincide with the period where cash is
exhausted. Across withdrawals, equation (EE-LR) holds.

Poor hand-to-mouth behavior                     Figure 1 shows consumption and wealth dynam-
ics in an example where an agent with logarithmic utility starts her working life with
zero wealth, receives an increasing endowment while working and a constant endow-
ment when retired. To make this example as stark as possible, we impose a very large
transaction cost. Panel (a) shows that, because of the increasing earnings profile, the
agent in this example chooses first to borrow to smooth consumption, and then starts
saving for retirement. She adjusts her illiquid account at only three points in time:
one deposit while working, after repaying her debt, and two withdrawals in retirement.
After its inception, the value of the illiquid account grows at rate 1/q a .16
  15
      Note that, as long as q̄ m < q a , a household would never borrow liquid assets to deposit into the
illiquid account.
   16
      Over the working life, the household piles up liquid funds in anticipation of her deposit into the
liquid account, but also to smooth consumption across her transition into retirement. As we show in


                                                     13
     6                                                                          0.3
          Liquid assets
     5    Illiquid assets

                                                                            0.25
     4

     3
                                                                                0.2
     2

     1                                                                      0.15

     0
                                                                                       Income
                                                                                0.1                             a
    −1                                                                                 Consumption (1 asset, R=R )
                                                                                       Consumption (1 asset, R=Rm)
    −2                                                                                 Consumption (2 assets)
                                                                            0.05
         20   40    60      80   100   120   140   160   180   200   220              20   40   60   80   100   120   140   160   180   200   220

          (a) Lifecycle asset accumulation                                      (b) Lifecycle income and consumption path


      Figure 1: Example of lifecycle of a poor hand-to-mouth agent in the model

Panel (b) shows her associated earnings and consumption paths. In the same panel,
we have also plotted the paths for consumption arising in the two versions of the cor-
responding one-asset model: one with the “short-run” interest rate 1/q m (mj+1 ), and
one with the “long-run” rate 1/q a . The sawed pattern for consumption that arises
in the two-asset model is a combination of the short-run and long-run behavior: be-
tween adjustment dates the consumption path is parallel to the path in the one-asset
model with the low return; while across adjustment dates dates, the slope is parallel
to consumption in the one-asset model with the high return. Finally note that, after
repayments of her debts, this agent is poor hand-to-mouth (i.e., she keeps zero net
worth and consumes all her income) for a phase of her life, before starting to save.

Wealthy hand-to-mouth behavior                                                  Figure 2 illustrates how the model can
feature households with positive net worth who consume their income every period:
wealthy hand-to-mouth agents. The parameterization is the same as in Figure 1, except
for a higher return on the illiquid asset. This higher return leads to stronger overall
wealth accumulation. But rather than increasing the number of deposits during the
working life, the household changes the timing of its single deposit: the deposit into
the illiquid account is now made earlier in life in order to take advantage of the high
return for a longer period (compare the left panels across Figures 1 and 2). Thus, the
household optimally chooses to hold zero liquid assets in the middle of the working
life, after her deposit, while the illiquid asset holdings are positive and are growing in
value. Intuitively, since her net worth is large, this household would like to consume
more than her earnings flow, but the transaction cost and the high interest rate on
Appendix C.4, this pattern of accumulation of liquid wealth around retirement survives in the richer
model heterogeneity and uncertainty and is also distinctly visible in the micro data.


                                                                           14
        6                                                                          0.3
             Liquid assets
        5    Illiquid assets

                                                                               0.25
        4

        3
                                                                                   0.2
        2

        1                                                                      0.15

        0

                                                                                   0.1
       −1
                                                                                          Income
       −2                                                                                 Consumption
                                                                               0.05
            20   40    60      80   100   120   140   160   180   200   220              20   40   60   80   100   120   140   160   180   200   220

             (a) Lifecycle asset accumulation                                      (b) Lifecycle income and consumption path


       Figure 2: Example of lifecycle of a wealthy hand-to-mouth agent in the model

unsecured borrowing dissuade her from doing so. This is a household that, upon re-
ceiving the rebate, will consume a large part of it and, upon the news of the rebate,
will not increase her expenditures.

Why would households choose to consume all of their earnings and deviate from the
optimal consumption path imposed by the short-run Euler equation EE-SR, even for
long periods of time? The answer is that households are better off taking this welfare
loss because avoiding it entails either (i) paying the transaction cost more often to
withdraw cash in order to consume more than income; or (ii) holding larger balances
of liquid wealth hence foregoing the high return on the illiquid asset (and, therefore,
the associated higher level of long-run consumption); or (iii) using expensive unsecured
credit to finance expenditures.17 We note that this logic is reminiscent of Cochrane’s
(1989) insight that, in a representative agent model with reasonable risk aversion, the
utility loss from setting consumption equal to income is second-order.18


4.2         The SCF data
We begin with some descriptive statistics about household portfolios in the Survey of
Consumer Finances (SCF). We then explain how we exploit these data to estimate the
proportion of hand-to-mouth households in the US.

Households’ portfolio data                                   Our data source is the 2001 wave of the SCF, a trien-
  17
     While we have focused our examples on (poor and wealthy) hand-to-mouth behavior at the kink
for zero liquid wealth, there is a second type of hand-to-mouth behavior when agents borrow up to
the limit (the second kink in the budget constraint). In this case, option (iii) is obviously not feasible.
In Appendix A, we illustrate an example of wealthy hand-to-mouth behavior at the credit limit.
  18
     See also Browning and Crossley (2001) for a similar calculation in the context of the life-cycle
model of consumption.


                                                                              15
                                                      Median      Mean Fraction          Return
                                                      ($2001)    ($2001) Positive         (%)
   Earnings plus benefits (age 22-59)                  41,000     52,745    –              –

   Net worth                                          62,442     150,411       0.90        1.67

   Net liquid wealth                                   2,629      31,001       0.77        -1.48
   Cash, checking, saving, MM accounts                 2,858      12,642       0.92         -2.2
    Directly held stocks, bonds, T-Bills                 0        19,920       0.29         1.7
              Revolving credit card debt                 0         1,575       0.41          –

   Net illiquid wealth                                54,600     119,409       0.93        2.29
                Housing net of mortgages              31,000     72,592        0.68        2.0
                    Retirement accounts                950       34,455        0.53        3.5
                           Life insurance               0         7,740        0.27        0.1
                   Certificates of deposit              0         3,807        0.14        0.9
                            Saving bonds                0          815         0.17        0.1

Table 2: Household Portfolio Composition. Authors’ calculations based on the 2001
Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). The return reported in the last column is the
real after-tax risk-adjusted return. See Appendix B.1 for additional details.

nial cross-sectional survey of the assets and debts of US households. For comparability
with the CEX sample in JPS (2006), we exclude the top 5% of households by net worth.
Average (median) labor income for the working-age population is $52,745 ($41,000), a
number close to the one reported by JPS (2006, Table 1).19 Our definition of liquid
assets comprises: cash, money market (MM), checking, savings and call accounts plus
directly held mutual funds (MF), stocks, bonds, and T-Bills net of revolving debt on
credit card balances. In Appendix B.1 we describe our cash imputation (the SCF does
not record household cash holdings) and our identification of revolving debt.20

Our baseline measure of illiquid assets includes housing net of mortgages and home
equity loans, retirement accounts (e.g., IRA, 401K), life insurance policies, CDs, and
saving bonds. Table 2 reports some descriptive statistics.

As expected, the bulk of household wealth is held in (what we call) illiquid assets,
notably housing and retirement accounts. For example, the median of the liquid and
  19
     In our definition of household labor income, we include unemployment and disability insurance,
TANF, and child benefits.
  20
     Briefly, our cash imputation uses data from the Survey of Consumer Payment Choice administered
by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. To calculate revolving unsecured debt, we use a combination
of different SCF questions. This strategy (common in the literature, e.g., see Telyukova, 2011) avoids
including, as debt, purchases made through credit cards in between regular payments.


                                                 16
illiquid asset distributions are, respectively, $2,629, and $54,600. Moreover, over their
working life households save disproportionately through illiquid wealth and keep hold-
ings of liquid wealth fairly stable: median illiquid assets grow by around $100,000 from
age 30 to retirement, whereas median liquid wealth increases by $5,000 or less.

Measurement of hand-to-mouth households                         In the model, we define a house-
hold to be “hand to mouth” (HTM) if she chooses to be at one of the kinks of her
budget constraint (either the borrowing limit or zero liquid wealth). Such a house-
hold will have high marginal propensity to consume out of an extra dollar of windfall
income. How can we identify these HTM households in the SCF data?

We proxy HTM households at the borrowing limit by those SCF households with
negative holdings of liquid wealth (i.e., with outstanding credit card debt) larger than
90% of their reported total credit limit.21 Measuring HTM households at the “zero
kink” for liquid wealth is more challenging. We start from the observation that, since
these households do not borrow and do not save through liquid assets, they do not
carry any liquid wealth across pay periods. If we observed liquid balances at the end
of the period in the data, we could easily identify these HTM agents, but the SCF
reports only the average liquid balance during the last month. Average balances are
positive for all households (HTM and not) because labor income is paid as liquid assets
and because of a mismatch in the timing of consumption and earnings within a pay
period. Then, a strict criterion to identify these HTM agents in the data is to count
those households in the SCF whose average balance of liquid wealth is equal to or less
than half their earnings (where the “half” presumes resources being consumed at a
constant rate per pay-period).22

Any sample split based on income and liquid wealth is bound to contain both type I
and type II classification error (see, e.g., Jappelli, 1990). Nevertheless, our estimate is
likely to be a lower bound because, while all non HTM households would always hold
average liquid balances above half their earnings, some HTM households may fall in
this latter group as well.23

The examples of Section 4.1 show that there are two types of HTM agents. There
  21
      We have experimented with fractions closer to 100% of the credit limit and results are unchanged.
  22
      Alvarez and Lippi (2009) suggest this calculation as a test of the liquidity management model.
   23
      If the household starts the period with some savings in addition to earnings and ends the period
with some savings, its average balance would be above half earnings. If its initial balance equals only
earnings for that period and it ends the period with positive savings, the average balance would also
be above half earnings. Both these households are not HTM. However, if a household starts the period
with positive savings in addition to earnings and ends the period with zero liquid savings, its average
liquid balance would be above half earnings, but she is a HTM household in that period.


                                                  17
are poor HTM agents without any illiquid assets, and wealthy HTM agents who have
positive balances of illiquid wealth. In the SCF we identify wealthy HTM agents as
those households who satisfy the HTM requirements listed above and, at the same
time, hold illiquid assets.

Appendix B.2 contains more details on this measurement. There, we also perform
a robustness analysis with respect to the frequency of the pay-period (weekly, bi-
weekly, monthly), the definition of liquid wealth (whether it includes directly held
mutual funds, stocks and bonds), the definition of illiquid wealth (whether it includes
vehicles), and the presence of “commitment expenditures” (such as pre-scheduled loan
payments, rent, utility bills, etc.) that effectively reduce the amount that can be spent
on discretionary consumption every period.

Our estimates imply that between 18% and 37% of households are HTM in the US.
Among these, between 50 and 80 percent are wealthy HTM, depending mainly on the
pay frequency and on whether one expands the notion of illiquid wealth by including
vehicles. This group of wealthy HTM households, which represents a sizeable fraction of
the population (between 10% and 32%), is only visible through the lens of the two-asset
model. From the point of view of the standard one asset model, these are households
with positive net worth, and are hence unconstrained. It is useful to compare these
estimates with those that one would obtain when HTM agents are measured in terms
of net worth.24 We compute that between 4% and 15% of US households are HTM in
terms of net worth, depending largely on whether vehicles are included or not.

Because of the lower bound nature of our estimator, in the model we target a total
fraction of HTM households on the high end of the range, around 1/3 of the population.
This target is also consistent with three additional pieces of survey evidence. First, the
SCF asks households whether “in the past year their spending exceeded their income,
but did not spend on a new house, a new vehicle, or on any investment”. Almost 36%
of households fall into this category. Second, Lusardi, Schneider, and Tufano (2011)
document that around 1/3 of US households would “certainly be unable to cope with
a financial emergency that required them to come up with $2,000 in the next month.”
The authors also report that, among those giving that answer, a high proportion of
individuals are at middle class levels of income. Similarly, Broda and Parker (2012)
document, from the AC Nielsen Homescan database, that 40% of households report
  24
     We define HTM households in terms of net worth in exactly the same way. A household is HTM
(in terms of net worth) if she either (i) has negative net worth larger than 90% of her credit limit, or
(ii) has positive net worth below half her earnings per pay-period.



                                                  18
that they do not have “at least two months of income available in cash, bank accounts,
or easily accessible funds”.


5      Calibration
Demographics and initial asset positions                       Decisions in the model take place
at a quarterly frequency. Households begin their active economic life at age 22 (j = 1)
and retire at age 60 (J w = 152). The retirement phase lasts for 20 years (J r = 80). We
use observed wealth portfolios of SCF households aged 20 to 24 to calibrate the age
j = 0 asset positions in the model. Our procedure also targets the observed correlation
between initial earnings and initial liquid and illiquid wealth.25

Preferences        We calibrate the discount factor β to replicate median illiquid wealth
(as a fraction of average income) in the SCF.26 The annualized value of β is 0.941,
and hence our results are not driven by an implausibly low discount factor that makes
households highly impatient. We set the coefficient of relative risk aversion γ to 4 and
the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (1/σ) to 1.5.27 Finally, we set φ = 0.85 to
  25
      See Appendix C.1 for details.
  26
      In the literature on quantitative macroeconomic models with heterogeneous households and in-
complete markets there are two approaches to calibrating the discount factor. The first is to match
median wealth (e.g., Carroll, 1992, 1997). The second is to match average wealth (e.g., Aiyagari, 1994;
Rios-Rull, 1995; Krusell and Smith, 1998). There is a trade off in this choice. Matching median wealth
allows one to reproduce more closely the wealth distribution for the vast majority of households, with
the exception of the upper tail that holds a large portion of total assets. Matching average (and
aggregate) wealth allows one to fully incorporate equilibrium effects on prices at the cost of overstat-
ing wealth holdings and, therefore, understating the MPC for a large fraction of households (due to
the concavity of the consumption function, see Carroll and Kimball, 1996). We choose the former
approach because for the question at hand, a plausible distribution of MPCs across the population is
far more important than aggregate price effects.
   27
      We have chosen a value of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution above one based on theoret-
ical and empirical grounds. Two recent promising approaches to account for asset pricing facts –the
long-run risk hypothesis and the rare disasters model– point towards a high willingness to substitute
intertemporally. Bansal and Yaron (2004) show that to replicate the estimated consumption volatility
effects on price-dividend ratios, one needs an elasticity above one. In the context of the rare disasters
literature, Barro (2009) makes the analogous observation that an intertemporal elasticity below one
has the counterfactual implication that a rise in the probability (or the size) of a “disaster” increases
asset prices. The literature examining the empirical magnitude of this elasticity based on aggregate
time series leads to a wide range of estimates. As discussed at length in Bansal et al. (2012, section
4.6), low estimates are typically obtained by estimating the elasticity as the slope coefficient from
a regression of consumption growth on the real interest rate. This traditional approach can lead to
severely downward biased estimates because of attenuation bias (when the real rate is measured with
error) or endogeneity bias (when omitted variables are correlated with the real rate or when con-
sumption volatility is time-varying). To deal with endogeneity, Gruber (2006) uses cross-individual
differences in after-tax real interest rates that derive from arguably exogenous differences in capital
income tax rates and estimates an elasticity around 2. In general, when a GMM approach is used
instead of the regression approach (with a larger set of moment restrictions including, for example,


                                                   19
match the ratio of expenditures on housing services to total consumption expenditures
in the National Income and Product Account, which is around 15 percent on average
over the period 1960-2009. In Section 6 we discuss the robustness of our results to this
preference parameterization.

Appendix C.2 explains in detail how we compute the service flow from housing which
maps into the parameter ζ. In short, we account for the fact that owning housing wealth
has both costs (maintenance, insurance, property taxes, and mortgage interests) and
benefits (imputed rental value of the space and tax deductibility of mortgage interests
and property taxes), and arrive at a conservative estimate for ζ of 1 percent per quarter.
Since the median ratio of gross housing wealth to net illiquid assets in the SCF is around
one, we apply ζ to the entire stock aj .

Earnings heterogeneity        From the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), we
construct a sample of households with heads 22-59 years old in 1969-1996, following the
same selection criteria as in Heathcote, Perri, and Violante (2010). We use a fourth-
order polynomial in age to extract the common life-cycle earnings profile χj . Since the
residual variance from this regression rises almost linearly with age, we model zij as
a unit root process with quarterly variance of the innovation equal to 0.003 to match
the total increase over the age range we consider. The variance of the individual fixed
effect (αi ) is set to 0.18 to reproduce the dispersion of initial earnings at age 22.

Asset returns           We measure financial returns on liquid and illiquid wealth in four
steps. First, we compute returns on each individual asset class (e.g., T-bills, stocks,
CDs, housing, etc...) over the period 1960-2009. Second, we perform a risk-adjustment
on each of these returns that acknowledges the fact that in our model there is no aggre-
gate uncertainty. Third, we apply these risk-adjusted returns and the corresponding
capital income tax rates to each individual household portfolio in the SCF, and com-
pute the average return on liquid wealth, illiquid wealth, and net worth (for the one
asset version of our model) in the population. The average risk-adjusted after-tax real
returns we obtain are −1.48% for liquid wealth, 2.29% for illiquid wealth, and 1.67%
for net worth (see Table 2). Appendix C.3 reports details of these calculations.

Credit limit and borrowing rate                 The SCF asks households to report their total
credit limit (summed over all credit cards). The median ratio of credit limit to annual
labor income for households aged 22 to 59 is 18.5%. For working-age households, we
therefore specify the function mj+1 (yj ) as m · yj , with m = 0.74. For retirees the
other asset market data), values for this elasticity well above one are found (e.g., Hansen et al. 2007).



                                                   20
borrowing limit is set to zero.

The interest rate on unsecured debt 1/q̄ m is set so that the model reproduces the
fraction of borrowers in the data. In the SCF, one could define borrowers in two
ways: (i) as households with negative net liquid wealth, or (ii) as households with
credit card debt, independently of their balances on checking accounts, saving accounts,
etc. Around 17% of working-age households are borrowers according to (i) and 37%
according to (ii). The second definition is more conventional, but the first one is the
exact counterpart of borrowers in the model, since the model only speaks to net holdings
of liquid wealth.28 We target a fraction of borrowers in the middle of this range. At
a nominal borrowing rate of 10% (or 6% real), 26% of agents have mj+1 < 0 in the
model. The implied wedge between the unsecured borrowing cost and real after-tax
return on liquid assets (7.48% = 6% + 1.48%) is in line with estimates by Davis et al.
(2006) who report wedges between 6.5% and 8.5% for the period 1991-2001.

Transaction cost           Because of the lack of systematic evidence on transaction costs,
we set the value of κ to match the proportion of hand-to-mouth households in the data.
For a value of κ = $1, 000, the model implies that roughly 1/3 of agents in the model
are (poor and wealthy) hand-to-mouth, consistently with the estimates presented in
Section 4.2. We note that this value of κ corresponds to 0.9% of the stock of illiquid
assets, on average, for adjusting households.29

Figure 3 displays some features of the model as a function of κ. For each value of κ > 0,
we re-calibrate β to match median holdings of illiquid wealth. Panel (a) shows that
the fraction of households adjusting (i.e., accessing the illiquid account to withdraw or
deposit) falls with the size of the transaction cost κ. As illustrated in the simulations of
Section 3, retirees adjust more often than working-age households because they finance
their consumption largely by withdrawing from the illiquid account. At κ = $1, 000,
4.5% of workers and 20% of retirees adjust each quarter. Holdings of liquid wealth
increase with the transaction cost (panel (b)), because when κ is larger households
deposit into/withdraw from the illiquid account less often and carry larger balances of
liquid assets. However, even for large transaction costs, median liquid wealth remains
  28
     The model is not designed to tackle the so-called “credit card puzzle” (i.e., households who have
positive balances of liquid wealth and credit card debt at the same point in time). Telyukova (2011)
documents the extent of this puzzle in the data and proposes a solution based on the the existence of
certain “cash” good expenditures whose size is unpredictable.
  29
     Transaction costs for housing are commonly estimated around 5% of the asset value (e.g., OECD,
2011). Alvarez and Lippi (2009) report transaction costs on durables of the order of 1%. Individual
retirement accounts are subject to set-up costs and penalties for early distributions (typically, 10% of
the amount withdrawn). In light of these estimates, our value of κ appears reasonable.


                                                  21
                               100
                                                                                   Workers                                           7000
                                                                                                                                               25th pctile
                                                                                   Retirees                                                    Median




                                                                                                 Average Liquid Wealth Balance ($)
                                                                                                                                     6000      75th pctile
                               80



      Fraction Adjusting (%)
                                                                                                                                     5000

                               60
                                                                                                                                     4000



                               40                                                                                                    3000


                                                                                                                                     2000

                               20
                                                                                                                                     1000


                                0                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                           0        500      1000        1500        2000   2500   3000
                                 0        500      1000    1500      2000      2500      3000
                                                       Fixed Cost ($)                                                                                               Fixed Cost ($)


                               (a) Fraction of households adjusting                                                                        (b) Distribution of liquid wealth

           45
                                                                                                                                     45
                                     Hand−to−mouth, no illiquid wealth
           40                        Hand−to−mouth, positive illiquid wealth                                                         40

           35                                                                                                                        35

           30                                                                                                                        30

           25                                                                                                                        25

           20                                                                                                                        20


           15                                                                                                                        15


           10                                                                                                                        10


                        5                                                                                                             5


                        0                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                       0           500       1000        1500        2000   2500    3000
                         0            500       1000    1500      2000      2500      3000                                                                          Fixed Cost ($)
                                                    Fixed Cost ($)

                                (c) Fraction of HTM households                                                                                  (d) Fraction of borrowers


                                          Figure 3: Features of two-asset model, by transaction cost

small. Liquid balances are more sensitive to κ at the upper end of the distribution since,
in that range, transaction costs have more of an impact on the optimal frequency of
adjustment. Panel (c) plots the fraction of hand-to-mouth consumers in the model
and divides them into those who also have zero illiquid wealth and those with positive
illiquid wealth. The size of both groups is increasing in κ. At κ = $1, 000 the split
between poor and wealthy hand-to-mouth (roughly 1/5 and 4/5) is in line with the
data presented in Section 4.2. The fraction of borrowers in the model declines with κ
(panel (d)). This result is the mirror image of our findings of panel (b): as κ grows,
households hold larger liquid balances and respond to negative shocks by dissaving
rather than by taking up debt.

Taxes and social security benefits                                                              The consumption tax τ c is set to 7.2% (Mc-
Daniel, 2007). We specify the tax function T (yj, aj , mj ) as a sum of four components:
(i) a progressive tax on labor income τ y (y) modelled as a smooth approximation to the
estimates in Kiefer et al. (2002, Table 5) who report effective tax rates on wage income
for ten income brackets in the year 2000; (ii) a payroll tax τ ss (y) set to 12.4% up to an


                                                                                                22
earnings cap of 0.5 times average annual earnings, in order to reproduce the Old-Age,
Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI) tax rates in 2000; (iii) a tax of 23.2% on
income from liquid assets (τ m ), and (iv) of 7.9% on income from illiquid assets (τ a ).30
When we solve the one-asset model, we set the tax rate on capital income from net
worth to 10.4%. To compute social security benefits, our proxies for individual aver-
age lifetime earnings yiJ w = exp(χJ w + αi + ziJ w ) are run through a formula based on
replacement rates and bend points as in the actual system in the year 2000.

Calibration of one-asset model    The one-asset model corresponds to the case
κ = 0 (and mj = 0), where aj maps into net worth. Therefore: (i) we set β to
reproduce median net worth; (ii) the interest rate is the average after-tax real return
on net worth in the SCF data (see Table 2); and (iii) the parameter ζ, which measures
the consumption flow from housing, is applied to the entire stock of net worth.

Appendix C.4 compares the life-cycle means and variances of earnings, nondurable
consumption and wealth across the one-asset and two-asset models. Both models
reproduce reasonably well the key features of the data (e.g., see Heathcote et al.,
2010). Consumption inequality from middle age to retirement grows somewhat faster
in the two-asset economy. In that phase of the life-cycle, most of a household’s wealth
is tied into illiquid instruments which are seldom used for consumption insurance.


6      The tax rebate experiment
We now reproduce the 2001 tax rebate episode within our economic model.

Experiment design        The economy is in a steady state in 2001:Q1. The rebate
checks are randomly sent out to half the eligible population in 2001:Q2 (group A), and
to the other half in 2001:Q3 (group B). The size of the rebate is set to $500 based on
JPS (2006) who report that the average rebate check was $480 per household. The
government finances the rebate program by increasing debt, and after ten years it
permanently increases the payroll tax to gradually repay the accumulated debt (plus
interest).31
  30
     The function Kiefer et al. (2002, Table 5) also report the effective tax schedule on interests and
dividends, and on long term capital gains by ten income brackets in 2000. We apply these tax rates
to each household portfolio in our SCF sample, then take the average to compute τ m and τ a , as well
as for the tax on capital income from net worth. See Appendix C.3 for more details.
  31
     We have experimented with other lengths of time before the tax rate is increased to repay the
rebate outlays, and with a case where the rebate is entirely financed by expenditure cuts. These
choices have no quantitative bearing on the results.



                                                  23
                              25                                                                                          60
                                                                                                                               Hand−to−mouth agents




                                                                                     Marginal Propensity to Consume (%)
                                                                                                                               Non hand−to−mouth agents
                                                                                                                          50
                              20


     Rebate Coefficient (%)
                                                                                                                          40
                              15
                                                                                                                          30
                              10
                                                                                                                          20

                              5
                                                                                                                          10


                              0                                                                                           0
                               0   500   1000    1500      2000   2500   3000                                              0    500     1000    1500      2000   2500   3000
                                             Fixed Cost ($)                                                                                 Fixed Cost ($)

                                    (a) Rebate coefficient                                       (b) Average marginal prop. to consume


Figure 4: Rebate coefficient and marginal propensity to consume, by transaction cost

There are different views that one could plausibly take about the timing of when the
rebate enters households’ information sets. At one extreme, households become fully
aware of the rebate when the bill is discussed in Congress and enacted. This scenario
implies the news arriving in 2001:Q1. Under this timing, the check is fully anticipated
by both groups. At the other extreme, one could assume that households became aware
of the rebate only after receiving their own check: under this assumption, both groups
of households treat the rebate as a surprise. In our baseline, we take an intermediate
position: all households learn about the rebate when the first batch of Treasury checks
are received, in 2001:Q2. Under this timing, the check is fully anticipated only by the
second group who receives the check in 2001:Q3. We explore the two alternative timing
assumptions later in this section. We assume throughout that the news/check reaches
households before their consumption/saving and adjustment decisions for that quarter.

We start by studying a baseline where the tax rebate occurs in isolation. In Section 7,
we incorporate two features of the macroeconomic environment of 2001: the broader
income tax reform and the recession.

Baseline results                                Figure 4(a) displays the rebate coefficient in the model for a
range of the transaction cost between $0 − $3, 000. The rebate coefficient is computed
through regression (1) run on simulated panel data, exactly as in JPS (2006). The
rebate coefficient grows steadily from 0.6% at κ = 0 (the one-asset model) to 20% at
κ = $3, 000. For κ = $1, 000, the calibrated value of the transaction cost, the model
generates a rebate coefficient of 15% or nearly 2/3 of the empirical estimate. Figure
4(b) shows the MPC out of the fiscal stimulus payment for two groups of households:
those who are hand-to-mouth and those who are not. Note how, for the former group,
the average MPC is over 40%, while for the latter group it is only 7%. Therefore,

                                                                                24
the vast majority of households in the model behave as predicted by the PIH and
have small MPCs. The high rebate coefficient is entirely driven by hand-to-mouth
households. Such households have significant MPCs out of the rebate check (when
they are in the treatment group) and do not respond to the news of the check (when
they are in the control group).

Figure 4(a) also displays the powerful amplification mechanism intrinsic in the two-
asset model: the rebate coefficient is 14 percentage points larger than its one-asset
model counterpart (κ = 0). This amplification works through both an extensive and
an intensive margin. First, the two-asset model features a much larger fraction of
hand-to-mouth consumers, many of which hold sizeable quantities of illiquid assets.32
Second, even among HTM agents, the wealthy hand-to-mouth have larger MPCs out of
tax rebates than the poor hand-to-mouth (44% vs 34%) since they have higher wealth
(tied in the illiquid asset) and, therefore, higher desired target consumption.

Rebate coefficient and average MPC                      We now substantiate the statement that
the rebate coefficient is not a MPC. The estimated rebate coefficient β2 in equation
(1) is the average of two components: (i) consumption growth of the treatment group
in Q2 (group A who receives the check in Q2) net of Q2 consumption growth of the
control group (group B who receives the check in Q3) and (ii) consumption growth
of the treatment group in Q3 (group B) net of Q3 consumption growth of the control
group (group A who received the check in Q2).

Let ∆cgt be consumption growth of group g in quarter t. The term ∆cA
                                                                   Q2 is exactly the
average MPC out of the unexpected $500 check. Table D1 in Appendix D shows that
this component equals 19% (an average of the MPCs of HTM and non HTM agents
plotted in Figure 4(b)). The term ∆cB
                                    Q2 is exactly the MPC out of the news (that a
$500 check will be received next quarter) and equals 6%. Overall, this first component
equals to ∆cA        B                                   A
            Q2 − ∆cQ2 = 19% − 6% = 13%. The term ∆cQ3 is the lagged consumption
growth of group A. This term is negative (−9%) since consumption of group A peaks
in Q2 upon receiving the check, after which it declines steeply following the slope
dictated by the short-run Euler equation. Finally, the term ∆cB
                                                              Q3 , which equals 7%, is
a combination of a large response of the HTM agents in group B net of the consumption
   32
      The fraction of HTM households in the one-asset model (κ = 0) is 7%, and hence within the
range of the estimates obtained from the SCF 2001 (see Table B1). Since β is set to match median
net worth, and all other parameters are disciplined directly by the data, the fraction of HTM agents
is not an explicit target in the one-asset model. If, instead of targeting median net worth, we set β
to reproduce 15% of HTM agents (the upper bound of our estimates), the implied rebate coefficient
increases to 2.5%. In conclusion, there is essentially no scope for the one asset model to generate large
rebate coefficients, while remaining consistent with SCF data on the distribution of net worth.


                                                   25
                                                35

                                                30

                                                25




                       Rebate Coefficient (%)
                                                20

                                                15

                                                10

                                                 5
                                                                    Surprise for early recipients only
                                                 0                  Surprise for noone
                                                                    Surprise for all
                                                −5
                                                  0     500   1000    1500      2000      2500      3000
                                                                  Fixed Cost ($)


Figure 5: Rebate coefficients under alternative assumptions on timing of arrival of news

drop of the unconstrained agents in group B who already responded to the news in
Q2. Overall, this second component equals to ∆cB       A
                                               Q3 − ∆cQ3 = 7% − (−9%) = 16%.
Averaging out the two components, we obtain (modulo the rounding) the estimated
value of the rebate coefficient.

This calculation reveals that the rebate coefficient is a combination of contemporaneous
MPCs out of the check (for those surprised or constrained), MPCs out of the news
(for those informed and unconstrained), and lagged negative consumption growth (for
the early respondents). As a result, it cannot be strictly interpreted as a propensity
to consume out of the fiscal stimulus payment, nor used directly for policy analysis.
Under our baseline parameterization, the true MPC out of the check is higher than the
estimated rebate coefficient (19% vs 15%), but different information structures reverse
this finding, as we will see next.

Information structure                                 In Figure 5, we report the rebate coefficient under alter-
native assumptions about when the news of the rebate enters households’ information
sets. When the rebate is anticipated by all households (the news arrives in Q1, i.e.,
one quarter ahead of the check for the first group and two quarters ahead for the sec-
ond group), the estimated rebate coefficient drops by 4 percentage points compared
to the baseline. Non HTM households increase their consumption upon arrival of the
news and hence when they receive the check either one or two quarters later, their
consumption response is substantially weakened. However, the rebate coefficient re-
mains of a sizable magnitude, around 11% for κ = $1, 000, and, most importantly, the
amplification with respect to the one-asset model (where the rebate coefficient is now
0.1%) is still very large. The reason is that liquidity constrained households are those


                                                                      26
responsible for the amplification mechanism in the two-asset model and learning about
the policy ahead of time does not affect their behavior.

When the policy is a surprise for all (i.e., households learn about the policy only
upon receiving their check), the rebate coefficient increases significantly relative to the
baseline. At κ = $1, 000, the model-implied rebate coefficient reaches 25%, the same
magnitude as its empirical counterpart. Under this information structure, the control
group who receives the check in Q3 cannot respond to the news in Q2, like it does in the
baseline. The absence of this anticipation effect raises the model’s rebate coefficient.33

This analysis reinforces our point that the rebate coefficient is not a MPC. The rebate
coefficient varies between 11% and 25%, depending on how households process infor-
mation, but the MPC out of the unexpected fiscal stimulus payment is always 19%.
Therefore, the rebate coefficient may underestimate or overestimate the true MPC.
Only a structural model can help disentangle the true MPC (the key policy variable of
interest) from the results of regressions such as (1).

A natural question is: which is the correct information structure? Survey data are
typically not rich enough to identify when the rebate enters households’ information
sets. An important exception is a recent paper by Broda and Parker (2012) which
studies the consumption response to the fiscal stimulus payment of 2008. The authors
conduct a survey of roughly 60,000 households in the Nielsen Consumer Panel and,
among other questions, ask when the surveyed household learned about the rebate.
They document that 60% of households knew about the policy the quarter before pay-
ments began to be disbursed.34 Moreover, they show that even those households who
learned in advance did not have a significant spending response before receipt of their
payment. The first finding offers support for our baseline informational assumption;
the second for the view that the policy is, effectively, a surprise for all households.

Heterogeneity         The stark dichotomy in the MPC of HTM and non HTM agents
documented in Figure 4(b) suggests that our model features a large amount of het-
erogeneity in consumption responses to fiscal stimulus payments across households.
Figure 6(a) plots the model distribution of rebate coefficients: almost half of house-
holds in the model have consumption responses close to zero, 15% spend more than
half the rebate in the quarter they receive it, and the remaining third are in between.
  33
     Table D1 in Appendix D offers an anatomy of the rebate coefficient, term by term, under these
two alternative informational assumptions.
  34
     The Bill was passed by Congress in February, and payments begun in late April. 60% of households
responded they learned in February or March.



                                                 27
                                                                                                        100000
                                .5




                                                                                                        80000
       Fraction of Households
                                .4




                                                                                      Median Earnings
                                                                                                        60000
                                .3




                                                                                                        40000
                                .2




                                                                                                        20000
                                .1




                                                                                                        0
                                0




                                      0     .2       .4        .6     .8    1                                    20        40         60         80         100
                                                 Rebate Coefficient                                              Percentile of Rebate Coefficient Distribution


   (a) Distribution of rebate coefficients in the                                    (b) Median earnings by quintile of rebate co-
   population                                                                        efficient distribution


                                     Figure 6: Heterogeneity in rebate coefficients in the model (κ = $1, 000)

Misra and Surico (2013) apply quantile regression techniques to the JPS (2006) data
to estimate the empirical cross-sectional distribution of consumption responses to the
2001 rebate. Their results line up remarkably well with the model predictions. They
find that between 40% and 50% of U.S. households have responses that are statistically
indistinguishable from zero; another 20% of households have rebate coefficients that are
significantly above one half; and the remaining households fall somewhere in between.

Misra and Surico (2013, Figure 5) also document that high income households are
disproportionately concentrated in the two tails of the distribution of consumption
responses, a finding that rationalizes two former results in the literature. JPS (2006)
report that, when splitting the population into three income groups, differences in
rebate coefficient across groups are not statistically significant. Similarly, Shapiro and
Slemrod (2003a, 2003b) find no evidence of higher spending rates among low income
households. Figure 6(b) shows that our model can replicate the bimodality of the
income distribution by size of the rebate coefficient. The reason why there are high
earnings households at both ends of the distribution in the model, is that some of
them are unconstrained (those at the bottom end) and some are wealthy hand-to-
mouth (those at the top end). In particular, because the rebate is a lump sum, among
wealthy HTM agents the income-richest have the highest MPCs.35

Correlation with liquid wealth                                             The model predicts that households carrying low
levels of liquid wealth across pay periods, i.e., the HTM households, should have strong
  35
    A further validation of our mechanism comes from another finding in Misra and Surico (2013):
in contrast to the high income households at the bottom of the distribution, those at the top tend
to have high mortgage debt. They therefore do own illiquid wealth in the form of housing, and their
large interest payments mean that they are likely to be wealthy HTM households.


                                                                                28
                                                   25
                                                         $500 rebate
                                                         $1000 rebate
                                                   20    $2000 rebate
                                                         $5000 rebate




                          Rebate Coefficient (%)
                                                   15


                                                   10


                                                    5


                                                    0


                                                   −5
                                                     0    500     1000    1500      2000   2500   3000
                                                                      Fixed Cost ($)


              Figure 7: Rebate coefficients by size of the stimulus payment

consumption responses. Although it is not possible to construct an analogous measure
in the data, an imperfect proxy can be obtained by grouping households based on liquid
wealth-to-earnings ratios. This is because for a hand-to-mouth household, the quantity
of liquid assets that are held for within pay-period expenditures is, on average, half its
earnings. Broda and Parker (2012) split households in two groups and find very strong
(and statistically significant) evidence that households with a low ratio of liquid assets
to income spend at least twice as much as the average household, precisely as predicted
by our model.36 Souleles (1999) studies the consumption response to anticipated tax
refunds (whose median size is around $560). When the sample is split between low
and high liquid wealth to earnings ratio households, the former are found to have
statistically significant larger responses to the refund (Souleles, 1999, Table 4).37

Size asymmetry                   Figure 7 shows how, in our baseline economy, the rebate coeffi-
cient declines with the size of the rebate. With a $1,000 transaction cost, the rebate
  36
      They ask households “In case of an expected decline in income or increase in expenses, do you
have at least two months of income available in cash, bank accounts, or easily accessible funds?” Hence
their liquid wealth variable is relative to income.
   37
      Other studies have failed to find a significantly negative association between liquid wealth and
consumption responses. For example, when JPS (2006) estimate rebate coefficients for sub-groups of
households with different amounts of liquid assets they do not a strong systematic variation. These
effects are imprecisely estimated, though, for three reasons. First, the sample becomes very small
when divided into sub-groups. Second, the asset data in the CEX must be viewed with extreme
caution, due to the large amount of item non-response. JPS (2006) have data on liquid wealth for less
than half of the sample, and hence it is likely that respondents are a highly selected group. Third,
households hold liquid wealth both to finance consumption expenditures within pay periods, and to
save across pay periods. Therefore, even hand-to-mouth households will be observed to hold positive,
and possibly large, quantities of liquid wealth if they are sampled at a point in time between pay
dates, as done in the CEX. Therefore, empirically, the relationship between rebate coefficients and
the level of liquid wealth can be statistically weak. As explained, the liquid wealth-to-earnings ratio
is more informative.


                                                                         29
coefficient drops by over a factor of two (from 15% to 6%) as the size of the stimulus
payment increases from $500 to $2,000. A large enough rebate loosens the liquidity
constraint, and even constrained households find it optimal to save a portion of their
payment. Moreover, for rebates that are sufficiently large relative to the transaction
cost, many working households will choose to pay the transaction cost and make a
deposit upon receipt of the rebate. But adjusting households are unconstrained, so
they save a large portion of the rebate, as in the one asset model.38

This size asymmetry feature of our mechanism is consistent with two well-known em-
pirical findings. Hsieh (2003) shows that the same CEX consumers who “overreact”
to small income tax refunds respond very weakly to much larger payments (around
$2,000 per household) received from the Alaskan Permanent Fund. Browning and
Collado (2001) document similar evidence from Spanish survey data: workers who re-
ceive anticipated double-payment bonuses (hence, again, large amounts) in the months
of June and December do not alter their consumption growth significantly in those
months. Our interpretation of these findings is that although households spend large
portions of small anticipated shocks, they predominantly save large ones, since only
large enough payments trigger an adjustment.

Robustness         Appendix D contains an extensive discussion of sensitivity analysis
with respect to preference parameters (risk aversion and IES), access to credit (borrow-
ing costs and limits), desirability of the illiquid asset (financial return and consumption
flow), and size of idiosyncratic risk. One of the main findings is the role played by the
IES. Households who are more willing to substitute consumption intertemporally are
more likely to save heavily in the illiquid asset during working-age (and to be wealthy
hand-to-mouth) in order to enjoy higher consumption at retirement . Quantitatively,
the effects are substantial: doubling the IES from 1 to 2 more than doubles the rebate
coefficient.



7      Role of aggregate economic conditions
We now incorporate two features of the macroeconomic environment of 2001 into the
analysis: the broader income tax reform and the recession. These additional experi-
  38
    Figure 7 also shows how estimated rebate coefficients (not necessarily the MPC) may become
negative for small values of the transaction cost. This occurs when the stimulus payment is large
relative to the transaction cost. In this case, many working households choose to make a deposit into
the illiquid account upon receipt of the payment, and hence, in that period, consume even less than
the control group.


                                                 30
                                25                                                                                 25


                                20                                                                                 20



       Rebate Coefficient (%)




                                                                                          Rebate Coefficient (%)
                                15                                                                                 15


                                10                                                                                 10


                                 5                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                  Baseline
                                 0                                                                                  0                             Mild recession
                                                           Baseline                                                                               Severe recession
                                                           Baseline + Tax reform                                                                  Mild expansion
                                −5                                                                                 −5
                                  0   500   1000    1500      2000   2500     3000                                   0   500   1000    1500      2000   2500    3000
                                                Fixed Cost ($)                                                                     Fixed Cost ($)

                                (a) Rebate coefficient with tax reform                    (b) Rebate coefficient with recession and
                                                                                          expansion


Figure 8: Effect of tax reform and aggregate economic conditions on rebate coefficient

ments also serve the purpose of highlighting that our model features a strong aggregate
state-dependence of the consumption response to fiscal stimulus payments: same-size
rebates distributed under different economic conditions can have different effects.

2001 Tax reform                                   The 2001 rebate was part of a broader tax reform which, beyond
decreasing the lowest rate, also reduced all other marginal rates by 3% or more. We
construct the sequence of effective tax schedules implied by the reform based on Kiefer
et al. (2002).39 These changes were phased in gradually over the five years 2002:Q1-
2006:Q1 and planned to “sunset” in 2011. A tax reform is defined as a sequence of
                                                          ∗∗
income tax schedules {Tt }tt=t∗ which is announced, jointly with the rebate, in 2001:Q2.
Date t∗ , the first quarter of the change in the tax code, is 2002:Q1. Date t∗∗ , the
last quarter of the change in the tax code, is 2011:Q1 when the tax reform sunsets,
as originally legislated. The tax cut is deficit-financed for ten years, after which the
payroll tax is increased permanently (by roughly 0.2%) to gradually reduce the debt
to its pre-reform level.40

Figure 8(a) shows the consumption responses to the tax rebate when the baseline
economy is augmented with the tax reform. The fall in future tax liabilities leads to a
rise in the desired level of lifetime consumption which, in turn, triggers two offsetting
forces. On the one hand, households who are already borrowing sizeable amounts may
reach their credit limit, which tends to increase the number of HTM households in the
  39
     Kiefer et al. (2002, Table 5) report the pre and post reform income tax rates, and describe the
timing of the reduction in the various brackets (page 90).
  40
     Instead of sunsetting, the tax cuts were further extended. An alternative scenario, where the
tax cut is permanent yields almost identical results. Similarly, when the tax cut is funded by lower
expenditures, the model’s rebate coefficient is unchanged.


                                                                                     31
economy. On the other hand, HTM households at the zero kink may start borrowing
and, once off the kink, they have low MPCs out of the rebate. For low transaction
costs, when there are already lots of households borrowing (see panel (d) of Figure
3), the first channel dominates, and the rebate coefficient is slightly higher than in
the baseline. However, for higher transaction costs, the second channel appears to be
stronger. At κ = $1, 000, one year after the tax reform, the fraction of households using
credit is twice the initial one. Overall, the fraction of HTM agents is down significantly
and, as a consequence, the rebate coefficient drops by roughly 2 points.41

2001 Recession         To model the downturn of 2001, we assume that in 2001:Q1 house-
holds become aware that they are entering a recession. At this time they learn that
their labor income will fall evenly for the next three quarters, generating a cumula-
tive drop of 3%, and will then fully recover at a constant rate over the following eight
quarters.42 Figure 8(b) shows that the occurrance of a mild recession, such as the 2001
episode, increases the number of hand-to-mouth households in the economy and adds
roughly 2 percentage points to the rebate coefficient.

State dependence        Figure 8(b) also shows that the consumption response to the
rebate is highly dependent on the aggregate economic conditions. For example, when
the rebate is distributed during a mild expansion (of the same size of the mild recession
of 2001, with the sign reversed, and of the same duration), the consumption response
is more muted in the model. Since most episodes of fiscal stimulus payments occur in
recessions, it is difficult, empirically, to isolate the role of aggregate economic conditions
on the size of the consumption response. A unique piece of evidence is offered by JPS
(2009) who examine the impact of the child tax credit of 2003, a period of sustained
growth. Their point estimates of the contemporaneous response of consumption for
the 2003 episode are about half of those estimated for 2001 in similar specifications
(although not statistically different). This leads them to conjecture “a more potent
response to such payments in recessions, when liquidity constraints are more likely
to bind, than during times of more typical economic growth.” Our model offers a
mechanism why this force may be at work and quantifies its significance.
  41
     To further understand
                          the importance of credit for these effects, we simulated an economy without
borrowing mj+1 = 0 . Here, when the rebate occurs jointly with the tax reform, the rebate coefficient
increases by 7-8 percentage points relative to the baseline rebate experiment without the tax reform.
The reason is that the announced tax cuts exacerbate liquidity constraints, and the rebate enables
HTM households to start consuming immediately out of this additional future disposable income.
  42
     The NBER dates the 2001 recession as starting in March 2001 and ending in November 2001. The
magnitude of the downturn and the duration of its recovery are calibrated from HP-filtered quarterly
GDP (NIPA Table 1.1.6).



                                                 32
The state dependence can be quite complex. A sufficiently sharp recession induces
many households to start using credit heavily, or even to pay the transaction cost
and withdraw from the illiquid account, to smooth consumption. In such a scenario,
households who were HTM before the recession become effectively unconstrained at
the time of the rebate, and their consumption response can be quite low. In Figure
8(b), we report the results of a rebate handed out during a severe downturn (5 times
deeper than the mild recession examined before). Two quarters after the onset of
the recession, the fraction of households borrowing or accessing their illiquid account
is almost double the baseline value, and the rebate coefficient is 6 percentage points
lower relative to the mild-recession case.

Aggregate impact of the policy                 When we run the tax rebate experiment within
an environment which combines both the 2001 tax reform and the 2001 recession, the
economic forces discussed in this section tend to balance out, and the rebate coefficient
falls only slightly (by roughly half a percentage point) relative to the baseline.43

Within this rich macroeconomic environment, we exploit our structural model to quan-
tify the aggregate effect of the 2001 fiscal stimulus payments. We find that, in the
model, households spend 24% of the total rebate outlays, $38B, in the first two quar-
ters after the announcement (2001:Q2 and Q3). One may be worried that this cal-
culation may not be particularly informative because our baseline cannot fully match
the estimated rebate coefficient. However, when we use the alternative timing where
the rebate is a surprise for all (and the model’s rebate coefficient is in line with the
empirical estimates), our conclusions are virtually unchanged: households spend 25%
of their fiscal stimulus payment in the first two quarters.

In the empirical literature (JPS, 2006; PSJM, 2011; Broda and Parker, 2012; Misra and
Surico, 2013), the aggregate effect of the policy is estimated by augmenting equation
(1) with a lagged rebate indicator and then by cumulating the contemporaneous and
lagged rebate coefficients. This methodology (which is based on the estimated rebate
coefficients, not on the true propensity to consume out of the check and out of the
news) applied to the 2001 episode leads to point estimates of the fraction of the rebates
spent within the first two quarters between 0.4 (Misra and Surico, 2013) and 0.7 (JPS,
2006).44 We conclude that previous estimates may have exaggerated the aggregate
  43
     Combining the tax reform and recession leads to minor changes in rebate coefficients also for
the other two information structures. In the case where the policy is anticipated by all, the rebate
coefficient increases by 1.5 percentage points, and in the case where the rebate is a surprise for all it
increases by 3 percentage points.
  44
     As a further validation, when we calculate this regression-based estimate on simulated data from


                                                   33
                                                  45
                                                                                                                                                               60




      Fraction of Rebate Spent after N Quarters
                                                                                       One quarter




                                                                                                                   Fraction of Rebate Spent after N Quarters
                                                                                                                                                                                                           One quarter
                                                  40                                   Two quarters                                                                                                        Two quarters
                                                                                       Four quarters                                                           50                                          Four quarters
                                                  35

                                                  30
                                                                                                                                                               40

                                                  25
                                                                                                                                                               30
                                                  20

                                                  15                                                                                                           20

                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                  5

                                                  0                                                                                                            0
                                                   0   500    1000     1500     2000       2500        3000                                                     0    10    20   30   40    50   60    70     80   90    100
                                                             Size of Rebate Check ($)                                                                               Bottom Percentage of Income Distribution Targeted


    (a) Experiment on the size of the stimulus pay- (b) Experiment on the income-targeting of the
    ment                                            stimulus payment


Figure 9: Alternative designs of fiscal stimulus policies: implications for aggregate
consumption

short-run impact of the policy.


8                        Implications for the design of stimulus policies
The main lesson from our model is that the sizable estimated response of aggregate con-
sumption to fiscal stimulus payments are largely attributable to the behavior of HTM
households, many of which are wealthy HTM. This conclusion has implications for pol-
icy design. A government who aims at stimulating consumption expenditures in the
short-run (the declared objective of such policies) should recognize that (i) increasing
the magnitude of the stimulus will not raise household expenditures proportionately,
and (ii) targeting, whenever possible, the group of wealthy HTM households in the
population will yield stronger effects. In this section, we illustrate these prescriptions
in more detail by running two policy experiments.45

Stimulus size                                                  In the first experiment, we compute the fraction of the rebate spent at
different short-run horizons (1, 2, and 4 quarters) for policies of different sizes, starting
at $100 up to $2,500 per household. Larger fiscal stimulus checks clearly induce larger
household expenditures, but as explained in Section 6, our model displays a strong
size-dependence due to the infrequent adjustment of the illiquid asset: larger payments
the model, we obtain a value of 0.43 which is very close to the empirical estimate of Misra and Surico
(0.42), and not statistically different from the JPS estimate (0.66, with a S.E. of 0.26).
  45
     To keep the policy experiments simple, we assume that (i) the policy is a surprise for all households,
and (ii) all the rebates are paid at the same time. All our qualitative results are robust to using the
baseline (i) information structure and (ii) staggering of payments.


                                                                                                              34
trigger anticipated deposits into the illiquid account, a feature that tends to dampen
the short-run consumption response. Figure 9(a) shows that this mechanism is quan-
titatively significant: increasing the magnitude of the government transfer from $500
to $2,000 per household reduces the fraction of the rebate spent by over 10 percentage
points at all horizons.

Stimulus targeting       In the second experiment, we consider a series of budget-
equivalent policies with different targeting based on household income, e.g., when
targeted to the bottom half of the income distribution the rebate is twice as large
as when it is paid to the entire population (our baseline $500 rebate check). Figure
9(b) plots the percentage of the total outlays (the same in each simulation) spent at
different horizons. All the curves are hump shaped. Targeting income-poorer house-
holds makes it more likely to reach the HTM agents, but there are two countervailing
forces. First, the wealthy HTM are not the income poorest, so an excessively narrow
targeting may miss many agents with high MPCs. Second, as the policy targets fewer
agents the size of the payments increases, which leads some households to save a large
fraction of their transfer into the illiquid asset instead of consuming it.

The implications for policy design are quite stark. A steep phasing out is required
for the policy to reach its highest “bang for the buck”: at all horizons, the aggregate
consumption response is the largest when the policy is phased out around median
income.


9    Concluding remarks
By integrating the Baumol-Tobin model with the standard incomplete-markets life-
cycle framework, one can provide a theoretical foundation, and a quantitative valida-
tion, for the observation that the MPC out of anticipated, small, temporary income
changes is large – an empirical finding that is substantiated by quasi-experimental
evidence. Going forward, our analysis can be expanded in several directions.

More immediately, the model can be used to analyze the fiscal stimulus payments of
2008. This episode is of particular interest because both PJSM (2011) and Broda and
Parker (2012) measure responses in nondurable expenditures around half of the size of
the 2001 estimates. The 2008 episode differs from the one studied in this paper in four
ways: (i) its magnitude was roughly twice as large; (ii) eligibility phased out quickly
starting at $75,000 of gross individual income; (iii) the 2008 recession was much deeper
than its 2001 counterpart; and, (iv) the 2008 episode was not part of any broader tax

                                          35
reform. As explained here, each of these factors matters for households’ consumption
responses, and only a quantitative analysis that contains all of these ingredients can
shed light on what accounted for the more modest effects of the 2008 stimulus program.

Taking a broader view, the framework used in this paper can be seen as the “second
generation” of the spender-saver model of Campbell and Mankiw (1989, 1991). Com-
pared to its original formulation, where the measure of “spenders” is exogenous and
entirely composed of impatient wealth-poor households, here the fraction of hand-to-
mouth agents is endogenously determined and mostly composed of patient individuals
who own assets tied up in illiquid instruments. This distinction changes some of the
key macroeconomic implications of this model. For example, one well-known problem
of the model with exogenous spenders is that the volatility of aggregate consumption
is too high relative to the data. But in the time-series for aggregate income there are
large and small innovations. While the consumption response of the wealthy hand-
to-mouth agents and that of the impatient spender are similar with respect to small
shocks, large shocks induce the former type of agents to adjust their portfolio and, as
a result, better smooth the change in income.

In a similar vein, major fiscal or monetary policy interventions that influence the rela-
tive return between liquid funds and illiquid assets (e.g., large public debt expansions
or changes in the federal fund rate) will affect the endogenous measure of wealthy
hand-to-mouth consumers in the second-generation models, complicating the analysis
of the impact of policy on the macroeconomy.

As just exemplified, some applications of the model cannot abstract from general equi-
librium effects on prices. Given the high-frequency OLG structure, solving a version
of our two-asset model with aggregate shocks and asset returns determined endoge-
nously is not numerically feasible (see Krueger and Kubler, 2004). To make progress
in these directions, one could develop an infinite-horizon version of our economy with
a stochastic transition between work and retirement. To close the model, one would
interpret the illiquid asset as productive capital with a return equal to its marginal
product, whereas the return on the liquid asset could be pinned down by a monetary
policy rule.




                                           36
References
Abel, A., J. Eberly, and S. Panageas (2009): “Optimal Inattention to the Stock Market
 with Information Costs and Transactions Costs,” NBER Working Paper, 15010.

Aiyagari, S. (1994): “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 109(3), 659–684.

Aiyagari, S., and M. Gertler (1991): “Asset Returns with Transactions Costs and
  Uninsured Individual Risk,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 27(3), 311–331.

Alvarez, F., A. Atkeson, and P. Kehoe (2002): “Money, Interest Rates, and Exchange
  Rates with Endogenously Segmented Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(1), 73–
  112.

Alvarez, F., L. Guiso, and F. Lippi (2010): “Durable Consumption and Asset Manage-
  ment with Transaction and Observation Costs,” NBER Working Paper, 15835.

Alvarez, F., and F. Lippi (2009): “Financial Innovation and the Transactions Demand
  for Cash,” Econometrica, 77(2), 363–402.

Angeletos, G., D. Laibson, A. Repetto, J. Tobacman, and S. Weinberg (2001):
 “The Hyperbolic Consumption Model: Calibration, Simulation, and Empirical Evalua-
 tion,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(3), 47–68.

Bansal, R., D. Kiku, and A. Yaron (2012): “An Empirical Evaluation of the Long-Run
 Risks Model for Asset Prices,” Critical Finance Review, 1, 183–221.

Bansal, R., and A. Yaron (2004): “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of
 Asset Pricing Puzzles,” The Journal of Finance, 59(4), 1481–1509.

Barro, R. J. (2009): “Rare Disasters, Asset Prices, and Welfare Costs,” American Economic
 Review, 99(1), 243–264.

Broda, C., and J. Parker (2012): “The Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008 and the
  Aggregate Demand for Consumption,” Mimeo.

Browning, M., and M. Collado (2001): “The Response of Expenditures to Anticipated
  Income Changes: Panel Data Estimates,” American Economic Review, 91(3), 681–692.

Browning, M., and T. Crossley (2001): “The Life-Cycle Model of Consumption and
  Saving,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(3), 3–22.

Campbell, J., and N. Mankiw (1989): “Consumption, Income, and Interest Rates: Rein-
 terpreting the Time Series Evidence,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 4, 185–216.

Campbell, J. R., and Z. Hercowitz (2009): “Liquidity Constraints of the Middle Class,”
 Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper, 09-20.

Campbell, J. Y., and N. G. Mankiw (1991): “The Response of Consumption to Income:
 A Cross-Country Investigation,” European Economic Review, 35(4), 723–756.

Carroll, C., and M. Kimball (1996): “On the Concavity of the Consumption Function,”
 Econometrica, 64(4), 981–992.

Carroll, C. D. (1992): “The Buffer-Stock Theory of Saving: Some Macroeconomic Evi-
 dence,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 61–156.


                                           37
        (1997): “Buffer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1), 1–55.

Chetty, R., and A. Szeidl (2007): “Consumption Commitments and Risk Preferences,”
 The Quarterly journal of economics, 122(2), 831–877.

Cochrane, J. (1989): “The Sensitivity of Tests of the Intertemporal Allocation of Consump-
 tion to Near-Rational Alternatives,” The American Economic Review, 79(3), 319–337.

Congressional Budget Office (2009): “Did the 2008 Tax Rebates Stimulate Short-Term
 Growth?,” Economic and Budget Issue Brief.

Council of Economic Advisors (2010): “The Economic Impact of the American Recovery
 and Reinvestment Act (Third Quarterly Report),” Executive Office of the President.

David Laibson and Andrea Repetto and Jeremy Tobacman (2003): “A Debt Puz-
  zle,” in Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern Economics: In Honor of
  Edmund S. Phelps, ed. by Philippe Aghion and Roman Frydman and Joseph Stiglitz and
  Michael Woodford, pp. 228–266. Princeton University Press.

Davis, S. J., F. Kubler, and P. Willen (2006): “Borrowing Costs and the Demand for
  Equity over the Life Cycle,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(2), 348–362.

Deaton, A. (1991): “Saving and Liquidity Constraints,” Econometrica, 59(5), 1221–1248.

Diaz-Gimenez, J., A. Glover, and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2011): “Facts on the Distributions
  of Earnings, Income, and Wealth in the United States: 2007 Update,” Federal Reserve
  Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 31(1), 2–35.

Erosa, A., and G. Ventura (2002): “On Inflation as a Regressive Consumption Tax,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 49(4), 761–795.

Galı́, J., J. D. López-Salido, and J. Vallés (2007): “Understanding the Effects of
 Government Spending on Consumption,” Journal of the European Economic Association,
 5(1), 227–270.

Gruber, J. (2006): “A Tax-Based Estimate of the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution,”
 NBER Working Paper Series, 11945.

Hamilton, D. (2008): “A Reexamination of Johnson, Parker, and Souleles 2001 Tax Rebate
 Estimate,” Mimeo.

Hansen, L. P., J. Heaton, J. Lee, and N. Roussanov (2007): “Intertemporal Substi-
 tution and Risk Aversion,” Handbook of Econometrics, 6, 3967–4056.

Heathcote, J. (2005): “Fiscal Policy with Heterogeneous Agents and Incomplete Markets,”
 Review of Economic Studies, 72(1), 161–188.

Heathcote, J., F. Perri, and G. Violante (2010): “Unequal We Stand: An Empirical
 Analysis of Economic Inequality in the United States 1967-2006,” Review of Economic
 Dynamics, 13(1), 15–51.

Heathcote, J., K. Storesletten, and G. Violante (2009): “Quantitative Macroeco-
 nomics with Heterogeneous Households,” Annual Reviews in Economics, 1.

Hsieh, C. (2003): “Do Consumers React to Anticipated Income Changes? Evidence from
  the Alaska Permanent Fund,” American Economic Review, 93(1), 397–405.


                                           38
Huggett, M. (1996): “Wealth Distribution in Life-Cycle Economies,” Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 38(3), 469–494.

Huntley, J., and V. Michelangeli (2011): “Can Tax Rebates Stimulate Spending in a
 Life-Cycle Model?,” Mimeo.

Johnson, D., J. Parker, and N. Souleles (2006): “Household Expenditure and the
  Income Tax Rebates of 2001,” The American Economic Review, 96(5), 1589–1610.

        (2009): “The Response of Consumer Spending to Rebates During an Expansion:
  Evidence from the 2003 Child Tax Credit,” Mimeo.

Jovanovic, B. (1982): “Inflation and Welfare in the Steady State,” The Journal of Political
  Economy, 90(3), 561–577.

Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2013): “Household Leveraging
  and Deleveraging,” NBER Working Papers, 18941.

Kaplan, G., and G. L. Violante (2011): “A Model of the Consumption Response to
 Fiscal Stimulus Payments,” NBER Working Papers, 17338.

Kiefer, D., R. Carroll, J. Holtzblatt, A. Lerman, J. McCubbin, D. Richardson,
  and J. Tempalski (2002): “The Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of
  2001: Overview and Assessment of Effects on Taxpayers,” National Tax Journal, 55(1),
  89–118.

Krueger, D., and F. Kubler (2004): “Computing Equilibrium in OLG Models with
 Stochastic Production,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 28(7), 1411–1436.

Krusell, P., and A. Smith, Jr. (1998): “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroe-
 conomy,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(5), 867–896.

Li, G. (2009): “Transaction Costs and Consumption,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and
  Control, 33(6), 1263–1277.

Lusardi, A., D. Schneider, and P. Tufano (2011): “Financially Fragile Households:
  Evidence and Implications,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 42(1), 83–150.

McDaniel, C. (2007): “Average Tax Rates on Consumption, Investment, Labor and Capital
 in the OECD: 1950–2003,” Mimeo.

Misra, K., and P. Surico (2013): “Consumption, Income Changes and Heterogeneity:
 Evidence From Two Fiscal Stimulus Programmes,” CEPR Discussion Paper, 9530.

Oh, H., and R. Reis (2011): “Targeted Transfers and the Fiscal Response to the Great
 Recession,” NBER Working Paper, 16775.

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2011): “Housing and
 the Economy: Policies for Renovation,” Economic Policy Reforms 2011: Going for Growth.

Parker, J., N. Souleles, D. Johnson, and R. McClelland (2011): “Consumer Spend-
  ing and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008,” NBER Working Paper, 16684.

Piazzesi, M., M. Schneider, and S. Tuzel (2007): “Housing, Consumption and Asset
  Pricing,” Journal of Financial Economics, 83(3), 531–569.

Ragot, X. (2011): “The Case for a Financial Approach to Money Demand,” Mimeo.


                                            39
Reis, R. (2006): “Inattentive Consumers,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(8), 1761–
 1800.

Rı́os-Rull, J.V. (1995): “Models with Heterogeneous Agents,” in Frontiers of Business
   Cycles Research, ed. by T. F. Cooley, pp. 98–125. Princeton University Press.

Romer, D. (1986): “A Simple General Equilibrium Version of the Baumol-Tobin Model,”
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101(4), 663–685.

Shapiro, M., and J. Slemrod (2003a): “Consumer Response to Tax Rebates,” American
  Economic Review, 93(1), 381–396.

        (2003b): “Did the 2001 Tax Rebate Stimulate Spending? Evidence from Taxpayer
  Surveys,” Tax Policy and the Economy, 17, 83–109.

         (2009): “Did the 2008 Tax Rebates Stimulate Spending?,” American Economic
  Review, 99(2), 374–379.

Souleles, N. (1999): “The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax Refunds,”
  The American Economic Review, 89(4), 947–958.

Telyukova, I. (2013): “Household Need for Liquidity and the Credit Card Debt Puzzle,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 80(3), 1148–1177.




                                         40
                           Appendix Not For Publication
This Appendix is organized as follows. Section A illustrates another case of wealthy
hand to mouth behavior which completes the discussion of Section 4.1 in the main text.
Section B contains more details on our definitions of liquid and illiquid wealth from
the SCF and on the measurement of hand-to-mouth households. Section C describes
certain steps of the model’s calibration omitted from the main text, and contains plots
of the lifecycle path of consumption and wealth accumulation in the model. Section D
reports the decomposition of the rebate coefficient for the three different informational
structures, and contains a robustness analysis on the baseline rebate experiment. The
numerical computation of the model is delineated in Section E.



A        Wealthy hand-to-mouth behavior in the model
     6
                Liquid assets
     5          Illiquid assets
                                                                                      0.3
     4

     3                                                                               0.25


     2
                                                                                      0.2

     1
                                                                                     0.15
     0

         Borrowing Limit
    −1                                                                                0.1
                                                                                             Income
    −2                                                                                       Consumption
                                                                                     0.05
             20       40   60     80   100   120   140   160   180   200   220              20   40   60   80   100   120   140   160   180   200   220

               (a) Lifecycle asset accumulation                                       (b) Lifecycle income and consumption path


Figure A1: Example of lifecycle of a “wealthy hand-to-mouth” agent in the two-asset
model where hand-to-mouth behavior occurs when the agent hits the credit limit.

Figure A1 illustrates how the model can feature households with positive illiquid assets
who, at the same time, use credit up to the limit. This is another type of wealthy hand-
to-mouth (HTM) behavior compared to the one described in the main text (the latter
being more prevalent in the data and in the model’s simulation). In Figure 2, the HTM
behavior arises because the agent is at the zero kink for liquid wealth, whereas here
she is at the borrowing limit.

After the first deposit into the illiquid account, households would like to increase their
consumption to a target level that reflects the higher rate of return earned on her saving.
In Figure 2, borrowing costs were prohibitive for the household, and after the deposit
the household was immediately constrained. The key difference in parameterization

                                                                                 1
between the example in this Appendix and that in the main text is that credit is much
cheaper here. As a result, the household starts borrowing to finance consumption after
her deposit (see panel (b) in Figure A1), and she quickly reaches the credit limit. At
that point, she stays at the limit for several periods, and consumes all her earnings,
net of the interest payment on debt. During this phase of her lifecycle, upon receiving
the rebate check, she will consume a large part of it and, upon receiving the news of
the rebate, she will not increase her expenditures.

As retirement gets closer, the lifecycle saving motive starts kicking in, and she begins
repaying her debt and accumulating liquid wealth.



B     SCF data and measurement of hand-to-mouth
      households

B.1     Estimation of cash holdings and credit card debt

Cash imputation The SCF does not record cash holdings of households. To impute
cash holdings to our measure of liquid assets, we make use of the Survey of Consumer
Payment Choice, administered by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, for 2008 (the
earliest survey year). This survey reports that median cash holdings on person and
property was $69 (Foster et al., 2011, Table 9). Median wealth in checking, saving,
money market, and call accounts in the SCF 2001 is $2, 850. We therefore increase
proportionately all individual household holdings of these assets by a factor of 1 +
(69 × 2) /2, 850 = 1.05, where the 2 multiplying the median individual holdings of cash
accounts for the fact that there are two adults in most households.

Unsecured debt As for the calculation of revolving credit card debt, the SCF asks
the following questions about credit card balances: (i) “How often do you pay on your
credit card balance in full?” Possible answers are: (a) Always or almost always; (b)
Sometimes; or (c) Almost never. (ii) “After the last payment, roughly what was the
balance still owed on these accounts?” From the first question, we identify households
with revolving debt as those who respond (b) Sometimes or (c) Almost Never. We
then use the answer to the second question, for these households only, to compute
statistics about credit card debt. This strategy (common in the literature, e.g., see
Telyukova, 2011) avoids including, as debt, purchases made through credit cards in
between regular payments.




                                           2
B.2     Measurement of hand-to-mouth households

Based on the discussion of Section 4 in the paper, we use the following definitions of
hand-to-mouth (HTM) households. Let mi be the average balance of liquid assets over
the past month for household i as reported by the SCF, and ai be the stock of illiquid
assets. Let yi be her monthly labor income (annual labor income from the SCF divided
by 12). Finally, let mi be household’s i reported credit limit in the survey.

Household i is HTM if either
                                     mi ≤ −0.90 · mi                                   (B1)
or
                                                       yi
                                 mi ≥ 0 and mi ≤                                       (B2)
                                                      2·f
where f is the frequency of pay. For monthly frequency f = 1, for biweekly f = 2, and
for weekly f = 4. Since the frequency of pay is not available from the SCF, we do all
our calculations under three alternative assumptions: weekly, bi-weekly, and monthly
frequency.

Household i is wealthy HTM if either

                               mi ≤ −0.90 · mi and ai > 0                              (B3)

or
                                                  yi
                           mi ≥ 0 and mi ≤           and ai > 0.                       (B4)
                                                 2·f
Poor HTM households are all the residual HTM households who are not wealthy HTM,
i.e., those who have ai ≤ 0. In our sample, less than 1% of households have negative
illiquid wealth, mostly due to negative housing equity.

Table B1 row (i) reports the calculation with the baseline definition of liquid and illiquid
wealth described in the main text.

We also offer a robustness analysis on these measures. First, we use a stricter definition
of liquid wealth that only includes cash, checking, saving, money markets and call
accounts (and therefore excludes directly held mutual funds, stocks, bonds and T-
Bills which are, arguably, less liquid). Second, we subtract from liquid wealth “pre-
committed expenditures” that effectively reduce the amount of liquidity available to
be spent on discretionary consumption. From the SCF we can identify only a subset
of these expenses. In particular, we define committed consumption as the sum of
monthly equivalent rent, support payments (alimony, child support, etc.), payments
on home loans, car payments, education loans, consumption loans, and loans from
pensions. Utility bills are not reported in SCF, and hence we underestimate this class

                                             3
                                                       Total HTM Households
                                                      Week Bi-week Month
                  (i) Baseline                        0.177   0.220   0.296
                  (ii) Strict liquid definition       0.189   0.241   0.334
                  (iii) Committed expend.             0.189   0.247   0.330
                  (iv) Vehicles                       0.177   0.220   0.296
                  (v) All                             0.203   0.272   0.372

                                                      Wealthy HTM Households
                                                      Week Bi-week Month
                  (i) Baseline                        0.089   0.120  0.179
                  (ii) Strict liquid definition       0.100   0.139  0.214
                  (iii) Committed expend.             0.095   0.139  0.204
                  (iv) Vehicles                       0.135   0.175  0.245
                  (v) All                             0.160   0.222  0.318

                                                      Total HTM in Net Worth
                                                      Week Bi-week Month
                  (i) Baseline                        0.096   0.112    0.135
                  (ii) Strict liquid definition       0.096   0.112    0.135
                  (iii) Committed expend.             0.102   0.120    0.146
                  (iv) Vehicles                       0.043   0.048    0.056
                  (v) All                             0.045   0.052    0.061

Table B1: Estimates of Hand-to-Mouth (HTM) households. Entries are percentages of
the total population. The labels Week, Bi-week and Month refer to the assumptions
on the frequency of pay. Row (i) reports the calculation with the baseline definition
of liquid and illiquid wealth; (ii) uses a stricter definition of liquid wealth which ex-
cludes directed held MF, stocks, and bonds; (iii) subtracts from income an estimate
of commitment expenditures; (iv) adds to illiquid wealth the net value of vehicles; (v)
combines (ii), (iii), and (iv).

of expenditures. Third, we use a broader definition of illiquid wealth that also includes
vehicles (excluded from the baseline definition of illiquid assets). Note that 86% of
households in the SCF own a vehicle and, for many households, this is the major
component of their non-liquid wealth. While the first two modifications increase the
total number of HTM agents, this third one only affects the split between “poor” and
“wealthy” hand to mouth but not the total fraction of HTM households.

As reported in the main text, our analysis leads us to conclude that between 18% and
37% of US households are hand-to-mouth, and between 50% and 80% of them are
wealthy hand-to-mouth, depending mainly on the pay frequency and on whether one
expands the notion of illiquid wealth by including vehicles.

Finally, for comparison, we also compute the fraction of HTM agents in terms of net

                                                  4
worth. We apply the definition in (B1) and (B2), with the only difference that in those
definitions we use net worth instead of liquid wealth. The bottom part of Table B1
show that the fraction of agents HTM in terms of net worth never exceeds 15%, and
is as low as 4-5% for many of our definitions.



C     Calibration

C.1     Initial asset positions

We divide households in the SCF into 21 groups based on their earnings and calculate
1) the fraction with zero holdings, and 2) the median liquid and illiquid wealth in each
group, conditional on positive holdings. When we simulate life-cycles in the model,
we create the same groups based on the initial earnings draw. Within each group,
we initialize a fraction of agents with zero assets, and the rest with the corresponding
median holdings of liquid and illiquid wealth. For example, in the median initial
earnings group, the fraction of households with zero liquid (illiquid) wealth is 14%
(55%). For those with positive holdings, median liquid wealth is $2,300, and median
illiquid wealth is $7,700.


C.2     Service flow from housing

To calculate the service flow from housing (the parameter ζ in the model), we start
from the following relationship holding at any given date t:

                     ζt = rth − mht − nht − 1 − τtded       τtprop + imort
                                                                            
                                                                      t                (C1)

where (as for the left hand side variable) every variable on the right hand side is ex-
pressed as a fraction of a unit of housing stock. Specifically, rth is the rental value of a
unit of housing, mht are maintenance and repair expenditures, nht are home-owner insur-
ance expenditures, τtprop are property taxes, and imort
                                                   t     are mortgage interests payments.
The formula accounts for the fact that these latter two items are tax deductible at the
(average) marginal tax rate τ ded . This formula reflects that owning housing wealth has
both costs (maintenance, insurance, property taxes, and mortgage interests) and ben-
efits (imputed rental value of the space and tax deductibility of mortgage interests and
property taxes).

We omit from this calculation housing price appreciation net of physical depreciation
because this component is included in the calculation of the financial return on total


                                             5
illiquid wealth described in Section C.3. We now explain how we measure all the
ingredients in equation (C1). Our final value for ζ is computed as an average of ζt over
the period 1960-2009, the same period used to compute asset returns in Section C.3.

Our starting point is the total value of residential housing from the Flow of Funds
(Table B100). Residential housing can be tenant-occupied or owner-occupied. NIPA
Table 2.5.5 (line 20) reports rents from tenant-occupied housing. For owner-occupied
housing, NIPA uses a “rental equivalence approach” stating that the housing services
produced by a owner-occupied unit are deemed to be equal in value to the rentals that
would be paid on the market for accommodations of the same size, quality and type.
NIPA Table 2.5.5 (line 21) reports these “imputed” rents. Computing total rents over
the total value of the residential housing stock over the sample period yields rh = 7.9%.

We set maintenance and repair expenditures mh at 1 percent of the stock (an upper
bound, see below). The Federal Reserve Board (http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/
settlement/default.htm) estimates the cost of home-owner insurance nh at 0.35 percent
per year. Poterba and Sinai (2008) report an average annual property tax τ prop of 1
percent.

To compute mortgage interest payments imort as a fraction of the value of the housing
stock, we proceed as follows. As a measure of mortgage interest rates, we use the 30-
year interest on conventional mortgages (series MORTG from St. Louis Fed “Federal
Reserve Economic Data – FRED”) which averages 8.3 percent over this period. To
calculate the average loan-value ratio, we divide the total outstanding stock of home
mortgages from the Flow of Funds (series HMLBSHNO from FRED) by the total value
of residential housing from the Flow of Funds (the same series used above), which gives
an average value of 0.36 over this period. By multiplying, year by year, the interest
rate by the loan-value ratio, we obtain an estimate of mortgage interest payments per
unit of housing owned of 2.9 percent.

Finally, Barro and Redlick (2011) report that the average marginal Federal tax rate
τ ded over this period was 23.8 percent.

Combining all these components into (C1), and averaging over the sample period, we
obtain an estimate of ζ of 4.2 percent per year. This estimate is a lower bound for
various reasons.

First, if one repeats the calculation for rh only on the stock of owner-occupied housing
by using the value of residential housing wealth at current cost (i.e., market value) for
owner-occupied housing from NIPA Table 5.1 (line 11) together with the imputed rents
from owner-occupied housing from NIPA Table 2.5.5, one obtains a higher value for


                                           6
rh , 8.6% instead of 7.9%, a result which confirms that the conventional wisdom that
the stock of owner-occupied housing is, on average, of better quality.

Second, the Census reports estimates of “maintenance and repair” expenditures for
both owner-occupied housing and for all residential properties (http://www.census.gov/
construction/c50/c50index.html). These estimates are considerably below our baseline
of 1 percent per year. Using the Census estimates for mht , we obtain values of ζ which
are 0.8-0.9 percentage point higher.

Third, property taxes can be thought of as the price to pay to gain access to certain
local services (notably, public schooling). As a result, they are not entirely a cost, as
they imply a utility flow as well. Adding back 50 percent of property taxes in the
calculation increases ζ by 0.9 percentage points.

Fourth, the service flow originates from the housing stock, whereas in the model a is
the net value of illiquid assets. These two values differ because 1) housing is a leveraged
claim, and 2) housing is only one asset class (albeit the largest) among illiquid wealth.
From the SCF 2001, the median and mean gross housing wealth to net illiquid wealth
ratios are, respectively, 1 and 1.6. By applying ζ to a we implicitly use a ratio of one.

To conclude, we choose a value of 1 percent per quarter for ζ and the calculations
reported in this section lead us to think that this may be a conservative estimate.


C.3     Returns on liquid and illiquid assets

Risk adjustment Since in the model we abstract from aggregate risk, we perform
a “risk-adjustment” on the returns of all our asset classes.

In the data, assets have differ returns because of the risk properties of their dividend
stream, as usual, and because of their liquidity value. In our model, we have abstracted
from aggregate risk, and hence the only source of return differentials is liquidity sum-
marized (arguably, in reduced form) by the existence of transaction costs.

We outline two approaches to identify the portion of the return associated with the
liquidity properties of the asset in question. The “residual approach” uses a minimum
amount of asset pricing theory to filter out from the observed return the component
due to aggregate risk and identifies the one due to liquidity residually. The “direct
approach” uses existing estimates of liquidity premia from the literature.




                                            7
C.3.1    Residual Approach

Then, the Euler equation for an asset i at date t can be written as

                                             i
                                                   1 − `it+1
                                                           
                         1 = Et M RSt+1 1 + rt+1                                      (C2)

                                                                          i
where M RSt+1 is the marginal rate of substitution of the asset holder, rt+1  is the return
                                                      i
of the asset (price appreciation cum dividend), and `t+1 ≥ 0 is an additional component
of the return that captures the “liquidity value” of asset i (highest for `it+1 = 0). For
example, Lagos (2010, equation 1) derives the Euler equation (C2) from a model with
search frictions where some assets, beyond paying a stream of dividends, are better
than others as a medium of exchange for the final consumption good in a decentralized
frictional market. There, `it+1 is a function of the model primitives (e.g., the lower the
probability for the holder of asset i to meet a buyer in the frictional market, the higher
is `it+1 ).

For an asset which is safe, yields no dividends, and has perfect liquidity, the Euler
equation (C2) implies
                                  1 = Et [M RSt+1 ] .                               (C3)
                                            i
                                                        
Abstracting from second order terms, 1 + rt+1   1 − `it+1 ' 1+rt+1
                                                                 i
                                                                    −`it+1 , rearranging
(C2) and using (C3), one can obtain the following reformulation for (the unconditional
version of) that Euler equation:

                   E ri = −cov M RS, ri + cov M RS, `i + E (`)
                                                    
                                                                                      (C4)

which yields an intuitive expression for the average return of the asset. The first term in
the RHS of (C4) encodes the classical risk premium due to the comovement between the
return of the asset and the marginal rate of substitution of the asset holder. The second
and third terms capture the additional components of the return associated with the
liquidity value. An asset with low liquidity properties (E (`) large) and liquidity value
that is negatively correlated with the marginal rate of substitution (positive correlation
between ` and M RS) must command a high financial return to be held by risk-averse
households. See Lagos (2010, equation 20), for a reinterpretation of the Euler equation
(C2) exactly along these lines.

In this context, risk adjusting the return ri means eliminating the first covariance com-
ponent cov (M RS, ri ) from the return in (C4). This covariance-component, however,
is model-specific since the M RS depends on preferences and market structure. Our
model cannot be used for such calculation since it has no aggregate uncertainty. We
therefore propose two empirical strategies to perform this risk adjustment.


                                            8
First, a plausible assumption, which allows making a risk-adjustment without taking
a stand on the M RS, is
                             var ri > −cov ri , M RS
                                                     
                                                                               (C5)
Under this inequality, one can subtract from the expected return the observed variance
of the return and obtain a lower bound for the component of the return which is
associated to liquidity, i.e., for the risk-adjusted return.

A second plausible upper bound for the term −cov (ra , M RS) can be constructed us-
ing the insight that, empirically and theoretically, aggregate income volatility exceeds
the volatility of the aggregate component of consumption. From NIPA Table 2.1 (se-
ries: Compensation of Employees plus 0.66× series Proprietor’s Income) and from the
St. Louis FRED database (series: Civilian Employment), we compute labor income
per worker and estimate a stochastic process for the residuals of this series around
a deterministic linear trend. These residuals are well approximated as an AR1 with
autoregressive coefficient of 0.95 and annualized variance of the innovation equal to
0.003. Next, we use our Epstein-Zin-Weil preference specification parameterized as in
our calibration (i.e., with risk aversion equal to 4, IES equal to 1.5 and discount factor
equal to 0.941) to compute the implied volatility of the MRS, when the consumption
process equals the labor income process. See Chen, Favilukis, and Ludvigson (2013,
equation 5) for the analytical expression of the MRS with Epstein-Zin-Weil preferences.

Let M RS denote this alternative time series proxy for the M RS. We find that
         
std M RS = 0.044. Since this is, arguably, an upper bound for the volatility of
the M RS in the data, we can write the inequality

           −cov (ra , M RS) < std (ra ) · std (M RS) < std (ra ) · std M RS .
                                                                           
                                                                                     (C6)


and use the last (measurable from the data) term in this inequality for the risk ad-
justment. In what follows, we refer to the first strategy based on inequality (C5) as
risk-adjustment strategy S1 and to the second strategy based on inequality (C6) as
strategy S2.

Nominal returns We apply this methodology to all individual asset classes we
consider within the liquid and illiquid wealth groups. All our calculations refer to the
period 1960-2006. We perform this calculation in nominal terms first, since we are
interested in after-tax returns and taxes apply to nominal returns. Then, we make an
adjustment for inflation. We set the annual inflation rate to 4% (the average over this
period was 4.1%).

Recall that our definition of liquid assets comprises: cash, money market, checking,

                                            9
savings and call accounts plus directly held mutual funds, stocks, bonds, and T-Bills.
Our baseline measure of illiquid assets includes net housing worth, retirement accounts,
life insurance policies, CDs, and saving bonds.

We set the nominal return on cash and all non-interest bearing accounts to zero. We set
the return on savings accounts, T-Bills, savings bonds, and life insurance (assuming
actuarially fair contracts) to the interest rate on 3-month T-Bills (Federal Reserve
Board, FRB hereafter, database). Over the period 1960-2006, we obtain an average
nominal return on 3-month T-Bills of 5.33% (SD 2.76%) with an implied risk-adjusted
return of 5.25% under strategy S1 and 5.21% under strategy S2.

For CDs (for which data are available only starting from 1964 in the FRB database)
we compute a return of 6.29% (SD 3.13%) corresponding to a risk-adjusted return of
6.2% under both strategies.

For equities, we use Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) value-weighted
returns, assuming dividends are reinvested, and obtain an annualized nominal return
of 11.1% (SD 17.89%), with an implied risk-adjusted nominal return of 7.9% under
strategy S1 and 10.3% under strategy S2. Note that our risk-adjustment S1 closes half
of the gap between equity and bond returns. This is a generous adjustment, in light
of the fact that Lagos (2010) concludes that 90% of the equity premium is liquidity
driven (and hence the risk adjustment would only account for 10 percent of the gap,
similarly to what obtained from our risk-adjustment strategy S2).

The SCF reports the equity share for directly held mutual funds, stocks and bonds and
for retirement accounts, which allows us to apply separate returns on the equity and safe
components of each saving instrument. An important feature of retirement accounts
is the employer’s matching rate. Over 70% of households in our sample with positive
balance on their retirement account have employer-run retirement plans. The literature
on this topic finds that, typically, employers match 50% of employees’ contributions
up to 6% of earnings, but the vast majority of employees do not contribute above
this threshold (e.g., Papke and Poterba, 1995). As a result, we raise the return on
retirement accounts by a factor of 1.35.

To compute the rate of return on housing (appreciation net of physical depreciation),
we follow two alternative methods. The first method replicates the calculation in
Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2010). We measure housing wealth for
the household sector from the Flow of Funds (Table B100) and construct an index
measuring the growth in residential housing wealth. We then subtract population
growth in order to correct for the growth in housing quantity. We obtain an average
annual nominal return of 6.6% (SD 7.3%) implying a risk-adjusted nominal return of


                                           10
                                                        Nominal
                                          Mean            SD        Risk-Adjusted
        Cash, checking accounts            0.00          0.00            0.00
        3-month T-bills                    5.33           2.76           5.25
        Saving acc./bonds, Life ins.       5.33           2.76           5.25
        3-month CDs (1964-2009)            6.29          3.13            6.20
        Stocks                            11.06          17.89           7.86
        Housing                            6.56          7.30            6.03

                                          Nominal       Mean    Real After-Tax
                                       Risk-Adjusted   Tax Rate Risk-Adjusted
        Liquid Wealth                       3.30         23.19       -1.48
        Illiquid Wealth                     6.84          7.86        2.29
        Net Worth                           6.30         10.37       1.67

 Table C1: Summary of calculations for returns of various asset classes (1960-2009)

6% under the risk-adjustment strategy S1 and 6.2% under strategy S2.

Second, we use the calculations of Piazzesi and Schneider (2007) who list different
estimates for the real return on housing over the postwar period. Their Tables B1
and B2 report both means and standard deviation, and hence we can calculate risk-
adjusted returns. We find that their estimates range between 1.7 and 2.7 percent per
year in real terms under both risk-adjustment strategies, and hence in line with the
6% nominal obtained from the first approach, given our assumed inflation rate of 4%.

Finally, we note that both risk-adjustment strategies lead to very similar results, except
for the case of stocks where the first strategy leads to much lower risk-adjusted returns.


C.3.2     Direct Approach

We take the view that the entire return on saving bonds, 3-month T-Bills and on
3-month CDs is due to their imperfect liquidity (relative, say, to cash or bank ac-
counts), and hence we do not perform any risk-adjustment. The calculations based on
the residual approach outlined above suggest the adjustment would be rather trivial
anyway.

The most widely cited recent paper on the measurement of liquidity risk for equities
is Pastor and Stambaugh (JPE, 2003, PS thereafter). PS study whether liquidity
(measured as the temporary effect of order flows on stock prices) is a relevant factor
in explaining the cross-section of stock returns, over and above the standard Fama-
French factors. Their answer is quite striking, the authors rank stocks by decile of

                                            11
sensitivity to their measure of aggregate liquidity risk and show that liquidity accounts
for an excess return of 7.5% between the top and the bottom decile, and roughly 3.5%
between the median and the bottom decile over the period 1966-1999.

If we assume that stocks in the bottom decile of the PS classification (the most liquid)
are akin to T-Bills in their liquidity properties, and that the median stock is repre-
sentative of the equity portfolio held by our agents, then we obtain a risk-adjusted
nominal return for stocks of 5.33 + 3.5 = 8.83% under this strategy (that we call S3).

Since we are not aware of an equivalent calculation in the literature for housing, we
proceed as follows. Over the period 1966-1999, the illiquidity premium computed by
PS represents 3.5/6.9=51% of the excess return for stocks. It is reasonable to think
therefore that, since housing is less liquid than the median stock, a larger portion of
the excess return of housing (1.23%) stems from its illiquid nature. If we assume that
this portion is 2/3, we obtain a risk-adjusted nominal return for housing of 5.33+1.23∗
0.66 = 6.14%.

Overall, strategy S3 yields a return differential between total illiquid and liquid wealth
in between that obtained with strategy S1 and that obtained with strategy S2.


C.3.3    Calculation of real after-tax returns on liquid and illiquid assets

In light of these results, we proceed with our calculations using the first, more conserva-
tive, strategy for risk-adjustment, S1. To complete our calculations we need estimates
for (i) tax rates and (ii) inflation.

Capital income tax rates Kiefer et al. (2002, Table 5) report the effective tax
schedule on interests and dividends, and on long term capital gains by ten income
brackets in 2000. We apply the interests and dividend tax rates on all asset returns with
two exceptions. First, we apply the capital gain tax rate on the return to retirement
accounts. Second, we follow Poterba and Sinai (2008) and set to zero the effective tax
rate on housing returns. They write that “since 1997, married (single) homeowners
have been able to realize $500,000 ($250,000) of capital gains tax-free after a holding
period of two years. Relatively few accruing housing capital gains are likely to face
taxation under this regime.”

Real after-tax returns We apply these nominal returns (by asset type) and these
tax rates (by asset type and household income bracket) to each household portfolio in
the SCF and compute average risk-adjusted after-tax nominal returns in the population
for liquid wealth, illiquid wealth, and net worth. Finally, we subtract 4% inflation to
each rate of return, and obtain risk-adjusted after-tax real returns of -1.48% for liquid

                                            12
      0.6                                                                                         0.6
                  Labor Income
                                                                                                                  Labor Income
                  Nondurable Consumption
      0.5                                                                                         0.5             Consumption
                  Iliquid Wealth/10
                  Liquid Wealth/10                                                                                Net Worth/10


      0.4                                                                                         0.4



      0.3                                                                                         0.3



      0.2                                                                                         0.2



      0.1                                                                                         0.1



       0                                                                                           0
            25        30   35   40        45   50  55        60   65   70        75   80                    25    30   35     40    45   50  55   60   65    70   75   80
                                               Age                                                                                       Age



 (a) Mean earnings, consumption and wealth in (b) Mean earnings, consumption and wealth in
 the two asset model                          the one asset model

      0.7                                                                                           0.7

                  Variance Log Labor Income                                                                       Variance Log Labor Income
      0.6                                                                                           0.6           Variance Log Consumption
                  Variance Log Consumption


      0.5                                                                                           0.5


      0.4                                                                                           0.4


      0.3                                                                                           0.3


      0.2                                                                                           0.2


      0.1                                                                                           0.1


        0                                                                                               0
                 25        30        35        40       45        50        55        60                         25      30        35     40      45    50        55        60
                                                Age                                                                                        Age



  (c) Variance log earnings and log consumption                                                 (d) Variance log earnings and log consumption
  in the two asset model                                                                        in the two asset model

Figure C1: Life-cycle profiles (means and variances) in the one-asset and two-asset
models

wealth, 2.29% for illiquid wealth, and 1.67% for net worth. Table C1 summarizes these
calculations.

The real after-tax risk adjusted asset returns reported in Table 2 in the main text and
in the last column of Table C1 in this Appendix reflect strategy S1.


C.4         Life-cycle plots

Panels (a) and (b) in Figure C1 plot the average lifecycle profile of income, nondurable
consumption, and asset accumulation in the baseline model and in the one-asset coun-
terpart. In the two-asset model depicted in panel (a), wealth accumulation to finance
consumption in retirement is done entirely through the illiquid (but high-return) ve-
hicle, whereas average holdings of liquid wealth are fairly constant over the lifetime.
Compared to the one-asset model in panel (b), in the two-asset model wealth accumu-

                                                                                           13
                                             3



                                            2.5


                                                                                                   Model


              (normalized to 1 at age 50)
                                             2
                Median Liquid Wealth


                                            1.5                       SCF data


                                             1



                                            0.5



                                             0
                                             50   51   52   53   54   55   56    57 58   59   60   61   62   63   64   65
                                                                                  Age



Figure C2: Pattern of median liquid wealth around retirement in the model (where
retirement age is 59 for all households) and in the SCF data. SCF data are 3-year
moving averages. Model is yearly averages of quarterly values.

lation starts somewhat later (as the households need enough liquid funds to justify the
first deposit), but then the value of illiquid wealth grows at a faster rate, reflecting the
slightly larger financial return.

Panels (c) and (d) plot the variance of log earnings and consumption in the two models.
Over the working age, the total increase is quite similar across the two models, but the
shape of consumption dispersion differs. In particular, consumption inequality grows
faster in the two-asset model between age 30 and age 50, as many households are
wealthy hand-to-mouth after having saved into the illiquid vehicle.

Figure C2 zooms in the age range 50-65 to display the hump in median liquid wealth
around retirement in the model and in the SCF data. In the model, households cu-
mulate liquid wealth in anticipation of retirement to smooth the drop in income. The
micro data display a similar pattern. Unsurprisingly, in the data the hump is smoother
since not every individual retires at the same age.




                                                                                 14
                                        ∆cAQ2   ∆cBQ2       ∆cAQ3   ∆cBQ3       β2
              Baseline                  0.19    0.06        -0.09   0.07        0.15
              Surprise for all          0.20    0.00        -0.10   0.19        0.25
              Anticipated by all        0.07    0.00        -0.08   0.06        0.11

Table D1: Breakdown of the model’s rebate coefficient into different component for
the three different informational assumptions. ∆cgQt denotes consumption growth of
group g ∈ {A, B} at quarter t ∈ {2, 3}. The last
                                                column is the rebate coefficient (β2 )
                   A      B         B      A
computed as (∆cQ2 − ∆cQ2 ) + (∆cQ3 − ∆cQ3 ) /2


D      More on the rebate experiment

D.1      Decomposition of the rebate coefficient

Table D1 reports the decomposition of the rebate coefficient into its four components
(the consumption growth of groups A and B at Q2 and Q3) for the three different
information structures. Many of the numbers in this table have an economic interpre-
tation. As explained, in the baseline where the rebate is a surprise for group A only,
the consumption response of group A at Q2 (∆cA     Q2 ) is the MPC out of the unexpected
check. Clearly, in the case where the rebate is a surprise for all, ∆cA        B
                                                                      Q2 and ∆cQ3 are also
the MPC’s out of the unexpected check. The table shows that these three numbers are
indeed the same, roughly 19%, modulo small approximation/simulation errors.

The consumption response of group B at Q2 is the MPC of the news that the rebate
will be paid next quarter and equals 6%. Both ∆cB                                A
                                                     Q3 in the baseline and ∆cQ2 , in the
case where the policy is fully anticipated, represent the MPC out of the check whose
arrival was anticipated a quarter ahead of time. Finally, ∆cB    Q2 is exactly zero in the
case where the policy is a surprise for all because group B is still unaware of the rebate
at that point.


D.2      Robustness

Table D2 summarizes our sensitivity analysis with respect to preference parameters
(risk aversion and IES), access to credit (borrowing costs and limits), desirability of
the illiquid asset (financial return and consumption flow), and size of the idiosyncratic
risk.46 The analysis is done for all three information structures, and for both the one-
asset and the two-asset models. For every parameterization, we recalibrate the discount
  46
     The table does not report sensitivity with respect to the transaction cost κ because it can be
easily inferred from the figures in the paper.


                                                15
factor β to match median illiquid wealth (as a fraction of average income).

Preferences       Increasing the coefficient of relative risk aversion from 2 to 6 raises
the rebate coefficient because households hold more illiquid wealth as a precautionary
saving instrument in case they are hit by large shocks. As a result, the calibrated dis-
count factor needed to match the median illiquid wealth-income ratio is lower. Higher
impatience increases the MPC of all agents.

As we mention in the main text, the IES plays a powerful role. Households who are
more willing to substitute consumption intertemporally are more likely to save heavily
in the illiquid asset, and to be wealthy hand-to-mouth, during working-age to enjoy
higher consumption at retirement. Moreover, those households who learn about the
rebate in advance are less likely to use costly credit to start spending the check earlier,
and would rather wait one extra quarter to consume it. Indeed, with higher IES there
are more hand-to-mouth agents and fewer agents using credit in the economy. Both
forces push up the rebate coefficient.

Credit     Lowering and increasing the borrowing cost, relative to the baseline, in-
creases the rebate coefficient. Cheap credit creates an arbitrage opportunity: many
households borrow up to the limit to invest into the illiquid asset, and end up wealthy
hand-to-mouth at the credit limit (recall the example in Appendix A). When credit is
very expensive, few households ever borrow and there are many more hand-to-mouth
households at the zero kink for liquid wealth.

Table D2 shows that our credit limit is not too binding. Doubling the limit has no
impact on the rebate coefficient. Tightening the limit down to zero has similar effects
to prohibitively increasing borrowing costs.

Desirability of the illiquid asset         Raising the return wedge and the housing-
service flow makes the illiquid asset more desirable and induces more households to be
wealthy hand-to-mouth which, in turn, increases the rebate coefficient.

Idiosyncratic earnings risk Making the individual earnings process more volatile
has similar effects to raising risk aversion. It pushes households in the model to hold
more illiquid wealth as a precautionary saving instrument. The discount factor required
to replicate the median illiquid wealth-income ratio in the data is lower, and this lower
degree of patience increases the MPC of all agents.




                                            16
                                                 Rebate coefficient
   Information structure            Baseline   Surprise for All Anticipated by All

   Assets in model                 One   Two   One      Two     One       Two

   Borrowing rate          5%      <1%   19%   <1%      19%     <1%       19%
                           10%     <1%   15%    3%      25%     <1%       11%
                           15%      3%   25%    3%      30%     <1%       17%

   Credit limit            0       <1%   28%    3%      30%     <1%       27%
                           0.18    <1%   14%    3%      25%     <1%       11%
                           0.36    <1%   14%    3%      24%     <1%       11%

   Risk aversion           2       <1%   13%    3%      23%     <1%       10%
                           4       <1%   15%    3%      25%     <1%       11%
                           6       <1%   17%    4%      28%      3%       13%

   IES                     1.05    <1%   9%     3%      17%     <1%        7%
                           1.5     <1%   15%    3%      25%     <1%       11%
                           2       <1%   20%    3%      33%     <1%       16%

   Return wedge            2.54    <1%   15%    3%      25%     <1%       11%
                           3.54    <1%   15%    3%      25%     <1%       11%
                           4.54    <1%   14%    3%      25%     <1%       11%

   Housing service flow    0.02    <1%   14%    3%      22%     <1%       11%
                           0.04    <1%   15%    3%      25%     <1%       11%
                           0.06    <1%   18%    3%      25%     <1%       15%

   Variance of shocks      0.002   <1%   14%    3%      23%     <1%       11%
                           0.003   <1%   15%    3%      25%     <1%       11%
                           0.004   <1%   16%    4%      27%     <1%       11%


Table D2: Robustness analysis. The borrowing rate is the nominal annual rate on
unsecured credit. The credit limit is expressed as a fraction of annual income, as in
the model. The return wedge is the differential after-tax return between illiquid and
liquid assets. In all sensitivity analyses, the middle row is the value of the baseline
calibration. For every parameterization, we recalibrate the discount factor β to match
median illiquid wealth (as a fraction of average income).




                                          17
E       Numerical solution of the model

E.1      Detailed Description of Model

E.1.1    Preliminaries

An agent of age j can hold two assets in the model: an illiquid asset, aj , that has
an associated price q a ; and a liquid asset, mj , that has an associated price q m (mj+1 ),
where dependence on mj+1 reflects the possibility of a wedge between borrowing cost
and interest rate on liquid saving.

In this appendix we make the following modifications relative to the main text:

    1. For ease of notation, we let ψj ≡ (α, zj ), and write earnings at age j as yj (ψj ).
       We denote by F (ψj |ψj−1 ) the conditional probability distribution of earnings and
       assumes ψj can only take a finite number of values.

    2. In the main text we defined a tax function T (yj , aj , mj ). Since this tax function
       is separable between earnings and the two assets, in this appendix we express
       its earnings component as T (yj ) to reflect the (non-linear) tax on earnings, and
       interpret the prices (q a , q m ) as after-tax prices.

    3. We use ej to denote total expenditures. That is ej ≡ cj + hj where cj is non-
       durable expenditures and hj is housing expenditures on the rental market. Be-
       cause of the assumption of a frictionless rental market for housing, the model
       can be solved in two stages. In the first stage we solve for total expenditures,
       allowing for a flow of consumption services from the illiquid asset holdings in
       period j in the amount of ζaj+1 . In the second stage we solve the within-period
       problem of allocating total spending on non-durables and rental housing services,
       conditional on the optimal total expenditure and holdings of illiquid assets. In
       Section E.2 below we show the solution to this second stage problem yields the
       indirect period utility function ej+1 + ζaj+1 , which we use in the first stage.

We define the following objects:

    • xN
       j is total liquid funds available for consuming and saving, for an agent who is
      not adjusting:
                           xN
                            j (mj , aj , yj ) ≡ mj + yj − T (yj ) + rebj

       rebj is equal to 0 unless a rebate is received in period j.


                                             18
    • xA
       j is total liquid funds available for consuming and saving, for an agent who is
      adjusting, before paying the adjustment cost:

                         xA
                          j (mj , aj , yj ) ≡ mj + aj + yj − T (yj ) + rebj

                                             = xN
                                                j (mj , aj , yj ) + aj


    • VjA (xj , ψj ) is the value function if the agent accesses the illiquid asset. eA
                                                                                      j (xj , ψj )
      is the associated consumption policy function.

    • VjN (xj , aj , ψj ) is the value function if the agent does not access the illiquid asset.
      eN
       j (xj , aj , ψj ) is the associated consumption policy function.

    • We define the expected value function, where the expectation is taken over the
      current period shocks, and so is a function of the current period holdings of the
      two types of assets (since these are chosen the period before) and the previous
      period’s realization of the persistent component of earnings. Note that cash-on-
      hand is only realized when earnings are realized and so is not a state variable for
                                                               
      the expected value function. Dependence of xA     j , xN
                                                             j   on (mj , aj , yj ) is implicit
      in this function and those defined below.
                                  X
                                     max VjA xA
                                                      N N                
          EVj (mj , aj , ψj−1 ) =               j , ψj , Vj    xj , aj , ψj F (ψj |ψj−1 )
                                    ψj ∈Ψj


    • We define a new operator, max.˜    This operator chooses between two objects
      based on which of the corresponding value functions is higher. For example
          
       ˜ eA , eN selects consumption expenditures eA when V A > V N at the corre-
      max
      sponding point in the state space.

    • We define the risk-adjusted expected value function, RVj , as
                                 X     n              1−γ N N               1−γ o
      RVj (mj , aj , ψj−1 )1−γ =    ˜ VjA xA
                                   max         j , ψj     , Vj x j , aj , ψj        F (ψj |ψj−1 )
                                    ψj ∈Ψj


    • We define the functions F Va,j and F Vm,j as
                                      (                                                      )
                            X                       −γ ∂VjA N N              1−γ    ∂VjN
F Va,j (mj , aj , ψj−1 ) =        max
                                   ˜    VjA xA
                                             j , ψj         , Vj xj , aj , ψj                    F (ψj |ψj−1 )
                           ψj ∈Ψj
                                                        ∂aj                            ∂aj
                                      (                                                      )
                            X                       −γ ∂VjA N N              1−γ    ∂VjN
F Vm,j (mj , aj , ψj−1 ) =        max
                                   ˜    VjA xA
                                             j , ψj         , Vj xj , aj , ψj                    F (ψj |ψj−1 )
                           ψ ∈Ψ
                                                        ∂mj                           ∂mj
                            j   j



    • We define Sj = (mj , aj , ψj−1 ) .

                                                 19
E.1.2     Decision Problems

Problem if not adjusting
                                                                                                1
        VjN (xj , aj , ψj ) = max               (1 − β) (ej + ζaj+1 )1−σ + βRVj+1 (Sj+1 )1−σ
                                                                                              1−σ
                                ej ,mj+1


subject to:

                                  q m (mj+1 ) mj+1 + ej ≤ xj
                                                       q a aj+1 = aj
                                                         mj+1 ≥ mj+1 (yj )


Problem if adjusting
                                                                                                1
        VjA (xj , ψj ) =                        (1 − β) (ej + ζaj+1 )1−σ + βRVj+1 (Sj+1 )1−σ
                                                                                              1−σ
                               max
                           ej ,mj+1 ,aj+1


subject to:

                           q m (mj+1 ) mj+1 + q a aj+1 + ej ≤ xj − κ
                                                               mj+1 ≥ mj+1 (yj )
                                                               aj+1 ≥ 0


E.1.3     First-Order Necessary Conditions

To solve the model, we derive the first-order conditions. Note that due to the non-
convexity of the problem, these are not sufficient. Nonetheless, these conditions are
necessary. Our computational approach is to look for all solutions to each set of FOCs,
and then compare the associated value functions at each candidate solution.


No-adjust case             When agents do not adjust, there is one FOC, a standard Euler
Equation (EE):
                               
                                  β               γ−σ
                                qm RVj+1 (Sj+1 )     F Vm,j+1 (Sj+1 )             if mj+1 > 0
                               
                               
                                  β               γ−σ
(1 − β) (ej + ζaj+1 )−σ       = q̄mhRVj+1 (S
                                           i j+1
                                                 )    F Vm,j+1 (Sj+1 )             if mj+1 < 0
                                                             γ−σ
                               
                               ∈ 1m , 1m · βRVj+1 (Sj+1 )
                               
                                                                  F Vm,j+1 (Sj+1 ) if mj+1 = 0
                                     q  q̄



Adjust case For adjusting agents there are two FOCs. One is a standard Euler
Equation (intuitively, the liquid asset can be adjusted costlessly the following period

                                                          20
so an EE holds), the other is a portfolio problem that equates the marginal value of
investing in the two different assets:
                          β
                               RV (S )γ−σ F Vm,j+1 (Sj+1 )                        if mj+1 > 0
                           qjm j+1 j+1
                          
                          
(1 − β) (ej + ζaj+1 )−σ = q̄βmhRVj+1 (S
                                                γ−σ
                                           j+1 )    F Vm,j+1 (Sj+1 )              if mj+1 < 0
                                        i
                          ∈ 1 , 1 · βRV (S )γ−σ F V
                          
                                q m q̄ m          j+1  j+1          m,j+1 (Sj+1 ) if mj+1 = 0



                                          1−β
              (1 − β) (ej + ζaj+1 )−σ =      a
                                               ζ (ej + ζaj+1 )−σ
                                           q
                                           β
                                          + a RVj+1 (Sj+1 )γ−σ F Va,j+1 (Sj+1 )
                                           q

with an inequality for the second FOC when the non-negativity constraint on illiquid
assets (aj+1 ≥ 0) binds.

Below we transform these two equations into an Euler equation and a portfolio con-
straint, so that they can be solved by (i) guessing the solution to the inter-temporal
saving problem, and then (ii) solving the portfolio problem at each guessed value for
savings.


E.1.4    Envelope Conditions

Here we derive the partial derivatives of value function that are required to evaluate
F Va,j and F Vm,j . Our approach is to store these partial derivatives alongside the value
function and policy functions, constructing them recursively. Of course, they may not
be continuous, due to the discrete choice. However, (i) if there is enough uncertainty
in the problem the jumps tend to be smoothed away; and (ii) there are a finite number
points of discontinuity.

Recall that
                          "      (                                                   )#
                                                −γ ∂VjA N N              −γ ∂VjN
        F Vm,j (Sj ) = E max
                          ˜  VjA        xA
                                         j , ψj         , V x   , aj , ψj
                                                    ∂mj j     j
                                                                              ∂mj
                          "      (                                                   )#
                                                −γ ∂VjA N N              −γ ∂VjN
        F Va,j (Sj ) = E max
                          ˜  VjA        xA
                                         j , ψj         , V x   , aj , ψj
                                                    ∂aj j     j
                                                                               ∂aj




                                             21
where the partial derivatives with respect to assets and cash on hand are related by
                                                  
                              ∂VjA      ∂VjA xA j       A
                                     =              ≡ Vx,j
                              ∂mj           ∂xj
                                                  
                              ∂VjN      ∂VjN xN j       N
                                     =              ≡ Vx,j
                              ∂mj           ∂xj
                                 A
                                                  
                              ∂Vj       ∂Vj xA
                                            A
                                                j       A
                                     =              = Vx,j
                               ∂aj          ∂xj

We denote the partial derivative with respect to illiquid assets when not adjusting by

                                        ∂VjN     N
                                             ≡ Va,j
                                         ∂aj

Next, we compute these partial derivatives of the choice-specific value functions. For
the adjust case, it is given by
                                                                        σ
                      A
                    Vx,j (xj , ψj ) = (1 − β) (ej + ζaj+1 )−σ VjA


For the no-adjust case, they are given by
                                            −σ
                        ζ                aj          σ β                                       σ
  N
Va,j (xj , aj , ψj ) = a (1 − β) ej + ζ a         VjN + a RVj+1 (Sj+1 )γ−σ F Va,j+1 (Sj+1 ) VjN
                       q                 q              q
  N                                         −σ   N σ
                                                   
Vx,j (xj , aj , ψj ) = (1 − β) (ej + ζaj+1 )   Vj

In these expression, ej , mj+1 and aj+1 on the RHS should be interpreted as the optimal
decision rules at the point (xj , aj , ψj ).


E.1.5   Recursive Computation

To make progress in constructing these objects recursively, it is useful to define some
intermediate functions:
                                            F Va,j (Sj ) RVj (Sj )γ−σ
                              dj (Sj ) ≡
                                                       1−β
                                              N
                                            Va,j (xj , aj , ψj )
                       gj (xj , aj , ψj ) ≡                  σ
                                            (1 − β) VjN
                                            F Vm,j (Sj ) RVj (Sj )γ−σ
                             µj (Sj ) ≡
                                                     1−β




                                             22
By substituting into the envelope conditions, we obtain the following recursions:
                                  "     (                                                                !−σ )#
                                                                                                     N
                                                 σ−γ                −σ          σ−γ                a j
        µj (Sj ) = RVj (Sj )γ−σ E max      VjA        eA      A
                                                                       , VjN           eN
                                                                            
                                     ˜                 j + ζaj+1                        j +ζ a
                                                                                                   q
                                  −σ
                     ζ         ζ         β
gj (xj , aj , ψj ) = a eNj + a aj      + a dj+1 (Sj+1 )
                     q         q         q
                                  h    n      σ−γ A             −σ                                     oi
                                                                            N σ−γ
         dj (Sj ) = RVj (Sj )γ−σ E max    VjA        ej + ζaA
                                                                             
                                    ˜                        j+1      ,  V j       g j (x j , aj , ψ  j )

These recursions reflect the expected marginal values of illiquid assets (dj ) and total
assets (µj ).


E.1.6    Euler Equations

We can now finally substitute these into the first-order conditions and obtain the Euler
Equations that need to be solved.

For the no-adjust case, we have one Euler equation:
                              
                                  β
                       −σ       µ (Sj+1 )
                                 q m j+1
                                                         if mj+1 > 0
                     aj       
                                  β
               ej + ζ a     = q̄mhµj+1 (Sij+1 )          if mj+1 < 0
                     q        
                              ∈ 1m , 1m × βµj+1 (Sj+1 ) if mj+1 = 0
                              
                                     q   q̄


For the adjusting agents, there are two Euler equations:

                                  
                                     β
                                   qm µj+1 (Sj+1 )          if mj+1 > 0
                                  
                                  
                                     β
               (ej + ζaj+1 )−σ   = q̄mhµj+1 (Sij+1 )         if mj+1 < 0
                                  
                                  ∈ 1m , 1m × βµj+1 (Sj+1 ) if mj+1 = 0
                                  
                                        q   q̄




        (ej + ζaj+1 )−σ =    β
                                d
                             q a j+1
                                       (Sj+1 ) + (1 + τ c ) qζa (ej + ζaj+1 )−σ   if aj+1 > 0
        (ej + ζaj+1 )−σ >    β
                                d
                             q a j+1
                                       (Sj+1 ) + (1 + τ c ) qζa (ej + ζaj+1 )−σ   if aj+1 = 0


E.1.7    Recursive algorithm

The model is computed by recursively solving these Euler Equations backward from
the last period of agents’ life j = J. At each point the state space, we search for
multiple solutions to the first-order conditions, compute the associated value functions
and choose the solution with the highest value. We explicitly allow for the possibility


                                                  23
of solutions at each of the corners and compute the associated value function at these
points.


E.2     Sub-problem for housing and non-durable consumption

In this section we outline the static sub-problem at age j that yields the optimal choice
of housing services hj bought/sold on the rental market, and non-durable consumption
cj . In this problem, total expenditures ej and the allocation of illiquid assets aj+1 are
predetermined. Recall that total housing services sj which yields utility to the agent
also include the flow from the illiquid asset. The household faces the problem:

                                u (ej , aj+1 ) =    max cφj s1−φ
                                                             j
                                                   cj ,sj ,hj
                                subject to:
                            (1 + τ c )cj + hj = ej
                                          sj = hj + ζaj+1
                                         hj ≥ −ζaj+1
                                          cj ≥ 0

The interior solution to this problem is:

                                      φ (ej + ζaj+1 )
                               cj =
                                          1 + τc
                               sj   = (1 − φ) (ej + ζaj+1 )
                               hj = (1 − φ) ej − φζaj+1

The resulting indirect utility function (modulo a multiplicative constant) used in the
first-stage problem is:
                                u (ej , aj+1 ) = ej + ζaj+1 .


E.3     Bounds, grids, interpolation, and computational limits

We now describe the space for each of the state variables for the problem and our
methods for interpolation.


E.3.1    (mj , aj ) space

The risk-adjusted expected value function RVj and the expected marginal values of
the two assets (µj , dj ) are defined over the space (mj , aj ). We discretize this space as

                                              24
follows. Let the lower bound for liquid assets, mj , be given my mj . Let Mj and Aj be
an exogenous, age-dependent upper bound on liquid and illiquid assets, that will be
chosen so that they never bind in the solution. Then the feasible set for (mj , aj ) is
                                                      
                                      mj ∈     mj , Mj
                                      aj ∈ [0, Aj ]

i.e., a rectangular space. We choose grid points in the a dimension to be polynomial
spaced with more points closer to a = 0. We choose grids in the positive m dimension
to be polynomial spaced between m = 0 and m = M , with an explicit point at m = 0.
For the negative m dimension, the grid points are polynomial spaced between m and
m/2, and between m/2 and 0, with more points closer to 0 and m.


E.3.2   (xj , aj ) space
                                
The value functions VjA , VjN       and the decision rules are defined separately for the
adjust and no-adjust cases.

When the agent is adjusting, these are defined over the space of cash on hand condi-
tional on adjusting, xA
                      j . This space is discretized as follows. The lowest possible value
    A
of xj is
                              xA
                               j = mj + min {yj − T (yj )}

and the highest possible value is

                            XjA = Mj + max {yj − T (yj )}

We choose grids in the positive dimension to be polynomial spaced between 0 and XjA ,
with an explicit point at xA                         A
                           j = 0. For the negative xj dimension, the grid points are
polynomial spaced between xA         A                  A
                              j and xj /2, and between xj /2 and 0, with more points
closer to 0 and xA
                 j .
                                                                                      
When the agent is not adjusting, these functions are defined over the space xN  j , aj .
We use the same space as defined above for aj . The xN
                                                     j space is discretized as follows.
                                            N
The lowest and highest possible values of xj are

                            xN
                             j = mj + min {yj − T (yj )}
                           XjN = Mj + max {yj − T (yj )}

subject to these not violating the borrowing limit. The grid points are chosen in
analogous manner to the adjust case.


                                             25
E.3.3   Grid sizes

In the models without borrowing, we use 30 points each in the grids for aj , mj and
xN                                       A
 j , and 50 points in the grid for for xj . In the models with borrowing, we retain
the same grid points as for the models without borrowing but add 16 points in the
negative regions for each of mj , xN        A
                                    j and xj . We use 21 points in the grid for the
realization of the permanent shock. Polynomial spaced grids with points concentrated
at the lower bound are constructed by taking an equally spaced partition, z, of [0, 1],
                                                    1
then constructing a grid for x as xL + (xH − xL ) z k . We use k = 0.4.


E.3.4   Interpolation

We use linear and bilinear interpolation. When using bilinear interpolation over the
(mj+1 , aj+1 ) space, we interpolate along the mj+1 dimension and a diagonal that holds
total assets, mj+1 + aj+1 constant. This provides much more accurate interpolations
than standard bilinear interpolation since the mj+1 is the relevant dimension if the
agent does not adjust at j + 1 while mj+1 + aj+1 is the relevant dimension if the agent
does adjust at j + 1.


E.3.5   Computational details

Our model is very computationally intensive. However, by working with the first order
conditions directly, rather than using value function iteration, and by parallelizing the
computation of decision rules and simulations, we are able to compute the model in
a reasonable time on New York University’s High Performance Computing Bowery
cluster. Using 16 processors, it takes roughly 1-2 hours to solve one parameterization
of the model. This involves iterating over the steady-state of the model (to calibrate
the discount factor, which is computationally equivalent to solving for the interest
rate in a general equilibrium economy), computing the transition path induced by the
policy change (due to the tax change that is needed to balance the government budget
constraint), simulating the economy, and computing rebate coefficients.

The amount of memory (RAM) that is required to store the large number of decision
rules (for each quarter along the transition at every quarter of the lifecycle over a very
large state space) and large number of simulations is significant. Our baseline model
requires around 45Gb of RAM to run.




                                           26
References
Barro, R. J., and C. J. Redlick (2011): “Macroeconomic Effects from Government
 Purchases and Taxes,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1), 51–102.

Favilukis, J., S. Ludvigson, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2010): “The Macroeconomic
  Effects of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk-Sharing in General Equi-
  librium,” Mimeo.

Foster, K., E. Meijer, S. Schuh, and M. Zabek (2011): “The 2009 Survey of Consumer
  Payment Choice,” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Public Policy Discussion Paper, 11-1.

Kiefer, D., R. Carroll, J. Holtzblatt, A. Lerman, J. McCubbin, D. Richardson,
  and J. Tempalski (2002): “The Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of
  2001: Overview and Assessment of Effects on Taxpayers,” National Tax Journal, 55(1),
  89–118.

Lagos, R. (2010): “Asset Prices and Liquidity in an Exchange Economy,” Journal of Mon-
  etary Economics, 57(8), 913 – 930.

Papke, L., and J. Poterba (1995): “Survey Evidence on Employer Match Rates and
  Employee Saving Behavior in 401 (k) Plans,” Economics Letters, 49(3), 313–317.

Pastor, L., and R. Stambaugh (2003): “Liquidity Risk and Expected Stock Returns,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 111(3), 642–685.

Piazzesi, M., and M. Schneider (2007): “Asset Prices and Asset Quantities,” Journal of
  the European Economic Association, 5(2-3), 380–389.

Poterba, J., and T. Sinai (2008): “Income Tax Provisions Affecting Owner-Occupied
  Housing: Revenue Costs and Incentive Effects,” NBER Working Paper, 14253.

Telyukova, I. (2013): “Household Need for Liquidity and the Credit Card Debt Puzzle,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 80(3), 1148–1177.




                                          27
