NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COUNTRY SIZE, INTERNATIONAL TRADE, AND AGGREGATE FLUCTUATIONS
IN GRANULAR ECONOMIES
Julian di Giovanni
Andrei A. Levchenko
Working Paper 17335
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17335

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2011

We are grateful to the editor (Sam Kortum), two anonymous referees, Michael Alexeev, Stijn Claessens,
Fabio Ghironi, Gordon Hanson, Chris House, Marc Melitz, Andy Rose, Matthew Shapiro, Linda Tesar,
and workshop participants at various institutions for helpful suggestions, and to Edith Laget, Lin Ma,
and Ryan Monarch for expert research assistance. Levchenko thanks the National Science Foundation
for financial support under grant SES-0921971. The views expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and should not be attributed to the International Monetary Fund, its Executive Board, its management,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The Supplementary Web Appendix to this paper is
available at http://alevchenko.com/diGiovanni_Levchenko_granular_web_appendix.pdf.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Julian di Giovanni and Andrei A. Levchenko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Country Size, International Trade, and Aggregate Fluctuations in Granular Economies
Julian di Giovanni and Andrei A. Levchenko
NBER Working Paper No. 17335
August 2011
JEL No. F12,F15,F41
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a new mechanism by which country size and international trade affect macroeconomic
volatility. We study a multi-country, multi-sector model with heterogeneous firms that are subject
to idiosyncratic firm-specific shocks. When the distribution of firm sizes follows a power law with
an exponent close to -1, the idiosyncratic shocks to large firms have an impact on aggregate output
volatility. We explore the quantitative properties of the model calibrated to data for the 50 largest economies
in the world. Smaller countries have fewer firms, and thus higher volatility. The model performs well
in matching this pattern both qualitatively and quantitatively: the rate at which macroeconomic volatility
decreases in country size in the model is very close to what is found in the data. Opening to trade increases
the importance of large firms to the economy, thus raising macroeconomic volatility. Our simulation
exercise shows that the contribution of trade to aggregate fluctuations depends strongly on country
size: in the largest economies in the world, such as the U.S. or Japan, international trade increases
volatility by only 1.5-3.5%. By contrast, trade increases aggregate volatility by some 15-20% in a
small open economy, such as Denmark or Romania.
Julian di Giovanni
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street NW
Washington, DC 20431
jdigiovanni@imf.org
Andrei A. Levchenko
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
alev@umich.edu

1

Introduction

Output volatility varies substantially across economies: over the past 35 years, the standard
deviation of annual real per capita GDP growth has been 2.5 times higher in non-OECD
countries compared to the OECD countries. Understanding the sources of these differences
is important, as aggregate volatility itself has an impact on a wide variety of economic
outcomes.1
This paper investigates the role of large firms in explaining cross-country differences in
aggregate volatility. We show that the impact of shocks to large firms on aggregate volatility
can help account for two robust empirical regularities: (i) smaller countries are more volatile;
and (ii) more open countries are more volatile. The key ingredient of our study is that the
distribution of firm size is very fat-tailed – the typical economy is dominated by a few
very large firms (Axtell, 2001). In a recent contribution, Gabaix (2011) demonstrates that
under these conditions idiosyncratic shocks to individual firms do not cancel out and can
instead generate aggregate fluctuations (see also Delli Gatti et al., 2005). Gabaix (2011)
provides both statistical and anecdotal evidence that even in the largest and most diversified
economy in the world – the United States – shocks to the biggest firms can appreciably affect
macroeconomic fluctuations. The economy is “granular,” rather than smooth.
We develop a theoretical and quantitative framework to study the consequences of this
phenomenon in a large cross section of countries. The analysis is based on the canonical
multi-country model with heterogeneous firms in the spirit of Melitz (2003) and Eaton et al.
(2011), implemented on the 50 largest economies in the world. In order to study the impact
of large firms on aggregate fluctuations, the equilibrium total number of firms is determined
endogenously in the model, and the parameters are calibrated to match the observed firm
size distribution. The solution procedure targets the key aggregate country characteristics
– GDPs and average trade volumes – and successfully reproduces a number of non-targeted
features of the micro data, such as the share of exporting firms and the relative size of the
largest firms across countries.
Our main results can be summarized as follows. First, the model endogenously generates
a negative relationship between country size and aggregate volatility. The reason is that
smaller countries will have a smaller equilibrium number of firms (a result known since at
least Krugman, 1980), and thus shocks to the largest firms will matter more for aggregate
1

Numerous studies identify its effects on long-run growth (Ramey and Ramey, 1995), welfare (Pallage
and Robe, 2003; Barlevy, 2004), as well as inequality and poverty (Gavin and Hausmann, 1998; Laursen and
Mahajan, 2005).

1

volatility. In effect, smaller economies are less diversified, when diversification is measured
at the firm level. The model matches this relationship not only qualitatively, but also
quantitatively: the rate at which volatility decreases in country size in the model is very
similar to what is observed in the data. Both in the model and in the data, a typical
country that accounts for 0.5% of world GDP (such as Poland or South Africa) has aggregate
volatility that is 2 times higher than the largest economy in the world – the U.S..
Second, trade openness increases volatility by making the economy more granular. When
a country opens to trade, only the largest and most productive firms export, while smaller
firms shrink or disappear (Melitz, 2003). This effect implies that after opening, the biggest
firms become even larger relative to the size of the economy, thus contributing more to
aggregate output fluctuations. In the counterfactual exercise, we compute what aggregate
volatility would be for each country in autarky, and compare it to the volatility under
the current trade costs. It turns out that at the levels of trade openness observed today,
international trade increases volatility relative to autarky in every country. The importance
of trade for aggregate volatility varies greatly depending on country characteristics. In the
largest economies like Japan or the U.S., aggregate volatility is only 1.5-3.5% higher than
it would have been in complete autarky. In small, remote economies such as South Africa
or New Zealand, trade raises volatility by about 10% compared to autarky. Finally, in
small, highly integrated economies such as Denmark or Romania, international trade raises
aggregate volatility by some 15-20%.
The theoretical link between country size, trade openness, and volatility we explore in
this paper has not previously been proposed. Head (1995) and Crucini (1997) examine the
relationship between country size and volatility in a 2-country international real business
cycle (IRBC) model. In those papers, the smaller country has higher volatility because the
world interest rate is less sensitive to shocks occurring in that country. Thus, following a
positive shock it can expand investment without much of an impact on interest rates.2 Our
explanation for the size-volatility relationship is qualitatively different, and relies instead
on the notion that smaller countries have fewer firms. When it comes to the relationship
between trade openness and volatility, existing explanations have focused on the propagation
2

The Supplementary Web Appendix implements the canonical IRBC model of Backus et al. (1995), and
examines the relationship between country size and volatility, and between trade openness and volatility,
in that model. It turns out that while the calibrated IRBC model can produce higher volatility in smaller
countries, the relationship between country size and volatility in that model is two orders of magnitude
flatter than what is observed in the data. The relationship between trade openness and volatility in the
IRBC model is ambiguous, its sign depending crucially on the elasticity of substitution between domestic
and foreign goods.

2

of global demand or supply shocks (Newbery and Stiglitz, 1984; Kraay and Ventura, 2007).
We show that trade can increase volatility even if the nature of shocks affecting the firms
is unchanged upon opening. Finally, the mechanism in our model resembles the traditional
arguments that smaller countries, and more open countries, will have a less diversified
sectoral production structure, and thus exhibit higher volatility (see Katzenstein, 1985;
OECD, 2006; Blattman et al., 2007, among many others). Our analysis shows that this
argument applies to individual firms as well as sectors, and makes this point quantitatively
precise by calibrating the model to the observed firm size distribution.
Our work is also related to the empirical literature that studies macroeconomic volatility
using disaggregated data. Koren and Tenreyro (2007) explore the importance of sectorspecific shocks in explaining the relationship between a country’s level of development and
its aggregate volatility, while di Giovanni and Levchenko (2009, 2011) use sector-level data
to study the openness-volatility relationship. Canals et al. (2007) analyze sector-level export
data and demonstrate that exports are highly undiversified, both across sectors and across
destinations. Furthermore, they show that this feature of export baskets can explain why
aggregate macroeconomic variables cannot account for much of the movements in the current
account.3
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the empirical regularities
that motivate our study, as well as some novel stylized facts about firm size distributions
in a large cross section of countries. Section 3 develops a simple theoretical framework
and illustrates analytically the mechanisms behind the key results of the paper. Section 4
presents the quantitative results based on a calibrated model of the world economy. Section 5
discusses robustness checks and results based on model perturbations. Section 6 concludes.

2

Basic Facts

Figure 1a presents a scatterplot of log macroeconomic volatility against log country size for
a sample of 143 countries. Volatility is the standard deviation of the yearly growth rate of
real per capita GDP, while country size is the share of the country in world GDP.4 The
3

Our work is complementary to the research agenda that studies the impact of firm dynamics on macroeconomic outcomes in 2-country IRBC models. Ghironi and Melitz (2005) use the heterogeneous firms model
to help account for the persistence of deviations from purchasing power parity, while Alessandria and Choi
(2007) and Ruhl (2008) evaluate the quantitative importance of firm entry and exit for aggregate trade
dynamics. An important difference between these papers and our work is that these contributions examine
consequences of aggregate shocks, while in our paper all the shocks are at the firm level. In addition, our
work features multiple countries, and explains cross-sectional differences in volatility between countries.
4
Detailed variable definitions and sources for all the data in this section are described in Appendix A.

3

Figure depicts the partial correlation between these two variables after netting out per capita
income, as it has been shown that high-income countries tend to experience lower volatility.
As established by Canning et al. (1998) and Furceri and Karras (2007) among others, smaller
countries are more volatile. The elasticity of volatility with respect to country size is about
−0.14 in this set of countries, and the relationship is highly significant, with a t-statistic of
6.2.
Figure 1b presents the scatterplot of log macroeconomic volatility against log trade
openness (imports plus exports as a share of GDP), once again netting out per capita
income. There is a positive and significant relationship: countries that trade more tend to
be more volatile, with a coefficient of 0.33 and a t-statistic of 3.6. This empirical regularity
has been demonstrated in a cross section of countries by Easterly et al. (2001) and Kose et al.
(2003). The cross-country evidence is likely to be affected by reverse causality and omitted
variables problems. Di Giovanni and Levchenko (2009) investigate the openness-volatility
relationship in great detail using industry-level data, which makes it possible to overcome
these econometric estimation concerns. They confirm that the relationship between trade
openness and macroeconomic volatility is indeed positive and economically significant.
The analysis below focuses on the role of large firms in explaining these cross-country
patterns. Anecdotal evidence on the importance of large firms for aggregate fluctuations
abounds. Here, we describe two examples in which the roles of country size and international
trade are especially evident. In New Zealand a single firm, Fonterra, is responsible for a full
one-third of global dairy exports (it is the world’s single largest exporter of dairy products).
Such a large exporter from such a small country clearly matters for the macroeconomy.
Indeed, Fonterra’s sales (95% of which are exports) account for 20% of New Zealand’s
overall exports, and 7% of its GDP.5 Two points about this firm are worth noting. First,
international trade clearly plays a prominent role in making Fonterra as large as it is.
And second, the distribution of firm size in the dairy sector is indeed highly skewed. The
second largest producer of dairy products in New Zealand is 1.3% the size of Fonterra.
This phenomenon is not confined to commodity exporting countries. In Korea, a larger
manufacturing-based economy, the 10 biggest business groups account for 54% of GDP and
51% of total exports. Even among the top 10, the distribution of firm size and total exports
is extremely skewed. The largest one, Samsung, is responsible for 23% of exports and 14%
5

It is important to note that GDP represents value added, and thus Fonterra’s total sales are less than
7% of the total sales of all firms in New Zealand. However, because exports are recorded as total sales,
Fonterra’s export sales are directly comparable to New Zealand’s total exports. The same caveat applies to
the example that follows.

4

of GDP (see Figure 2).6
Gabaix (2011) shows that aggregate volatility due to the idiosyncratic shocks to firms
is an increasing function of the Herfindahl index of the firms’ output shares. To produce
the country size-volatility relationship in Figure 1a through the shocks to large firms, it
must be the case that smaller countries have higher Herfindahl indices of firm output –
they are less diversified. Figure 3a presents the partial correlations between the Herfindahl
index of firm sales and country size, after netting out the impact of per capita income,
with all variables in natural logs.7 The figure also plots the OLS best fit through the data,
along with the slope coefficients, standard errors, and the R2 ’s. The firm-level data used to
compute the Herfindahl indices come from the ORBIS database described in Appendix A.
Because the number of firms covered by ORBIS varies substantially across countries, we
present the results for three samples: (i) all 134 countries for which it is possible to calculate
the Herfindahl index in ORBIS data; (ii) the 81 countries with sales data for at least 100
firms; and (iii) the 52 countries with sales data for at least 1,000 firms. The countries with
different numbers of firms are labelled with different symbols. Figure 3a shows that the
relationship between the Herfindahl index and country size is negative as expected, and
highly statistically significant in all three samples.
The Herfindahl index is the variable most directly relevant to the quantitative results
in the paper. However, because ideally it requires information on the entire firm size
distribution, the Herfindahl index may also be most heavily influenced by differences in
coverage in the ORBIS database. Because of this, we also present the relationship of country
size to two other indicators of firm size: the combined sales of the 10 largest firms in the
country, and the size of the single largest firm. These indicators focus on the very largest
firms that are measured more reliably in the data, and thus the problems of coverage are less
severe. In addition, these empirical relationships capture a related feature of the data that
is crucial for evaluating the role of large firms for the country size-volatility relationship. A
bigger country could either have larger firms, or have more firms, than a smaller country.
Since these two possibilities have very different implications for how aggregate volatility
changes with country size, it is important for our model to match the relative size of the
largest firms in countries of different sizes. Figure 3b depicts the partial correlation between
the log size of the 10 largest firms and log country size, once again after netting out log per
6

It turns out that the size distribution of firms is quite skewed even within business groups. For instance, breaking Samsung down into its constituent firms reveals that the sales of Samsung Electronics
alone accounted for 7% of GDP and 15.5% of Korea’s exports in 2006.
P
7
The Herfindahl index is defined as the sum of squared shares of firm sales in total sales: h = k h(k)2 ,
where k indexes firms, and h(k) is the share of firm k in total sales by all firms.

5

capita income. The results are reported for all three ORBIS samples, as above. There is a
significant positive relationship between the absolute size of the largest 10 firms and country
size: not surprisingly, larger countries have bigger firms, with an elasticity slightly below 1.
The slope coefficient and the fit are both quite stable across the samples. Figure 3c reports
the analogous relationship for the size of the single largest firm in each country, with quite
similar conclusions.

3

Theoretical Framework

This section lays out a simplified analytical framework to illustrate the main mechanisms
behind the results. The quantitative investigation based on a more complete model follows
in Section 4. The full description of the equations defining the complete model is presented
in Appendix B.
The minimalist framework that can be used to model the role of firms in the relationship
between country size and volatility has to feature: (i) a firm size distribution that can
be matched to the data; (ii) endogenous determination of the set of firms operating in
equilibrium; and (iii) idiosyncratic shocks to firms. In addition, to investigate the role of
international trade, the model must have (iv) an export participation decision by firms.

3.1

The Environment

Consider a model in the spirit of Melitz (2003), but with a discrete number of goods as
in Krugman (1980). The world is comprised of C countries, indexed by i, j = 1, . . . , C. In
country i, buyers (who could be final consumers or firms purchasing intermediate inputs)
maximize a standard CES objective over the set of Ji varieties available in country i. It is
well known that in country i demand for an individual variety k is equal to
xi (k) =

Xi
pi (k)−ε ,
Pi1−ε

(1)

where ε is the elasticity of substitution between varieties, xi (k) is the quantity of good
k demanded in country i, pi (k) is the price of this good, Xi is total expenditure in the
economy, and Pi is the ideal price index,
Pi =

"J
i
X

1
# 1−ε

pi (k)1−ε

.

(2)

k=1

There is one factor of production, labor, with country endowments given by Lj , j =
1, . . . , C, and wages denoted by wj . Production uses both labor and intermediate inputs. In
6

particular, a firm with unit input requirement a must use a input bundles to produce one
unit of output. An input bundle in country j has a cost
cj = wjβ Pj1−β .
There are both fixed and variable costs of production and trade. The timing in the
economy is depicted in Figure 4. At the beginning of the period each potential producer
of variety k = 1, . . . , I¯j in each j = 1, . . . , C must pay an “exploration” cost fe in order to
become an entrepreneur. Upon paying this cost, entrepreneur k discovers her productivity,
indexed by a unit input requirement a(k), and faces downward-sloping demand for her
unique variety given by (1). On the basis of this draw, each entrepreneur in country j
decides whether to operate and which markets to serve. To start serving market i from
country j, a firm must pay a fixed cost fij , and an iceberg per-unit cost of τij > 1 (with τjj
normalized to 1). Having paid the fixed costs of entering these markets, the firm learns the
realization of a transitory shock z(k), i.i.d. across firms. Once all of the uncertainty has
been realized, each firm produces with a unit input requirement a(k)z(k), markets clear,
and consumption takes place.8
If a firm from country j decides to sell to country i, its profit-maximizing price is a
ε
constant markup over marginal cost pi (k) = ε−1
τij cj a(k)z(k), the quantity supplied is

−ε
ε
i
equal to PX1−ε
, and its expected profits from serving i are
ε−1 τij cj a(k)z(k)
i

"

Xi
E
εPi1−ε



ε
τij cj a(k)z(k)
ε−1

1−ε

#
− cj fij | a(k) .

(3)

Because of fixed costs of serving a market, there is a cutoff unit input requirement aij
above which firms in country j do not serve market i, defined as the level of a(k) = aij such
that the expected profits in equation (3) equal zero. To go forward with the analysis, we
make the following two assumptions:
8

Note that the assumption on the timing of events, namely that the decision to enter markets takes place
before z(k) is realized, implies that the realization of the firm-specific transitory shock does not affect the
equilibrium number of firms in each market. This simplification lets us analyze the equilibrium production
allocation as an approximation around a case in which the variance of z is zero. That is, we abstract from the
extensive margin of exports, and entry and exit of firms in response to transitory shocks. This simplification
delivers substantial analytical convenience, while it is unlikely to affect the results. This is because the focus
of the paper is on the role of the largest firms in generating aggregate volatility, and the largest firms are
inframarginal: their entry decision will be unaffected by the realization of the transitory shock. Note also
that this timing assumption implies that our analytical approach is akin to the common one of analyzing
the response to shocks in deviations from a non-stochastic steady state.

7

Assumption 1 The marginal firm is small enough that it ignores the impact of its own realization of z(k) on the total expenditure Xi and the price level Pi in all potential destination
markets i = 1, . . . , C.
Assumption 2 The marginal firm treats Xi and Pi as fixed (non-stochastic).
The first assumption is not controversial, and has been made in the literature since Dixit
and Stiglitz (1977) and Krugman (1980). The second assumption allows us to take Xi and Pi
outside of the expectation operator. It amounts to assuming that the entrepreneur ignores
the volatility of aggregate output and the price level when deciding to enter a market.9
Under these two assumptions, setting (3) to zero and taking the expectation over z, the
zero profit cutoff condition for serving market i from country j reduces to
ε − 1 Pi
aij =
ε τij cj



Xi
εcj fij



1
ε−1

,

(4)


after normalizing the transitory shocks z such that Ez z 1−ε = 1.
The equilibrium number of potential entrepreneurs I¯j is pinned down by the familiar free
entry condition in each country. Entrepreneurs will enter until the expected profit equals
the cost of finding out one’s type:
!#
" C
1−ε

X
Xi
ε
τij cj a(k)z(k)
− cj fij
E
= cj fe ,
1 [a(k) ≤ aij ]
εPi1−ε ε − 1
i=1

(5)

for each country j, where 1 [·] is the indicator function.
Closing the model involves finding expressions for aij , Pi , wi , and I¯i for all i, j = 1, . . . , C.
As an approximation, we solve for the equilibrium production allocation and price levels
9

It is important to emphasize that these are assumptions placed on the behavior of the marginal entrepreneur. They allow us to compute the cutoffs for production and exporting aij as if the model was
non-stochastic. This delivers substantial analytical and computational simplicity without affecting any of
the main conclusions, since in our model the economy is dominated by very large firms, and thus the marginal
ones are not important for the aggregate outcomes. On the other hand, one may question our assumption
about the behavior of the largest firms, namely that markups are a constant multiple of marginal cost. If
the largest firms in the economy are so large that their pricing decisions can affect the price level, their
profit-maximizing prices will depart from the simple Dixit-Stiglitz constant markup benchmark. Note that
qualitatively, this critique applies to all implementations of the Dixit-Stiglitz framework, and their extensions to heterogeneous firms. It is ultimately a quantitative question how much this force matters (Yang and
Heijdra, 1993; Dixit and Stiglitz, 1993). While the full solution of our model under flexible markups would
be impractical, and to our knowledge has not yet been implemented in this type of large-scale setting, we
can perform a simple simulation that assesses the quantitative importance of allowing for variable markups
in this setting. The Supplementary Web Appendix describes the exercise in detail, and shows that quantitatively, the deviations of flexible-markup prices from the constant-markup benchmark are very small even
for the largest firms in small countries.

8

ignoring firm-specific transitory shocks. Taking the expectations over a(k) and z(k), and

using the fact that Ez z 1−ε = 1, the price levels become

 1
1−ε
1−ε
C 
X

ε
1−ε
.
Pi = 
I¯j Pr(a < aij )E a
| a < aij 
τij cj
ε−1

(6)

j=1

We make the standard distributional assumption on productivity:
Assumption 3 Firm productivity 1/a follows a Pareto(b, θ) distribution: Pr(1/a < y) =
1 − (b/y)θ , where b is the minimum value labor productivity can take, and θ regulates dispersion.
Using the distributional assumption to compute the cdf’s and conditional expectations over
a, and plugging in the expressions for aij in (4), the price levels become

 1

− 1
 − θ−(ε−1) X
θ 
 θ−(ε−1) − θ

C
θ
θ(ε−1)
ε−1
1
θ
Xi
ε
1
1

 .
Pi =
I¯j
b θ − (ε − 1)
ε−1 ε
τij cj
cj fij

(7)

j=1

The model is closed by assuming balanced trade in each country, which delivers a system of
equations defining the vector of equilibrium wages wi . The definition of equilibrium and the
set of equilibrium conditions for the complete 2-sector model are laid out in Appendix B.
In the remainder of this section, we use the relationships implied by the simple model above
to illustrate the main mechanisms behind our results.

3.2

Power Law in Firm Size and Aggregate Volatility in the Model and
the Data

Total sales in the economy is defined by
X=

I
X

x(a(k), z(k)),

(8)

k=1

where I is the total number of operating firms, x(a(k), z(k)) is the sales of firm k, and we
omit the country subscripts. Appendix C shows that the standard deviation of the growth
rate of aggregate sales, or more precisely of the deviation from the expected aggregate sales,
is equal to

Stdz
where h =

PI

2
k=1 h(k)

∆X
Ez (X)



√
= σ h,

(9)

is the Herfindahl index of production shares of firms in this economy,

and σ is the standard deviation of the growth rate of sales of an individual firm. This is
9

the familiar expression for the standard deviation of a sum of random variables, and is the
same as the one used by Gabaix (2011).10
This economy is granular, that is, idiosyncratic shocks to firms result in aggregate
fluctuations, if the distribution of firm size follows a power law with an exponent sufficiently
close to 1 in absolute value. Firm sales x in the economy must conform to
Pr(x > q) = δq −ζ ,

(10)

where ζ is close to 1. Gabaix (2011, Proposition 2) shows that when the firm size distribution
follows a power law with an exponent −ζ, the economy is populated by N firms, and each
firm has a standard deviation of sales growth equal to σ, the aggregate volatility given by
(9) is proportional to σ/N 1−1/ζ for 1 < ζ < 2, and to σ/ log N when ζ = 1. This result
means that when ζ < 2 and thus the distribution of firm size has infinite variance, the
conventional Law of Large Numbers does not apply, and aggregate volatility decays in the
number of firms N only very slowly. In other words, under finite variance in the firm size
√
distribution, aggregate volatility decays at rate N in the number of firms. But under
Zipf’s Law – defined as ζ ≈ 1 – it decays only at rate log N .
In this paper, we take this statistical result for granted. This section relates it to our
theoretical framework by first demonstrating how the parameters of the model can be calibrated to the observed distribution of firm size. Then, we discuss the two key comparative
statics: the role of country size and the role of trade openness in aggregate volatility.
It turns out that the baseline Melitz-Pareto model delivers a power law in firm size. We
demonstrate the power law in an autarkic economy, and then discuss how the distribution
of firm size is affected by international trade. In our model, the expected sales of a firm as
a function of its unit input requirement are: x(a) = Da1−ε , where the constant D reflects
the size of domestic demand, and we drop the sector and country subscripts. Under the
assumption that 1/a ∼Pareto(b, θ), the power law follows:
1−ε

Pr(x > q) = Pr(Da
satisfying (10) for δ = bε−1 D



θ
ε−1


> q) = Pr
and ζ =

θ
 ε−1  ε−1
1 
1  q  ε−1
b D
>
=
,
a
D
q

θ
ε−1 .

Thus, our model economy will be granular if

This relationship is depicted in Figure 5.

θ
ε−1

is close enough to 1 – the power law

exponent in the data (see, among others, Axtell, 2001; di Giovanni and Levchenko, 2010;
di Giovanni et al., 2011).
10

Note that there are no aggregate shocks in the model, only the firm-specific idiosyncratic shocks.

10

Gabaix (2011) shows that although aggregate volatility decays in the number of firms
much more slowly than under the conventional LLN, countries with a greater number of
firms N will nonetheless have lower aggregate volatility. This forms the basis of the relationship between country size and aggregate volatility. As has been understood since Krugman
(1980), larger countries – those with higher L in our model – will feature a larger number
of firms in equilibrium. Thus, they can be expected to have lower aggregate volatility. This
can be demonstrated most transparently in the autarky equilibrium. Setting the number of
countries C = 1 and using the Pareto distributional assumption, equation (5) can be used
to compute the production cutoff aaut consistent with free entry. With zero net aggregate
profits, the total expenditure in the economy is equal to X = L/β, where we set the wage
to be the numéraire. Equations (4) and (7) then imply that the equilibrium number of
entrants I¯aut is proportional to:
I¯aut ∼ L 1−

1
1−β 1
β ε−1

.

(11)

This is the well-known result that the number of firms increases in country size, measured
by L. It is immediate that without input-output linkages (β = 1), the relationship is simply
linear.11 The presence of input-output linkages actually tends to raise this elasticity above 1:
as long as βε > 1, the number of firms responds more than proportionately to the increase
in market size. The condition that βε > 1 is akin to the “no black hole” assumption
(Fujita et al., 2001). When it is violated, increasing returns are so strong that countries
with higher L actually have a smaller number of entrants. We impose the restriction that
βε > 1 throughout. It is likely to be comfortably satisfied in the data, as available estimates
put β in the range of 0.5, while ε is typically assumed to be around 6 (see Section 4.1 for
details).12 Equilibrium relationship (11) combined with Zipf’s Law in firm size thus forms
the basis for the first main result of the paper: smaller countries will have fewer firms, and
thus higher aggregate volatility.

3.3

International Trade and Aggregate Volatility

How does international trade affect the distribution of firm size and therefore aggregate
volatility? As first demonstrated by Melitz (2003), the distribution of firm size becomes
11
In that case, the solution for the equilibrium number of entrants has the particularly simple form:
¯
Iaut = εfLe ε−1
.
θ
12
One may wonder whether the larger number of number of entrants I¯ actually translates into a larger
number of operating firms, since not all entrants decide to produce. The number of operating firms is given
by I¯aut G(aaut ), where G(·) is the cdf of a. The solution to aaut does not depend on L in this model, and
thus the number of actual operating firms is linear in I¯aut .

11

more unequal under trade: compared to autarky, the least productive firms exit, and only
the most productive firms export abroad. Due to competition from foreign varieties, domestic sales and profits decrease. Thus, as a country opens to trade, sales of most firms shrink,
while the largest firms grow larger as a result of exporting.13 Figure 5 depicts this effect.
In the two-country case, there is a single productivity cutoff, above which firms export
abroad. Compared to autarky, there is a higher probability of finding larger firms above
this cutoff. In the C-country case, with multiple export markets there will be cutoffs for
each market, with progressively more productive firms exporting to more and more markets
and growing larger and larger relative to domestic GDP. Thus, if the distribution of firm
sales follows a power law and the economy is granular, international trade has the potential
to increase the size of the largest firms, in effect creating a “hyper-granular” economy, with
clear implications for the relationship between trade openness and aggregate volatility. All
else equal, this “selection into exporting” effect implies that after trade opening, aggregate
volatility increases.
Before moving on to the quantitative assessment of the relationships between country
size, international trade, and volatility illustrated above, we allude to another mechanism
through which trade can affect volatility in a model with free entry. When a country
opens to trade, the possibility of getting a sufficiently high productivity draw and becoming
an exporter induces more potential entrepreneurs to enter and draw their productivity: I¯
rises. To demonstrate this effect in the simplest possible way, we assume that countries are
symmetric: Li = L, fii = f ∀i, and τij = τ , fij = f X ∀i, j. Under trade, the number of
13
Firm-level studies of dynamic adjustment to trade liberalization appear to find empirical support for
these predictions. Pavcnik (2002) provides evidence that trade liberalization led to a shift in resources from
the least to the most productive firms in Chile. Bernard et al. (2003) show that a fall in trade costs leads
to both exit by the least productive firms and entry by firms into export markets. In addition, existing
exporters ship more abroad. A recent contribution by Holmes and Stevens (2010) shows that in the U.S.,
in some sectors the large firms are the ones suffering the most from foreign competition, because smaller
firms are highly specialized boutique operations that are less affected by imports than the large factories
producing standardized products with close foreign substitutes. The point made by Holmes and Stevens
(2010) is a very important one, but it can be thought of as one about industrial classification: large factories
and boutique ones produce different types of goods, which face very different market structures – competitive
environments, trade costs, and so on. This comes through most clearly in the modeling approach adopted
in that paper, in which it classifies the small boutique producers as nontradeable. Thus, the Holmes and
Stevens (2010) finding can be easily reconciled with our complete two-sector model, described in Appendix B
and used in the quantitative analysis, by assuming that the standardized producers are part of the tradeable
sector, while the boutique producers are part of the non-tradeable sector. Indeed, this is very close to the
assumption that Holmes and Stevens (2010) actually adopt in their model.

12

entrants is equal to

I¯trade = 1 + (C − 1) τ −θ



f
fX

 θ−(ε−1)

 1−β

1
βθ 1− 1−β 1
β ε−1

ε−1



I¯aut .

(12)

It is linear in I¯aut , and thus trade opening increases the number of entrants relative to
autarky, since the term in the square brackets is larger than 1. Because aggregate volatility
decreases in the number of firms, this “net entry” effect will tend to decrease volatility when
a country opens to trade, as long as βε > 1.
As we demonstrate below, however, this effect is quite small quantitatively. The impact
of international trade on aggregate volatility is virtually the same whether we allow new net
entry after opening or not. To see why this is the case, note that at reasonable parameter
values, the exponent on the “trade term” – the square bracket in equation (12) – is quite
small, and thus the change in I¯ from autarky to trade is modest. Furthermore, even if
the number of operating firms increases by as much as the difference between I¯aut and
I¯trade , this effect alone would amount to a proportional reduction in volatility of only 1 −
1−1/ζ
I¯trade /I¯aut
, which is very small if ζ is close to 1 – i.e. if the firm size distribution
follows Zipf’s Law.
As a back of the envelope calculation, we could evaluate the reduction in volatility due
to the net entry effect alone by plugging in the parameter values for τ , f , fX , θ, ε, and β
from the quantitative model below (see Section 4.1 and Table 1). It turns out that with 100
symmetric countries (each thus accounting for 1% of world GDP), I¯trade /I¯aut = 1.21, which
alone would imply a reduction in aggregate volatility of only 0.9% compared to autarky.
With 200 countries (each 0.5% of world GDP), the reduction is 1.4%. These are upper
bounds, because the number of actual operating firms will increase by less than the term
in brackets in (12), as the production cutoffs will also become more stringent under trade.
While the baseline quantitative exercise below retains the free entry assumption, Sec¯ confirming the conclusion of the back of the
tion 5 presents the results under fixed I’s,
envelope calculation: changes in net entry play only a minor role in the impact of trade on
volatility.

4

Quantitative Evidence

Though the analytical results obtained with symmetric countries in a one-sector model are
informative, we would like to exploit the rich heterogeneity among the countries in the
world. In order to do this, we numerically implement the general multi-country model laid
13

out in Section 3, extended to include a non-traded sector with intermediate input linkages
both within and between sectors. Since only the minority of economic activity takes place
in sectors with substantial cross-border trade, including an explicitly non-traded sector in
the quantitative exercise is especially important for evaluating the impact of changes in
trade costs on volatility.
In particular, suppose that in each country there are two broad sectors, the tradeable
T and the non-tradeable N . Consumer preferences are Cobb-Douglas in CES aggregates
of N and T , with the share of N in final expenditure equal to α. Intermediate inputs are
also Cobb-Douglas in the N and T aggregates, with the share of N equal to ηs in sector
s = N, T . The share of labor in total spending on inputs, βs , will also now vary by sector.
The rest of the model remains unchanged. Appendix B presents the complete description
of the equations defining the equilibrium in the two-sector model.

4.1

Calibration

We numerically implement the economy under the following parameter values (see Table 1
for a summary). The elasticity of substitution is εs = 6. Anderson and van Wincoop (2004)
report available estimates of this elasticity to be in the range of 3 to 10, and we pick a
value close to the middle of the range. The key parameter is θs , as it governs the slope of
the power law. As described above, in this model firm sales follow a power law with the
exponent equal to

θs
εs −1 .

In the data, firm sales follow a power law with the exponent close

to 1. Axtell (2001) reports the value of 1.06, which we use to find θs given our preferred
value of εs : θs = 1.06 × (εs − 1) = 5.3. We set both the elasticity of substitution and
the Pareto exponent to be the same in the N and the T sectors. Appendix Section B.1
justifies in detail the calibration of the two-sector model parameters to the observed firm
size distributions.
We set the share of non-tradeables in consumption α = 0.65. This is the mean value
of services value added in total value added in the database compiled by the Groningen
Growth and Development Center and extended to additional countries by Yi and Zhang
(2010). It is the value also adopted by Alvarez and Lucas (2007). The values of βN and βT –
share of labor/value added in total output – are calibrated using the 1997 U.S. Benchmark
Input-Output Table. We take the Detailed Make and Use tables, featuring more than 400
distinct sectors, and aggregate them into a 2-sector Direct Requirements Table. This table
gives the amount of N , T , and factor inputs required to produce a unit of final output. Thus,
βs is equal to the share of total sector s output that is not used to pay for intermediate

14

inputs, i.e., the payments to factors of production. According to the U.S. Input-Output
Matrix, βN = 0.65 and βT = 0.35: the traded sector is considerably more input-intensive
than the non-traded sector. The shares of non-traded and traded inputs in both sectors
are also calibrated based on the U.S. I-O Table. According to the data, more than 75%
of the inputs used in the N sector come from the N sector itself (ηN = 0.77), while only
35% of T -sector inputs are non-tradeable (ηT = 0.35). Nonetheless, these values still leave
substantial room for cross-sectoral input-output linkages.
To calibrate the values of τij for each pair of countries we use the gravity estimates from
the empirical model of Helpman et al. (2008). To take a stand on the values of fiis and fijs ,
we follow di Giovanni and Levchenko (2010) and use the information on entry costs from
the Doing Business Indicators database (The World Bank, 2007a). The data sources and
the details of the calibration of τij and fijs are described in Appendix A.
Finally, we set the value of the “exploration cost” fe such that the equilibrium number
of operating firms in the U.S. is equal to 7 million. According to the 2002 U.S. Economic
Census, there were 6,773,632 establishments with a payroll in the United States. There
are an additional 17,646,062 business entities that are not employers, but they account for
less than 3.5% of total shipments. Thus, while the U.S. may have many more legal entities
than what we assume here, 7 million is a number sufficiently high as to let us consider
consequences of granularity. Since we do not have information on the total number of firms
in other countries, we choose to set fe to be the same in all countries. In the absence of
data, this is the most agnostic approach we could take. In addition, since fe represents the
cost of finding out one’s abilities, we do not expect it to be affected by policies and thus
differ across countries. The resulting value of fe is 15 times higher than fUs S,U S , and 2.4
times higher than the average fiis in the rest of the sample. The finding that the ex-ante
fixed cost of learning one’s type is much higher than the ex-post fixed cost of production is
common in the quantitative models of this type (see, e.g., Ghironi and Melitz, 2005).
We carry out the analysis on the sample of the largest 49 countries by total GDP, plus
the 50th that represents the rest of the world. These 49 countries together cover 97% of
world GDP. We exclude the entrepôt economies of Hong Kong and Singapore, both of which
have total trade well in excess of their GDP due to significant re-exporting activity. Thus,
our model is not intended to fit these countries. (We do place them into the rest-of-the-world
category.) The country sample, sorted by total GDP, is reported in Table 2.

15

4.2

Model Solution and Simulation Method

In order to solve the model numerically, we must find the wages and price indices for each
country, wi , PiN , PiT , that satisfy equations (B.1), (B.2), and (B.3), jointly with the values
of I¯N and I¯T that satisfy equations (5) for each sector. The system is non-reducible, such
i

i

that all of the prices and numbers of entrants must be solved simultaneously. Note that
in this step the equilibrium values are computed under the assumption that the model
aggregates take on their expected values. That is, this step ignores any variation in Pis ’s,
I¯is ’s, and asij ’s that would arise from one random draw of a vector of a’s to another – a
common approach in monopolistic competition models.
Using the equilibrium equations and the chosen the parameter values, we can solve the
full model for a given vector of Li . For finding the values of Li , we follow the approach of
Alvarez and Lucas (2007). First, we would like to think of Li not as population per se, but
as “equipped labor,” to take explicit account of TFP and capital endowment differences
between countries. To obtain the values of Li that are internally consistent in the model,
we start with an initial guess for Li for all i = 1, . . . , C, and use it to solve the full model.
Given the solution for wages, we update our guess for Li for each country in order to match
the GDP ratio between each country i and the U.S.. Using the resulting values of Li , we
solve the model again to obtain the new set of wages, and iterate to convergence (for more
on this approach, see Alvarez and Lucas, 2007). Thus, our procedure generates vectors wi
and Li in such a way as to match exactly the relative total GDPs of the countries in the
sample. In practice, the results are close to simply equating Li to the relative GDPs. In
this procedure, we must normalize the population of one of the countries. We thus set LU S
to its actual value of 291 million as of 2003, and compute Li of every other country relative
to this U.S. value. An important consequence of this approach is that countries with higher
TFP and capital abundance will tend to have a greater number of potential productivity
draws I¯is , all else equal, since our procedure will effectively give them a higher Li . This is
akin to the assumption adopted by Alvarez and Lucas (2007) and Chaney (2008) that the
number of productivity draws is a constant multiple of equipped labor Li . The difference in
our approach is that though we take labor-cum-productivity to be the measure of market
size, we solve for I¯N and I¯T endogenously within the model.
i

i

Having solved the model given the data on country GDPs and trade costs, we now
simulate it using random productivity draws for each firm in each economy. Namely, in
each country i and sector s we draw I¯s productivities from a Pareto(bs ,θs ) distribution. For
i

each firm, we use the cutoffs asji for serving each market j (including its own market j = i)
16

given by equation (4) to determine whether the firm operates, and which, if any, foreign
markets it serves. We next calculate the total sales of each firm as the sum of its sales in
each market it serves, and compute the Herfindahl index of firm sales in country i. Since
the distribution of firm productivities gives rise to a highly skewed distribution of firm sales,
there is variation in the Herfindahl index from simulation to simulation, even though we
draw as many as 7 million operating firms in a given country – note that this number is the
total for the N and T sectors, where we take independent draws for each sector. We thus
repeat the exercise 1001 times, and take the median values of the Herfindahl index in each
country. In parallel, we also compute the Herfindahl index of firm sales in autarky for each
country, which will allow us to gauge the contribution of international trade to aggregate
volatility. Given these values of the Herfindahl index h, we can then construct each country’s
aggregate volatility under trade and in autarky using the formula for the standard deviation
of aggregate output growth (9) and a realistic value of σ. Following Gabaix (2011), we set
σ = 0.1, although since in this paper we will not exploit any variation in σ across countries,
none of the results will be driven by this choice.

4.3

Model Fit

We assess the model fit along three dimensions: (i) overall and bilateral trade volumes; (ii)
the relationship between country size and the size of the largest firms in each country; and
(iii) the share of exporting firms in the economy.
Figure 6a reports the scatterplot of bilateral trade ratios, πij = Xij /wi Li . Note that
since in the data we only have bilateral trade as a share of GDP, not of total sales, we
compute the same object in the model. This captures both the distinction between trade,
which is recorded as total value, and GDP, which is recorded as value added; as well as
the fact that there is a large non-traded sector in both the model and in the data. On
the horizontal axis is the natural logarithm of πij that comes from the model, while on the
vertical axis is the corresponding value of that bilateral trade flow in the data. Hollow dots
represent exports from one country to another, πij , i 6= j. Solid dots, at the top of the
scatterplot, represent sales of domestic firms as a share of domestic absorption, πii . For
convenience, we add a 45-degree line. It is clear that the trade volumes implied by the model
match the actual data well. Most observations are quite close to the 45-degree line. It is
especially important that we get the variation in the overall trade openness (1 − πii ) right,
since that will drive the contribution of trade to the aggregate volatility in each country.
Figure 6b plots the actual values of (1 − πii ) against those implied by the model, along with

17

a 45-degree line. We can see that although the relationship is not perfect, it is quite close.
Table 3 compares the means and medians of πii and πij ’s for the model and the data,
and reports the correlations between the two. The correlation between domestic shares πii
calculated from the model and those in the data for this sample of countries is around 0.48.
The correlation between export shares, πij , is actually higher at 0.78.14 Since we use estimated gravity coefficients together with the actual data on bilateral country characteristics
to compute trade costs, it is not surprising that our model fits bilateral trade data quite
well given the success of the empirical gravity relationship. Nonetheless, since the gravity
estimates we use come from outside of our calibration procedure, it is important to check
that our model delivers outcomes similar to observed trade volumes.
We next assess whether the model reproduces the relationships between country size and
the relevant features of the firm size distributions demonstrated in Figure 3. In the data, log
country size is negatively and significantly related to the log Herfindahl index of firm sales;
and positively and significantly related to the size of the 10 largest firms and the size of the
largest firm in the economy. We can compare the data to the same relationships inside our
model. It turns out that in the model the elasticity of the Herfindahl index with respect to
country size of −0.135, which is right in between the Herfindahl-country size elasticity of
−0.114 (sample of countries with more than 1000 firms) and −0.284 (sample of countries
with more than 100 firms) in Figure 3a. Turning to the size of the largest firms, our model
produces an elasticity of the 10 largest firms to country size of 0.903, and of the single
largest firm to country size of 0.908. These match almost perfectly the range of elasticities
produced by the data: 0.888 to 1.006 for the 10 largest firms (Figure 3b), and 0.838 to
0.906 (Figure 3c) for the single largest firm. We conclude that overall, the predictions of
the model regarding these aspects of the firm size distribution across countries match fairly
well the patterns observed in the data.
Finally, we use the model solution to calculate the percentage of firms that export
in the total economy, as well as in the tradeable sector. In particular, the total number

n oθT
. The total number of firms
of exporters in country i equals I¯iT × bT maxj6=i aTji

n oθT
operating in the tradeable sector equals I¯iT × bT maxj aTji
, and in the non-tradeable

θ
N
. We would like to compare the export participation shares in the
sector I¯iN × bN aN
ii
14

We also experimented with increasing the number of countries in the simulation to 60. The model fits
the data well, but there are more zeros in bilateral trade data in the 60-country sample compared to the
50-country one. (With 50 countries, among the 2500 possible unidirectional bilateral trade flows, only 18
are zeros.) Since our model does not generate zero bilateral trade outcomes, we stick with the largest 49
countries in our analysis.

18

model to what is found in the data. Unfortunately, there is no systematic empirical evidence
on these shares across countries (and time). However, we have examined available data and
existing literature and found these shares for 8 countries: U.S., Germany, France, Argentina,
Colombia, Ireland, Chile, and New Zealand. Table 4 compares the export participation
shares produced by the model to those found in the data in this subset of countries. The
first two columns report the values in the model, with the shares of exporters relative to all
the firms in the economy in column 1 and in the tradeable sector only in column 2. Data
sources differ across countries, in particular the shares of exporting firms are sometimes
reported only relative to all firms in the economy (which we record in column 3), and
sometimes relative to all the firms in the tradeable sector (which we record in column 4).
Thus, data in column 3 should be compared to model outcomes in column 1, while data in
column 4 should be compared to model outcomes in column 2.
It is clear from this table that the model produces quite reasonable results. Larger
countries tend to have fewer exporters relative to the overall number of firms (compare
U.S. to Colombia); countries closer to large markets tend to have higher shares of exporters
compared to faraway countries (compare Ireland to New Zealand). In most cases the model
implied value is close to the data. We should note that by making ad hoc adjustments
to trade costs in individual countries, we can match each and every one of these numbers
exactly. We do not do so because this information is not available systematically for every
country in our sample, and because the available firm-level data themselves are noisy. Instead, we take trade costs as implied by a basic gravity model, and the variation in fixed
costs as implied by the Doing Business Indicators, an approach that is rather straightforward and does not involve any manual second-guessing. And yet, our model gets the rough
values and orders of magnitude more or less right for a number of different countries.

4.4

Main Results: Country Size and Trade Openness

As would be expected, the level of aggregate volatility in the model is lower than what is
observed in the data, since in the model all volatility comes from idiosyncratic shocks to
firms. Column 1 of Table 5 reports the ratio of the aggregate volatility implied by the model
to the actual GDP volatility found in the data. It ranges between 0.14 and 0.72, with a
value of 0.377 for the United States, almost identical to what Gabaix (2011) finds using
a very different methodology. Note that the variation in aggregate volatility in the model
across countries is generated by differences in country size as well as variation in bilateral
trade costs.

19

How well can the model reproduce the empirical relationship between aggregate volatility
and country size? Figure 7 plots volatility as a function of country size in the data and the
model. Note that since the level of aggregate volatility in the model does not match up
with the level in the data, this graph is only informative about the comparison of slopes,
not intercepts. In the data the elasticity of GDP volatility with respect to country size is
−0.139 (σGDP ) in this sample of countries. Table A1 reports the results of estimating the
volatility-size relationship in the data for various country samples and with and without
controls. The baseline coefficient used in Figure 7 comes from the 50-country sample and
controlling for income per capita. Our calibrated model produces an elasticity of −0.135
(σT ), which is extremely close to the one in the data though slightly below it in absolute
terms.
We now assess the contribution of international trade to aggregate volatility in our
sample of countries. Our model yields not only the predicted aggregate volatility in the
simulated trade equilibrium, but also the aggregate volatility in autarky. As a preview of
the results on the impact of trade openness, Figure 7 reports the volatility-size relationship in
autarky. Without trade this relationship is somewhat flatter: the elasticity of volatility with
respect to country size in autarky is −0.115 (σA ), lower than the −0.139 in the data. Thus,
it appears that openness helps the model match the slope of the size-volatility relationship:
without trade, smaller countries would be less volatile than they actually are.
Column 2 of Table 5 reports the ratio of the volatility under the current trade regime to
the volatility in autarky in each country in the sample. In the table, countries are ranked by
size in descending order. We can see that international trade contributes very little to overall
GDP volatility in the U.S.. The country is so large and trade volumes are so low (relative
to total output) that its volatility under trade is only 1.035 times higher than it would be
in complete absence of trade. Similar results obtain for other very large economies, such as
Japan and China. By contrast, smaller, centrally located countries experience substantially
higher volatility compared to autarky. For instance, in a country like Romania, the volatility
under trade is some 22 percent higher than it would be in autarky, and in Turkey, Denmark,
and Norway it is 14-16% higher. In between are small, but remote countries. South Africa,
Argentina, and New Zealand experience aggregate volatility that is about 10% higher than
it would have been in autarky.
Finally, we investigate how well the model predicts the actual GDP volatility found
in the data. Table 6 presents regressions of actual volatility of per capita GDP growth
over the period 1970-2006 against the one predicted by the model (σT ), with all variables

20

in natural logs. Column 1 includes no controls. The relationship is positive and highly
significant. The fit of this simple bivariate relationship is remarkably high (R2 = 0.353),
given that in the model variation in σT is driven only by country size, trade barriers,
and fixed costs. The model uses no information on any type of aggregate shocks (TFP,
monetary, or fiscal policy), or any other country characteristics that have been shown to be
shown to correlate with macroeconomic volatility, such as per capita income, institutions,
or industrial specialization. The second column includes GDP per capita. The fit of the
model improves slightly, and though the coefficient on the model volatility is somewhat
smaller, it remains significant at the 1% level. The next two columns include measures
of export structure volatility and sectoral specialization, since di Giovanni and Levchenko
(2009, 2011) show that opening to trade can impact aggregate volatility through changes
in these variables. Column 3 adds the risk content of exports, which captures the overall
riskiness of a country’s export structure.15 The model volatility remains significant, and the
R2 of the regression is now 0.477. Finally, the fourth column adds a measure of production
specialization for the manufacturing sector (Herfindahl of sectoral production shares).16
The number of observations drops to 35 due to limited data availability, but the model
volatility still remains significant.

5

Robustness Checks and Model Perturbations

5.1

Free Entry and Intermediate Inputs

The assumption that the number of potential projects is determined by a free entry condition
may not be realistic. We argued in Section 3.3 that when evaluating the impact of trade
opening, the free entry assumption is unlikely to matter much for the results. We confirm
this conjecture by simulating the quantitative model under the assumption that the numbers
of potential entrepreneurs I¯s is fixed in every country and sector.17
i

Table 7 reports the results of this robustness check. For ease of comparison, the top
row presents the two main results from the baseline analysis. The first is that the model
generates higher volatility in smaller countries, with the elasticity of volatility with respect
to country size of −0.135. (As reported above, in the data this elasticity is very close,
15

This measure is taken from di Giovanni and Levchenko (2011). A country’s export structure can be
volatile due to a lack of diversification and/or exporting in sectors that are more volatile.
16
This measure is calculated using the UNIDO database of sectoral production, and is taken from di Giovanni and Levchenko (2009).
17
We set the values of I¯is to be the same as in the free entry baseline, and adjust fii to match the 7 million
operating firms in the U.S. in the trade equilibrium; the results are virtually the same if we instead adopt
the common ad hoc assumption that I¯is are some constant fraction of Li , as in Chaney (2008), for instance.

21

−0.139.) The second key result of the paper is the contribution of trade openness to
aggregate volatility. Column 2 reports the mean ratio of aggregate volatility under the
current level of trade openness relative to complete autarky.
Row 2 of Table 7 reports these two main results of the paper under the alternative
assumption that I¯is is fixed. Not surprisingly, the elasticity of volatility with respect to
country size is virtually identical. Less obviously, the fixed-I¯s model delivers very similar
i

changes in volatility due to trade openness: the mean impact is 9.0%, compared to 9.7%
with free entry.
A somewhat related question is what is the role of intermediate input linkages. With
intermediate inputs, trade opening reduces the costs of the input bundle faced by firms,
making it easier to enter markets, all alse equal. To assess the importance of this effect,
we implement the baseline model with free entry but without intermediate input linkages:
βT = βN = 1. The two main results are presented in the third row of Table 7. The elasticity
of volatility with respect to country size is only slightly larger than in the baseline, at −0.145.
The impact of trade on volatility is much larger, at 23.8%.

5.2

Volatility Varying with Firm Size

An assumption that simplifies the analysis above is that the volatility of the proportional
change in sales, σ, does not change in firm size x. If the volatility of sales decreases
sufficiently fast in firm size, larger firms will be so much less volatile that they will not impact
aggregate volatility. In fact, an economy in which larger firms are just agglomerations of
smaller units each subject to i.i.d. shocks is not granular: shocks to firms cannot generate
aggregate fluctuations.
In practice, however, the negative relationship between firm size and its sales volatility
is not very strong. Several papers estimate the relationship between size and volatility of
the type σ = Ax−ξ using Compustat data (see, e.g., Stanley et al., 1996; Sutton, 2002).
The benchmark case in which larger firms are simply collections of independent smaller
firms would imply a value of ξ = 1/2, and the absence of granular fluctuations. Instead,
the typical estimate of this parameter is about 1/6, implying that larger firms are not
substantially less volatile than smaller ones.18 Gabaix (2011) argues that these estimates
18

A related point concerns multi-product firms: if large firms sell multiple imperfectly correlated products,
then the volatility of the total sales for multi-product firms will be lower than the volatility of single-product
firms. Evidence suggests, however, that even in multi-product firms the bulk of sales and exports is accounted
for by a single product line. Sutton (2002) provides evidence that in large corporations, the constituent
business units themselves follow a power law, with just a few very large business units and many much
smaller ones. Along similar lines, Adalet (2009) shows that in the census of New Zealand firms, only about

22

may not be reliable, since they are obtained using only data on the largest listed firms. In
addition, it is not clear whether estimates based on the U.S. accurately reflect the experience
of other countries. Hence, our baseline analysis sets ξ = 0, and a value of σ based on the
largest 100 listed firms in the U.S.. In other words, we assume that all firms in the economy
experience volatility as low as the largest firms in the economy.
To check robustness of our results, we allow the firm-specific volatility to decrease in
firm size at the rate estimated in the literature. In that case, aggregate volatility is given
by

Stdz

∆X
Ez (X)



v
u I
uX
2
=t
(Ax(k)−ξ h(k)) ,
k=1

where, once again, x(k) is sales of firm k, while h(k) is the share of firm k’s sales in total
output in the economy.
The rest of the simulation remains unchanged. Since we are not matching the level of
aggregate volatility, just the role of country size and trade, we do not need to posit a value
of the constant A. However, it would be easy to calibrate to match the volatility of the top
100 firms in the U.S. as reported by Gabaix (2011), for example. Note that compared to the
baseline simulation, modelling a decreasing relationship between country size and volatility
is a double-edged sword: while larger firms may be less volatile as a result, smaller firms are
actually more volatile. This implies that the impact of either country size or international
trade will not necessarily be more muted when we make this modification to the basic
model.
Row 4 of Table 7 reports the two main results of the paper under the alternative assumption that firm volatility decreases with firm size. In turns out that in this case, smaller
countries are even more volatile relative to large ones (the size-volatility elasticity doubles to
−0.286), and the contribution of trade is also larger, with trade leading to an average 29%
increase in volatility, compared to 9.7% in the baseline. Somewhat surprisingly, therefore,
allowing volatility to decrease in firm size implies a larger contribution of trade to aggregate
volatility, not a smaller one. In fact, this is the case in every country in the sample save the
U.S..19
6.5% to 9.5% of sales variation is explained by the extensive margin (more products per firm), with the rest
explained by the intensive margin (greater sales per product).
19
Another possible determinant of firm volatility that would be relevant to our analysis is exporting.
The baseline model assumes that the volatility of a firm’s sales growth does not change when it becomes an
exporter. If exporters became systematically more or less volatile than non-exporters, the quantitative results
could be affected. To check for this possibility, we used the Compustat Quarterly database of listed U.S.
firms together with information on whether a firm is an exporter from the Compustat Segments database.

23

5.3

Alternative Parameter Values

We assess the sensitivity of the results in two additional ways. The first is an alternative
assumption on the curvature of the firm size distribution. Eaton et al. (2011) estimate a
range of values for θ/(ε − 1) of between 1.5 and 2.5. Though Gabaix (2011) shows that the
shocks to large firms can still generate aggregate volatility when the power law exponent is
less than 2, it is important to check whether the main results of our paper survive under
alternative values of θ/(ε − 1). Row 5 of Table 7 presents the two main results of the paper
under the assumption that the slope of the power law in firm size is 1.5 instead of 1.06.
Though in each case the numbers are slightly smaller in absolute value, the main qualitative
and quantitative results remain unchanged: smaller countries still have lower volatility, with
elasticity of −0.123, and trade contributes slightly more to aggregate volatility, with the
average increase of 11.6%.
Second, we re-calibrate the model under two alternative values of ε, 4 and 8. In these
exercises, we continue to assume that the economy is characterized by Zipf’s Law, so that
θ/(ε − 1) is still equal to our baseline value of 1.06. Thus, as we change ε, we change θ
along with it. The results are presented in the last two rows of Table 7. The size-volatility
relationship is robust to these alternative assumptions. The elasticity of volatility with
respect to country size is similar to the baseline, though slightly lower when ε = 4. The
contribution of trade is quite similar as well, with 9.9% and 11.1% for ε = 4 and ε = 8,
respectively.
Although for all of the alternative models Table 7 reports only the average impact of
trade, it turns out that all of these models preserve the basic patterns found in the baseline:
trade raises volatility relative to autarky in all countries; larger countries, and countries
farther away from major trading partners tend to experience smaller changes in volatility.

5.4

Further Reductions in Trade Costs

The analysis above compares aggregate volatility under today’s trade costs and in autarky,
and finds that the impact of trade on volatility has been robustly positive. We now evaluate
how volatility would change if trade costs decreased further from their current levels. Table 8 presents the distribution of changes in aggregate volatility relative to its current level
Table A2 estimates the relationship between firm-level volatility – based on either the growth rate of sales
or a measure of “granular residual” following Gabaix (2011) – and its export status and size. Controlling
for size, export status is always insignificant, and even the magnitude of the coefficient is exceedingly small,
implying that volatility of exporters is between 96 and 99% of the volatility of non-exporters. Furthermore,
the estimated elasticity of volatility with respect to firm size is similar to what is reported in the literature
and used in the sensitivity check.

24

for various magnitudes of trade cost reductions, from 10% to 75%. Strikingly, a further
reduction in trade costs leads to practically no change in volatility on average. For the
median country, a 50% reduction in trade costs increases volatility by only 1.1% relative to
the baseline. Furthermore, while the median volatility does rise slightly as trade costs fall,
the impact always ranges from positive to negative.
What can explain this non-monotonicity? Starting from autarky, as trade costs fall only
the largest firms export, and the distribution of firm size becomes more right-skewed. This
is the main mechanism responsible for the positive effect of trade openness on volatility.
However, as trade costs fall further, the exporting cutoff falls, and more and more firms
begin exporting. Eventually, this process will make the firm size distribution less fat-tailed:
when trade costs are so low that everyone exports, there is no selection into exporting, and
the power law in firm size exponent is the same as it was in autarky. Consistent with this
intuition, we find that the change in aggregate volatility when trade costs fall is closely
correlated with the concomitant change in the share of exporters. Smaller countries tend
to experience the largest increases in the share of exporters, and the greatest decreases in
volatility in this counterfactual. The opposite is true for the biggest countries.
Two additional points are worth making about the impact of further reductions in trade
costs. First, the non-monotonicity is not due to the assumption of free entry. Confirming
the arguments in Section 3.3, the results are virtually the same if we assume fixed I¯s instead.
i

Second, in the model without intermediates the non-monotonicity disappears: reductions
in trade costs always increase volatility in that model. The source of the difference is
that without intermediates, a given fall in trade costs leads to a far smaller change in the
exporting cutoffs than in the model with intermediates. Many fewer firms enter the export
markets, and thus the selection into exporting effect is not reversed as it is in the baseline.
What is the intuition for this difference? In both models, a global fall in τij has the direct
effect of lowering the firms marginal cost of serving the export markets, and thus makes
the firm more likely to start selling abroad. In a model with intermediates, there is an
additional effect that the fall in τij lowers the cost of the input bundle csj , since that input
bundle includes foreign varieties and those are now cheaper. This indirect effect further
lowers the exporting cutoffs, over and above the direct effect of τij . In the model without
intermediates the indirect effect is absent, since the input bundle is just the wage. It turns
out that quantitatively this makes a large difference for the results of a reduction in trade
costs.
We conclude from these exercises that while the impact of openness on volatility at the

25

current levels of trade costs is robustly positive in all the models we consider, the outcomes of
further reductions in trade costs are sensitive to modelling assumptions about intermediate
input linkages.

6

Conclusion

Recent literature in both macroeconomics and international trade has focused attention on
the role of large firms. Gabaix (2011) demonstrates that if the distribution of firm size
follows a power law with an exponent close to negative 1 – which appears to be the case
in the data – the economy is granular: shocks to the largest firms can lead to aggregate
fluctuations.
This paper argues that the preponderance of large firms and their role in aggregate
volatility can help explain two empirical regularities found in cross-country data: (i) smaller
countries are more volatile, and (ii) more open countries are more volatile. We calibrate
and simulate a multi-country model of firm-level production and trade that can generate
granular fluctuations. The model matches quite well a number of features of the data, such
as observed bilateral and overall trade volumes, export participation ratios, and the relative
size of the largest firms in different countries. We show that the model reproduces the
elasticity of GDP volatility with respect to country size found in the data. The contribution of international trade to aggregate volatility varies a great deal depending on country
characteristics. While it is minimal in large, relatively closed economies like the U.S. or
Japan, trade increases volatility by up to 15-20% in small open economies such as Denmark
or Romania.
Recent research incorporates heterogeneous firms into fully dynamic general equilibrium macroeconomics models, focusing on the impact of persistent aggregate shocks and
firm entry and exit (Ghironi and Melitz, 2005; Alessandria and Choi, 2007; Ruhl, 2008).
The importance of firm-specific idiosyncratic shocks for macroeconomic volatility via the
granular channel emphasized in this paper should be viewed as complementary to this work.
Future research incorporating these different mechanisms, as well as bringing disaggregated
data to the models, will help provide an even more complete picture of the macroeconomic
impact of trade integration.

26

Appendix A

Data Description and Sources

Data on total GDP, per capita income, and trade openness come from the World Bank’s
World Development Indicators database (The World Bank, 2007b). Aggregate volatility
is the standard deviation of the yearly growth rates of per capita GDP in constant local
currency units over the period 1970-2006. Country size is the average share of the country’s
nominal U.S. dollar GDP in the world U.S. dollar GDP. Per capita income is the average
real PPP-adjusted per capita GDP. Trade openness is average imports plus exports as a
share of GDP. All the averages are taken over the same period over which the volatility is
computed, 1970-2006.
The figures on Fonterra are obtained from http://www.maf.govt.nz/mafnet/rural-nz/
profitability-and-economics/contribution-of-land-based-industries-nz-economic-growth/contribution07.
htm and http://tvnz.co.nz/view/page/423466/146647. The data on the 10 largest Korean
business groups come from the Korean Development Institute courtesy of Wonhyuk Lim,
and are for the year 2006.
The data on the Herfindahl indices of firm sales and the size of the 10 largest and the
single largest firm come from ORBIS, a large multi-country database published by Bureau
van Dijk that contains information on more than 50 million companies worldwide. The
data come from a variety of sources, including, but not limited to, registered filings and
annual reports. Importantly, the database includes both publicly traded and privately held
firms. The main variable used in the analysis is total sales. For each country, we use the
year with the most observations available, which is always between 2006 and 2008. ORBIS
is the largest available non-proprietary firm-level database. Nonetheless, coverage is quite
uneven across countries and years, implying that measures of concentration may not be
reliable or comparable across countries. We alleviate this concern by restricting the sample
of countries to those with a certain minimum numbers of firms, and by using indices that
are less prone to coverage-related biases. Di Giovanni and Levchenko (2010) present a more
complete description of the ORBIS database and further evidence based on these data that
firm size distributions in a large number of countries are extremely fat-tailed.
To obtain values of τij , we use the gravity estimates from the empirical model of Helpman
et al. (2008). Combining geographical characteristics such as bilateral distance, common
border, common language, whether the two countries are in a currency union and others,
with the coefficient estimates reported by Helpman et al. (2008) yields, up to a multiplicative
constant, the values of τij for each country pair. We vary the multiplicative constant so as

27

to match the mean and median imports/GDP ratios observed in the data in our sample
of countries. Data on bilateral distance, common border, whether the country is an island
or landlocked, common language, and colonial ties are from Centre d’Etudes Prospectives
et Informations Internationales (CEPII). Data on legal origins come from La Porta et al.
(1998). Finally, information on currency unions and free-trade areas come from Rose (2004),
supplemented by internet searches whenever needed. The advantage of the Helpman et al.
(2008) estimates is that they are obtained in an empirical model that accounts explicitly
for both fixed and variable costs of exporting, and thus correspond most closely to the
theoretical structure in our paper. Note that in this formulation, τij = τji for all i and j.20
The values of fiis and fijs are calibrated following di Giovanni and Levchenko (2010). The
Doing Business Indicators database (The World Bank, 2007a) collects information on the
administrative costs of setting up a firm – the time it takes, the number of procedures, and
the monetary cost – in a large sample of countries in the world. The particular variable we
use is the amount of time required to set up a business. We favor this indicator compared
to others that measure entry costs either in dollars or in units of per capita income, because
in our model fiis is a quantity of inputs rather than value. We must normalize fiis for one
country. Thus, we proceed by setting fUs S,U S to a level just high enough to ensure an interior
solution for production cutoffs.21 Then, for every other country fiis is set relative to the
U.S.. To be precise, if according to the Doing Business Indicators database, it takes 10
times longer to register a business in country i than in the U.S., then fiis = 10 × fUs S,U S .
Since we do not have data on fixed costs of operating a business that vary by sector, we set
fiis to be equal in the N and T sectors.
To measure the fixed costs of international trade, we use the Trading Across Borders
module of the Doing Business Indicators. This module provides the costs of exporting a
20-foot dry-cargo container out of each country, as well as the costs of importing the same
kind of container into each country. Parallel to our approach to setting the domestic cost
fiis , the indicators we choose are the amount of time required to carry out these transactions.
This ensures that fiiT and fijT are measured in the same units. We take the bilateral fixed
cost fijT to be the sum of the cost of exporting from country j and the cost of importing
into country i. The foreign trade costs fijT are on average about 40% of the domestic entry
costs fiiT .22
20

An earlier version of the paper also computed τij using the estimates of Eaton and Kortum (2002) as a
robustness check. The results were very similar.
21
That is, we set fUs S,U S to a level just high enough that asji < 1/bs for all i, j = 1, ..., C in all the baseline
and counterfactual exercises, with 1/bs being the upper limit of the distribution of a.
22
An earlier version of the paper was more agnostic about the nature of domestic fixed costs fiiT , and

28

The bilateral and overall trade volumes as a share of GDP used for comparison to the
model come from the Direction of Trade Statistics (International Monetary Fund, 2007).

Appendix B

The Complete 2-Sector Model

In country i, consumers maximize
N 
T
 εαε−1
 (1−α)ε
 N
εT −1
Ji
JiT
N
εN −1
εT −1
X
X


max
yiN (k) εN 
yiT (k) εT 
{yiN (k),yiT (k)}

k=1

k=1

s.t.
JiN

X

T

N
pN
i (k) yi (k) +

k=1

where

yis (k)

Ji
X

pTi (k) yiT (k) = Yi ,

k=1

is final consumption of good k belonging to sector s = N, T in country i, psi (k)

is the price of this good, Yi is total final consumption expenditure in the economy, and Jis
is the number of varieties available in sector s in country i coming from all countries. Since
consumer preferences are Cobb-Douglas in CES aggregates of N and T , final consumption
expenditure on sector N is equal to αYi , and on the T sector, (1 − α)Yi .
The CES composites of both N and T are used both as consumption and as intermediate
inputs in production. Let Xis denote the total spending – final and intermediate – on sector
s = N, T in country i. Given this total expenditure, it is well known that demand for an
individual variety k in country i is equal to
xsi (k) =

Xis
psi (k)−εs ,
(Pis )1−εs

where Pis is the ideal price index of sector s in this economy, (2), augmented with the
appropriate sector superscripts.
Production in both sectors uses both labor and CES composites of N and T as intermediate inputs. An input bundle in country j and sector s has a cost
h
ηs T 1−ηs i1−βs
csj = wjβs PjN
Pj
.
That is, production in sector s = N, T requires labor, inputs of N , and inputs of T . The
share of labor in value added, βs , and the share of non-tradeable inputs in total input usage,
ηs , both vary by sector.
assumed instead that they are equal (and low) in every country. The results were very similar. In addition,
we carried out the analysis setting the bilateral fixed cost to be the sum of domestic costs of starting a
T
T
business in the source and destination countries: fij
= fiiT + fjj
. This approach may be preferred if fixed
costs of exporting involved more than just shipping, and required, for instance, the exporting firm to create
a subsidiary for the distribution in the destination country. The results were virtually identical.

29

Entrepreneurs can pay the exploration cost fe to enter either sector. Each entrepreneur
that entered sector s in country j decides whether or not to pay the fixed cost of production
s , and which, if any, export markets to serve. In the N sector, we assume that trade costs
fjj

are infinite, and thus a firm in country j may only serve its own market.
The expressions defining the input requirement cutoffs asij , (3) and (4), and the free
entry conditions (5), have the same form (up to the appropriate sector superscripts) and
will hold in each sector. Following similar steps, we derive the expressions for the price
levels in the two sectors:
PiN =

1
bN



θN
θN − (εN − 1)

−

1
θN

εN
εN − 1



XiN

− θN −(εN −1)
θN (εN −1)

εN


I¯iN



1
cN
i

θN 

 θN −(εN −1)

1

−

εN −1

1
θN



N
cN
i fii

(B.1)
and

PiT =

1
bT



θT
θT − (εT − 1)

−

1
θT

εT
εT − 1



XiT

− θT −(εT −1)
θT (εT −1)

εT


C
X ¯T
Ij

j=1

1
τij cTj

!θT

1

! θT −(εT −1)




cTj fijT
(B.2)

Having expressed Pis , and asij in terms of Xis and csi for all i, j = 1, . . . , C, it remains to close
the model by solving for the Xis ’s and wi ’s. To do this, we impose balanced trade for each
country and the market clearing conditions in each sector and country. Free entry implies
that the total profits are zero, and thus final expenditure in country i simply equals labor
income: Yi = wi Li . Total expenditure XiN and XiT equals final spending plus expenditure
on sector s as intermediate inputs in both sectors:
XiN

= αwi Li + (1 − βN ) ηN XiN + (1 − βT ) ηT XiT

XiT

= (1 − α)wi Li + (1 − βN ) (1 − ηN ) XiN + (1 − βT ) (1 − ηT ) XiT .

Note that even though the T sector has both imports and exports, the assumption that only
T -sector goods can be traded amounts to imposing balanced trade within the T sector, and
thus the second condition must be satisfied in equilibrium as written. These two conditions
imply that total spending in each sector is a constant multiple of labor income wi Li .
Total sales from country i to country j can be written as
T
Xji

XjT
=  1−εT
PjT



εT
τji cTi
εT − 1

1−εT

30

I¯iT

θT −(εT −1)
bθTT θT
aTji
.
θT − (εT − 1)

−

εT −1

1
θT

.

Using expressions for aTji in (4), and PjT in (B.2), total exports from i to j become
I¯iT

T
Xji
=



1
τji cT
i



PC

¯T
l=1 Il

θT 

1
τjl cT
l

1
T
cT
i fji

θT 

 θT −(εT −1)

1
T
cT
l fjl

PC

Using the trade balance conditions, XiT =

εT −1

T
j=1 Xji

T
 θT −(εT −1) Xj .
εT −1

for each i = 1, . . . , C, as well as the

property that total spending XiT is a constant multiple of wi Li leads to the following system
of equations in wi :
! θT −(εT −1)

!θT
wi Li =

C
X
j=1

I¯iT

1
β

τji wi T

h

εT −1

1
1−ηT

η

(PiN ) T (PiT )

i1−β

β

T

wi T

h

η

(PiN ) T (PiT )

1−ηT

i1−β

T

T
fji

! θT −(εT −1) wj Lj ,

!θT
PC

¯T
l=1 Il

β

τjl wl T

η

(PlN ) T (PlT )

εT −1

1

1
h

1−ηT

i1−β

T

β

wl T

h

η

1−ηT

(PlN ) T (PlT )

i1−β

T

T
fjl

(B.3)
i = 1, . . . , C. There are C − 1 independent equations in this system, with wage in one of the
countries as the numéraire.

A monopolistically competitive equilibrium is a set of prices wi , PiN , PiT

C
,
i=1

and factor

allocations such that (i) consumers maximize utility; (ii) firms maximize profits, and (iii)
all goods and factor markets clear. The equilibrium is obtained as a solution to (C − 1) + 2 ×
C + 2 × C equations in wi , P N , P T , I¯N and I¯T that satisfies equations (5) for both s = N, T ,
i

i

i

i

(B.1), (B.2), and (B.3) for each i = 1, . . . , C. We solve these equations numerically in order
to carry out the main quantitative exercise in this paper.

B.1

Calibrating To Zipf ’s Law in Firm Size in a Two-Sector Model with
Trade

While Section 3.2 argues that in a one-sector Melitz-Pareto economy, steady-state firm size
follows a power law with exponent θ/(ε − 1), our quantitative model features two sectors,
idiosyncratic shocks to firm sales, as well as selection into exporting. This section shows
that the aggregate model economy with these additional features will still exhibit Zipf’s
Law in firm size.
Deriving an aggregate power law in an economy with two sectors involves computing
the (counter-)cdf of the following mixture of distributions. Let Q be a random variable
that follows a power law with exponent ζ1 with probability p, and with exponent ζ2 with
probability 1 − p. It is straightforward to show that the counter-cdf of Q is equal to:
31

Pr(Q > q) = pD1 q −ζ1 + (1 − p)D2 q −ζ2 . Importantly, when ζ1 = ζ2 = ζ, Q is itself a power
law with exponent ζ. This means that a two-sector economy in which both sectors follow
a power law with the same exponent will, in aggregate, also exhibit a power law with that
exponent. Our quantitative exercise adopt the assumption that both the N and T sectors
follow Zipf’s Law. Though we are not aware of any comprehensive set of estimates of power
law exponents in both traded and non-traded sectors, di Giovanni et al. (2011) estimate
power law exponents for a wide range of both traded and non-traded industries using a
census of French firms, and find that power law exponents do not differ systematically
between traded and non-traded sectors. It still could be the case that while the reduced
form exponents – which correspond to θT /(εT − 1) and θN /(εN − 1) – are the same, the
actual values of θs and εs differ. Since we do not have reliable information about how these
two individual parameters differ across sectors, we adopt the most agnostic and neutral
assumption that both θs and εs are the same in the two sectors.
Another concern is that even if steady-state firm size in the aggregate economy follows
Zipf’s Law, when firms are hit by idiosyncratic shocks z, the resulting distribution would be
something else. It turns out, however, that power laws are preserved under multiplication
by a random variable with finite variance. That is, if firm sales are driven by a random
productivity that generates Zipf’s Law (1/a in our notation), and a finite variance shock
(z), the resulting distribution of sales is still Zipf (Gabaix, 2009, pp. 258-259).
Another point regarding the calibration of power law parameters is that strictly speaking, when not all firms export, selection into exporting implies that the power law exponent
estimated on total sales – domestic plus exporting – is lower than θ/(ε − 1). Di Giovanni
et al. (2011) explore this bias in detail using the census of French firms, and suggest several corrections to the estimating procedure that can be used to estimate θ/(ε − 1) in an
internally consistent way. Their analysis shows that the bias introduced by selection into
exporting is not large. Corrected estimates obtained by di Giovanni et al. (2011) show that
θ/(ε − 1) is about 1.05, roughly the same as the value used in the quantitative exercise.
Thus, even though the model is enriched with these additional features, the resulting
distribution of firm size that the model produces still follows Zipf’s Law.

32

Appendix C

Aggregate Volatility Derivation

Firm k in country i with unit input requirement a(k) and realization of transitory shock
z(k) has sales of
C
X


1−εs
Xjs
εs
s
x (a(k), z(k)) =
τji ci a(k)z(k)
1 [a(k) ≤ aij ]  1−εs
εs − 1
j=1
Pjs




C
s
1−ε
s
Xj
εs
X

τji csi a(k)
= 
1 [a(k) ≤ aij ]  1−εs
 z̃,
εs − 1
j=1
Pjs
s

(C.1)

where 1 [·] is the indicator function that captures whether firm k serves market j, and z̃ ≡
z 1−εs . We already assumed that Ez (z̃) = 1, and now we further suppose that Varz (z̃) = σ 2 .
Expected sales for the firm with productivity a(k) are
Ez [xs (a(k), z(k))] =

C
X
j=1

1 [a(k) ≤ aij ] 

Xjs
1−εs

Pjs



1−εs
εs
.
τji csi a(k)
εs − 1

(C.2)

Given the expression for the actual sales of the firm with a transitory shock z(k) in (C.1)
and the expected sales of the firm with productivity a(k) in (C.2), the actual sales as an
approximation around Ez [xs (a(k), z(k))] are
xs (a(k), z(k)) ≈ Ez [xs (a(k), z(k))] +

dx
dz̃

∆z̃.
z̃=1

Therefore, the proportional change in xs (a(k), z(k)), or the growth rate, is given by
∆xs (a(k), z(k))
= z̃ − 1,
Ez (xs (a(k), z(k)))
and the variance of this growth rate is


∆xs (a(k), z(k))
Varz
= σ2,
Ez (xs (a(k), z(k)))
which we assume for simplicity is the same in the two sectors s = N, T . Dropping the sector
superscripts, the total sales in the economy are given by (8), thus the change in the total
sales relative to the non-stochastic steady state (the growth rate) is
∆X
=
Ez X

PI

k=1 ∆x(a(k), z(k))

Ez X

=

I
X
∆x(a(k), z(k)) Ez [x(a(k), z(k))]
.
Ez [x(a(k), z(k))]
Ez X
k=1

33

This means that the aggregate volatility is

Varz

∆X
Ez X



!
I
X
∆x(a(k), z(k)) Ez [x(a(k), z(k))]
= Varz
Ez [x(a(k), z(k))]
Ez X
k=1



I
X
∆x(a(k), z(k))
Ez [x(a(k), z(k))] 2
=
Varz
Ez [x(a(k), z(k))]
Ez X
k=1

I 
X
Ez [x(a(k), z(k))] 2
2
=σ
Ez X
= σ2

k=1
I
X

h(k)2 ,

k=1

where h(k) is the share of the firm k’s expected sales in total expected sales in the economy.
As expected, the volatility of total output in the economy is equal to the volatility of an
individual firm’s output times the Herfindahl index of production shares.

References
Adalet, Müge, “Multi-Product Exporters and Product Turnover Behaviour of New Zealand
Firms,” April 2009. New Zealand Treasury Working Paper 09/01.
Alessandria, George and Horag Choi, “Do Sunk Costs of Exporting Matter for Net Export
Dynamics?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (1), 289–336.
Alvarez, Fernando and Robert E. Lucas Jr., “General Equilibrium Analysis of the EatonKortum Model of International Trade,” Journal of Monetary Economics, September 2007,
54 (6), 1726–1768.
Anderson, James and Eric van Wincoop, “Trade Costs,” Journal of Economic Literature,
2004, 42 (3), 691–751.
Arndt, Christian, Claudia Buch, and Anselm Mattes, “Barriers to Internationalization:
Firm-Level Evidence from Germany,” September 2009. IAW Discussion Paper 52.
Axtell, Robert L., “Zipf Distribution of U.S. Firm Sizes,” Science, September 2001, 293
(5536), 1818–1820.
Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland, “International Business Cycles:
Theory and Evidence,” in Thomas Cooley, ed., Frontiers of Business Cycle Research,
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995, pp. 331–356.
Barlevy, Gadi, “The Costs of Business Cycles Under Endogenous Growth,” American Economic Review, September 2004, 94 (4), 964–990.
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter Schott, “Falling Trade Costs, Heterogeneous Firms, and Industry Dynamics,” April 2003. NBER Working Paper No. 9639.
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen Redding, and Peter Schott, “Firms in
International Trade,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2007, 21, 105–130.

34

Blattman, Christopher, Jason Hwang, and Jeffrey G. Williamson, “Winners and Losers
in the Commodity Lottery: The Impact of Terms of Trade Growth and Volatility in
the Periphery 1870–1939,” Journal of Development Economics, January 2007, 82 (1),
156–179.
Bustos, Paula, “Trade Liberalization, Exports and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on
the impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinean Firms,” American Economic Review, March
2011, 101 (1), 304–340.
Canals, Claudia, Xavier Gabaix, Josep M. Vilarrubia, and David E. Weinstein, “Trade
Patterns, Trade Balances, and Idiosyncratic Shocks,” 2007. la Caixa Working Paper
02/2007.
Canning, D., L.A.N. Amaral, Y. Lee, M. Meyer, and H.E. Stanley, “Scaling the Volatility
of GDP Growth Rates,” Economics Letters, 1998, 60, 335–341.
Chaney, Thomas, “Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of International
Trade,” American Economic Review, September 2008, 98 (4), 1707–1721.
Crucini, Mario J., “Country Size and Economic Fluctuations,” Review of International
Economics, May 1997, 5 (2), 204–220.
Delli Gatti, Domenico, Corrado Di Guilmi, Edoardo Gaffeo, Gianfranco Giulioni, Mauro
Gallegati, and Antonio Palestrini, “A New Approach to Business Fluctuations: Heterogeneous Interacting Agents, Scaling Laws and Financial Fragility,” Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization, April 2005, 56 (4), 489–512.
di Giovanni, Julian and Andrei A. Levchenko, “Trade Openness and Volatility,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, August 2009, 91 (3), 558–585.
and , “Firm Entry, Trade, and Welfare in Zipf’s World,” August 2010. NBER Working
Paper No. 16313.
and , “The Risk Content of Exports: a Portfolio View of International Trade,” July
2011. Forthcoming, NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics.
, , and Romain Rancière, “Power Laws in Firm Size and Openness to Trade: Measurement and Implications,” May 2011. Forthcoming, Journal of International Economics.
Dixit, Avinash K. and Joseph E. Stiglitz, “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
Diversity,” American Economic Review, June 1977, 67 (3), 297–308.
and , “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product Diversity: Reply,” American
Economic Review, March 1993, 83 (1), 302–304.
Easterly, William, Roumeen Islam, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, “Shaken and Stirred: Explaining
Growth Volatility,” in B. Pleskovic and N. Stern, eds., Annual World Bank Conference
on Development Economics, 2001.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel S. Kortum, “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica, September 2002, 70 (5), 1741–1779.
, , and Francis Kramarz, “An Anatomy of International Trade: Evidence from French
Firms,” 2011. Forthcoming, Econometrica.
Fabling, Richard and Lynda Sanderson, “Firm Level Patterns in Merchandise Trade,” May
2008. New Zealand Ministry of Economic Development Occasional Paper 08/03.

35

Fitzgerald, Doireann and Stefanie Haller, “Pricing-to-Market: Evidence From Plant-Level
Prices,” September 2010. Mimeo, Stanford University and ESRI.
Fujita, Masahisa, Paul Krugman, and Anthony J. Venables, The Spatial Economy: Cities,
Regions, and International Trade, Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press, 2001.
Furceri, Davide and Georgios Karras, “Country Size and Business Cycle Volatility: Scale
Really Matters,” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 2007, 21 (4),
424–434.
Gabaix, Xavier, “Power Laws in Economics and Finance,” Annual Reviews of Economics,
2009, 1, 255–93.
, “The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, May 2011, 79 (3),
733–772.
Gavin, Michael and Ricardo Hausmann, “Growth with Equity: The Volatility Connection,”
in Nancy Birdsall, Carol Graham, and Richard H. Sabot, eds., Beyond Tradeoffs: Market Reforms and Equitable Growth in Latin America, Washington, DC: Inter-American
Development Bank and the Brookings Institution, 1998, pp. 91–109.
Ghironi, Fabio and Marc J. Melitz, “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with
Heterogeneous Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2005, 120 (3), 865–915.
Head, Allen C., “Country Size, Aggregate Fluctuations, and International Risk Sharing,”
Canadian Journal of Economics, November 1995, 28 (4b), 1096–1119.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein, “Estimating Trade Flows: Trading Partners and Trading Volumes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2008, 123 (2),
441–487.
Holmes, Thomas J. and John J. Stevens, “An Alternative Theory of the Plant Size Distribution with an Application to Trade,” April 2010. Mimeo, University of Minnesota and
Federal Reserve Board of Governors.
International Monetary Fund, “Directions of Trade Statistics,” 2007.
Katzenstein, Peter J., Small States in World Markets: Industrial Policy in Europe, Ithaca
and London: Cornell University Press, 1985.
Koren, Miklós and Silvana Tenreyro, “Volatility and Development,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, February 2007, 122 (1), 243–287.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar S. Prasad, and Marco E. Terrones, “Financial Integration and
Macroeconomic Volatility,” IMF Staff Papers, 2003, 50 (Special Issue), 119–141.
Kraay, Aart and Jaume Ventura, “Comparative Advantage and the Cross-Section of Business Cycles,” Journal of European Economic Association, December 2007, 5 (6), 1300–
1333.
Krugman, Paul, “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,”
American Economic Review, 1980, 70 (5), 950–959.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, “Law
and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, December 1998, 106 (6), 1113–1155.
Laursen, Thomas and Sandeep Mahajan, “Volatility, Income Distribution, and Poverty,” in
Joshua Aizenman and Brian Pinto, eds., Managing Economic Volatility and Crises: A
Practitioner’s Guide, Cambridge University Press New York 2005, pp. 101–136.
36

Melitz, Marc J., “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, November 2003, 71 (6), 1695–1725.
Newbery, David M. G. and Joseph E. Stiglitz, “Pareto Inferior Trade,” Review of Economic
Studies, January 1984, 51 (1), 1–12.
OECD, “The Rise of China and India: What’s in it for Africa?,” Technical Report, Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development, Development Centre Studies 2006.
Pallage, Stéphane and Michel A. Robe, “On The Welfare Cost of Economic Fluctuations in
Developing Countries,” International Economic Review, May 2003, 44 (2), 677–698.
Pavcnik, Nina, “Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements: Evidence from
Chilean Plants,” Review of Economic Studies, January 2002, 69 (1), 245–276.
Ramey, Garey and Valerie A. Ramey, “Cross-Country Evidence on the Link Between
Volatility and Growth,” American Economic Review, December 1995, 85 (5), 1138–1151.
Rose, Andrew K., “Do We Really Know That the WTO Increases Trade?,” American
Economic Review, March 2004, 94 (1), 98–114.
Ruhl, Kim J., “The International Elasticity Puzzle,” 2008. mimeo, NYU Stern School of
Business.
Stanley, Michael H.R., Luis A.N. Amaral, Sergey V. Buldyrev, Shlomo Havlin, Heiko
Leschhorn, Philipp Maass, Michael A. Salinger, and H. Eugene Stanley, “Scaling Behaviour in the Growth of Companies,” Nature, February 1996, 379, 804–806.
Sutton, John, “The Variance of Firm Growth Rates: the ‘Scaling’ Puzzle,” Physica A, 2002,
312, 577–590.
The World Bank, “Doing Business Indicators,” 2007.
, “World Development Indicators,” 2007.
Yang, Xiaokai and Ben J. Heijdra, “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product Diversity: Comment,” American Economic Review, March 1993, 83 (1), 295–301.
Yi, Kei-Mu and Jing Zhang, “Structural Change in an Open Economy,” April 2010. Mimeo,
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and University of Michigan.

37

Table 1. Parameter Values for the Calibrated Model
Parameter
εa
θb
α

Baseline
6
5.3
0.65

Source
Anderson and van Wincoop (2004)
θ
Axtell (2001): ε−1
= 1.06
Yi and Zhang (2010)

{βN , βT }
{ηN , ηT }

{0.65, 0.35}
{0.77, 0.35}

τij

c,d

2.30

Helpman et al. (2008)

fii
fij

c

14.24
7.20

The World Bank (2007a); normalizing fU S,U S
so that nearly all firms the U.S. produce

34.0

To match 7,000,0000 firms in the U.S.
(U.S. Economic Census)

0.1

Standard deviation of sales growth of the top
100 firms in COMPUSTAT

fe

σ

e

c

1997 U.S. Benchmark Input-Output Table

Notes:
a
Robustness checks include ε = 4 and ε = 8.
b
θ
Robustness checks include ε−1
= 1.5 and ε = 6, so that θ = 6.5.
c
Average in our sample of 50 countries.
d
τij = τji . Trade costs are adjusted by a constant ratio to match the median-level of openness across the
50-country sample.
e
Robustness checks include σ varying with firm sales: σ = Ax−ξ , where ξ = 1/6.

38

Table 2. Top 49 Countries and the Rest of the World in Terms of 2006 GDP

Country
United States
Japan
Germany
France
United Kingdom
Italy
China
Canada
Brazil
Spain
India
Australia
Russian Federation
Mexico
Netherlands
Korea, Rep.
Sweden
Switzerland
Belgium
Argentina
Saudi Arabia
Austria
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Turkey
Denmark

GDP/
World GDP
0.300
0.124
0.076
0.054
0.044
0.041
0.028
0.026
0.021
0.020
0.017
0.016
0.015
0.015
0.015
0.011
0.010
0.010
0.009
0.008
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.006

Country
Indonesia
South Africa
Norway
Poland
Finland
Greece
Venezuela, RB
Thailand
Portugal
Colombia
Nigeria
Algeria
Israel
Philippines
Malaysia
Ireland
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Pakistan
Chile
New Zealand
Czech Republic
United Arab Emirates
Hungary
Romania
Rest of the World

GDP/
World GDP
0.006
0.006
0.006
0.005
0.005
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.003
0.003
0.003
0.003
0.003
0.003
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.027

Notes: Ranking of top 49 countries and the rest of the world in terms of 2006 U.S.$ GDP. We include Hong
Kong, POC, and Singapore in Rest of the World. Source: The World Bank (2007b).

39

Table 3. Bilateral Trade Shares: Data and Model Predictions
Model
Domestic sales as a share of domestic absorption (πii )
mean
median
corr(model,data)
Export sales as a share of domestic absorption (πij )
mean
median
corr(model,data)

Data

0.7900 0.7520
0.7717 0.7921
0.4783
0.0043 0.0047
0.0021 0.0047
0.7799

Notes: This table reports the means and medians of domestic output (top panel), and bilateral trade (bottom
panel), both as a share of domestic absorption, in the model and in the data. Source: International Monetary
Fund (2007).

Table 4. Export Participation: Data and Model Predictions for Whole Economy and
Tradeable Sector
(1)
Country
United States
Germany
France
Argentina
Colombia
Ireland
Chile
New Zealand

Total
0.010
0.111
0.029
0.112
0.148
0.332
0.095
0.062

(2)
Model
Tradeable
0.018
0.238
0.065
0.352
0.548
1.000
0.335
0.189

(3)
Total
0.040
0.100
0.040
...
...
...
0.105
0.051

(4)
Data
Tradeable
0.150
...
0.090
0.422
0.363
0.740
...
0.135

Notes: This table compares, for selected countries, the share of exporters among all firms in the model
(column 1) and the share of exporters among the tradeable sector firms in the model (column 2) with
available estimates of corresponding shares in existing literature. Since for some countries, data are reported
relative to all the firms in the economy, while for other countries it is reported relative to all the firms in
the traded sector, column 3 (data) should be compared to column 1 (model), and column 4 (data) should
be compared to Column 2 (model). For the United States, data are imputed based on publicly available
U.S. Economic Census data on the numbers of firms by sector, together with the summary statistics for the
numbers of exporters reported in Bernard et al. (2007). Data for France is based on authors’ calculations
using the French Census data in di Giovanni et al. (2011). Data for Germany are from Arndt et al. (2009)
(Table A2). Data for Argentina come from Bustos (2011), Table D.1. For New Zealand, data come from
Fabling and Sanderson (2008), Table 4. Data on Ireland come from Fitzgerald and Haller (2010), Table 1.
Data for Chile come from private communication with Miguel Fuentes at the Central Bank of Chile. Data
for Colombia come from private communication with Jorge Tovar at the Universidad de los Andes.

40

41

(2)
Trade/
Autarky
1.035
1.014
1.080
1.098
1.076
1.098
1.024
1.077
1.045
1.061
1.064
1.051
1.099
1.052
1.104
1.059
1.099
1.107
1.072
1.091
1.069
1.066
1.097
1.157
1.156
Country
Indonesia
South Africa
Norway
Poland
Finland
Greece
Venezuela, RB
Thailand
Portugal
Colombia
Nigeria
Algeria
Israel
Philippines
Malaysia
Ireland
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Pakistan
Chile
New Zealand
Czech Republic
United Arab Emirates
Hungary
Romania

(1)

(2)
Trade/
Actual
0.376
0.535
0.716
0.377
0.437
0.414
0.285
0.337
0.379
0.646
0.274
0.271
0.513
0.439
0.371
0.457
0.513
0.630
0.262
0.531
0.330
0.178
0.399
0.242
Trade/
Autarky
1.060
1.109
1.137
1.114
1.109
1.116
1.070
1.099
1.068
1.118
1.172
1.156
1.131
1.107
1.095
1.087
1.192
1.165
1.119
1.114
1.095
1.089
1.114
1.218

Notes: ‘Trade/Actual’ reports the ratio of aggregate volatility implied by the model under trade to the actual volatility of per capita GDP growth. In
calculating volatility in the model, this column assumes that the firm-level volatility is equal to σ = 0.1. ‘Trade/Autarky’ reports the ratio of volatility
in the model under trade to the volatility under autarky for each country.

Country
United States
Japan
Germany
France
United Kingdom
Italy
China
Canada
Brazil
Spain
India
Australia
Russian Federation
Mexico
Netherlands
Korea, Rep.
Sweden
Switzerland
Belgium
Argentina
Saudi Arabia
Austria
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Turkey
Denmark

(1)
Trade/
Actual
0.377
0.405
0.582
0.559
0.476
0.463
0.280
0.446
0.311
0.550
0.371
0.513
0.144
0.329
0.693
0.296
0.634
0.548
0.713
0.219
0.168
0.716
0.189
0.254
0.612

Table 5. International Trade and Aggregate Volatility

Table 6. Aggregate Volatility: Data and Model Predictions
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

1.578**
(0.244)

1.365**
(0.321)
-0.093
(0.073)

1.099**
(0.287)
-0.098
(0.065)
0.100+
(0.053)

3.490**
(1.092)
49
0.353

3.417**
(1.145)
49
0.378

2.994**
(1.079)
47
0.477

0.765**
(0.274)
-0.146*
(0.060)
-0.064
(0.052)
-0.134
(0.217)
0.282
(1.045)
35
0.450

Dep. Var: Log(GDP Volatility)
Log(σT )
Log(GDP per capita)
Log(Risk Content of Exports)
Log(Herfindahl of Production)
Constant
Observations
R2

Notes: The dependent variable is the standard deviation of per capita GDP growth over the period 19702006. σT is the aggregate volatility implied by the simulated model. GDP per capita is the PPP-adjusted
per capita GDP. Risk Content of Exports is the measure of the volatility of a country’s export pattern taken
from di Giovanni and Levchenko (2011). Herfindahl of Production is the Herfindahl index of industry-level
production shares, taken from di Giovanni and Levchenko (2009). Robust standard errors in parentheses.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.

Table 7. Sensitivity Checks: The Impact of Country Size and Trade on Volatility

Baseline

(1)
βSize
-0.135

(2)
Trade/Autarky
1.097

Fixed I¯is
βT = βN = 1
σ = Ax−ξ
ζ = 1.5
ε=4
ε=8

-0.133
-0.145
-0.286
-0.123
-0.119
-0.138

1.090
1.238
1.291
1.116
1.099
1.111

Notes: This table reports (1) the coefficient of regressing the log of aggregate volatility on the log of country
size (βSize ) in the trade equilibrium, and (2) the contribution of international trade to aggregate volatility
(ratio of volatility under trade to the volatility in autarky) under alternative assumptions. Row 1 reports
the results for the baseline trade equilibrium simulation. Row 2 reports the results of a simulation without
free entry. Row 3 reports the results of a simulation without intermediates. Row 4 reports the results of a
simulation in which the firm-specific volatility decreases in firm size. Row 5 reports the results of applying
a power law coefficient of 1.5 rather than the baseline of 1.06. Rows 6 and 7 report the results when using
an elasticity of substitution of 4 or 8, respectively.

42

Table 8. The Impact of Further Reductions in Trade Costs on Aggregate Volatility
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Percentage Reduction in Trade Costs
10%
25%
50%
75%
Percentile
5
10
25
50
75
95
min
max

0.998
0.998
1.001
1.004
1.011
1.019
0.995
1.030

0.994
0.998
1.003
1.011
1.022
1.036
0.988
1.050

0.984
0.991
1.001
1.011
1.036
1.055
0.973
1.084

1.003
1.006
1.017
1.034
1.075
1.129
0.990
1.167

Notes: This table reports percentiles and minimum and maximums of the ratio of aggregate volatility under
a four reductions in iceberg trade costs τij to the aggregate volatility as implied by the model under current
trade costs.

43

Figure 1. Aggregate Volatility, Country Size, and Trade Openness





  





















    









(a) Partial Correlations Between Country Size and Aggregate Volatility



   














 



(b) Partial Correlation Between Trade Openness and Aggregate Volatility
Notes: These ﬁgures report the partial correlation plot of aggregate volatility, measured as the standard
deviation of the annual growth rate of per capita GDP over 1970-2006, on the y-axis against (a) country size
on the x-axis, and (b) trade openness on the x-axis, both after netting out the impact of per capita income.
Both axes are in log scale. Source: The World Bank (2007b).

44

Figure 2. Korean Business Groups’ Sales As a Share of GDP and Total Exports

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
Samsung

Hyundai
Motor Co.

SK

LG

Korea
POSCO
Electric
Power
Corporation

Sales/GDP

Lotte

KT

Korea
Korea
Housing
Highway
Corporation Corporation

Exports/Total Exports

Notes: This ﬁgure reports the 2006 sales of the top 10 Korean business groups, as a share of Korean GDP
(blue/dark bars) and total Korean exports (red/light bars). Source: Korean Development Institute.

45

Figure 3. Country Size, Firm Sales Concentration, and Size of Large Firms



&-($,*$."-(&/*0



**
`!
0


  
"0*
`!
0
 

 

!



"0*
`!
0
 

  

!

 !


!



!

!

!




"#$%&'()*%(+%"%,"&*,&

!







(a) Country Size and Firm Herﬁndahl Indices







*0"& 0%(&/0





"0*
`
0 
 
 



"0*
`
0
 

  


**
`
0 

 



 !


!



!

!

!




"#$%&,(-*%(+%"%,"&*,&

!







(b) Country Size and the Size of the 10 Largest Firms
Notes: These ﬁgures present the scatterplots of log country size and (a) the log Herﬁndahl index of ﬁrm
sales; (b) the log size of the 10 largest ﬁrms, and (c) the log size of the largest ﬁrm, in all cases after netting
out per capita GDP. The countries with more than 1000 ﬁrms with sales data are labeled with ♦’s; the
countries with between 100 and 1000 ﬁrms with sales data are labeled with ’s, and the countries with less
than 100 ﬁrms with sales data with ◦’s. The regression lines through the samples of (i) all countries; (ii)
countries with ≥100 ﬁrms; and (iii) countries with ≥1000 ﬁrms are plotted through the data. Both axes are
in log scale. Sources: ORBIS and The World Bank (2007b).

46

Figure 3. Country Size, Firm Sales Concentration, and Size of Large Firms (Cont’d)






*0"& 0%(&/

"0*



`
0
 
 



"0*
` 
0 
 

  


**
`
0







 !


!



!

!

!




"#$%&,(-*%(+%"%,"&*,&

!







(c) Country Size and the Size of the Largest Firm
Notes: These ﬁgures present the scatterplots of log country size and (a) the log Herﬁndahl index of ﬁrm
sales; (b) the log size of the 10 largest ﬁrms, and (c) the log size of the largest ﬁrm, in all cases after netting
out per capita GDP. The countries with more than 1000 ﬁrms with sales data are labeled with ♦’s; the
countries with between 100 and 1000 ﬁrms with sales data are labeled with ’s, and the countries with less
than 100 ﬁrms with sales data with ◦’s. The regression lines through the samples of (i) all countries; (ii)
countries with ≥100 ﬁrms; and (iii) countries with ≥1000 ﬁrms are plotted through the data. Both axes are
in log scale. Sources: ORBIS and The World Bank (2007b).

47

Figure 4. The Timing of the Economy
Those that decide
to enter/export pay
the ﬁxed costs of
producing/exporting

Produce with
marginal cost az;
consume;
markets clear
-

Each entrant k = 1, . . . , I
ﬁnds out its type a, and
decides whether or not to
produce and export

Existing producers
learn the transitory
shock z

Figure 5. The Analytical Power Law in the Melitz-Pareto Model

Log(P{Sales>q})

Autarky1

Trade: 2-Country
Trade: C-Country

Log(q)

Notes: This ﬁgure depicts the distribution of ﬁrm size, measured by sales, and how it changes as it moves
from Autarky to a 2-Country Trade equilibrium, and ﬁnally to a C-Country Trade equilibrium. In the twocountry case, there is a single productivity cutoﬀ, above which ﬁrms export abroad. Compared to autarky,
there is a higher probability of ﬁnding larger ﬁrms above this cutoﬀ. In the C-country case, with multiple
export markets there will be cutoﬀs for each market, with progressively more productive ﬁrms exporting to
more and more markets and growing larger and larger relative to domestic GDP.

48

Figure 6. Bilateral Trade Shares and Trade Openness: Data and Model Predictions








  











































 







(a) Bilateral Trade Shares

0.8

MYS

0.7

BEL

0.6

Data Openness

0.5
THA

0.4

0.3

0.2
CHN
AUS
USA

0.1

0

JPN

0

0.1

CZE
ARE
HUN
NLD
PHL

AUT
ROM
MEX
IRL
ISR
CAN CHE POL
EGY
KOR
PRT
SWE
TUR
DNK
FIN
DEU
CHL
GRC
ESP
FRA
NZL
DZA
ZAF
GBR
ITA
NGA
SAU IRN
NOR PAK
COL
IDN
ARG VEN
BRA RUS
IND

0.2

0.3

0.4
Model Openness

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

(b) Trade Openness
Notes: Figure (a) reports the scatterplot of domestic output (πii ) and bilateral trade (πij ), both as a
share of country i GDP. Solid dots represent observations of πii , while hollow dots represent bilateral trade
observations (πij ). Both axes are in log scale. Figure (b) reports the scatterplot of total imports as a share
of GDP. In both ﬁgures, the values implied by the model are on the horizontal axis; actual values are on
the vertical axis, and the line through the data is the 45-degree line. Source: International Monetary Fund
(2007).

49

Figure 7. Volatility and Country Size: Data and Model Predictions











'#$"$"' " ' &







'

















('%!*

%















$(#'%* +"' )'$'$%"%





Notes: This ﬁgure plots the relationship between country size and aggregate volatility implied by the data
(conditioning for per capita GDP), the model under trade, and the model in autarky. The dots represent
actual observations of volatility. Note that the data points and regression line are shifted by a constant for
ease of visual comparability with the model regressions lines. Source: The World Bank (2007b).

50

Table A1. Aggregate Volatility and Country Size Regressions
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.177**
(0.038)

-0.139**
(0.044)
-0.157*
(0.069)
-2.696**
(0.763)
49
0.273

-0.090+
(0.045)
-0.261**
(0.070)
-1.533+
(0.773)
30
0.337

-0.209**
(0.035)
-0.049
(0.057)
-4.010**
(0.601)
75
0.328

-0.180**
(0.027)
-0.019
(0.045)
-4.154**
(0.473)
100
0.296

-0.142**
(0.023)
0.018
(0.037)
-4.291**
(0.410)
143
0.225

Dep. Var: Log(GDP Volatility)
Log(Size)
Log(GDP per capita)
Constant
Observations
R2

-4.352**
(0.190)
49
0.192

Notes: The dependent variable is the log of the standard deviation of per capita GDP growth over the period
1970-2006. Size is a country’s GDP as a share of world GDP; GDP per capita is PPP-adjusted per capita
income. All right-hand side variables are averages over 1970-2006. Robust standard errors in parentheses;
+ signiﬁcant at 10%; * signiﬁcant at 5%; ** signiﬁcant at 1%.

51

Table A2. U.S. Evidence on Relationship between Firm-Level Volatility and Exporter
Status and Size

Exporter
Log(Sales)
Observations
Number of SIC
R2

Exporter
Log(Sales)
Observations
Number of SIC
R2

Exporter
Log(Sales)
Number of SIC
Observations
R2

(A) Sample period: 1980-2007
Growth
Granular
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
All
Restricted
All
Restricted
-0.022
-0.014
-0.024
-0.017
(0.021)
(0.022)
(0.021)
(0.023)
-0.129**
-0.135**
-0.128**
-0.133**
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.004)
15,901
14,597
15,859
14,558
440
415
427
403
0.181
0.183
0.198
0.201
(B) Sample period: 1980-1989
Growth
Granular
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
All
Restricted
All
Restricted
-0.020
-0.013
-0.010
-0.013
(0.021)
(0.023)
(0.020)
(0.023)
-0.128**
-0.133**
-0.126**
-0.133**
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.006)
8,529
7,693
8,509
7,693
435
410
422
410
0.171
0.170
0.181
0.170
(C) Sample period: 1990-2007
Growth
Granular
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
All
Restricted
All
Restricted
-0.025
-0.021
-0.041
-0.036
(0.029)
(0.031)
(0.029)
(0.031)
-0.136**
-0.140**
-0.134**
-0.140**
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.007)
409
386
398
375
6,881
6,467
6,857
6,443
0.149
0.151
0.165
0.174

Notes: This table presents the results from regressing a measure of ﬁrm-level sales volatility on measures of
its export status (‘Exporter’) and size (‘Sales’). Columns (1) and (2) (‘Growth’) take the natural logarithm
of the standard deviation of ﬁrm real sales as the dependent variable. Columns of (3) and (4) (‘Granular’)
uses a granular volatility measure, calculated as the standard deviation of the estimated residuals, ε̂ist , from
the following ﬁrm-level panel regression: Δ log (Salesist ) = αi + αst + εist , where i is a ﬁrm, s is a sector,
and t is a quarter, so that αi is a ﬁrm-level eﬀect, and αst is a sector×time eﬀect. Standard deviations are
calculated over the given sample period, while export status and measures of ﬁrm size are averaged over
the period. Regressions include sector-level ﬁxed eﬀects at the 4-digit SIC. ‘All’ includes all ﬁrms, while
‘Restricted’ excludes ﬁrms in the commodity, energy, and public sectors. Data are taken from the Compustat
Quarterly database of listed U.S. ﬁrms together with information on whether a ﬁrm is an exporter from the
Compustat Segments database. Robust standard errors in parentheses; + signiﬁcant at 10%; * signiﬁcant
at 5%; ** signiﬁcant at 1%.
52

