NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REEXAMINING THE IMPACT OF FAMILY PLANNING PROGRAMS ON U.S. FERTILITY:
EVIDENCE FROM THE WAR ON POVERTY AND THE EARLY YEARS OF TITLE X
Martha J. Bailey
Working Paper 17343
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17343

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2011

This project was supported by the National Science Foundation (Grant 6334659); the National Bureau
of Economic Research’s (NBER) Dissertation Grant for the Study of the Nonprofit Sector (2003-2005);
the University of Michigan’s National Poverty Center (NPC) and Robert Wood Johnson Health and
Society Programs; the University of Michigan Population Research Center’s Eva Mueller Award;
and the National Institute of Health (Grant HD058065-01A1). I also received grant support from the
University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research (UKCPR) through the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (Grant 5 UO1
PE000002-05). The opinions and conclusions expressed herein are solely those of the author and should
not be construed as representing the opinions or policy of the NBER, NPC or UKCPR or any agency
of the federal government. I am grateful to Doug Almond and Hillary Hoynes for sharing the Regional
Economic Information System (REIS) data for the 1959 to 1978 period and to the Guttmacher Institute
and Ted Joyce for sharing information on abortion providers from 1973 to 1979. I also thank John
Bound, Nzinga Broussard, Charlie Brown, John DiNardo, Daniel Eisenberg, Hilary Hoynes, David
Lam, Ron Lee, Daniel Leeds, Paul Rhode, Mel Stephens, and Jeff Smith for helpful comments and
suggestions. Exceptional research assistance was provided by Andrew Goodman-Bacon, Allie Davido,
Nic Duquette, Emily Collins, Brad Hershbein, and Jessica Williams.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Martha J. Bailey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Reexamining the Impact of Family Planning Programs on U.S. Fertility: Evidence from the
War on Poverty and the Early Years of Title X
Martha J. Bailey
NBER Working Paper No. 17343
August 2011
JEL No. J1,J13,J18
ABSTRACT
Almost 50 years after domestic U.S. family planning programs began, their effects on childbearing
remain controversial. Using the county-level roll-out of these programs from 1964 to 1973, this paper
reevaluates their shorter- and longer-term effects on U.S. fertility rates. I find that the introduction
of family planning is associated with significant and persistent reductions in fertility driven both by
falling completed childbearing and childbearing delay. Although federally-funded family planning
accounted for a small portion of the post-baby boom U.S. fertility decline, the estimates imply that
they reduced childbearing among poor women by 21 to 29 percent.

Martha J. Bailey
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
611 Tappan Street
207 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
baileymj@umich.edu

“[L]ess than five dollars invested in population control is worth a hundred dollars
invested in economic growth.” ~President Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965
“It is my view that no American woman should be denied access to family planning
assistance because of her economic condition. I believe, therefore that we should
establish as a national goal the provision of adequate family planning services within
the next five years to all those who want them but cannot afford them. This we have
the capacity to do.” ~President Richard Nixon, 1969

The 1960s marked an important turning point in U.S. population policy. Motivated by
concerns over the international “population explosion” and the high fertility rates of the U.S.
baby boom, domestic family planning grants began under the 1964 Economic Opportunity Act,
the centerpiece of President Johnson’s War on Poverty, and continued under Title X of the 1970
Public Health Service Act, signed into law by President Nixon. The rationale for family
planning programs was twofold. By subsidizing contraception, family planning programs would
promote greater economic opportunities for disadvantaged women, who “do not want more
children than do families with higher incomes” but “do not have the information or the resources
to plan their families effectively according to their own desires” (National Academy of Sciences
1963). In addition, the architects of the War on Poverty viewed reducing unwanted and ill-timed
childbearing as a means to promoting opportunities for children and, thus, achieving broader and
longer-term economic prosperity.
More than forty years later, the achievements of the U.S. family planning program remain
an open question. In fact, even the fertility effects of these programs remain controversial.
Although many economic models predict that family planning programs could reduce
childbearing (Becker and Lewis 1973, Michael and Willis 1976), incorporating marriage-market
effects or moral hazard dimensions (Akerlof et al. 1996, Levine et al. 1996, Ananat et al. 2009)
can generate predictions that family planning programs increase childbearing. This theoretical
ambiguity has not been resolved in the empirical literature. The conclusions of observational
studies on family planning have been limited by well-known omitted variables and endogeneity
problems (Rosenzweig and Wolpin 1986, Hotz et al. 1997, Mellor 1998), and randomized trials
have found almost no evidence that family planning affects teen childbearing in the U.S. (Kirby
1997, DiCenso et al. 2002).1 Although the null results of these trials are inconclusive due to their
1

A handful of quasi-experimental studies in developing countries examine the longer-term effects of family planning programs
on completed fertility (Joshi and Schultz 2007, Bangladesh; Salehi-Isfahani et al. 2008, Iran; and Miller 2009, Colombia), and a

Family Planning – 1

short time horizons (which neglect longer-term effects), small sample sizes (which limit
precision), and focus on teens (who may respond differently than non-teens), they provide no
support for the view that family planning reduces births.2 Kearney and Levine’s (2009)
differences-in-differences study of changes in state-level Medicaid eligibility for family planning
provides the best available evidence that domestic programs reduce births for women near the
poverty line for at least two years. Because their identification strategy relies upon recent policy
changes that affected women who were just eligible for Medicaid, it is unclear how their results
generalize to women with higher earnings or whether their shorter-term reductions in
childbearing persist in the longer-term—effects important for understanding how family
planning programs have shaped family size, the intergenerational transmission of poverty, and
longer-term economic development.
This paper exploits the roll-out of federally-funded family planning programs from 1964
to 1973 to evaluate both their shorter and longer-term effects on childbearing. The “wild sort of
grant-making operation” (Gillette 1996: 193) during the period provides both a plausible,
county-level identification strategy and allows for the effects of federally-funded family planning
to be evaluated over a fifteen years horizon. Using a balanced panel of U.S. counties from 1959
to 1988, I find that the introduction of family planning programs is associated with a significant
and sustained reduction in childbearing. Five years after these programs were established, the
general fertility rate was 2 percent lower net of fertility reductions in similar communities that
did not receive federal family planning dollars. This reduction was partially driven by a delay in
childbearing, as teen births and births to women in their early 20s remained 2 and 1.4 percent
lower, respectively, five to ten years after communities received federally-funded family
planning programs. But the decline in the fertility rate also reflected a reduction in completed
childbearing, evinced by a longer-term, 2-percent reduction in second births. Together, delayed
childbearing and reductions in higher-order births generated a decrease in the general fertility
rate of 1.4 percent up to fifteen years after communities received their first federal family
planning grants.

recent randomized-control trial in Zambia examines the effects of spousal disagreement about the desired number of children—
and the potential role of female contraception—in reducing fertility (Ashraf, Field, and Lee 2010). Although these studies
suggest that family planning services should reduce childbearing, the findings do not easily generalize to the U.S., where
differences in women’s rights, knowledge and resources should imply different treatment effects.
2
Helmerhorst et al. (2006) note additional limitations of published randomized trials including intentional exclusion of
participants after randomization, failure to use intention-to-treat analyses, and lack of treatment blinding.

Family Planning – 2

Because federally-funded family planning programs served mostly lower-income women
and operated in only one fifth of all U.S. counties, the program accounted for a small portion of
the large decline in the general fertility rate from 1959 to 1974. Nevertheless, the program had a
profound effect on the women it served. The estimates imply that family planning programs
reduced childbearing among poor women by 21 to 29 percent within 10 years. This effect is
large enough to account for roughly half to three-quarters of the 1965 gap in childbearing
between poor and non-poor women and suggests that federally-funded family planning
substantially diminished the income-based differences in childbearing that initially motivated the
program.
I. A BRIEF HISTORY OF U.S. FAMILY PLANNING PROGRAMS, 1964 TO 1973
Today, the most effective contraceptive methods are scientifically tested, U.S. Food and
Drug Administration approved, and medically prescribed. But historically, contraception was
deemed obscene material and banned under federal and most state statutes (Tone 2001). After
Enovid, the first birth control pill, was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in
1960, a series of legal changes at the national and state level removed restrictions on the
shipping, manufacturing, and sales of contraceptives to married and, later, unmarried women
(Bailey et al. 2011).
Legal access, however, did not guarantee access in practice. Although the Pill was
popular, it was prohibitively expensive. Shortly after its release, an annual supply of Enovid sold
for the equivalent of about $760 in 2010 dollars (Tone 2001: 257)–roughly twice today’s annual
cost and more than three weeks of full-time work at the 1960 minimum wage. Both widespread
concern about population growth (Wilmoth and Ball 1992, 1995) and studies showing that lower
income women were having more children than they desired (National Academy of Sciences
1963) galvanized support for federal intervention.
A. The Early Expansion of U.S. Family Planning Programs
Federal grants for family planning began under the Economic Opportunity Act (EOA,
1964), the cornerstone legislation of President Johnson’s War on Poverty.3 Although explicit
language about family planning was not included in the EOA, the program fit within its funding
authority. Sargent Shriver, the head of the Office of Economic Opportunity (OEO), began
3

According to 1967 estimates, expenditures for family planning through the Maternal and Child Health programs (started in
1942) and the Maternal and Infant Care programs under the 1963 Social Security Amendment were small (DHEW 1974: 3).

Family Planning – 3

funding family planning programs through the Community Action Program as early as 1964
(Levitan 1969).
Figure I shows gradual increases in federal outlays for family planning between 1965 and
1967 and two large increases in funding corresponding to two important policy changes. The
first substantial increase in funding came with the 1967 “Green Amendment” to the EOA (Public
Law 90-222, Title II, Section 222a), which designated family planning as a “national emphasis”
program. From fiscal year 1967 to 1970, federal allocations to family planning increased by over
13 times their 1967 level to roughly 400 million (2010) dollars.
Like other OEO programs, any local organization could apply for family planning
funding.4 Unfortunately, both the sensitivity of the family planning program (contraception was
still a taboo topic and its sales were illegal in many states in 1964) and its small size resulted in
few written records about funding decisions in the National Archives. Family planning funding
comprised less than 0.4 percent of the 7.6 billion dollars in OEO outlays from 1965 to 1969 and
less than 3 percent of the Community Action Program budget. Gillette’s (1996) oral histories
and interviews with former OEO officials provide one of the richest pictures of the agency’s
functioning. OEO administrators report receiving applications for all of their programs from
“various and sundry groups” often having little to do with the spirit of the legislation (Gillette
1996: 196 quoting Theodore M. Berry, assistant director of the OEO). Donald Baker, chief
counsel of the OEO, recalls: “It was a wild sort of operation in those early days, making the first
grants. We didn’t have any guidelines and didn’t have the time really to draft them to start
out…As a practical matter, Sarge[nt Shriver, director of the OEO,] and [Jack] Conway[, head of
the Community Action Program,] and many others in the Congress were pressing the program
people to get the money out and to go, go, go and make the grants and make the contracts” (193).
Edgar Cahn, an attorney who worked closely with the OEO, described the agency’s urgency “to
move fast to shovel out the money, because a few precious, perfect projects won’t do anybody
any good” (199).
The second large increase in funding for family planning occurred under the
administration of Richard Nixon. His 1969 Special Message to the Congress on the Problems of
Population Growth advocated that Congress “establish as a national goal the provision of
4

This feature of the OEO funding was intended to empower those who had been excluded from local politics to create positive
changes in their community. It is also closely linked to Civil Rights. The direct-to-local-organization granting structure made the
War on Poverty programs controversial, because they challenged traditional political structures and entrenched local interests.

Family Planning – 4

adequate family planning services within the next five years to all those who want them but
cannot afford them.” In November 1970, Title X of the Public Health Service Act (also known
as the Family Planning Services and Population Research Act, P.L. 91-572) was enacted and
called for comprehensive family planning services for all who wanted them. Importantly, Title
X prohibited the use of federal funds “in programs where abortion is a method of family
planning” (§ 1008). Under Title X, family planning grants were made directly from Department
of Health Education and Welfare (DHEW) to local organizations in response to grant
applications. With the new agency came important changes in policies, priorities, and
administrative responsibility as well as a good deal of confusion. At one point, for instance,
DHEW’s regional offices “refused to entertain local grant applications for family-planning
services, insisting instead that state health departments be the only vehicle for such applications”
(Gould 1979). This reflected conflicts within the DHEW about how to implement Nixon’s “new
federalism” in order to shift control of funds from federal to state officials (Dryfoos 1976).
By 1973, federally supported family planning programs existed in 656 U.S. communities
and served 1.9 million patients annually. By 1983, the number of patients had grown to almost 5
million annually (Dryfoos 1988). In the same year, roughly 83 percent of family planning
patients were below 150 percent of the poverty line (13 percent were AFDC recipients); 70
percent of patients were white and roughly one quarter were black (284). From 1969 to 1983,
service use increased by four times (from 1.2 million to almost 5 million), in large part due to
strong federal support and rising support from state and local governments. Although the bulk of
family planning funds was federal in the first decade of the program (Cutright and Jaffe 1977: 3),
the Alan Guttmacher Institute (2000) estimated that, by 1980, 50 percent of public support for
family planning came from sources other than Title X. By 1994, 80 percent of public support
came from sources other than Title X (13).
II. PREVIOUS RESEARCH ON U.S. FAMILY PLANNING PROGRAMS
Although it has been almost 50 years since the first federally-funded family planning
programs began, the empirical evidence that they reduce birth rates is remarkably thin. The
earliest literature evaluating U.S. programs provides mixed evidence of its effects on fertility
(see Mellor 1998 for a review).5 Although these studies are closest to the period and programs
5

See Mellor’s comprehensive, interdisciplinary literature review. For instance, Damey (1975) and Moore-Caldwell (1977) find
that measures of family planning use and availability, respectively, are associated with reduced birth rates among black women.

Family Planning – 5

considered in this analysis, they are primarily cross-sectional and limited by well-known omitted
variables and endogeneity problems (Rosenzweig and Wolpin 1986, Hotz et al. 1997).
More recent studies using randomized trials of interventions to reduce teen pregnancies
overcome these methodological limitations, but generally find that family planning programs had
no effect on teen pregnancy in the U.S.6 Indeed, DiCenso et al.’s (2002) review and metaanalyses of 22 randomized studies of family planning, sex education, and abstinence
interventions conducted from 1981 to 2000 concludes that the interventions did not increase the
use of birth control among teens or reduce the number of teen pregnancies. Although these
findings may not generalize to the broader population of U.S. women, they are hardly an
endorsement of family planning’s fertility effects. The absence of program effects may reflect
the trials’ short time horizons (treatment effects may take longer to manifest than the one to two
years between baseline and follow-up time) or small sample sizes (even when pooled for the
meta-analysis). 7
Quasi-experimental methodologies, ideal for addressing both endogeneity and power
problems in the observational and experimental literatures, have been difficult to implement in
the U.S. context, because federal funds for family planning have changed little since 1980 (figure
I). Kearney and Levine’s (2009) state-level, differences-in-differences study provides the most
compelling and direct evidence to date that U.S. family planning programs reduce birth rates.
Using the state-by-year variation in Medicaid eligibility for family planning, they find that
greater eligibility for family planning services in 17 states significantly reduced birth rates
among teens (by 4 percent) and among older women (by 2 percent).

While Moore- Caldwell do not find a significant correlation between family planning use and fertility rates for white teens,
Damey reports that the use of family planning increases birth rates among white women. On the other hand, Forrest et al. (1981)
find no relationship between program enrollment in family planning programs and birth rates among black teens, but conclude
that enrollment reduces birth rates among white teens. County-level studies of roughly the same period come to contradictory
conclusions: Udry et al. (1976) find no significant relationship between average dollars spent per recipient of family planning
services and births, whereas Cutright and Jaffe (1977) report that enrollment in family planning programs is associated with
reductions in birth rates among blacks and whites. Weingarden (1974), Moore and Caldwell (1977), and Brann (1979) use crosssectional comparisons at the state level. Damey (1975), Udry, Bauman, and Morris (1976), Cutright and Jaffe (1977), and
Forrest, Hermalin, and Henshaw (1981) use cross-sectional comparisons of counties.
6
Ashraf, Field and Lee (2010) find that the presence of a spouse when presenting wives with information about family planning
has a substantial effect on their contraceptive use and unwanted childbearing in Zambia. The importance of spousal
disagreement about the desired number of children may also play a role in the U.S. and affect the use of the Pill (because neither
spousal knowledge nor consent is required to use it) as well as the use of free or reduced cost family planning clinics (as they
eliminate the need to bargain with a spouse over spending money on an expensive contraceptive).
7
Helmerhorst et al. (2006) note additional limitations of published randomized control trials including intentional exclusion of
participants after randomization, the failure to use intention-to-treat analysis, and the lack of treatment blinding.

Family Planning – 6

While suggestive, it is unclear how Kearney and Levine’s local average treatment effects
relate to the broader and longer-term effects of U.S. family planning policy for several reasons.
First, the effects of a global change in family planning policy considered in this paper may affect
women in different income ranges (Kearney and Levine were able to examine effects for women
whose incomes were about 133 to 200 percent of the poverty line) or affect treated women
differently. Second, the scale effects of family planning resources may be highly nonlinear.
With diminishing returns to program scale (Schultz 1973, 1992), Kearney and Levine’s marginal
changes in program eligibility may understate Title X’s overall effects on birth rates. Third, their
analysis only recovers the two-year effects of changes in Medicaid eligibility for a balanced
panel of states. To the extent that changes in shorter-term eligibility affect fertility due to better
timing and increased birth intervals, their estimates may overstate the effects of family planning
on completed fertility as well as on period fertility over a five to ten year period. The ability to
recover only shorter-term effects is by no means a limitation specific to Kearney and Levine’s
analysis. Schultz (2008) argues it is a general problem for studies of family planning. Although
a handful of quasi-experimental studies in developing countries examine the longer-term effects
of family planning programs on fertility, these studies do not easily generalize to the U.S., where
women’s rights, knowledge and resources imply considerably different treatment effects (Joshi
and Schultz 2007, Bangladesh; Salehi-Isfahani et al. 2008, Iran; and Miller 2009, Colombia).8
In summary, the shorter and longer-term effects on U.S. childbearing remain an open
question. The dearth of evidence reflects the difficulty of recovering causal effects with
observational data or small-scale trials as well as the limited amount of variation in family
planning policy since the 1980s. This paper contributes to this literature by exploiting countylevel variation in the roll-out of federally-funded family planning programs between 1964 and
1973 to estimate the program’s shorter and longer-term effects on U.S. childbearing. The next

8

A closely-related quasi-experimental literature examines the effects of changes in legal access to abortion and the birth control
pill on birth rates during the 1960s and the 1970s (Levine et al. 1996, Guldi 2008, Bailey 2010). Using the staggered legalization
of first trimester abortion in five states in 1970 and in the remainder with Roe v. Wade in 1973, Levine et al. (1996a) show that
birth rates fell more rapidly after 1970 in states with legal abortion. To examine the impact of the birth control pill on marital
fertility, Bailey (2010) uses state-level variation in the language of Comstock statutes that banned the sales of contraceptives until
1965. Her analysis shows that fertility rates fell more rapidly in states without laws banning contraceptive sales. Guldi (2009)
exploits state-level differences in the age of consent to show that the birth control pill reduced birth rates among younger,
unmarried women as well. Although none of these studies considers the effects of greater financial access to family planning
services on shorter and longer-term birth rates, several consider the impact of changes in Medicaid income eligibility on
abortions and births (Levine et al. 1996b, Joyce et al. 1998).

Family Planning – 7

section describes the newly collected data that facilitate the analysis and motivates the eventstudy identification strategy.
III. THE ROLL-OUT OF FAMILY PLANNING PROGRAMS, 1964 TO 1973
Newly compiled information on family planning grants allows the documentation of the
establishment of federal programs in 656 U.S. communities from 1964 to 1973. The National
Archives Community Action Program (NACAP) and National Archives Federal Outlay (NAFO)
files provide information on (1) the county and state where services were delivered, which
allows each program to be matched to the annual, county-level fertility statistics (the lowest level
of geographic aggregation in the Vital Statistics records) and (2) the date of the first family
planning grant, which provides a consistent proxy for when the program began operating.9
Figure II illustrates the roll-out of federally-funded family planning programs, showing
their introduction by time period and by county of service provision (in most cases, county or
local governments were not grantees; county is used here because family planning programs are
matched to counties in the Vital Statistics Natality Files). From 1965 to 1973, family planning
programs began in each of the lower 48 states. Figure II categorizes counties receiving family
planning programs (also called “funded counties”) during these years into three periods: the
initial programs established between 1964 and 1967; the programs established between 1968 and
1969, during the expansion of family planning as a national emphasis program; and programs
established from 1970 to 1973, with the initiation of Title X.
Immediately evident in figure II is that funded counties tended to encompass more urban
areas, an impression confirmed by the 1960 census data presented in table I. Counties receiving
family planning programs had much larger populations: roughly 60 percent of the U.S.
population of women ages 15 to 44 lived in the 656 funded counties. Also consistent with family
9
The main limitation of the data is that they provide little documentation explaining the purpose of grants. To identify family
planning awards, I used string searches on grant titles. In addition, fiscal year 1969 is missing from the electronic records. To
minimize measurement error in the date of the first federal award and the location of service delivery, I compared the NACAP
and NAFO data to printed, county-level OEO reports covering the universe of family planning programs in fiscal year 1968,
calendar year 1969, and fiscal year 1971 (OEO 1969, 1971, 1974). This comparison allowed me to add the establishment of
family planning programs in 278 communities. Only 23 of the remaining 378 dates were revised to reflect the earlier date in the
OEO reports. Overall, the electronic records and printed reports agreed in 95 percent of cases where both are present. The
analysis may miss some communities receiving their first grant before 1968. By necessity, these communities are grouped with
unfunded communities. Under the assumption that these early, unobserved grants had similar effects to those I observe, this
measurement error should lead the analysis to understate the effects of family planning programs. As a final additional check on
my data, the dates and grant amounts in my database are compared to Title X appropriations published by the Office of
Population Affairs (OPA, 2009). Because the OPA figures omit allocations through the Community Action Program, figure I
shows that my series, “Federal Outlays from All Sources” which includes both OEO and Title X grants, is larger than the OPA
Title X series before 1974, when both Title X and the OEO funded family planning. The similarity of my data to the OPA figures
after 1973, when the OEO was disbanded, suggests that my method captures the vast majority of federal family planning awards.

Family Planning – 8

planning programs being in more urban areas, funded counties had fewer elderly residents and
had more of their population above the 1960 poverty line for a family of four ($3,000); they were
also more educated and affluent. Importantly, counties with federal programs did not have higher
fertility rates (as proxied by the proportion of the 1960s population under 5 years of age) or more
nonwhite residents.10 These observed differences and their suggestion of unobserved differences
motivate the inclusion of county fixed effects in the analysis. With county fixed effects, crosssectional differences in characteristics are not a threat to the internal validity of this study, but
they are important to keep in mind when evaluating the study’s external validity.
Figure II also illustrates significant within-state variation in the establishment of
federally-funded family planning programs. For instance, the first U.S. community to receive a
family planning program was Corpus Christi, Texas, in 1964, but Ector and Gonzales, Texas did
not receive a program until 1973. In 43 of the lower 48 states, programs were established in at
least two different years; counties in 41 states established family planning programs in at least
four different years. In more than half of states, programs were established in at least five
different years. This within-state variation is useful for this analysis as it allows the inclusion of
state-by-year fixed effects in the analysis, which absorb time-varying changes in state policy like
abortion legalization, Medicaid expansion, and changes in laws governing the age of access to
contraception.
Rather than cross-sectional differences, the event-study analysis (described below) uses
variation in when family planning programs were established to estimate their effects. If the
establishment of family planning programs was as disorganized as the oral history indicates, then
county characteristics should not predict this date. The unadjusted statistics in table I show that
this appears to be the case with one exception: family planning programs were established earlier
in areas with greater urban populations. (This is not surprising given that urban areas have more
organizations that may apply for funding and more infrastructure for programs to build upon.)
No evidence, however, indicates correlations between program establishment date and other
1960 population characteristics—correlations that may indicate a more systematic selection
process than administrators claimed. After accounting for proportion of the population in urban
areas in both weighted and unweighted regression specifications, none of the 1960 population
characteristics except the proportion of residents above age 64 significantly predicts receiving a
10

The latter is inconsistent with claims that federally-funded family planning programs were motivated by racism at the OEO.

Family Planning – 9

family planning program sooner. 11 For programs initiated under the OEO, the proportion of
residents above age 64 loses predictive power (unweighted: 0.003, s.e. 0.036, weighted: -0.048,
s.e. 0.065). Notably, differences in lagged fertility measures (proportion of the population under
5 years of age) and in poverty rates have no predictive power in any specification,12 despite the
stated intent of the program to help reduce poverty.
Another possibility is that establishment may be correlated with more current fertility
levels or recent fertility changes. If proposals were more likely to originate or be funded in
locations with high fertility rates, then the event study may pick up reversion to the mean or the
later end of the baby boom. Alternatively, OEO officials, eager to claim results for the program,
may have used past changes in fertility to evaluate proposals, and given higher priority to
funding for locations where fertility rates were already falling. If this were the case, then the
program establishment date could be negatively correlated with fertility changes from 1960 to
1964. Figure III, however, provides no evidence of systematic application or selection on the
basis of observable fertility patterns.
Yet another hypothesis is that applications for federal family planning dollars are much
more correlated with local sexual behavior and attitudes about contraceptive and childbearing
than 1960 Census characteristics and fertility outcomes. If, for instance, proposals originated
sooner in locations with more permissive views about contraception and sex out-of-wedlock
(even though they had similar childbearing outcomes) and these views predict future fertility
declines, then the roll-out of family planning programs could be spuriously correlated with future
changes in fertility. The 1965 National Fertility Study (NFS), designed to illuminate the
determinants of childbearing among ever-married women, allows a direct test this hypothesis.
The results presented in table II show no relationship between the date of federally-funded
family planning program establishment and 16 measures of attitudes and outcomes related to
contraception and childbearing.13 These 16 measures include attitudes about the dangers of
world population growth, abortion, and the ideal number of children, as well as coital frequency
11

I regress the date federally-funded family planning programs were established on 1960 county characteristics in table I. These
regressions include all the characteristics in table 1 except population size, because it is highly collinear with proportion of
residents in urban areas. I also include state fixed effects and, therefore, omit regional dummies. Regression coefficients are
available upon request but omitted from this draft for brevity.
12
The failure of these characteristics to predict the timing of adoption differs from results in Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009),
who report statistically significant relationships between many of these characteristics and the initiation of food stamps programs.
13
I regress each characteristic on the date federally-funded family planning program was established the respondent’s county of
residence. To account for the stratified sample design of the 1965 NFS, I include dummy variables for the size of the sampling
unit, decade of birth, and race.

Family Planning – 10

in the last four weeks, the use of the birth control pill, and whether the respondent or her spouse
had operations “making it impossible to have another child.” The date of program establishment
is also uncorrelated with women’s education, Catholicism, age at first marriage and remarriage,
age at first pregnancy, the total children born, and husband’s income in 1965; it is uncorrelated to
childhood characteristics such as whether the respondent lived with both parents at age 14 and
the number of the respondent’s mother’s children.
In summary, this quantitative evidence is consistent with oral history accounts of a “wild
sort of operation” of federal grant making. Neither 1960 Census characteristics, 1964 fertility
levels, 1960 to 1964 fertility changes, nor a rich set of measures related to sexual behavior, birth
control use, and childbearing predict when federally-funded family planning programs were
established during the 1964 to 1973 period. As I will show, the date a family planning program
began strongly predicts when county-level fertility rates began declining more rapidly than those
in comparable communities without programs. The next section describes changes in fertility
over the 1960s and 1970s, introduces the event-study regression framework, and tests key
identifying assumptions.
IV. EMPIRICAL STRATEGY: EVENT-STUDY ANALYSIS
Data on family planning programs are linked to birth records from Vital Statistics from
1959 to 1988. The main fertility outcome, the general fertility rate (GFR), is defined as the
number of births by county of mother’s residence per 1,000 women of childbearing age (15 to 44
years). Although county-level birth rates by age group and parity are not available before 1968, I
use county-of-residence-level aggregates from NHCS microdata for 1968 to 1988 to create ageand parity-specific birth rates. 14
Panel A of figure IV shows changes in the GFR for the estimation sample for counties
with family planning programs established in three periods, and for unfunded counties. For
instance, counties in the “First funded 1965-67” group got programs between 1965 and 1967.
The “Unfunded” group corresponds to unshaded counties in figure II and to column (2) of table
I. For each of these groups, the GFR evolves nonlinearly over the 1959 to 1988 period, as the
baby boom ends. Panel B plots the raw difference in the GFR between the funded counties and
14

The numerator for the 1959 to 1968 GFR was hand-entered from published Natality Volumes; the numerator for the 1968 to
1988 GFR was aggregated from NCHS microdata to mother’s county of residence. Denominators for all birth rates were
constructed for 1959 to 1968 by linearly interpolating information between the 1950, 1960, and 1970 censuses (Haines 2005);
GFR denominators for the 1969 to 1988 period use the Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) data.

Family Planning – 11

unfunded counties. From 1959 to 1965, the relatively flat lines for each of the series in panel B
indicate that, before family planning programs began, the difference in the GFRs in funded and
unfunded locations did not change – that is, fertility declined similarly in locations eventually
getting programs and locations that did not. Simply subtracting the GFR in unfunded counties
completely accounts for the nonlinear evolution of the GFR from 1959 to 1974, including the
fertility notch of the late 1960s and the dramatic post-1970 fall in fertility. After 1966, however,
the GFR in funded counties diverges systematically by the date that the family planning program
began operating. After 1967, the GFR fell more rapidly in counties receiving family planning
programs between 1965 and 1967 than in unfunded locations. Similarly, after 1969, the GFR fell
more rapidly in counties receiving family planning programs between 1968 and 1969 than in
unfunded locations. Finally, after 1973, the GFR fell more rapidly in counties receiving family
planning programs between 1970 and 1973 than in unfunded locations. Also consistent with
family planning having a treatment effect, the GFR in counties funded from 1965 to 1967 fell
before the GFR in counties first receiving a program from 1968 to 1969. In short, both
comparisons of funded to unfunded locations and comparisons by date of establishment among
funded locations suggest that family planning programs reduced fertility.
A. Event-Study Regression Framework
An event-study specification (Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan 1993) formalizes this
analysis by mapping the exact year of fertility declines to the exact fiscal year when family
planning programs began; it also permits the inclusion of a rich set of fixed effects and timevarying covariates to adjust the raw differences shown in figure IV for potentially confounding
factors. I estimate the following linear model,
1

where

,

,

,

1

∗

1

∗

,

is a fertility outcome in county j in year t = 1959,…,1988 (for age group and parity

estimates, t = 1968,…,1988);

is a set of county fixed effects;

,

is either a set of year fixed

effects or state-by-year fixed effects, which captures time-varying, state-level changes in the
legality of abortion in the late 1960s and early 1970s, changes in Medicaid policy, and changes
in family planning funds in Title V of the 1967 Amendment to the Social Security Act;15 and
15

In 1967, Title V of the Social Security Act mandated that at least 6 percent of funds for child and maternal health at the state
level be earmarked for family planning services (Public Law 90-248, Title V, Secs. 502, 505a, 508a; Title IV, Sec. 201a).

Family Planning – 12

is a column vector including a constant and a set of control variables that exhaust the information
available to OEO administrators. These control variables include annual and county-level per
capita measures of government transfers using data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis
Regional Information System (REIS) (cash public assistance benefits such as Aid to Families
with Dependent Children, Supplemental Security Income, and General Assistance; medical
spending such as Medicare and military health care; and cash retirement and disability payments)
and one of the following: (1) the interaction of 1960 census characteristics in table I (share of
population in urban area, nonwhite, under age five, over 64 years of age; share of households
with income under $3000, over $10,000, and the share of the county’s land that is rural or a
farm) with linear time trends or (2) county-specific linear trends. In addition, information on the
number of abortion providers in each county accounts for within-state changes in the availability
of abortion from 1970 to 1988 (zero before 1970).16 Federal funds for family planning did not
go to programs providing abortion, so the estimated effects of family planning should reflect sex
education, counseling (and possible referral for abortion), and the provision of contraceptive
supplies.
, a dummy variable equal to one if

Of interest are the coefficients on the interaction of

the county ever received a family planning grant, and an indicator function, 1
to one when the year of observation is y = -8,-7,…,15, 16, years from the date,

, which is equal
∗

, the year that a

federally-funded family planning program was established in county j.17 Because the indicator
for y = 0 is omitted, the set of

describes the differential evolution of outcomes in funded

counties before the family planning program began. The set of describes the divergence in
outcomes y years after the family planning program began. Key to isolating the shock to the
supply of family planning services is the inclusion of county effects (not possible in crosssectional studies), which allows consistent estimation of

and even in the presence of pre-

existing unobserved differences between funded and unfunded locations.
One advantage of the non-parametric specification of relaxes the standard differencesin-differences (DiD) assumption that treatment with a family planning grant is associated with a
one-time, level shift in outcomes. A family planning program cannot be set up instantaneously,
16
The first two sets of county characteristics in X are comparable to specifications in Almond et al. (2008: 15). The third set were
generously provided by the Guttmacher Institute and Ted Joyce. Note that changes in the distance to states providing legal
abortion before 1970 is accounted for in state-by-year fixed effects.
17
To ensure the parameters are well estimated, values of y < -7 are grouped to be equal to -8 and all values greater than 15 are
grouped into the category 16.

Family Planning – 13

implying that the initial program effects may be smaller due to a smaller clientele. Moreover, if
family planning programs allow women to delay childbearing by several years, then federal
grants could initially depress birth rates but raise them later. The flexible specification in (1)
allows the analysis to characterize changes in the program effect over 15 years and sheds light on
how much of the effect found by Kearney and Levine reflects shorter-term adjustments in birth
timing versus longer-term changes in completed fertility. Another advantage of this
specification is that estimates of

allow a visual and statistical evaluation of the evolution of

pre-treatment unobservables in funded communities. Rather than assuming that
plots of

= 0 for y<0,

show whether non-linear, preexisting trends confound estimates of . They also show

whether the “effects” preceded the program even by a few years – an important falsification test.
After presenting the timing of changes in outcomes in the event-study framework, the
main results are summarized in the following DiD specification, in which the individual
indicators in equation 1 are replaced with dummies for five-year groups for the periods -6 and
before, -5 to -1, 1 to 5, 6 to 10, 11 to 15, and 16 or more years after the establishment of a federal
family planning program. Although all lead and lag dummies are included in all specifications,
figures and tables only present estimates for years that include a balanced set of counties (years 6 to +15 for the event study/ -5 to +15 for the DiD).
B. Testing for Threats to Internal Validity
Potential threats to the internal validity of the analysis are shocks that are (1)
concentrated among the funded counties, (2) coincident to or occurring just after the family
planning program began, and (3) correlated with fertility. It seems very unlikely that “various
and sundry” organizations in the 656 counties would begin unrelated initiatives to reduce fertility
at the same time as the OEO independently decided to fund a family planning program. (If a
complementary community family planning initiative begins because of the increase in federal
family planning funds, the event-study would appropriately incorporate these indirect, “crowdin” effects.) And, even if most applicants also began local programs after submitting a grant
proposal, it is unlikely that these initiatives would correspond closely in timing to OEO/DHEW
decisions to fund a local program (because of application rejections and administrative delays).
More plausible is the coincidence of other federal spending. Although the oral histories
provide no indication that OEO administrators deliberately packaged OEO programs, it may
have happened inadvertently or because certain communities were more effective at writing
Family Planning – 14

proposals. This is an important concern, because other War on Poverty programs also impacted
fertility and health. For instance, Ludwig and Miller (2007) show that Head Start programs
reduced child mortality, while Almond et al. (2008) report that food stamps programs increased
birth weight and decreased neonatal infant mortality. Other programs like Community or
Neighborhood Health Centers or Maternal and Infant Health projects often provided services for
family planning and aimed to improve infant and maternal health (DHEW 1974: 5, Dryfoos
1988). If the establishment of family planning programs co-occurred with the start-up of other
federal programs, then estimates of may fail to isolate the effects of the family planning
program.
Using newly compiled information on all grants for other OEO programs, I estimate
equation 1 with a dependent variable grant receipt (=1) for each of eight OEO programs as the
dependent variable.18 Event-study estimates presented in figure V are relative to the year the
county received its family planning program. Panel A of figure V is presented to fix ideas:
counties receiving family planning programs got their first grant at time zero.19 There is no pretrend in family planning funds, and subsequent coverage rates indicate that federal refunding
occurred in many but not all cases.20 In contrast, panels B through E show almost no pattern. In
no case is there evidence of an abrupt shift in funding for these programs at the time of the first
family planning award. Funding for Community Health Centers (panel B), Head Start (panel C),
jobs programs (panel D), and legal services (panel E) show very small or no increases predating
the establishment of family planning programs; funding did not increase over the years when
family planning funding was expanding. The next two panels of figure V examine the
coincidence of first family planning grants with maternal and infant care projects (panel F) and
maternity and infant health projects (panel G). These plots are flat lines and provide no evidence
of a trend break in the year of the first family planning grant. These programs are not exhaustive,
but this evidence does alleviate concerns of packaged federal spending on six of the most likely,
potentially confounding federal programs.

18

Because grants information for other federal programs are missing 1969, I omit this year from the sample (failing to do so
would favor finding no correlation in timing between a first family planning grant and other programs).
19
This figure is less than 100 percent due to the handful of first grants which do not appear in the grant data and come from OEO
reports.
20
This is not an indication that these programs were discontinued, because state and local funds for these programs were
increasing over the same period (AGI 2000). Funds from nonprofit sources were also increasing.

Family Planning – 15

In summary, much evidence supports the internal validity of this study’s research
strategy. Consistent with oral history accounts of federal grant making, section III (above) shows
that neither 1960 Census characteristics, nor 1964 fertility levels, nor 1960 to 1964 fertility
changes predict when federal family planning programs began. This section further narrows the
scope for omitted variables bias by showing—using the same specification as used for the main
results—that the initiation of other federal programs does not coincide with the roll-out of family
planning. The next section uses this plausibly-exogenous shock to a county’s family planning
resources to examine the program’s impact on childbearing.
V. RESULTS: DID FAMILY PLANNING PROGRAMS REDUCE U.S. FERTILITY RATES?
Using equation 4, figure VI presents event-study estimates of the effects of the family
planning programs on the GFR; table III summarizes the magnitudes of the estimates and their
joint significance in a DiD specification. Panel A of table III weights the results by the 1970
population of women ages 15 to 44 and, therefore, captures the effect of the first family planning
grant for the average woman of childbearing age. Three specifications are presented: model 1
includes county and year effects (assumes

,

); model 2 adds state-by-year fixed effects

to model 1; and model 3 adds the time-varying county-level covariates to model 2. Table III also
shows that the addition of linear, county trends (column 4) yields larger, though statistically
indistinguishable, estimates (compare to model 3, column 3).
Across models, the estimates show that family planning programs reduced childbearing.
Consistent with figure IV, the GFR evolved similarly in funded and unfunded counties before
family planning programs began. In each case, the pre-treatment differences are close to zero and
individually, statistically insignificant. Table III also shows that the average leads for years 5 to
1 are also indistinguishable from zero in each model. At the time family planning programs
began operating, a sharp trend break is visually evident and statistically significant. In the first
five years of program operation, the GFR fell more quickly in funded than in unfunded
communities (plots of the estimates and confidence intervals decrease and fall below zero).
Within three years of the program establishment, the GFR had fallen by roughly 1 birth per 1,000
women of childbearing age (model 3, panel A) and 2.5 births per 1,000 women in the average
county (model 3, panel B). By years 6 to 10, the GFR had fallen by an average of 1.5 (weighted;
model 3, panel A) and to 2.1 (unweighted; model 3, panel B) births per 1,000 women of
childbearing age. The growth in the effects is consistent with the earliest federal grants
Family Planning – 16

establishing or significantly expanding family planning programs and these programs reaching
their full capacity in around 4 to 5 years. After the initial 5-year period, these effects hardly
changed for the next decade. 15 years after family planning programs began, the GFR remained
1.4 to 2 percent lower than in the year the program started, net of declines in fertility in other
counties in the same state and after adjusting for observable county-level covariates.
Two specification checks underscore the robustness of these findings. Under the
assumption that funded counties evolved differently than unfunded counties (an assumption at
odds with the absence of a pre-trend in figure IV), one might opt to include only funded counties
in the regressions. Using funded counties only, column (5) of table III shows (1) no evidence of a
pre-trend and (2) a sharp trend break in the year after the grant. Omitting the unfunded counties
results in less precise estimates. For neither the weighted nor the unweighted specifications are
these estimates statistically distinguishable from those in column 2. The exclusion of unfunded
counties, therefore, does not change the patterns of results but does affect precision. A second
check considers the difference in the effects for pre-Title X and post-Title X family planning
programs. Although the magnitudes differ modestly, grants in both periods reduced the GFR by
an average of 1.5 to 1.6 births per 1000 women in years 6 to 10 (columns 6 and 7, table IIIA).
The event studies (omitted for brevity) also show that for grants in both periods the estimates
exhibit no pre-trend and a sharp trend break in the year after the family planning program began.
Taken together, these results provide robust evidence that family planning programs
reduced childbearing. Given the extensive controls included in the analysis, it is remarkable that
the pattern of estimates varies so little across specifications. Interestingly, the trend break and
the absolute magnitude of the effects tend to be larger in unweighted specifications, which
implies that the effects were stronger in less populous counties. This may be due to measurement
error (treated women may have been a larger proportion of the population in smaller counties) or
heterogeneity in the effect across locations (larger cities may have had more alternatives to
federally-funded family planning providers).
The longer-term reduction in the GFR may reflect changes in the timing of childbirth as
well as reductions in completed fertility. I examine both channels by considering age-specific
birth rates as well as birth rates by parity, which I construct using the natality microdata from
1968 to 1988 (these regressions omit counties funded before 1968 from the analysis to ensures a

Family Planning – 17

balanced panel of treated counties in the post-period).21 I cannot observe fertility delay directly,
but delay should result in reductions in childbearing among younger women. Permanent
reductions in childbearing manifest as decreases in childbearing at older ages (earlier stopping)
and as reductions in higher parity births. Figure VII presents event-study estimates consistent
with both channels; table IV presents DiD summary estimates. Panel A of figure VII and table
IV show that, following the establishment of a federally-funded family planning program, birth
rates for all age groups tended to decrease. Six to ten years after the program began, the largest
absolute drop in levels was approximately 4 births per 1,000 women, or 2.7 percent, among 25 to
29 year olds (table IV, column 3). These reductions among teens reached approximately 2
percent (column 1), while the effects for women in their early twenties and early thirties reached
1.4 percent (column 2) and 1.5 percent (column 4), respectively. Changes in birth rates among
women in their late 30s and 40s are negative, but they are statistically insignificant. Consistent
with larger effects among younger women, panel B of figure VII and table IV show that the
introduction of a family planning program also reduced the number of first, second, and third
births by 2.0, 2.8 and 2.1 percent, respectively, 6 to 10 years after the program started. Although
family planning programs did not affect first birth rates in the longer term (years 11 to 15), they
reduced 2nd and 3rd parity births for up to 15 years after they were established—a result
consistent with family planning programs reducing completed childbearing. The roughly 35
percent reduction of the magnitude of these effects in the last 5-year period, however, is
consistent with family planning programs causing women to delay 2nd and 3rd births. Estimates
for 4th and higher order births are negative, but statistically insignificant.
Together, these results imply that family planning programs achieved a significant
reduction in completed fertility and also induced delays in childbearing for 15 to 34 year olds. In
fact, the absence of effects among women 35 and older may reflect the fact that fertility delays
offset reductions in childbearing for this group.
VI. HOW LARGE ARE THE EFFECTS OF FEDERALLY-FUNDED FAMILY PLANNING PROGRAMS?
Thus far, the paper has examined changes in fertility rates for the average woman in
counties receiving federally-funded family planning programs (or the average treated county in
the unweighted specifications). A number of factors build a case for a causal interpretation of
21
Parity measures (panel B) are the number of births of the indicated parity divided by the population of women ages 15 to 44.
Panels A of figure VI and column (8) of table III show that the aggregate estimates for this shorter panel are similar in magnitude
to the estimates for the longer panel.

Family Planning – 18

the estimates: the (1) absence of a pre-trend in funded counties, (2) the sharp trend-break in
fertility following the establishment of the family planning program, (3) evidence that no other
federal program changed abruptly at the same time or in the years immediately following the
first federal grant (figure III), and (4) the robustness of these estimates across a variety of
demanding specifications (figure IV, table II). Given this robustness, a natural question is the
plausibility of the estimated magnitudes.
The lack of data on childbearing, family planning, and birth control use by county and
year prevents a direct examination of this question. As an alternative, I use a combination of
independent data sources to explore the magnitudes of the estimates from two perspectives. First,
I use a back-of-the-envelope calculation to examine whether the estimated effects of family
planning programs make sense given a plausible reduction in contraceptive failure rates. Second,
I approximate the treatment effect of family planning programs on users and compare this effect
to fertility differences by income in 1965. The idea of this second exercise is to evaluate whether
the implied effects of family planning programs on the treated are reasonable given differences
in birth rates by income before federally-funded family planning programs began.
A. A Back-of-the-Envelope Calculation of the Expected Effects of Family Planning on Fertility
Family planning programs may both affect the share of women choosing to prevent
pregnancies (by reducing the marginal cost of doing so) and reduce the contraceptive failures
among those who do (by subsidizing more reliable methods like the Pill). The rate of
contraceptive failure is difficult to estimate directly, because failures reflect both method failures
and selection. To circumvent this problem, I begin by backing out an estimate of the average
failure rate in the population using information on the share of women who are fecund and trying
to get pregnant in the 1965 National Fertility Study (NFS).
This estimate of the failure rate relies upon the following tautology. The GFR in year t
can be written as the sum of the planned birth rate, Pt, and the unplanned birth rate due to
contraceptive failures, Ft, or GFRt = Ft+ Pt. Planned births and failures reflect decisions in the
previous period about whether or not to get pregnant as well as the respective success and failure
rates. If Q denotes the share of women who are fecund and trying to get pregnant, S the share of
women who are not fecund, s the time-invariant average rate of success among women trying to
get pregnant, and f the average failure rate among fecund women, then the GFR can be written as
(2)

GFRt = Ft+ Pt = Qt-1 s + (1-Qt-1-S t-1) f.

Family Planning – 19

In 1966, the U.S. marital GFR was 123.6 per 1,000 married women ages 15 to 44. (I
compute the marital GFR, because the 1965 NFS contains information only on ever-married
women.) The 1965 NFS indicates that Q and S are 0.023 and 0.26 respectively. Trussell (2004)
places the likelihood of pregnancy occurring within a year among women who are trying at 0.85.
For the U.S. marital fertility rate to have reached 123.6 per 1,000 married women in 1966, these
numbers imply that, before the U.S. family planning program began, roughly 11.7 percent (f =
(0.1236 – 0.023 ×0.85) / (1 - 0.023- 0.26) = 0.117) of married U.S. women who were not trying
to get pregnant in 1965, conceived children. (This is much lower than the rate obtained using
estimates of method failures.)
This inferred failure rate then allows the computation of a differences-in-differences
(DiD) estimate of how family planning affected the GFR by rewriting equation (2) as GFRt = Qt-1
s + (1-Qt-1 -S t-1) [qt-1 f F +(1- qt-1) f], where qt-1 denotes the share of the fecund women using
family planning services, and f F the average failure rate for family planning program users. The
change in the difference in GFR between funded, BtF, and unfunded communities, Bt0, between
period T and the date of the family planning program’s initiation, 0, can be written, ΔD ≡
(GFRTF – GFRT0) – (GFR0F – GFR00)= [(QTF–QT 0) – ( Q0F–Q00)] s + (1–QT –S T)F [qTF f F + (1–
qTF) f ] – (1–QT –S T)0 [qT0 f F + (1– qT 0) f] – [(1-Q0 –S0)F – (1–Q0 –S0)0 ] f. Assuming that Q and
S did not change from the date the program began to T, and that there were no behavioral
differences in locations with family planning programs between when programs began and at
time T (this assumes that family planning does not affect choice to try to get pregnant or
sterilization), or (1-Q0 –S0)F = (1–Q0 –S0)0 = (1-QT -S T)F = (1-QT –ST)0), the DiD estimate of the
effect of family planning depends upon only three quantities: the fraction of women who are
fecund and not trying to get pregnant, the difference in the fraction of these women using family
planning services between funded and unfunded locations, and the difference in failure rates
conferred by family planning services, or
(3)

ΔD =(1-QT -ST)(qTF- qT0)(f F - f).

The 1965 NFS implies that (1-QT –ST) = 0.717. Assuming that the failure rates of services
supplied by family planning programs (i.e. the Pill) are around those implied by “typical use” (2
to 8 percent), (f F - f) ranges from -0.037 to -0.097.
I estimate the final unknown, (qTF- qT0), using the 1970 NFS. The 1970 NFS asked evermarried women between the ages of 18 and 44 whether they had ever used the Pill—the most

Family Planning – 20

prescribed method by family planning clinics. Using a linear probability model, I find that
federally-funded family planning programs raised cumulative use of the Pill by 5.2 percentage
points.22 Consistent with these programs having their largest effect on contraception use among
women below the poverty line, the increase in Pill use was only 4 percentage points (or 6.5
percent) among women above the poverty line and 23 percentage points (or 38 percent) higher
among women below the poverty line.
Altogether, the back-of-the-envelope calculation implies a DiD estimate (ΔD =(1-QT ST)(qTF- qT0)(f F - f)) ranging from -1.3 (0.717*0.05*-0.037) to -3.5 (0.717*0.05*-0.097) births
per 1,000 married women. Given that this estimate should be larger if the share of women trying
to avoid pregnancy increases with family planning programs (1-QT -ST increases), my estimates
of -1.4 to -2 births per 1,000 women presented in section V are quite reasonable.23
B. Treatment Effects on the Treated: Family Planning’s Effects on New Users
Because not all residents of a county would have benefited from the new family planning
program (many women would have obtained services anyway or from other providers), the
intention-to-treat (ITT) effects in section V understate the effects of family planning on the
women they served (“treated women”). To approximate the effects of federally-funded family
planning on the treated (TOT), I rescale these ITT effects by the induced changes in users of the
Pill. I use changes in use of the Pill (rather than changes in use of family planning services),
because it has the advantage of capturing substitution toward more reliable methods, which
should drive fertility rates down by reducing contraception failures. Using the estimate derived
from the 1970 NFS that shows federally-funded family planning programs increased use of the
Pill by 5.2 percentage points,24 a reduction in the period birth rate between 1.4 and 1.9 implies a
TOT of 27 (1.4/0.052) to 37 (1.9/0.052) births per 1,000 women.
Is such a reduction among treated women reasonable? Because women below 150
percent of the poverty line were the vast majority of program users (and Vital Statistics Natality
22

Specifically, I regress a binary variable for Pill use on a binary variable equal to one if the PSU of residence had a federal
family planning program before 1970. I limit my sample to PSUs that received federally-funded family planning programs
between 1964 and 1973. The regression coefficient on family planning before 1970 is 0.052 (s.e. 0.0256, p-value=0.044).
Interacting the binary variable for family planning program establishment before 1970 with Poverty status yields coefficients of
0.04 (s.e. 0.0257, p-value 0.116) on the direct effect of family planning before 1970 and a coefficient of 0.188 (s.e. 0.093, p-value
0.043) on the interaction of family planning before 1970 and Poverty.
23
Although I have no way to evaluate this directly (the NFS did not sample never-married wom1en), the effect may be larger or
smaller depending upon how family planning affected unmarried women.
24
This calculation uses the specification described in footnote 22 and assumes that roughly 20 percent of women fall below the
poverty line over the period in question and that the estimated changes in use apply to never-married women as well (the 1970
NFS does not contain information on never married women).

Family Planning – 21

data do not contain information on income), I use the 1964 to 1966 Natality Followback Survey
(US DHHS and ICPSR 2008) to generate a pre-program estimate of differences in childbearing
by income. This survey shows that the 1965 GFR among women below 150 percent of the
poverty line was 128, but the GFR among women above that threshold was 77. The implied
TOTs, therefore, indicate a 21 to 30 percent reduction in childbearing for women below 150
percent of the poverty line and can account for 53 (27/51) to 73 (37/51) percent of the fertility
disparities between poor and non-poor women before the program began. In short, the effects
are a reasonable magnitude and consistent with federally-funded family planning programs
diminishing the income-based differences in childbearing that initially motivated the program.
VII.

REEVALUATING THE EFFECTS OF FAMILY PLANNING

For almost 50 years the federal government has invested in domestic family planning
programs with mixed evidence of their short-run effectiveness and no credible evidence that
these programs reduced U.S. childbearing in the longer-term. The impact of these programs on
childbearing in the U.S. was contentious in the 1960s and it remains so today. 25 Although recent
research has argued that the birth control pill played an important role in reducing U.S. fertility
rates (Guldi 2008, Bailey 2010), these studies’ reliance on legal variation only provides evidence
on the importance of modern contraception for women who could afford it.
This paper adds to the literature by considering how family planning programs’
subsidization of contraception affected childbearing in both the shorter and longer run. Using
county-level variation in when family planning programs were established between 1964 and
1973, I find that domestic family planning programs reduce shorter- and longer-term fertility
rates by ameliorating income-based differences in access to more reliable contraceptives. My
estimates imply that U.S. family planning programs prevented roughly 1.8 million births in the
first ten years they existed at a cost of roughly 2,700 federal dollars per birth averted.26
Because federally-funded family planning programs served mostly lower-income women
and operated in only one fifth of all U.S. counties in 1974, the program accounts for only a
25

See, for example, the heated exchange in Science featuring the provocative articles, “Population Policy for Americans: Is the
Government Being Misled?” (Blake 1969) and “Family Planning and Public Policy: Who is Misleading Whom?” (Harkavy, Jaffe
and Wishik 1969).
26
Births averted estimates are obtained by multiplying the mean population of women ages 15 to 44 in funded counties in 1970
(145,193) by the event-study estimates for model 3 and summing over years 1 to 10. Federal outlays from 1965 to 1980 for
family planning are estimated at $5,067 million (2010 dollars). Thus, the reduction in births cost roughly 2,734 in federal dollars
per birth averted in the program’s first 10 years. Due to the large (unknown) contributions from state and local governments and
non-profits, it is unclear how much each birth averted cost overall.

Family Planning – 22

modest portion of the large decline in the general fertility rate from 1959 to 1974. Nevertheless,
these programs had a substantial effect on the women they served. This paper’s estimates imply
that federal family planning dollars reduced childbearing among poor women by 21 to 29 percent
within ten years—magnitudes large enough to account for half to three-quarters of the 1965 gap
in childbearing between poor and non-poor women. Future work should consider how family
planning programs affected a host of longer-term outcomes including the age-structure of
poverty, children’s resources and life chances, and economic growth.
VIII. REFERENCES
Akerlof, George A., Janet Yellen, and Michael L. Katz. (1996). “An Analysis of Out-of-Wedlock
Childbearing in the United States.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 277-317.
Alan Guttmacher Institute (AGI). (2000). Fulfilling the Promise: Public Policy and U.S. Family Planning
Clinics. (New York: AGI).
Almond, Douglas, Hilary W. Hoynes, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. (2008). “Inside the War on
Poverty: The Impact of Food Stamps on Birth Outcomes.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper 14306, September.
Ananat, Elizabeth O., Jonathan Gruber, Phillip Levine, and Douglas Staiger. (2009). “Abortion and
Selection.” Review of Economics and Statistics 91(1): 124–136.
Ashraf, Nava, Erica Field, and Jean Lee. (2010). “Household Bargaining and Excess Fertility: An
Experimental Study in Zambia,”
http://www.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/field/files/Ashraf_Field_Lee_November2010.pdf
(accessed 5/30/2011).
Bailey, Martha J. (2010). “‘Momma's Got the Pill’: How Anthony Comstock and Griswold v. Connecticut
Shaped U.S. Childbearing.” American Economic Review 100 (1): 98-129.
Bailey, Martha J., Melanie Guldi, Allison Davido, and Erin Buzuvis. (2011). “Laws and Policies
Governing Contraceptive Access, 1960-1980.” University of Michigan Working Paper, March 2011.
Becker, Gary and H. Gregg Lewis. (1973). “On the Interaction between Quantity and Quality of
Children,” Journal of Political Economy 81: S279-S288.
Blake, Judith. (1969). “Population Policy for Americans: Is the Government Being Misled?” Science,
New Series, Vol. 164, No. 3879, May 2: 522-529.
Brann, Edward. (1979). “A Multivariate Analysis of Interstate Variation in Fertility of Teenage Girls.”
American Journal of Public Health 69 (7): 661-66.
Cutright, Phillips and Frederick S. Jaffe. (1977). The Impact of Family Planning Programs on Fertility:
The U.S. Experience. (New York, NY: Praeger Publishers).
Damey, Philip D. (1975). “Fertility Decline and Participation in Georgia's Family Planning Program:
Temporal and Area Associations.” Studies in Family Planning 6 (6): 156-65.
Department of Health and Economic Welfare (DHEW), Center for Family Planning Program
Development (Planned Parenthood-World Population). (1974). Family Planning, Contraception, and
Voluntary Sterilization: An Analysis of Laws and Policies in the United States, each State and
Jurisdiction (as of September 1971): A Report of the National Center for Family Planning Services,
Health Services and Mental Health Administration. (Rockville, MD: U.S. DHEW, publication no. 7416001).
DiCenso A, Guyatt G, Willan A, Griffith L. (2002) “Interventions to reduce unintended pregnancies
among adolescents: Systematic review of randomized controlled trials.” British Medical Journal
324:1426–34

Family Planning – 23

Dryfoos, Joy G. (1976). “The United States National Family Planning Program, 1968-74.” Studies in
Family Planning, 7, No. 3
Dryfoos, Joy G. (1988). “Family Planning Clinics—A Story of Growth and Conflict.” Family Planning
Perspectives 20 (6): 282-287.
Forrest, Jacqueline Darroch, Albert I. Hermalin, and Stanley K. Henshaw. (1981). “The Impact of Family
Planning Clinic Programs on Adolescent Pregnancy.” Family Planning Perspectives 13 (3): 109-16.
Gillette, Michael L. (1996). Launching the War on Poverty: An Oral History. (New York, N.Y.: Twayne
Publishers).
Gould, Ketayun H. (1979). “Family Planning and Abortion Policy in the United States.” Social Science
Review 53 (3): 452-463.
Guldi, Melanie. (2008). “Fertility Effects of Abortion and Pill Access for Minors.” Demography 45 (4):
817-827.
Haines, Michael R. (2005), and the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research.
“Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2000” [Computer
file]. ICPSR02896-v2. (Hamilton, NY: Colgate University/Ann Arbor: MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [producers], 2004; Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2005-04-29).
Harkavy, Oscar, Frederick S. Jaffe, Samuel M. Wishik. (1969). “Family Planning and Public Policy: Who
Is Misleading Whom?” Science, New Series, Vol. 165, No. 3891, Jul. 25: 367-373.
Helmerhorst, Frans M., Toni Belfield, Regina Kulier, Nandita Maitra, Paul O’Brien, and David A.
Grimes. (2006). “The Cochrane Fertility Regulation Group: Synthesizing the Best Evidence about
Family Planning.” Contraception 74: 280-286.
Hotz, Joseph V., Jacob A. Klerman and Robert J. Willis. (1997). “The Economics of Fertility in
Developed Countries,” Handbook of Population Economics, volume 1A: 275-348.
Hoynes, Hilary and Diane Schanzenbach. (2009). “Consumption Reponses to In-Kind Transfers:
Evidence from the Introduction of the Food Stamp Program.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 1(4): 109-39.
Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan. (1993). “Earnings Losses of Displaced
Workers.” American Economic Review 83 (4): 685-709.
Joshi, Shareen and T. Paul Schultz. (2007). “Family Planning as an Investment in Development:
Evaluation of a Program’s Consequences in Matlab, Bangladesh.” Yale Economic Growth Center
Discussion Paper No. 951.
Joyce, Theodore, Robert Kaestner, and Florence Kwan. 1998. “Is Medicaid Pronatalist? Effects of the
Medicaid Eligibility Expansions on Abortions and Births.” Family Planning Perspectives 30(3): 108113.
Kearney, Melissa S. and Phillip B. Levine. (2009). “Subsidized Contraception, Fertility, and Sexual
Behavior.” Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (1): 137-151.
Kirby, D. (1997). “No easy answers: Research findings on programs to reduce teen pregnancy.”
Washington, D.C.: The National Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy.
Levine, Phillip B., Douglas Staiger, Thomas J. Kane, and David J. Zimmerman. (1996a). “Roe v. Wade
and American Fertility.” NBER Working Paper.
Levine, Phillip B., Amy B. Trainor, and David J. Zimmerman (1996b). “The Effect of Medicaid Abortion
Funding Restrictions on Abortions, Pregnancies, and Births.” Journal of Health Economics 15 (5):
555-578.
Levitan, Sar. (1969). The Great Society’s Poor Law: A New Approach to Poverty. (Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins).
Ludwig, Jens and Douglas L. Miller. (2007). “Does Head Start Improve Children's Life Chances?
Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (1): 159–
208.
Mellor, Jennifer M. (1998). "The Effect of Family Planning Programs on the Fertility of Welfare
Recipients: Evidence from Medicaid Claims." Journal of Human Resources 33: 866-895.

Family Planning – 24

Michael, Robert T. and Robert J. Willis. (1976). “Contraception and Fertility: Household Production
under Uncertainty,” in Demographic Behavior of the Household. (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau
of Economic Research).
Miller, Grant. (2009). “Contraception as Development? New Evidence from Family Planning in
Colombia.” Economic Journal 120: 709-736.
Moore, Kristen A. and Steven B. Caldwell. (1977). “The Effect of Government Policies on Out-ofWedlock Sex and Pregnancy.” Family Planning Perspectives 9 (4): 164-69.
National Academy of Sciences. (1963). “The Growth of World Population, Analysis of the Problems and
Recommendations for Research and Training.” April 11, Publication No. 1091, Washington, D.C.
National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). (2003). Natality Detail File, 1968-1988: [UNITED
STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National
Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1981. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for
Political and Social Research [distributor].
-----. (2008). Multiple Cause of Death Files, 1959-1988 [Computer file]. (Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor]).
National Fertility Study, 1965 [machine readable data file]. Survey conducted by Norman B. Ryder and
Charles F. Westoff for the Office of Population Research; data file edition was prepared by the Center
for Demography and Ecology, University of Wisconsin, Madison (Princeton, NJ: Office of
Population Research [producer], 1965; Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Data and Program
Library Service [distributor]).
National Fertility Study, 1970 [machine readable data file]. Survey conducted by Norman B. Ryder and
Charles F. Westoff for the Office of Population Research; data file edition was prepared under the
direction of Larry Bumpass, Center for Demography and Ecology, University of Wisconsin, Madison
(Princeton, NJ: Office of Population Research [producer], 1970; Madison, WI: University of
Wisconsin Data and Program Library Service [distributor], 1976).
Office of Economic Opportunity. (1969). The Need for Subsidized Family Planning Services: United
States, Each State and County, 1968. (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office).
-----. (1971). The Need for Subsidized Family Planning Services: United States, Each State and County,
1969. (Washington, D.C: Government Printing Office).
-----. (1974). The Need for Subsidized Family Planning Services: United States, Each State and County,
1971. (Washington, D.C: Government Printing Office).
Office of Population Affairs. (2009). http://www.hhs.gov/opa/about/budget (accessed February 7, 2009).
Regional Economic Information System (REIS), 1969-1989. Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S.
Department of Commerce, CIESIN (http://www.ciesin.org/datasets/reis/reis-home.html, accessed
2/2009).
Salehi-Isfahani, Djavad, M. Jalal Abbasi-Shavazi, and Meimanat Hosseini-Chavoshi. (2008). “Family
Planning and Rural Fertility Decline in Iran: A Study in Program Evaluation.”
http://www.internationalpolicy.umich.edu/edts/pdfs/isfahani-10-30-08.pdf (accessed 11/3/ 2008).
Rosenzweig, Mark R. and Kenneth Wolpin. (1986). “Evaluating the Effects of Optimally Distributed
Public Programs: Child Health and Family Planning Interventions.” American Economic Review 76
(3): 470-482.
Schultz, T. P. (1973). “Explanations of Birth Rate Changes over Space and Time: A Study of Taiwan”,
Journal of Political Economy, 81(2): S238-274.
Schultz, T. P. (1992). “Assessing Family Planning Cost-Effectiveness.” In Eds. J. F. Phillips and J. A.
Press, Family Planning Programmes and Fertility. (New York: Oxford University Press): 78-105.
Schultz, T. Paul. (2008). “Population Policies, Fertility, Women's Human Capital, and Child Quality.” In
Eds. T. Paul Schultz and John Strauss, Handbook of Development Economics, vol. 4 (Amsterdam,
Netherlands: Elsevier).
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program Populations (1969-1988). National Cancer
Institute, DCCPS, Surveillance Research Program, Cancer Statistics Branch, released February 2009.
(www.seer.cancer.gov/popdata, accessed 3/01/2009),

Family Planning – 25

Tone, Andrea. (2001). Devices and Desires: A History of Contraceptives in America. (New York, NY:
Hill and Wang).
Trussell, James. (2004). “Contraceptive Efficacy.” In Eds. Robert A. Hatcher, James Trussell, Anita
Nelson, Willard Cates, Jr., Felicia Stewart, and Deborah Kowal. Contraceptive Technology. 18th
edition. (New York: Ardent Media. ):747–826.
Udry, J. Richard, Karl E. Bauman, and Naomi M. Morris. (1976). “The Effect of Subsidized Family
Planning Services on Reproductive Behavior in the United States.” Demography 13 (4): 463-78.
United States Department of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. “National
Natality Followback Survey, 1964-1966 [Computer file]. ICPSR21961-v1. (Hyattsville, MD: United
States Department of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer],
197?. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor],
2008-08-22).
Weingarden, C.R. (1974). “The Fertility of AFDC Women: An Econometric Analysis.” Journal of
Economics and Business 26 (3): 159-66.
Wilmoth, John R. and Patrick Ball (1992). “The Population Debate in American Popular Magazines,
1946-90.” Population and Development Review 18 (4): 631-668.
----- (1995) “Arguments and Action in the Life of a Social Problem: A Case Study of ‘Overpopulation,’
1946-1990.” Social Problems 42 (3): 318-343.

Family Planning – 26

Figure I. Federal Spending on Family Planning, 1965-2008

700

2010 Dollars in Millions

600
500
400
300
200
100
1960

1970

1980

Title X Appropriations

1990

2000

2010

Federal Outlays from All Sources

Notes: No information is available for 1969, so a dashed line connects the 1968 and 1970 points. Title X
appropriations series differs from the inflation adjusted table 14 (p. 47) in Alan Guttmacher Institute (AGI) (2000),
because I use the CPI-U and AGI (2000) uses the CPI for medical care. Source: “Title X Appropriations” are taken
from the Office of Population Affairs (2009). “Federal Outlays from All Sources” are computed by the author using
the National Archives Community Action Program Data (NACAP) and the National Archives Federal Outlays Data
(NAFO).

Figure II. The Establishment of Federal Family Planning Programs by Period, 1965-1973

Notes: Dates are when the first federal family planning program was established in the county. Counties not
receiving family planning programs grant between 1965 and 1973, including a handful of communities that received
funding but with an unknown starting date, are not shaded. Source: NACAP, NAFO and OEO (1969, 1971 and
1974).

Family Planning – 27

Figure III. Fertility Rates and the Roll-Out of Federal Family Planning Programs

50

19 64 GF R
1 00

1 50

2 00

A. Year of Establishment and 1964 General Fertility Rate (GFR)

0

Slope = 0.13, S.E.= 0.42

1964

1966

1968
1970
1972
Year Family Planning Program Established

1974

1 00

B. Year of Establishment and 1960 to 1964 Change in the GFR

- 150

19 60 to 1 964 Ch an ge in GF R
- 100
- 50
0
50

Slope = 0.11, S.E.= 0.24

1964

1966

1968
1970
1972
Year Family Planning Program Established

1974

Notes: The x-axis plots when the first federal family planning program was established in the county. The y-axis in
panel A plots the 1964 GFR, the y-axis in panel B plots the change in the GFR from 1960 to 1964. The dashed lines
indicate the estimated relationship between the x and y variables using linear regression; text indicates the estimated
slope and standard error for each panel. Sources: Family planning data: NACAP, NAFO and OEO (1969, 1971 and
1974). GFR: Hand-entered 1959 to 1967 county vital statistics and 1968 to 1988 natality detail microdata files
(NCHS 2003). Denominators were constructed for 1959 to 1968 by linearly interpolating information between the
1950, 1960, and 1970 censuses; denominators for the 1969 to 1988 period use the Surveillance Epidemiology and
End Results (SEER) data.

Family Planning – 28

Figure IV. Descriptive Evidence of the Effects of Family Planning on Fertility Rates
A. Changes in the General Fertility Rate (GFR), 1946 to 1988
130
120
110
100
90
Unfunded
First funded 1965-67
First funded 1968-69
First funded 1970-73

80
70
60
1946

1956

1966

1976

1986

B. GFR in Funded Counties (By Date of Establishment) – GFR in Unfunded Counties
6
4
2
0
1959

1964

1969

1974

1979

1984

-2
-4
-6

First funded 1965-67-unfunded
First funded 1968-69-unfunded

-8
First funded 1970-73-unfunded
-10
Notes: Panel A plots the evolution of the general fertility. Panel B plots the annual difference in the GFR between
funded and unfunded counties for counties funded in the three indicated periods. All estimates are unweighted.
Sources: See figure III.

Family Planning – 29

Figure V. The Relationship of the Roll-Out of Family Planning Programs with Other Federal Grants

A. Family Planning Spending

B. Community Health Centers

C. Head Start Spending

1
0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

0

‐5

5

1

1

1

‐5

D. Jobs Programs Spending

0

‐5

5

0.5
0
0

‐5

5

0

‐0.5

‐0.5

‐0.5

‐0.5

‐1

‐1

‐1

‐1

E. Legal Services Spending

F. Maternal and Infant Care

G. Maternity and Child Health

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

‐5

0

5

‐5

5

0
0

5

‐5

0

‐0.5

‐0.5

‐0.5

‐1

‐1

‐1

5

Notes: Each panel plots weighted least-squares estimates of ߨ and  from equation 4 excluding covariates in X (equivalent to model 2). The weights are the 1970
population of women ages 15 to 44. The dependent variable is equal to 1 if the county received any federal grant for the indicated program. Heteroskedasticityrobust standard errors clustered by county are used to construct point-wise, 95-percent confidence intervals, which are presented in dashed lines in each panel.
Numerical estimates appear in online appendix. Sources: NACAP and NAFO.

Family Planning – 30

Figure VI. The Effects of Federal Family Planning Programs on Fertility Rates

A.

General Fertility Rate (weighted)
4

Model 1: County and year effects

3

Model 2: County + year + state by year effects (CI
dashed line)
Model 3: Model 2 + Covariates (Demographic,
REIS, Abortion Providers, CI dashed line)
Model 3: 1968 forward only

2
1
0
-6

-1

4

9

14

-1
-2
-3
-4

B.

General Fertility Rate (unweighted)

4
Model 2 Unweighted (CI dashed line)
Model 3 Unweighted (1968 forward)
Model 3 Unweighted (CI dashed line)

2

-6

0
-1

4

9

14

-2

-4

-6
Notes: Panels plot either weighted or unweighted estimates of ߨ and  from equation 1. Weights are the county
population of women ages 15 to 44 in 1970. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered by county construct
95-percent, point-wise confidence intervals (dashed lines). Sources: See figure III.

Family Planning – 31

Figure VII. The Effects of Federal Family Planning Programs on Fertility Rates, by Age and Parity
A.
Birth Rate by Age Group, 1968-1988
4

4
Model 3 Ages 15 to 19
Model 3 Ages 20 to 24 (CI dashed lines)
Model 3 Ages 25 to 29 (CI dashed lines)

2

Model 3 Ages 40 to44
Model 3 Ages 35 to 39 (CI dashed lines)
Model 3 Ages 30 to 34 (CI dashed lines)
2

0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

-2

0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

-4
-2
-6
-8

-4

B. Birth Rate by Parity, 1968-1988
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2 0
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
-1
-1.2
-1.4

0.2
Model 3 Parity 1
Model 3 Parity 2 (CI dashed lines)
Model 3 Parity 3 (CI dashed lines)

2

4

6

8

10

Model 3 Parity 4 (CI dashed lines)
Model 3 Parity 5 (CI dashed lines)
Model 3 Parity 6

0.1

12

14

0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

-0.1

-0.2

Notes: Panels present weighted, least-squares estimates of  from equation 1 for the indicated group for the 1968 to 1988 data. Sources: Outcome data taken from 1968 to
1988 Natality Files (NCHS 2003). Denominators were constructed for 1959 to 1968 by linearly interpolating information between the 1950, 1960, and 1970 censuses;
denominators for the 1969 to 1988 period use the Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) data.. Information on family planning programs drawn from
NACAP, NAFO and OEO (1969, 1971 and 1974) as described in text.

Family Planning – 32

Table I. Characteristics of Counties Receiving Federal Family Planning Programs from 1965 to 1973
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
All
Not
First Funded in years
All
Col 4- Col 2
Counties Funded
1965-7 1968-9
1970-3
Funded
(std. error)
3037
2381
123
332
201
656
Number of counties
55,400
30,660 239,474 139,331 97,176
145,193
114,532
Mean population
(12,903)
Proportion of 1960 population in counties
in Northeast
26.0
16.6
31.8
16.9
38.9
26.0
9.4
(4.96)
in Midwest
24.0
38.6
20.9
27.4
23.1
24.5
-14.1
(6.23)
in South
26.9
37.3
29.0
24.4
28.4
26.6
-10.7
(4.85)
in West
22.8
7.4
18.4
31.2
9.6
22.8
15.32
(5.67)
in urban areas
68.4
53.7
85.6
79.4
71.8
79.7
26.0
(4.18)
in rural/farm areas
7.9
13.3
2.2
4.2
5.0
3.7
-9.60
(1.21)
Proportion of 1960 county residents
Under 5 years of age
11.4
11.3
11.4
11.6
11.5
11.5
0.227
(0.12)
65 or older
9.2
9.8
8.9
8.6
9.1
8.8
-1.00
(0.20)
Nonwhite
10.9
11.3
12.8
10.4
7.8
10.6
-0.694
(1.05)
with 12 years of education
42.7
41.0
43.2
45.0
42.9
44.0
3.06
(3.88)
with fewer than 4 years of education
8.4
9.6
7.9
7.1
7.8
7.5
-2.14
(0.40)
of households with income under $3,000
21.9
27.1
17.4
17.9
18.9
18.0
-9.13
(1.45)
of households with income over $10,000
14.8
11.7
17.4
17.7
15.4
17.1
5.45
(1.26)
Notes: Characteristics except for population are weighted by 1960 county population. Source: 1960 County and City Databooks (Haines 2005). Information on
family planning programs drawn from NACAP, NAFO and OEO (1969, 1971 and 1974) as described in text.

Family Planning – 33

Table II. The Relationship of the Roll-Out of Federal Family Planning Programs and 1965 Determinants of Childbearing

Mean Dependent Variable
Year Family Planning
Program Established
Observations
R-squared

Mean Dependent Variable
Year Family Planning
Program Established
Observations
R-squared

(1)
Population
Growth a
Problem
0.804
-0.00495
[0.00711]

(2)
Ideal
Number of
Children
3.290
0.00989
[0.0221]

(3)

(4)

(5)
Ever Used
the Pill
0.221
-0.00444
[0.00971]

(6)
When 1st
Used Pill |
Ever Used
772.0
0.198
[0.384]

Approve of
Abortion
0.389
-0.000901
[0.00537]

Coital
Frequency
6.036
0.0363
[0.0708]

3,106
0.022

3,069
0.038

3,106
0.023

(9)
Married
Once
0.868
0.00624
[0.00492]

(10)
Age at 1st
Marriage
20.83
0.0541
[0.0593]

3,106
0.040

3,103
0.111

(7)
Surgically
Sterilized
0.198
-0.00436
[0.00747]

(8)
Children
Ever Born
to Mother
5.062
-0.0543
[0.0656]

2,967
0.136

3,106
0.154

742
0.022

3,106
0.095

3,101
0.075

(11)
Age at 1st
Pregnancy
22.35
0.0631
[0.0663]

(12)
Children
Ever Born
2.651
0.0171
[0.0312]

(13)
Husband's
Income
7620
50.61
[157.7]

(14)
Catholic
0.289
0.0234
[0.0157]

(15)
Highest
Grade
11.33
0.0359
[0.104]

(16)
2 Parents at
14
0.782
0.00411
[0.00600]

2,815
0.160

3,106
0.141

3,006
0.170

3,106
0.061

3,105
0.092

3,106
0.015

Notes: Dependent variables are coded as follows by column: (1) Do you consider the growth of world population a serious problem? Yes=1, (2) What is the ideal
number of children for average American family? (3) Index from three questions about whether the respondent approves of abortion if a woman is not married,
for health concerns, or in the case of financial hardship. 1=approve in all three cases; (4) Coital frequency in the last four weeks? (5) Have you ever used the Pill?
Yes=1, (6) When did you first use the Pill? (month and year), (7) Have you or your husband had an operation making it impossible to have (another) child?
1=Yes; (8) How many children did your mother have? (9) Is this your first marriage? 1=Yes; (10-11) Age in months constructed from month and year of birth
and month and year of first marriage and month and year of first pregnancy end date; (12) How many live births have you had? (13) Husband’s income in
nominal dollars. (14) Respondent identifies as “Roman Catholic.” (15) Highest grade attained by the respondent. (16) Did you live with both parents at age 14?
1=Yes. Estimates are obtained from weighted regressions of the indicated dependent variable on the year the family planning program was established. To
account for sampling design, the regressions control for size of sampled PSU, decade of respondent’s birth, and race (1=Nonwhite). Source: 1965 National
Fertility Study.

Family Planning – 34

Table III. The Effects of Federal Family Planning Programs on Fertility Rates
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

----------All Counties (1959-88)---------A. Weighted
Mean DV in 1970
Years 5 to 1
Years 1 to 5
Years 6 to 10
Years 11 to 15
R-squared
B. Unweighted
Mean DV in 1970
Years 5 to 1
Years 1 to 5
Years 6 to 10
Years 11 to 15

87.6
0.0830
[0.425]
-1.268
[0.425]
-1.805
[0.672]
-0.787
[0.842]
0.874

-0.327
[0.321]
-0.959
[0.380]
-1.901
[0.529]
-1.829
[0.567]
0.909

-0.525
[0.310]
-0.776
[0.383]
-1.446
[0.541]
-1.248
[0.586]
0.925

-0.273
[0.312]
-0.945
[0.402]
-1.832
[0.592]
-1.803
[0.692]
0.945

91.1
0.126
[0.399]
-2.158
[0.375]
-4.846
[0.526]
-5.187
[0.577]
0.693

0.169
[0.408]
-1.728
[0.376]
-3.285
[0.490]
-3.649
[0.525]
0.753

R-squared
For panels A and B:
Observations
90949
90949
Counties
3037
3037
Covariates
Model 1: Model 1
C,Y
+S-Y

(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Funded Pre-Title Post-Title
All
Counties X Grants X Grants Counties
Only
Only
Only (1968-88)
86.7
87.9
88.2
87.6
-0.494
[0.376]
-1.047
[0.689]
-1.687
[0.907]
-1.738
[1.086]
0.938

-0.408
[0.326]
-0.754
[0.438]
-1.558
[0.603]
-1.484
[0.636]
0.923

-0.221
[0.510]
-1.411
[0.448]
-1.445
[0.637]
-0.115
[0.867]
0.910

-0.990
[0.267]
-1.762
[0.462]
-1.225
[0.508]
0.793

86.7

90.1

90.9

91.1

-1.649
[0.409]
-2.732
[0.528]
-2.355
[0.569]
0.481

-0.262
[0.398]
-1.251
[0.370]
-2.051
[0.485]
-1.834
[0.518]
0.774

-0.127
[0.419]
-1.441
[0.391]
-2.540
[0.560]
-2.613
[0.691]
0.812

-0.378
[0.475]
-0.588
[0.837]
-1.322
[1.138]
-1.799
[1.394]
0.846

-0.311
[0.479]
-1.194
[0.447]
-2.115
[0.570]
-2.082
[0.607]
0.770

-0.0403
[0.662]
-1.589
[0.589]
-2.006
[0.854]
-1.070
[0.876]
0.759

90949
3037
Model 2
+R,A,D

90949
3037
Model 2
+R,A,
Ctrend

19638
656
Model 2

86833
2899
Model 3

75427
61167
2519
2914
Model 3 Model 3

Notes: Panels A (weighted by 1970 population of women ages 15 to 44) and B (unweighted) display least-squares
DiD estimates as described in text using the GFR as the dependent variable. Column 1 corresponds to model 1 and
includes county, C, and year, Y, effects. Column 2 corresponds to model 2 and adds state-by-year, S-Y, effects to
model 1. Column 3 corresponds to model 3 and adds 1960 county covariates including Demographic, D, REIS, R,
and abortion, A, controls to model 2. Column 4 adds linear county trends, Ctrend, R, and A to model 2. Column 5
estimates model 2 for funded counties only. Column 6 omits counties receiving first grants after 1970. Column 7
omits counties receiving first grants before 1971. Column 8 uses all counties receiving grants from 1968 to 1973 and
unfunded counties for the short 1968 to 1988 panel (for comparison with tables V). Heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors clustered by county are presented beneath each estimate in brackets. Source: See figure VI notes.

Family Planning – 35

Table IV. The Effects of Federal Family Planning Programs on Fertility Rates,
by Age Group and Parity

Age Group
1970 Mean DV
Year 1-5
Years 6-10
Years 11-15
R-squared
Observations
Counties
Parity
1970 Mean DV
Years 1-5
Years 6-10
Years 11-15
R-squared
Observations
Counties

(1)

(2)

15-19
67.8
-0.387
[0.390]
-1.286
[0.547]
-1.123
[0.638]
0.496
60845
2914

20-24
167.5
-1.863
[0.694]
-2.411
[0.891]
-2.635
[1.077]
0.791
61156
2914

One
33.7
-0.426
[0.187]
-0.677
[0.280]
-0.399
[0.311]
0.502
61109
2911

Two
23.8
-0.333
[0.112]
-0.673
[0.181]
-0.445
[0.204]
0.346
61109
2911

(3)
(4)
A. DV: Age-Specific Birth Rate
25-29
30-34
144.5
72.7
-2.252
-1.273
[0.558]
[0.426]
-3.871
-1.110
[0.798]
[0.579]
-3.125
-0.412
[0.923]
[0.689]
0.602
0.552
61124
60825
2914
2914
B. DV: Parity-Specific Birth Rate
Three
Four
13.5
7.12
-0.171
-0.0492
[0.0719]
[0.0461]
-0.286
-0.0364
[0.0973]
[0.0607]
-0.190
-0.0151
[0.126]
[0.0674]
0.555
0.714
61109
61109
2911
2911

(5)

(6)

35-39
31.7
-0.582
[0.362]
-0.550
[0.396]
-0.331
[0.450]
0.595
59675
2914

40-44
8.2
-0.184
[0.132]
-0.154
[0.144]
-0.147
[0.156]
0.454
56319
2912

Five
3.77
-0.0417
[0.0323]
-0.0277
[0.0417]
-0.0290
[0.0462]
0.726
61109
2911

Six
2.04
0.0154
[0.0237]
0.00748
[0.0311]
0.0151
[0.0339]
0.670
61109
2911

Notes: The table presents weighted least-squares estimates obtained from estimating the DiD specification
separately for indicated groups as described in text. All specifications are model 3. Heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors clustered by county are beneath each estimate in brackets. Source: See figure VII.

Family Planning – 36

DATA APPENDIX
A. Description of County-Level Natality Data
1.

Natality Data for 1959 to 1967
The data for 1959 to 1967 were double-entered from published volumes of the Vital
Statistics Division of the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS, formerly the National
Office of Vital Statistics). These records were compiled by Vital Statistics using microfilm
copies of transcripts or state data files of all original birth certificates sent by states to the NCHS.
All births are classified according to the place of residence of the mother. Data for the years
1959-1966 are based on a 50 percent sample consisting of only the even-numbered live birth
records. The data for 1967 are based on a 20 percent to 50 percent sample (depending upon the
state). The NCHS generated the published counts by multiplying the samples by two in the case
of a 50 percent sample and five in the case of a 20 percent sample.
2.

Completeness of Birth Registration (1959 to 1967)
The data do provide a representative sample of all registered births. Although there were
state laws requiring that all births and deaths be registered, the degree of compliance and
enforcement varied by state and over the course of the sample.
The NCHS conducted two tests of birth registration completeness. The first test was
conducted based on records for infants born between December 1, 1939, and March 31, 1940,
that were alive on April 1, 1940. The second test was conducted based on infants born between
January 1, 1950, and March 31, 1950, and is fully described in chapter 6 of the 1950 Vital
Statistics Volume. Both of these tests were implemented in a similar manner. During both testing
periods Census enumerators filled out infant cards for children born during the months of the
test. State Vital Statistics offices then provided NCHS with copies of all infant birth and death
records from the test period. These two sets of records were matched by NCHS. A follow-up
mail survey was sent to the institutions where any unmatched births occurred as well as to the
parents’ places of residence. More records were matched after additional information was
obtained from the follow-up mail survey. Any remaining records were checked against other
sources of information from the states.27 The completeness of birth registration in each area was
then determined by comparing the number of matched records to the total number of infant cards
and death records for the area.
The percent completeness was higher in 1950 than in 1940. In 1950, the NCHS estimated
that 98.1 percent of all births in the nation were registered: 98.8 percent for whites and 94.1
percent for the nonwhite (1950, p. XXI). In both tests of birth registration completeness, births
that occurred in hospitals had higher completion rates than births occurring outside hospitals. By
1960, NCHS estimated that birth registration was 98.9 percent complete (1965, pp. 4-9). The
counts of birth-related variables given by county were not adjusted for the completeness of
registration.
3.

Data Limitations
For all years before 1964, birth certificates for many intrastate nonresidents of
Massachusetts were received from the place of occurrence of the birth as well as from the place
of the mother’s residence. This produced some duplication and the Technical Appendix from
1964 gives an estimate of a four percent overstatement of the number of births (1964, pp. 4-10).
27

An example would be the use of adoption records to match birth records.

Family Planning Data Appendix – 1

Also in 1964, 1,800 birth records for Massachusetts were not received by the NCHS and so live
birth figures are understated (1946, pp. 4-10). Therefore, the sample of consistently identified
counties for 1946 to 1988 excludes all counties in Massachusetts.
4.

Natality Data for 1968 to 1988
The data for 1968 to 1988 were taken from NCHS Natality Detail Files (ICPSR Study
Numbers 3241, 3242, 3244, 3243, 3245, 3246, 3247, 3248, 3249, 3250, 3251, 3304, 3305, 3307,
3327, 3308, 3309, 3310, 3311, 3312, and 6651). The files contain information entered from
individual birth certificates during each calendar year. Data for the years 1968 to 1971 are based
on a 50 percent sample. All births are classified according to the place of residence of the mother
or according to the place of occurrence of the birth. Births to Americans outside of the United
States are not recorded in these data, although births to foreigners in the United States are
recorded and assigned to the county of occurrence. Race information was aggregated into county
of residence categories to match the pre-1968 data.
5.

Natality Variable Definitions
Most of the variables have been calculated based on the usual place of residence of the
mother as reported on the birth certificate. Until 1964, births to nonresident aliens were classified
with the place of residence being the exact place of occurrence of the birth within the county.
From 1964 until the end of the sample, these births were allocated to the “Balance of County” of
the county of occurrence rather than to the exact place of birth within the county (1964, pp. 4-5).
B. Description of County-Level Population Data, 1959 to 1988
County-level population data for the number of women per county between the ages of
15 and 44 is taken from the Census and from the Surveillance Epidemiology and End Result
(SEER) published by the National Cancer Institute. County-level information from the 1940,
1950, and 1960 censuses were compiled by Michael Haines for the Inter-university Consortium
for Political and Social Research (study 2896) and linear interpolation was used to generate
population denominators between 1959 and 1969. The Surveillance Epidemiology and End
Result’s data cover the period from 1969 to 1988 in single years, and dictionary files were
adapted from those written by Jean Roth of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER,
Retrieved on Sept 1, 2008 from http://www.nber.org/data/vital-statistics-mortality-datamulitiple-cause-of-death.html). Several counties are missing population data in at least one year.
Counties missing this data are listed below:
Arizona:
Yuma
Colorado:
Adams, Boulder, Jefferson, Weld
Florida:
Dade
New Mexico: Los Alamos, Valencia
New York:
New York
South Dakota: Washabaugh
Virginia:
Alleghany, Arlington, Henry, James City, Rockingham, Spotsylvania, Stafford,
York, Alexandria City, Clifton Forge City, Covington City, Falls Church City,
Fredericksburg City, Galax City, Harrisonburg City, Martinsville City, Norton
City, Williamsburg City

Family Planning Data Appendix – 2

C. Anomalies in the Data
1.

Changes in County Boundaries
Several counties combined or split during the sample period. I account for those
boundary changes by aggregating the affected counties for the entire sample period. Only
boundary changes that resulted in the creation or elimination of counties are reflected. I account
for boundary revisions only if they resulted in a name or county federal information processing
standard code change. These changes were verified by comparison with listed county changes
from the Census or against table footnotes from the Vital Statistics Volumes. The boundary
changes are as follows:
South Boston City, VA was completely absorbed into Halifax County, VA in 1960.
Fairfax City, VA became independent of Fairfax County, VA in 1961.
Franklin City, VA became independent of Southampton, VA in 1961.
Menominee County, WI was formed from the Menominee Indian Reservation, Oconto and
Shawano counties, WI in 1961.
Norfolk County, VA and South Norfolk City, VA combined to form Chesapeake City in 1963.
Princess Anne County, VA was completely absorbed into Virginia Beach City, VA in 1963.
Lexington City, VA became independent of Rockbridge County, VA in 1966.
Emporia City, VA became independent of Greenville County, VA in 1967.
Bedford City, VA became independent of Bedford County, VA in 1968.
Roanoke City, VA and Salem City, VA became independent of Roanoke County, VA in 1968.
Ormsby County, NV merged with Carson City, NV in 1969.
Nansemond County, VA was incorporated into Suffolk City, VA in 1972.
Manassas City, VA and Manassas Park City, VA became independent of Prince William County,
VA in 1975.
2.
Natality Data Anomalies for 1959 to 1967
1961: Alabama Nonwhite and White Totals for Dallas County did not sum to published total for
number of live births by place of occurrence.
1962: Ohio Nonwhite Total and White Total did not sum to published total for number of live
births by place of occurrence; Ohio Nonwhite and White Totals for Cuyahoga, Hamilton,
Montgomery, Stark, and Summit Counties did not sum to published total for number of
live births by place of occurrence.
1963: Wisconsin Nonwhite Total and White Total did not sum to published total for number of
live births by place of occurrence.
1964: Indiana Totals for DeKalb and Lagrange Counties were illegible for number of live births
by place of occurrence.
1965: California Total for Lake County was illegible for number of births by attendant (other) by
place of residence; North Carolina Total for Mitchell County was illegible for number of
births by attendant (other) by place of residence.
D. Bibliographic Information for Data Appendix
National Center for Health Statistics (2000). Data File Documentations, Compressed Mortality File,
1968-1988 (machine readable data file and documentation, CD-ROM Series 20, No. 2A), National
Center for Health Statistics, Hyattsville, Maryland

Family Planning Data Appendix – 3

National Center for Health Statistics (2000). Data File Documentations, Multiple Cause of Death Files,
1959-1988 (machine readable data file and documentation, CD-ROM Series 20), National Center for
Health Statistics, Hyattsville, Maryland
Roth, Jean (Dec. 1, 2000). Mortality Data – Vital Statistics NCHS’s Multiple Cause of Death Data, 19592005. National Bureau of Economic Research. Retrieved September 1, 2008, from
http://www.nber.org/data/vital-statistics-mortality-data-mulitiple-cause-of-death.html
Surveillance Epidemiology and End Result, National Cancer Institute (2001). Data files, Single Year of
Age County Population Estimates, 1969-1988, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.
Retrieved October 1, 2008 from http://seer.cancer.gov/popdata/download.html#single
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; Public Health Service. (1959). Vital Statistics of the
United States, Volume I. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; Public Health Service. (1960). Vital Statistics of the
United States, Volume I. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; Public Health Service. (1961). Vital Statistics of the
United States, Volume I. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; Public Health Service. (1962). Vital Statistics of the
United States, Volume I. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; Public Health Service. (1963). Vital Statistics of the
United States, Volume I. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; Public Health Service. (1964). Vital Statistics of the
United States, Volume I. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; Public Health Service. (1965). Vital Statistics of the
United States, Volume I. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; Public Health Service. (1966). Vital Statistics of the
United States, Volume I. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; Public Health Service. (1967). Vital Statistics of the
United States, Volume I. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; Public Health Service. (1968). Vital Statistics of the
United States, Volume I. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1968: [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1969. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2002. doi:10.3886/ICPSR03241.
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1969: [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1970. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2002. doi:10.3886/ICPSR03242.
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1970: [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1971. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2002. doi:10.3886/ICPSR03244.
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1971: [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1972. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2002. doi:10.3886/ICPSR03243.
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1972: [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1973. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2002. doi:10.3886/ICPSR03245.
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1973: [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human

Family Planning Data Appendix – 4

Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1974. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2002. doi:10.3886/ICPSR03246.
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1974: [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1975. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2002. doi:10.3886/ICPSR03247.
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1975: [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1976. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2002. doi:10.3886/ICPSR03248.
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1976: [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1977. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2002. doi:10.3886/ICPSR03249.
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1977: [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1978. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2002. doi:10.3886/ICPSR03250.
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1978: [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1979. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2002. doi:10.3886/ICPSR03251.
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1979: [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1980. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2003. doi:10.3886/ICPSR03304.
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1980: [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1981. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2003. doi:10.3886/ICPSR03305.
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1981: [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. ICPSR version. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of
Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1983. Ann Arbor, MI:
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2004.
doi:10.3886/ICPSR03327
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1982: [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1984. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2001. doi:10.3886/ICPSR03307
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1983: [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1985. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2001. doi:10.3886/ICPSR03308
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1984: [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1986. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2001. doi:10.3886/ICPSR03309
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1985: [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1987. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2001. doi:10.3886/ICPSR03310

Family Planning Data Appendix – 5

U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1986: [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1988. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2001. doi:10.3886/ICPSR03311
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1987: [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1989. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2001. doi:10.3886/ICPSR03312
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. NATALITY DETAIL
FILE, 1988 [UNITED STATES] [Computer file]. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services, National Center for Health Statistics [producer], 1990. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 1996. doi:10.3886/ICPSR06651

Family Planning Data Appendix – 6

