                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             MANAGING A LIQUIDITY TRAP:
                             MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY

                                          Ivan Werning

                                       Working Paper 17344
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17344


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2011




For useful discussions I thank Manuel Amador, George-Marios Angeletos, Emmanuel Farhi, Jordi
Galí and Ricardo Reis, as well as seminar participants at the Society of Economic Dynamics meetings
in Ghent and the NBER's summer institute. All remaining errors are mine. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Ivan Werning. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy
Ivan Werning
NBER Working Paper No. 17344
August 2011
JEL No. E0,H5

                                               ABSTRACT

I study monetary and fiscal policy in liquidity trap scenarios, where the zero bound on the nominal
interest rate is binding. I work with a continuous-time version of the standard New Keynesian model.
Without commitment, the economy suffers from deflation and depressed output. I show that, surprisingly,
both are exacerbated with greater price flexibility. I examine monetary and fiscal policies that maximize
utility for the agent in the model and refer to these as optimal throughout the paper. I find that the optimal
interest rate is set to zero past the liquidity trap and jumps discretely up upon exit. Inflation may be
positive throughout, so the absence of deflation is not evidence against a liquidity trap. Output, on
the other hand, always starts below its efficient level and rises above it. I then study fiscal policy and
show that, regardless of parameters that govern the value of "fiscal multipliers" during normal or liquidity
trap times, at the start of a liquidity trap optimal spending is above its natural level. However, it declines
over time and goes below its natural level. I propose a decomposition of spending according to "opportunistic"
and "stimulus" motives. The former is defined as the level of government purchases that is optimal
from a static, cost-benefit standpoint, taking into account that, due to slack resources, shadow costs
may be lower during a slump; the latter measures deviations from the former. I show that stimulus
spending may be zero throughout, or switch signs, depending on parameters. Finally, I consider the
hybrid where monetary policy is discretionary, but fiscal policy has commitment. In this case, stimulus
spending is typically positive and increasing throughout the trap.


Ivan Werning
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive, E51-251a
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
iwerning@mit.edu
1     Introduction

The 2007-8 crisis in the U.S. lead to a steep recession, followed by aggressive policy re-
sponses. Monetary policy went full tilt, cutting interest rates rapidly to zero, where they
have remained since the end of 2008. With conventional monetary policy seemingly ex-
hausted, fiscal stimulus worth $787 billion was enacted by early 2009 as part of the Amer-
ican Recovery and Reinvestment Act. Unconventional monetary policies were also pur-
sued, starting with “quantitative easing”, purchases of long-term bonds and other assets.
In August 2011, the Federal Reserve’s FOMC statement signaled the intent to keep inter-
est rates at zero until at least mid 2013. Similar policies have been followed, at least during
the peak of the crisis, by many advanced economies. Fortunately, the kind of crises that
result in such extreme policy measures have been relatively few and far between. Perhaps
as a consequence, the debate over whether such policies are appropriate remains largely
unsettled. The purpose of this paper is to make progress on these issues.
    To this end, I reexamine monetary and fiscal policy in a liquidity trap, where the zero
bound on nominal interest rate binds. I work with a standard New Keynesian model that
builds on Eggertsson and Woodford (2003).1 In these models a liquidity trap is defined as
a situation where negative real interest rates are needed to obtain the first-best allocation.
I adopt a deterministic continuous time formulation that turns out to have several advan-
tages. It is well suited to focus on the dynamic questions of policy, such as the optimal exit
strategy, whether spending should be front- or back-loaded, etc. It also allows for a simple
graphical analysis and delivers several new results. The alternative most employed in the
literature is a discrete-time Poisson model, where the economy starts in a trap and exits
from it with a constant exogenous probability each period. This specification is especially
convenient to study the effects of suboptimal and simple Markov policies—because the
    1 Eggertsson(2001, 2006) study government spending during a liquidity trap a New Keynesian model,
with the main focus is on the case without commitment and implicit commitment to inflate afforded by
rising debt. Christiano et al. (2011), Woodford (2011) and Eggertsson (2011) consider the effects of spending
on output, computing “fiscal multipliers”, but do not focus on optimal policy.



                                                     2
equilibrium calculations then reduce to finding a few numbers—but does not afford any
comparable advantages for the optimal policy problem.
   I examine policies that maximize welfare for the agent in the model and refer to them
throughout as optimal. I consider the policy problem under commitment, under discre-
tion and for some intermediate cases. I am interested in monetary policy, fiscal policy, as
well as their interplay. What does optimal monetary policy look like? How does the com-
mitment solution compare to the discretionary one? How does it depend on the degree of
price stickiness? How can fiscal policy complement optimal monetary policy? Can fiscal
policy mitigate the problem created by discretionary monetary policy? To what extent is
spending governed by a concern to influence the private economy as captured by "fiscal
multipliers", or by simple cost-benefit public finance considerations?
   I first study monetary policy in the absence of fiscal policy. When monetary policy
lacks commitment, deflation and depression ensue. Both are commonly associated with
liquidity traps. Less familiar is that both outcomes are exacerbated by price flexibility.
Thus, one does not need to argue for a large degree of price stickiness to worry about the
problems created by a liquidity trap. In fact, quite the contrary. I show that the depression
becomes unbounded as we converge to fully flexible prices. The intuition for this result
is that the main problem in a liquidity trap is an elevated real interest rate. This leads
to depressed output, which creates deflationary pressures. Price flexibility accelerates
deflation, raising the real interest rate further and only making matters worse.
   As first argued by Krugman (1998), optimal monetary policy can improve on this dire
outcome by committing to future policy in a way that affects current expectations favor-
ably. In particular, I show that, it is optimal to promote future inflation and stimulate a
boom in output. I establish that optimal inflation may be positive throughout the episode,
so that deflation is completely avoided. Thus, the absence of deflation, far from being at
odds with a liquidity trap, actually may be evidence of an optimal response to such a situ-
ation. I show that output starts below its efficient level, but rises above it towards the end


                                              3
of the trap. Indeed, the boom in output is larger than that stimulated by the inflationary
promise.
    There are a number of ways monetary policy can promote inflation and stimulate
output. Monetary easing does not necessarily imply a low equilibrium interest rate path.
Indeed, as in most monetary models, the nominal interest rate path does not uniquely
determine an equilibrium. Indeed, an interest rate of zero during the trap that becomes
positive immediately after the trap is consistent with positive inflation and output after
the trap.2 I show, however, that the optimal policy with commitment involves keeping
the interest rate down at zero longer. The continuous time formulation helps here because
it avoids time aggregation issues that may otherwise obscure the result.
    Some of my results echo findings from prior work based on simulations for a Poisson
specification of the natural rate of interest. Christiano et al. (2011) reports that, when the
central bank follows a Taylor rule, price stickiness increases the decline in output during
a liquidity trap. Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), Jung et al. (2005) and Adam and Billi
(2006) find that the optimal interest rate path may keep it at zero after the natural rate
of interest becomes positive. To the best of my knowledge this paper provides the first
formal results explaining these findings for inflation, output and interest rates.
    An implication of my result is that the interest rate should jump discretely upon exit-
ing the zero bound—a property that can only be appreciated in continuous time. Thus,
even when fundamentals vary continuously, optimal policy calls for a discontinuous in-
terest rate path.
    Turning to fiscal policy, I show that, there is a role for government spending dur-
ing a liquidity trap. Spending should be front-loaded. At the start of the liquidity trap,
government spending should be higher than its natural level. However, during the trap
   2 For example, a zero interest during the trap and an interest equal to the natural rate outside the trap.
This is the same path for the interest rate that results with discretionary monetary policy. However, in that
case, the outcome for inflation and output is pinned down by the requirement that they reach zero upon
exiting the trap. With commitment, the same path for interest rates is consistent with higher inflation and
output upon exit.



                                                     4
spending should fall and reach a level below its natural level. Intuitively, optimal govern-
ment spending is countercyclical, it leans against the wind. Private consumption starts
out below its efficient level, but reaches levels above its efficient level near the end of the
liquidity trap. The pattern for government spending is just the opposite.
   The optimal pattern for total government spending masks two potential motives. Per-
haps the most obvious, especially within the context of a New Keynesian model, is the
macroeconomic, countercyclical one. Government spending affects private consumption
and inflation through dynamic general equilibrium effects. In a liquidity trap this may be
particularly useful, to mitigate the depression and deflation associated with these events.
   However, a second, often ignored, motive is based on the idea that government spend-
ing should react to the cycle even based on static, cost-benefit calculations. In a slump,
the wage, or shadow wage, of labor is low. This makes it is an opportune time to produce
government goods. During the debates for the 2009 ARRA stimulus bill, variants of this
argument were put forth.
   Based on these notions, I propose a decomposition of spending into "stimulus" and
"opportunistic" components. The latter is defined as the optimal static level of govern-
ment spending, taking private consumption as given. The former is just the difference
between actual spending and opportunistic spending.
   I show that the optimum calls for zero stimulus at the beginning of a liquidity trap.
Thus, my previous result, showing that spending starts out positive, can be attributed
entirely to the opportunistic component of spending. More surprisingly, I then show
that for some parameter values stimulus spending is everywhere exactly zero, so that,
in these cases, opportunistic spending accounts for all of government spending policy
during a liquidity trap. Of course, opportunistic spending does, incidentally, influence
consumption and inflation. But the point is that these considerations need not figure into
the calculation. In this sense, public finance trumps macroeconomic policy.
   Another implication is that, in such cases, commitment to a path for government


                                              5
spending is superfluous. A naive, fiscal authority that acts with full discretion and per-
forms the static cost-benefit calculation chooses the optimal path for spending.
   These results assume that monetary policy is optimal. Things can be quite different
when monetary policy is suboptimal due to lack of commitment. To address this I study
a mixed case, where monetary policy is discretionary but fiscal policy has the power to
commit to a government spending path. Positive stimulus spending emerges as a way to
fight deflation. Indeed, the optimal intervention is to provide positive stimulus spending
that rises over time during the liquidity trap. Back-loading stimulus spending provides a
bigger bang for the buck, both in terms of inflation and output. Since price setting is for-
ward looking, spending near the end promotes inflation both near the end and earlier. In
addition, any improvement in the real rate of return near the end of the liquidity trap im-
proves the output outcome level for earlier dates. Both reasons point towards increasing
stimulus spending.
   If the fiscal authority can commit past the trap, then it is optimal to promise lower
spending immediately after the trap, and converge towards the natural rate of spending
after that. Spending features a discrete downward jump upon exiting the trap. Intuitively,
after the trap, once the flexible price equilibrium is attainable, lower government spend-
ing leads to a consumption boom. This is beneficial, for the same reasons that monetary
policy with commitment promotes a boom, because it raises the consumption level dur-
ing the trap. Thus, the commitment to lower spending after the trap attempts to mimic
the expansionary effects that the missing monetary commitments would have provided.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the model. Section
3 studies the equilibrium without fiscal policy when monetary policy is conducted with
discretion. Section 4 studies optimal monetary policy with commitment. Section 5 adds
fiscal policy and studies the optimal path for government spending alongside optimal
monetary policy. Section 6 considers mixed cases where monetary policy is discretionary,
but fiscal policy enjoys commitment.


                                             6
2    A Liquidity Trap Scenario

The model is a continuous-time version of the standard New Keynesian model. The envi-
ronment features a representative agent, monopolistic competition and Calvo-style sticky
prices; it abstracts from capital investment. I spare the reader another rendering of the de-
tails of this standard setting (see e.g. Woodford, 2003, or Galí, 2008) and skip directly to
the well-known log-linear approximation of the equilibrium conditions which I use in the
remainder of the paper.


Euler Equation and Phillips Curve. The equilibrium conditions, log linearized around
zero inflation, are


                               ẋ (t) = σ−1 (i (t) − r (t) − π (t))                      (1a)

                              π̇ (t) = ρπ (t) − κx (t)                                   (1b)

                               i (t) ≥ 0                                                  (1c)


where ρ, σ and κ are positive constants and the path {r (t)} is exogenous and given. We
also require a solution (π (t), x (t)) to remain bounded. The variable x (t) represents the
output gap: the log difference between actual output and the hypothetical output that
would prevail at the efficient, flexible price, outcome. Inflation is denoted by π (t) and
the nominal interest rate by i (t). Finally, r (t) stands for the “natural rate of interest”,
i.e. the real interest rate that would prevail in an efficient, flexible price, outcome with
x (t) = 0 throughout.
    Equation (1a) represents the consumer’s Euler equation. Output growth, equal to
consumption growth, is an increasing function of the real rate of interest, i (t) − π (t). The
natural rate of interest enters this condition because output has been replaced with the
output gap. Equation (1b) is the New-Keynesian, forward-looking Phillips curve. It can
be restated as saying that inflation is proportional, with factor κ > 0, to the present value


                                                7
of future output gaps,
                                                   ˆ    ∞
                                    π (t) = κ               e−ρs x (t + s)ds.
                                                    0

Thus, positive output gaps stimulate inflation, while negative output gaps produce defla-
tion. Finally, inequality (1c) is the zero-lower bound on nominal interest rates (hereafter,
ZLB).
    As for the constants, ρ is the discount rate, σ−1 is the intertemporal elasticity of substi-
tution and κ controls the degree of price stickiness. Lower values of κ imply greater price
stickiness. As κ → ∞ we approach the benchmark with perfectly flexible prices, where
high levels of inflation or deflation are compatible with minuscule output gaps.
    A number of caveats are in order. The model I use is the very basic New Keynesian
setting, without any bells and whistles. Basing my analysis on this simple model is con-
venient because it lies at the center of many richer models, so we may learn more general
lessons. It also facilitates the normative analysis, which could quickly become intractable
otherwise. On the other hand, the analysis abstracts from unemployment, and omits dis-
tortionary taxes, financial constraints and other frictions which may be relevant in these
situations.


Quadratic Welfare Loss.         I will evaluate outcomes using the quadratic loss function

                                        ˆ    ∞
                                   1                                 
                                L≡               e−ρt x (t)2 + λπ (t)2 dt.                             (2)
                                   2     0


According to this loss function it is desirable to minimize deviations from zero for both
inflation and the output gap. The constant λ controls the relative weight placed on the
inflationary objective. The quadratic nature of the objective is convenient and can be de-
rived as a second order approximation to welfare around zero inflation when the flexible
price equilibrium is efficient.3 Such an approximation also suggests that λ = λ̄/κ for
   3 In order to be efficient, the equilibrium requires a constant subsidy to production to undo the monop-
olistic markup. An alternative quadratic objective that does not assume the flexible price equilibrium is


                                                            8
some constant λ̄, so that λ → 0 as κ → ∞, as prices become more flexible, price instability
becomes less harmful.


The Natural Rate of Interest.             The path for the natural rate {r (t)} plays a crucial role in
the analysis. Indeed, if the natural rate were always positive, so that r (t) ≥ 0 for all t ≥ 0,
then the flexible price outcome with zero inflation and output gap, π (t) = x (t) = 0 for
all t ≥ 0, would be feasible and obtained by letting i (t) = r (t) for all t ≥ 0. This outcome
is also optimal, since it is ideal according to the loss function (2).
     The situation described in the previous paragraph amounts to the case where the ZLB
constraint (1c) is always slack. The focus of this paper is on situations where the ZLB
constraint binds. Thus, I am interested in cases where r (t) < 0 for some range of time.
For a few results it is useful to further assume that the the economy starts in a liquidity
trap that it will eventually and permanently exit at some date T > 0:


                                              r (t) < 0           t<T

                                              r (t) ≥ 0           t ≥ T.


I call such a case a liquidity trap scenario. A simple example is the step function

                                                      
                                                      
                                                      r
                                                               t ∈ [0, T )
                                            r (t) =
                                                                t ∈ [ T, ∞)
                                                      
                                                      r̄
                                                      


where r̄ > 0 > r. I use the step function case in some figures and simulations, but it is not
required for any of the results in the paper.
     Finally, I also make a technical assumption: that r (s) is bounded and that the integral
´t
 0   r (s)ds be well defined and finite for any t ≥ 0.
                ´
               1 ∞ −ρt
                         ( x (t) − x̄ )2 + λπ (t)2 dt for x̄ > 0. Most of the analysis would carry through to this
                                                  
efficient is   2 0 e
case.




                                                            9
3      Monetary Policy without Commitment

Before studying optimal policy with commitment, it is useful to consider the situation
without commitment, where the central bank is benevolent but cannot credibly announce
plans for the future. Instead, it acts opportunistically at each point in time, with absolute
discretion. This provides a useful benchmark that illustrates some features commonly as-
sociated with liquidity traps, such as deflationary price dynamics and depressed output.
I will also derive some less expected implications on the role of price stickiness. The out-
come without commitment is later contrasted to the optimal solution with commitment.



3.1        Deflation and Depression

To isolate the problems created by a complete lack of commitment, I rule out explicit rules
as well as reputational mechanisms that bind or affect the central bank’s actions directly
or indirectly. I construct the unique equilibrium as follows.4 For t ≥ T the natural rate is
positive, r (t) = r̄ > 0, so that, as mentioned above, the ideal outcome (π (t), x (t)) = (0, 0)
is attainable. I assume that the central bank can guarantee this outcome and implements
it so that (π (t), x (t)) = (0, 0) for t ≥ T.5 Taking this as given, at all earlier dates t < T the
central bank will find it optimal to set the nominal interest rate to zero. The resulting no-
commitment outcome is then uniquely determined by the ODEs (1a)–(1b) with i (t) = 0
for t ≤ T and the boundary condition (π ( T ), x ( T )) = (0, 0).6
    4 Inthis section, I proceed informally. With continuous time, a formal study of the no-commitment case
requires a dynamic game with commitment over vanishingly small intervals.
   5 Although this seems like a natural assumption, it presumes that the central bank somehow overcomes

the indeterminacy of equilibria that plagues these models. Usually this can be accomplished, for example,
by adherence to a Taylor rule, with appropriate coefficients. However, following such a rule requires com-
mitment, off the equilibrium path, which is not possible here. However, note that this issue is completely
separate from the zero lower bound on interest rates. Thus, the assumption that (π (t), x (t)) = (0, 0) can
be guaranteed for t ≥ T allows us to focus on the interaction between no commitment and a liquidity trap
scenario.
   6 This outcome coincides with the optimal solution with commitment if one constrains the problem by

imposing (π ( T ), x ( T )) = (0, 0). In other words, the ability to commit to outcomes within the interval
t ∈ [0, T ) is irrelevant; also, the ability to commit once t = T is reached is also irrelevant. What is crucial is
the ability to commit ex ante at t < T to outcomes for t = T.



                                                        10
                                              x

                                                              ẋ = 0




                                                                        π̇ = 0
                                       t=T
                                                                           π
                                                  0           −r




Figure 1: The equilibrium without commitment, featuring i (t) = 0 for t ≤ T and reaching
(0, 0) at t = T.

   This situation is depicted in Figure 1 which shows the dynamical system (1a)–(1b) with
i (t) = 0 and depicts a path leading to (0, 0) precisely at t = T. Output and inflation are
both negative for t < T as they approach (0, 0). Note that the loci on which (π (t), x (t))
must travel towards (0, 0) is independent of T, but a larger T requires a starting point
further away from the origin. Thus, initial inflation and output are both decreasing in T.
Indeed, as T → ∞ we have that π (0), x (0) → −∞.

Proposition 1. Consider a liquidity trap scenario, with r (t) < 0 for t < T and r (t) ≥ 0
for t ≥ T. Let π nc (t) and x nc (t) denote the equilibrium outcome without commitment. Then
inflation and output are zero after t = T and strictly negative before that:


                                 π nc (t) = x nc (t) = 0     t≥T


                               π nc (t) < 0   x nc (t) < 0    t < T.


                                                  11
Moreover, π (t) and x (t) are strictly increasing in t for t < T. In the limit as T → ∞, if the
                      ´T
natural rate satisfies 0 r (t; T )ds → −∞, then


                                 π nc (0, T ), x nc (0, T ) → −∞.


    The equilibrium features deflation and depression. The severity of both depend, among
other things, on the duration T of the liquidity trap. Both becomes unbounded as T → ∞.
In this sense, discretionary policy making may have very adverse welfare implications.
    How can the outcome be so dire? The main distortion is that the real interest rate
is set too high during the liquidity trap. This depresses consumption. Importantly, this
effect accumulates over time. Even with zero inflation consumption becomes depressed
        ´T
by σ−1 t r (t)ds. For example, with log utility σ = 1 if the natural rate is -4% and the trap
lasts two years the loss in output is at least 8%. Moreover, matters are just made worse by
deflation, which raises the real interest rate even more, further depressing output, leading
to even more deflation, in a vicious cycle.
    Note that it is the lack of commitment during the liquidity trap t < T to policy ac-
tions and outcomes after the liquidity trap t ≥ T that is problematic. Policy commitment
during the liquidity trap t < T is not useful. Neither is the ability to announce a credible
plan at t = T for the entire future t ≥ T. Indeed, if we add (π ( T ), x ( T )) = (0, 0) as a
constraint, then the no commitment outcome is optimal, even when the central bank en-
joys full commitment to any choice over (π (t), x (t), i (t))t6=T satisfying (1a)–(1b) for t < T
and t > T. What is valuable is the ability to commit during the liquidity trap to pol-
icy actions and outcomes after the liquidity trap. In particular, to something other than
(π ( T ), x ( T )) = (0, 0).




                                               12
3.2   Harmful Effects from Price Flexibility

How is this bleak outcome affected by the degree of price stickiness? One might ex-
pect things to improve when prices are more flexible. After all, the main friction in New
Keynesian models is price rigidities, suggesting that outcomes should improve as prices
become more flexible. The next proposition, perhaps counterintuitively, shows that the
reverse is actually the case.

Proposition 2. When prices are more flexible, the outcome without commitment features lower
inflation and output. That is, if κ < κ 0 then


         π nc (t, κ 0 ) < π nc (t, κ ) < 0     and    x nc (t, κ 0 ) < x nc (t, κ ) < 0   for all t < T.


Indeed, for given T > 0 and t < T in the limit as κ → ∞


                                             π (t, κ ), x (t, κ ) → −∞


and L(κ ) → ∞.

   According to this result, without commitment, price stickiness is beneficial. This
is punctuated by the limit as we approach perfectly flexible prices, which implies un-
bounded levels of deflation and depression. This upsets the common perception that
severe consequences from a liquidity trap require significant levels of price stickiness.
Quite the contrary, sticky prices hold back deflation and mitigate depressions.
   To gain intuition for this result, note that the Phillips curve equation (1b) implies that,
for a given negative output gap, a higher κ creates more deflation. More deflation, in turn,
increases the real interest rate i − π. By the Euler equation (1a) this requires higher growth
in the output gap ẋ; since x = 0 at t = T, this translates into a lower level of x for earlier
dates t < T. In words, flexible prices lead to more vigorous deflation, raising the real
interest rate and depressing output. Lower output reinforces the deflationary pressures,

                                                        13
creating a vicious cycle. The proof in the appendix echoes this intuition closely.
    A similar result is reported in the analysis of fiscal multipliers by Christiano et al.
(2011). They compute the equilibrium when monetary policy follows a Taylor rule and
the natural rate of interest is a Poisson process. In this context, they show that output
may be more depressed if prices are more flexible—they do not pursue a limiting result
towards full flexibility.7 My result is somewhat distinct, because it applies to a situation
with optimal discretionary monetary policy, instead of a Taylor rule, and it holds for any
deterministic path for the natural rate. Another difference is that in a Poisson environ-
ment an equilibrium fails to exist, when prices are too flexible. Despite these differences,
the logic for the effect is the same in both cases.8
    It is worth remarking that both the zero lower bound and the lack of commitment are
not critical. The same result holds for any path of the natural rate {r (t)} if we assume
the central bank sets the nominal interest rate above the natural rate i (t) = r (t) + ∆ with
∆ > 0 for some period of time t ≤ T and then switches back to the first best outcome
x (t) = π (t) = 0, with i (t) = r (t) for t > T. The zero lower bound and the lack of
commitment just serve to motivate such a scenario, but it could also result from policy
mistakes in interest rate setting.9
    The conclusion that price flexibility is always harmful relies on the lack of commit-
ment. Indeed, when the central bank can commit to an optimal policy, price flexibility
may be beneficial. Interestingly, this depends on parameters. Before studying optimal
policy, however, it is useful to consider the effects of commitment to simple non-optimal
policies.
   7 Basically the same Poisson calculations in Christiano et al. (2011) appear also in Woodford (2011) and
Eggertsson (2011), although the effects of price flexibility are not their focus and so they do not discuss its
effects.
    8 De Long and Summers (1986) make the point that, for given monetary policy rules, price flexibility may

be destabilizing, even away from a liquidity trap, in the sense of increasing the variance of output.
    9 Of course a symmetric result holds for ∆ < 0. There is a boom in output alongside inflation. The

undesirable boom and inflation are amplified when prices are more flexible, in the sense of a higher κ.




                                                      14
3.3      Elbow Room with a Higher Inflation Target

We now ask whether there are simple policies the central bank can commit to that avoid
the depression and deflation outcomes obtained without commitment. Consider a plan
that keeps inflation and output gap constant at

                                                   1
                     π ( t ) = −r > 0     x (t) = − r > 0         for all t ≥ 0.
                                                   κ

It follows that i (t) = r (t) + π (t), so that i (t) = 0 for t < T while i (t) = r̄ + π̄ > r̄ > 0 for
t ≥ T.
   Although this policy is not optimal, it behaves well in the limit as prices become fully
flexible. Indeed, in this limit as κ → ∞ the output gap converges uniformly to zero while
inflation remains constant. Thus, if we adopt the natural case where λ = λ̄/κ → 0,
the loss function converges to its ideal value of zero, L(κ ) → 0. Compare this to the
dire outcome without commitment in Proposition 2, where the output gap and losses
converge to −∞.
   Just as in the case without commitment, this simple policy sets the nominal interest
rate to zero during the liquidity trap, for t < T. Note that after the trap, for t > T, the
nominal interest rate is actually set to a higher level than the case without commitment.
Thus, the advantages of this simple policy do not hinge on lower nominal interest rates,
but quite the contrary. Higher inflation here coincides with higher nominal interest rates,
due to the Fischer effect. One may still describe the outcome as resulting from looser
monetary policy, but the point is that the kind of monetary easing needed to avoid the
deflation and depression does not require lower equilibrium nominal interest rates. As
we shall see in the next section, the optimal policy with commitment does feature lower,
indeed zero, nominal interest rates.
   This idea is more general. For any path for the natural interest rate {r (t)}, set a con-




                                                 15
stant inflation rate given by
                                        π (t) = π̄ = − min r (t)
                                                           t ≥0

and an output gap of x (t) = x̄ = κ π̄. This plan is feasible with a non-negative nominal
interest rates i (t) ≥ 0. These simple policy capture the main idea behind calls to tol-
erate higher inflation targets that leave more “elbow room” for monetary policy during
liquidity traps (e.g. Summers, 1991; Blanchard et al., 2010). However, given the forward
looking nature of inflation in this model, what is crucial is the commitment to higher in-
flation after the liquidity trap. This contrasts with the conventional argument, where a
higher inflation rate before the trap serves as a precautionary sacrifice for future liquidity
traps.
     It is perhaps surprising that commitment to a simple policy can avoid deflation and
depressed output altogether. Of course, they do so at the expense of inflation and over-
stimulated output. If the required inflation target π̄ or output gap x̄ are large, or if the
duration of the trap T is small, these plans may be quite far from optimal, since they
require a permanent sacrifice for the loss function.10 This motivates the study of optimal
monetary policy which I take up next.



4      Optimal Monetary Policy

I now turn to optimal monetary policy with commitment. The central bank’s problem
is to minimize the objective (2) subject to (1a)–(1c) with both initial values of the states,
π (0) and x (0), free. The problem seeks the most preferable outcome, across all those
compatible with an equilibrium. In what follows I focus on characterizing the optimal
    10 The
         reason the output gap x̄ is strictly positive is the New Keynesian model’s non-vertical long-run
Phillips curve. Some papers have explored modifications of the New Keynesian model that introduce
indexation to past inflation. Some forms of full indexation imply that a constant level of inflation does not
affect output nor welfare. Thus, with the right form of indexation very simple policies may be optimal or
close to optimal. Of course, this is not the case in the present model without indexation.




                                                     16
path for inflation, output and the nominal interest rate.11



4.1      Optimal Interest Rates, Inflation and Output

The problem can be analyzed as an optimal control problem with state (π (t), x (t)) and
control i (t) ≥ 0. The associated Hamiltonian is

                            1 2 1 2
                      H≡      x + λπ + µ x σ−1 (i − r − π ) + µπ (ρπ − κx ) .
                            2    2

The maximum principle implies that the co-state for x must be non-negative throughout
and zero whenever the nominal interest rate is strictly positive


                                                   µ x (t) ≥ 0,                                            (3a)

                                               i (t)µ x (t) = 0.                                           (3b)


The law of motion for the co-states are


                                   µ̇ x (t) = − x (t) + κµπ (t) + ρµ x (t),                                (3c)

                                  µ̇π (t) = −λπ (t) + σ−1 µ x (t).                                        (3d)


Finally, because both initial states are free, we have


                                                 µ x (0) = 0,                                              (3e)

                                                 µπ (0) = 0.                                               (3f)
  11 I do not dedicate much discussion to the question of implementation, in terms of a choice of (pos-
sibly time varying) policy functions that would make the optimum a unique equilibrium. It is well
understood that, once the optimum is computed, a time varying interest rate rule of the form i (t) =
i∗ (t) + ψ(π (t) − π ∗ (t)) + ψ( x (t) − x ∗ (t)) ensures that this optimum is the unique local equilibrium. Eg-
gertsson and Woodford (2003) propose a different policy, described in terms of an adjusting target for a
weighted average of output and the price level, that also implements the equilibrium uniquely.




                                                      17
Taken together, equations (1a)–(1c) and (3a)–(3f) constitute a system for {π (t), x (t), i (t),
µπ (t), µ x (t)}t∈[0,∞) . Since the optimization problem is strictly convex, these conditions,
together with appropriate transversality conditions, are both necessary and sufficient for
an optimum. Indeed, the optimum coincides with the unique bounded solution to this
system.
   Suppose the zero-bound constraint is not binding over some interval t ∈ [t1 , t2 ]. Then
it must be the case that µ x (t) = µ̇ x (t) = 0 for t ∈ [t1 , t2 ], so that condition (3c) implies
x (t) = κµπ (t), while condition (3d) implies µ̇π (t) = −λπ (t). As a result,


                     ẋ (t) = κ µ̇π (t) = −κλπ (t) = σ−1 (i (t) − r (t) − π (t)).


Solving for i (t) gives
                                            i (t) = I (π (t), r (t)),

where
                                        I (π, r ) ≡ r (t) + (1 − κσλ)π,

is a function that gives the optimal nominal rate whenever the zero-bound is not binding.
This is the interest rate condition derived in the traditional analysis that assumes the ZLB
never binds (see e.g. Clarida, Gali and Gertler, 1999, pg. 1683). Note that this rate equals
the natural rate when inflation is zero, I (0, r ) = r. Thus, it encompasses the well-known
price stability result from basic New-Keynesian models. Away from zero inflation, the
interest rate generally departs from the natural rate, unless σλκ = 1.
   Given this result, it follows that I ∗ (π ∗ (t), r (t)) ≥ 0 is a necessary condition for the
zero-bound not to bind. The converse, however, is not true.

Proposition 3. Suppose {π ∗ (t), x ∗ (t), i∗ (t)} is optimal. Then at any point in time t either
i∗ (t) = I (π ∗ (t), r (t)) or i∗ (t) = 0. Moreover


               I (π ∗ (t), r (t)) < 0     for t ∈ [t0 , t1 ) =⇒ i∗ (t) = 0   for t ∈ [t0 , t2 ]

                                                       18
with t2 > t1 .

   According to this result, the nominal interest rate should be held down at zero longer
than what current inflation warrants. That is, the optimal path for the nominal interest
rate is not the upper envelope


                               i∗ (t) 6= max{0, I (π ∗ (t), r (t))}.


Instead, the nominal interest rate should be set below this envelope for some time, at zero.
   The notion that committing to future monetary easing is beneficial in a liquidity trap
was first put forth by Krugman (1998). His analysis captures the benefits from future
inflation only. It is based on a cash-in-advance model where prices cannot adjust within
a period, but are fully flexible between periods. The first best is obtained by committing
to money growth and inducing higher future inflation. Thus, inflation is easily obtained
and costless in the model. Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) work with the same New
Keynesian model as I do here. They report numerical simulations where a prolonged
period of zero interest rates are optimal. My result provides the first formal explanation
for these patterns. It also clarifies that the relevant comparison for the nominal interest
rate i∗ (t) is the unconstrained optimum I (π ∗ (t), r (t)), not the natural rate r (t); the two
are not equivalent, unless κσλ = 1. The continuous time framework employed here helps
capture the bang-bang nature of the solution. A discrete-time setting can obscure things
due to time aggregation.
   One interesting implication of my result is that the optimal exit strategy features a
discrete jump in the nominal interest rate. Whenever the zero-bound stops binding the
nominal interest must equal I (π ∗ (t), r (t)), which given Proposition 3, will generally be
strictly positive. Thus, optimal policy requires a discrete upward jump, from zero, in
the nominal interest rate. Even when economic fundamentals vary smoothly, so that
I (π ∗ (t), r (t)) is continuous, the best exit strategy calls for a discontinuous hike in the


                                                19
nominal interest rate.
   The previous result characterizes nominal interest rates, but what can be said about
the paths for inflation and output? This question is important for a number of reasons.
First, output and inflation are of direct concern, since they determine welfare. In contrast,
the nominal interest rate is merely an instrument to influence output and inflation. Sec-
ond, as in most monetary models, the equilibrium outcome is not uniquely determined
by the equilibrium path for the nominal interest rate. A central bank wishing to imple-
ment the optimum needs to know more than the path for the nominal interest rate. For
example, the central bank may employ a Taylor rule centered around the target path for
inflation i (t) = i∗ (t) + ψ(π (t) − π ∗ (t)) with ψ > 1. Finally, understanding the outcome
for inflation and output sheds light on the kind of policy commitment required.
   The next proposition provides results for inflation and output. Inflation must be pos-
itive at some point in time. Indeed, in some cases, inflation is always positive, despite
the liquidity trap. Output, on the other hand, must switch signs. Thus, a future boom in
output is created, but the initial recession is never completely avoided.

Proposition 4. Suppose the first-best outcome is not attainable and that {π ∗ (t), x ∗ (t), i∗ (t)}
is optimal. Then inflation must be strictly positive at some point in time. Output is initially
negative, but becomes strictly positive at some point. If κσλ = 1 then inflation is initially zero
and is nonnegative throughout, π ∗ (0) = 0 and π ∗ (t) ≥ 0 for all t ≥ 0.

   There are two things optimal monetary policy accomplishes. First and most obvious,
it promotes inflation. This helps mitigate the deflationary spiral during the liquidity trap.
Lower deflation, or even inflation, lowers the real rate of interest, which is the true root of
the problem in a liquidity trap. Second, due to the non-neutrality of money, it stimulates
future output, after the trap. This percolates back in time, increasing output during the
trap. Anticipating a boom, consumers lower their saving and increase current consump-
tion, mitigating the negative output gap.
   In this model the two goals are related, since inflation requires a boom in output. Thus,

                                                20
pursuing the first goal already leads, incidentally, to the second, and vice versa. Impor-
tantly, the nominal interest rate path implied by Proposition 3 stimulates a larger boom
than that required by the inflation promise. To see this, suppose that along the optimal
plan I (π ∗ (t), r (t)) ≥ 0 for t ≥ t1 , and I (π ∗ (t), r (t)) < 0 otherwise. The optimal plan then
calls for i∗ (t) = 0 over some interval t ∈ [t1 , t2 ]. However, consider an alternative plan
that has the same inflation at t1 , so that π (t1 ) = π ∗ (t1 ), but, in contradiction with Propo-
sition 3, features i (t) = I (π (t), r (t)) for all t ≥ t1 .12 Suppose also that, for both plans,
the long-run output gap is zero: limt→∞ x (t) = limt→∞ x ∗ (t) = 0. It then follows that
x (t1 ) < x ∗ (t1 ). In this sense, holding down the interest rate to zero stimulates a boom
that is greater than the one implied by the inflation promise.
    Figure 2 plots the equilibrium paths for a numerical example. The parameters are set
to T = 2, σ = 1, κ = .5 and λ = 1/κ. These choices are made for illustrative purposes
and to ensure that κσλ = 1. They do not represent a calibration. The choices are tilted
towards a flexible price situation. Relative to the New Keynesian literature, the degree of
price stickiness is low (high κ) and the planner is quite tolerant of inflation (low λ). It is
also common to set a lower value for σ, on the grounds that investment, which may be
quite sensitive to the interest rate, has been omitted from the analysis.
    The black line represents the equilibrium with discretion; the blue line, the optimum
with commitment. With discretion output is initial depressed by about 11%, at the op-
timum this is reduced to just under 4%. The optimum features a boom which peaks at
about 3% at t = T. The discretionary case features significant deflation. In contrast, be-
cause κσλ = 1 optimal inflation starts at zero and is always positive. Both paths end at
origin, which represents the ideal first-best outcome. However, although the optimum
reaches it later at T̂ = 2.7, it circles around it, managing to stay closer to it on average.
This improves welfare.
  12 Note that, depending on the value of κσλ, the interest rate may even be greater than the natural rate
r (t). The fact that this policy is consistent with positive inflation and output after the trap even though
it may have higher interest rates than the discretionary solution underscores, once again, that monetary
easing does not necessarily manifest itself in lower equilibrium interest rates.


                                                    21
               0.04



                  0



             −0.04



             −0.08



             −0.12
                         −0.04            −0.02              0              0.02

Figure 2: A numerical example showing the full discretion case (black) and optimal com-
mitment case (blue).

   One implication of Proposition 4 is that, whenever the first best is unattainable, op-
timal monetary policy requires commitment. Output is initially negative x ∗ (0) ≤ 0, but
must turn strictly positive x ∗ (t0 ) > 0 at some future date for t0 > 0. This implies that, if
the planner can reoptimize and make a new credible plan at time t0 , then this new plan
would involve initially negative output x ∗ (t0 ) ≤ 0. Hence, it cannot coincide with the
original plan which called for positive output.
   Note that the kind of commitment needed in this model involves more than a promise
for future inflation, at time T, as in Krugman (1998). Indeed, my discussion here em-
phasizes commitment to an output boom. More generally, the planning problem features
both π and x as state variables, so commitment to deliver promises for both inflation and
output are generally required.
   Proposition 4 highlights the case with κσλ = 1, where inflation starts and ends at zero
and is positive throughout. This case occurs when the costate µπ (t) on the Phillips curve
is zero for all t ≥ 0. This case turns out to be an interesting benchmark. Numerical results



                                              22
show the following pattern, which I state as a conjecture.13

Conjecture. Suppose {π ∗ (t), x ∗ (t), i∗ (t)} is optimal and not equal to the first best. If κσλ < 1
then π ∗ (t) > 0 for all t. If κσλ > 1 then π ∗ (0) < 0.

    Liquidity traps are commonly associated with deflation, but these results suggest that
the optimum completely avoids deflation in some cases. This is more likely to be the case
if prices are less flexible (low κ ), if the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is high (low
σ), or if the central bank is not too concerned about inflation (low λ). Note that if we set
λ = λ̄/κ, then κσλ = λσ, so the degree of price flexibility κ drops out of the condition
determining the sign of initial inflation. In the other case, when κσλ < 1, the optimum
does feature deflation initially, but transitions through a period of positive inflation as
shown by Proposition 4. Numerical simulations return to deflation and a negative output
gap.
    It is worth noting that prolonged zero nominal interest rates are not needed to pro-
mote positive inflation and stimulate output after the trap. Indeed, there are equilibria
with both features and a nominal interest rate path given by i (t) = max{0, I (π (t), r (t))}.
In the liquidity trap scenario, the same is true for the interest rate path considered under
pure discretion, i (t) = 0 for t < T and i (t) = r (t) for t ≥ T. Without commitment,
a unique equilibrium was obtained by adding the condition that the first best outcome
π (t) = x (t) = 0 was implemented for t ≥ T. However, positive inflation and output,
π ( T ), x ( T ) ≥ 0 are also compatible with this very same interest rate path. This is possi-
ble because equilibrium outcomes are not uniquely determined by equilibrium nominal
interest rates. Policy may still be described as one of monetary easing, even if this is not
necessarily reflected in equilibrium nominal interest rates.14
  13 I verified this conjecture numerically for a very wide set of the parameter values in the step-wise liq-

uidity trap scenario. My procedure solves the optimum in near closed form as a solution to an ODE with
boundary conditions. Thus, it is very fast, essentially instantaneous for a single parametrization. This
makes checking the conjecture automatically over a large set of parameters feasible. To do so, for each pa-
rameter I set up a dense and wide grid of values. Using loops, I then had the conjecture checked over the
Cartesian product of these grids.
  14 To be specific, suppose policy is determined endogenously according to a simple Taylor rule, with a



                                                     23
4.2    A Simple Case: Fully Rigid Prices

To gain intuition it helps to consider the extreme case with fully rigid prices, where κ = 0
and π (t) = 0 for all t ≥ 0.15 Consider the liquidity trap scenario, where r (t) < 0 for t < T
and r (t) > 0 for t > T, and suppose we keep the nominal interest rate at zero until some
time T̂ ≥ T, and implement x (t) = π (t) = 0 after T̂. Output is then

                                                               ˆ        T̂
                                                         −1
                                        x (t; T̂ ) ≡ σ                       r (s)ds.
                                                                    t


Note that if T̂ = T then x (t, T ) < 0 for t < T, a special case of Proposition 1. More
generally, output rises up to time T, and then falls and reaches zero at time T̂. Higher T̂
increases the path for output x (·, T̂ ) in a parallel fashion, so that, as long as T̂ is greater
than T, but not too large, output starts out strictly negative and then turns strictly positive
for a while. Larger values of T̂ shrink the initially negative output gaps, but lead to larger
positive gaps later.
    It follows that, starting from T̂ = T an increase in T̂ improves welfare, since the loses
from creating positive output gaps are second order, while the gains from reducing the
pre-existing negative output gaps are first order. More formally, the optimum minimizes
                           ´∞
the objective V ( T̂ ) ≡ 12 0 e−ρt x (t; T̂ )2 dt, implying

                                                         ˆ   T̂ ∗
                               0   ∗          ∗     −1
                             V ( T̂ ) = r ( T̂ )σ                   e−ρt x (t; T̂ ∗ )dt = 0.
                                                         0


It follows that T < T̂ ∗ < T̄ where x (0, T̄ ) = 0. Monetary easing goes beyond the liquidity
trap, but stops short of preventing a recession. Indeed, the optimality condition implies
time varying intercept, i (t) = ī (t) + φπ π (t) with φπ > 1. In the unique bounded equilibrium, a temporarily
low value for ī (t) typically leads to higher inflation π (t), but not necessarily a lower equilibrium interest
rate i (t). The outcome for the nominal interest rate i (t) depends on various parameters. Either way, the
situation with temporarily low ī (t) may be described as one of “monetary easing”.
   15 The same conditions we will obtain for κ = 0 here can be obtained if we consider the limit of the general

optimality conditions derived above as κ → 0. However, it is more revealing to derive the optimality
condition from a separate perturbation argument.




                                                         24
                                              ´
that the present value of output is zero          e−ρt x (t)dt = 0, so that the recession and the
subsequent boom average out.
      Thus, with fully rigid prices the promise to hold nominal interest rates at zero longer
is optimal because it creates an output boom that peaks at time T and helps mitigate the
earlier recession. Inflation is zero regardless of monetary policy in this extreme case, so
it isolates only one of the two motives for monetary easing discussed in the previous
subsection. In this sense, it is the polar opposite of Krugman’s example, which isolated
the inflationary motive only. Next I turn to a graphical analysis of intermediate cases,
where both motives are present.



4.3     Stitching a Solution Together: A Graphical Representation

To see the solution graphically, consider the particular liquidity trap scenario with the
step function path for the natural rate of interest: r (t) = r < 0 for t < T but r (t) = r̄ ≥ 0
for t ≥ T. It is useful to break up the solution into three separate phases, from back to
front. I first consider the solution after some time T̂ > T when the ZLB constraint is no
longer binding (Phase III). I then consider the solution between time T and T̂ with the
ZLB constraint (Phase II). Finally, I consider the solution during the trap t ∈ [0, T ] (Phase
I).


After the Storm: Slack ZLB Constraint (Phase III).            Consider the problem where the
ZLB constraint is ignored, or no longer binding. If this were true for all time t ≥ 0 then
the solution would be the first best π (t) = x (t) = 0. However, here I am concerned with
a situation where the ZLB constraint is slack only after some date T̂ > T > 0, at which
point the state (π ( T̂ ), x ( T̂ )) is given and no longer free, so the first best is generally not
feasible.
      The planning problem now ignores the ZLB constraint but takes the initial state (π0 , x0 )
as given. Because the ZLB constraint is absent, the constraint representing the Euler equa-


                                                  25
tion is not binding. Thus, it is appropriate to ignore this constraint and drop the output
gap x (t) as a state variable, treating it as a control variable instead. The only remain-
ing state is inflation π (t).16 Also note that the path of the natural interest rate {r (t)} is
irrelevant when the ZLB constraint is ignored.
    I seek a solution for output x as a function of inflation π. Using the optimality con-
ditions with µ x (t) = 0 one can show that i (t) = I ∗ (π (t), r (t)) as discussed earlier, with
output satisfying
                                                  x (t) = φπ (t)
                                                           √
                            φ                         ρ+       ρ2 +4λκ 2
and costate µπ (t) =        κ π ( t ),   where φ ≡             2κ          so that φ > ρ/κ. The last inequality
implies that the ray x = φπ is steeper than that for π̇ = 0. Thus, starting with any
initial value of π the solution converges over time along the loci x = φπ to the origin
(π (t), x (t)) → (0, 0). These dynamics are illustrated in Figure 3.


Just out of the Trap (Phase II). Consider next the problem for t ≥ T incorporating the
ZLB constraint for any arbitrary starting point (π ( T ), x ( T )). The problem is stationary
since r (t) = r̄ > 0 for t ≥ T.
    If the initial state lies on the loci x = φπ, then the solution coincides with the one
above. This is essentially also the case when the initial state satisfies x < φπ, since one can
engineer an upward jump in x to reach the loci x = φπ.17 After this jump, one proceeds
with the solution that ignores the ZLB constraint. In contrast, the optimum features an
initial state that satisfies x > φπ. Intuitively, the optimum attempts to reach the red line
as quickly as possible, by setting the nominal interest rate to zero until x = φπ.
  16 One   can pick any absolutely continuous path for x (t) and solve for the required nominal interest rate
as a residual: i (t) = σ ẋ (t) + π (t) + r (t). Discontinuous paths for x (t) can be approximated arbitrarily
well by continuous ones. Intuitively, it is as if discontinuous paths for { x (t)} are possible, since upward
or downward jumps in x (t) can be engineered by setting the interest rate to ∞ or −∞ for an infinitesimal
moment in time. Formally, the supremum for the problem that ignores the ZLB constraint, but carries both
π (t) and x (t) as states, is independent of the current value of x (t). Since the current value of x (t) does not
meaningfully constrain the planning problem, it can be ignored as a state variable.
   17 For example, set i ( t ) = ∆/ε > 0 for a short period of time [0, ε ) and choose ∆ so that x ( ε ) = φπ ( ε ). As

ε ↓ 0 this approximates an upward jump up to the x = φπ loci at t = 0.


                                                           26
                        x



                                               x = φπ




                                                  π
                            0




   Figure 3: The solution without the ZLB constraint.


                        x

              ẋ = 0
                                               x = φπ



                                               π̇ = 0

                                                  π
             −r̄            0




Figure 4: The solution for t > T with the ZLB constraint.


                                27
                                         x

                                                          ẋ = 0
                                                                   x = φπ



                                                                   π̇ = 0

                                                                     π
                                             0            −r




  Figure 5: The solution for t ≤ T and r (t) = −r̄ < 0 with the ZLB constraint binding.

   These dynamics are illustrated in Figure 3 using the phase diagram implied by the
system (1a)–(1b) with i (t) = 0. The steady state with ẋ = π̇ = 0 involves deflation and a
                                                      ρ
negative output gap: π = −r̄ < 0 and x = − κ r̄ < 0. As a result, for inflation rates near
zero the output gap falls over time. As before, the red line denotes the loci x = φπ, for
the solution to the problem ignoring the ZLB constraint. For two initial values satisfying
x > φπ, the figure shows the trajectories in green implied by the system (1a)–(1b) with
i (t) = 0. Along these paths x (t) and π (t) fall over time, eventually reaching the loci
x = φπ. After this point, the state follows the solution ignoring the ZLB constraint,
staying on the x = φπ line and converges towards the origin.


During the Liquidity Trap (Phase I)    During the liquidity trap t ≤ T the ZLB constraint
binds and i (t) = 0. The dynamics are illustrated in Figure 5 using the phase diagram
implied by equations (1a) and (1b) setting i (t) = 0. For reference, the red line denoting
the optimum ignoring the ZLB constraint is also show.


                                                 28
   Unlike the previous case, the steady state ẋ = π̇ = 0 for this system now has positive
                                                                      ρ
inflation and a positive output gap: π = −r > 0 and x = − κ r > 0. In contrast to the
previous phase diagram, also featuring i (t) = 0, for inflation rates near zero the output
gap rises over time. Two trajectories are shown in green. Both trajectories start at t = 0
below the red line are above it at t = T. In one case the inflation rate is initially negative,
while in the other it is positive. In both cases the output gap is initially negative and
becomes positive some time before t = T.
   Figure 6 puts the three phases together to display two possible optimal paths for all
t ≥ 0. The two trajectories illustrated in the figure are quite representative and illustrate
the possibilities described in Proposition 4.
   As these figures suggest one can prove that the nominal interest rate should be kept
at zero past T. The following proposition follows from Proposition 3 and elements of the
dynamics captured by the phase diagrams.

Proposition 5. Consider the liquidity trap scenario with r (t) = r < 0 for t < T and r (t) = r̄ >
0 for t ≥ T. Suppose the path {π ∗ (t), x ∗ (t), i∗ (t)} is optimal. Then there exists a T̂ > T such
that
                                     i (t) = 0      ∀t ∈ [0, T̂ ].

   There are two ways of summarizing the optimal plan. In the first, the central bank
commits to a zero nominal interest rate during the liquidity trap, for t ∈ [0, T ]. It also
makes a commitment to an inflation rate and output gap target (π ∗ ( T ), x ∗ ( T )) after the
trap. However, note that here
                                        x ∗ ( T ) > φπ ∗ ( T )

so that the promised boom in output is higher than that implied by the inflation promise.
Commitment to a target at time T is needed not just in terms of inflation, but also in terms
of the output gap.
   Another way of characterizing policy is as follows. The central bank commits to set-


                                                 29
                                             x



                                                                        x = φπ



                                                                        π̇ = 0

                                                                           π
                                                 0




                    Figure 6: Two possible paths of the solution for t ≥ 0.

ting a zero interest rate at zero for longer than the liquidity trap, so that i (t) = 0 for
t ∈ [0, T̂ ] with T̂ > T. It also commits to implementing an inflation rate π ( T̂ ) upon exit of
the ZLB, at time T̂. In this case, no further commitment regarding x ( T̂ ) is required, since
x ( T̂ ) = φπ ( T̂ ) is ex-post optimal given the promised π ( T̂ ). Note that the level of inflation
promised in this case may be positive or negative, depending on the sign of 1 − κσλ. A
commitment to positive inflation once interest rates become positive is not necessarily a
feature of all optimum.



5    Government Spending: Opportunistic and Stimulus

I now introduce government spending as an additional instrument. I first consider the
full optimum over both fiscal and monetary policy. I then turn to a more restricted case,
where monetary policy is conducted with complete discretion and is, thus, suboptimal.
Fiscal policy, on the other hand, is chosen with commitment. This captures the notion that,


                                                     30
for both technical and political reasons, announcements of future government spending
may be more credible than those for monetary policy. Finally, I briefly discuss the case
where both fiscal and monetary policy are conducted with full discretion.
   The planning problem is now

                           ˆ   ∞
                       1                                                        
               min                 e−ρt (c(t) + (1 − Γ) g(t))2 + λπ (t)2 + ηg(t)2 dt
               c,π,i,g 2   0

subject to


                                   ċ(t) = σ−1 (i (t) − r (t) − π (t))

                                   π̇ (t) = ρπ (t) − κ (c(t) + (1 − Γ) g(t))

                                    i (t) ≥ 0


                                                x (0), π (0) free.

Here the constants satisfy η > 0 and Γ ∈ (0, 1); the variable c(t) = (C (t) − C ∗ (t))/C ∗ (t) ≈
log(C (t)) − log(C ∗ (t)) represents the private consumption gap, while g(t) = ( G (t) −
G ∗ (t))/C ∗ (t) represents the government consumption gap, normalized by private con-
sumption.
   The coefficient Γ ∈ (0, 1) represents the first best, or flexible-price equilibrium, gov-
ernment spending multiplier, i.e. for each unit increase in spending, output increases
by Γ units, consumption is reduced by 1 − Γ units. The loss function captures this, be-
cause given spending g, the ideal consumption level is c = −(1 − Γ) g. The Phillips curve
shows that c = −(1 − Γ) g also corresponds to a situation with zero inflation, replicating
the flexible-price equilibrium.
   The potential usefulness of the additional spending instrument g can be easily seen
noting that spending can zero out the first two quadratic terms in the loss function, en-
suring c(t) + (1 − Γ) g(t) = π (t) = 0 for all t ≥ 0. This requires a particular path for



                                                       31
spending satisfying
                                                      σ −1
                                        ġ(t) =            (r (t) − i (t)).
                                                      1−Γ

For simplicity, suppose we set i (t) = 0 for t < T and i (t) = r (t) for t ≥ T. Then spending
is declining for t < T and given by

                                                             ˆ
                                          σ −1                    t
                                   g(t) =                             r (s)ds + g(0).
                                          1−Γ                 0


After this, spending is flat g(t) = g( T ) for t ≥ T. To minimize the quadratic loss from
spending, the optimal initial value g(0) is set to ensures that g(t) takes on both signs:
g(0) is positive and g( T ) is negative. The same is true for consumption, since c(t) =
−(1 − Γ) g(t).
   Although this plan is not optimal, it is suggestive that optimal spending may take on
both positive and negative values during a liquidity trap. We prove this result in the next
subsection.



5.1   The Optimal Pattern for Spending

It will be useful to transform the planning problem by a change variables. In fact, I will
use two transformations. Each has its own advantages.
   For the first transformation, define the output gap x (t) ≡ c(t) + (1 − Γ) g(t). The plan-
ning problem becomes

                                   ˆ    ∞
                               1                −ρt
                                                      
                                                             2               2          2
                                                                                            
                       min                  e             x (t) + λπ (t) + ηg(t)                dt
                       x,π,i,g 2    0




                                                             32
subject to


                        ẋ (t) = (1 − Γ) ġ(t) + σ−1 (i (t) − r (t) − π (t))

                        π̇ (t) = ρπ (t) − κx (t)

                         i (t) ≥ 0


                                        x (0), π (0) free.

This is an optimal control problem with i (t) and g(t) as controls and x and π as states.
According to the objective, the ideal level of government spending, given the state vari-
ables x (t) and π (t), is always zero, g(t). However, because spending also appears in the
constraints, it may help relax them. In particular, spending enters the constraint associ-
ated with the consumer’s Euler equation. Indeed, the change in spending ġ(t) plays a
role that is analogous to the nominal interest rate i (t). Unlike the latter, the former is not
restricted to being nonnegative.
     Since government spending relaxes the Euler equation, it should be zero whenever the
zero-bound constraint is not binding, which is the case whenever i (t) > 0. Conversely, if
the zero-bound constraint binds and i (t) = 0 then government spending is not generally
zero. As the next proposition shows, spending is initially positive, then becomes negative,
and finally returns to zero.

Proposition 6. Suppose the zero lower bound binds over the interval (t0 , t1 ) and is slack in a
neighborhood outside it. Then g(t0 ) > 0, g(t1 ) = 0 with g(t) < 0 for t < t1 in a neighborhood
of t1 .

     This result confirms the notion that government spending should be front loaded. It
may seem surprising, however, that optimal spending takes on both positive and negative
values. The intuition is as follows. Initially, higher spending helps compensate for the
negative consumption gap at the start of a liquidity trap. However, recall that optimal


                                                33
                 0.03

                 0.02

                 0.01

                    0

               −0.01

               −0.02

               −0.03

               −0.04
                          0           0   0      0.01     0.01     0.01

Figure 7: A numerical example. The optimum without spending (blue) vs. the optimum
with spending for output (red) and consumption (orange).

monetary policy eventually engineers a consumption boom. If government spending
leans against the wind, we should expect lower spending. The next subsection refines
this intuition by decomposing spending into an opportunistic and a stimulus component.
   Figure 7 provides a numerical example, following the same parametrization used for
the example in Section 4, with the additional parameters Γ = 0.5 and η = .5. The figure
shows both consumption and output. As we see from the figure consumption is not as
affected as output is in this case.



5.2   Opportunistic vs. Stimulus Spending

Even a shortsighted government that ignores dynamic general equilibrium effects on the
private sector, finds reasons to increase government spending during a slump. When the
economy is depressed, the wage, or shadow wage, is lowered. This provides a cheap
opportunity for government consumption.
   Based on this notion, I define an opportunistic component of spending, the level that



                                          34
is optimal from a simple static, cost-benefit calculation. I then define the stimulus compo-
nent of spending as the difference between actual spending and the opportunistic com-
ponent. More precisely, given private consumption c, define opportunistic spending by
minimizing the loss function,

                                         n                      o
                         g∗ (c) ≡ arg max (c + (1 − Γ) g)2 + ηg2 ,
                                                  g



Define stimulus spending as the difference between actual and opportunistic spending,


                                              ĝ(t) ≡ g(t) − g∗ (c(t)).


Note that
                                                            1−Γ
                                               g∗ (c) = −       ψc,
                                                             η

                                              c + (1 − Γ) g∗ (c) = ψc,

with the constant ψ ≡ η/ η + (1 − Γ)2
                                                      
                                                          ∈ (0, 1). Thus, opportunistic spending leans
against the wind, ψ < 1, but does not close the gap, ψ > 0.
   Using these transformations, I rewrite the planning problem as

                                      ˆ   ∞
                                  1                                           
                        min                   e−ρt c(t)2 + λ̂π (t)2 + η̂ ĝ(t)2 dt
                       x̂,π,i, ĝ 2   0


subject to


                             ċ(t) = σ−1 (i (t) − r (t) − π (t))

                            π̇ (t) = ρπ (t) − κ (ψc(t) + (1 − Γ) ĝ(t))

                             i (t) ≥ 0,


                                                  c(0), π (0) free.



                                                          35
where λ̂ = λ/ψ and η̂ = η/ψ2 . According to the loss function, the ideal level of stimulus
spending is zero. However, stimulus may help relax the Phillips curve constraint.
   This problem is almost identical to the problem without spending. The only new
optimality condition is
                                                 κ (1 − Γ )
                                       ĝ(t) =              µ π ( t ).                                (4)
                                                      η̂

This gives a first result. Unlike total spending, stimulus spending is initially zero.

Proposition 7. Stimulus spending is always initially zero ĝ(0) = 0.

   Thus, total spending at the start of a liquidity trap is entirely opportunistic.18
   To say more, note that the costate for the Phillips curve, unlike the costate for the Euler
equation, is not restricted to being nonnegative and the path it takes actually depends on
parameters. Indeed, my main result for stimulus spending exploits this fact, providing a
benchmark where stimulus spending is always zero.

Proposition 8. Suppose κσλ = 1. Then at an optimum ĝ(t) = 0 for all t ≥ 0.

   Thus, under the conditions of the proposition, spending is entirely determined by its
opportunistic considerations. It is as if spending were chosen by a purely static cost-
benefit calculation, with no regards for its dynamic general equilibrium impact on the
economy. By implication, in this case government spending could be determined by a
naive agency, lacking commitment, that performs a static cost-benefit calculation, ignor-
ing the dynamic effects this has on the private sector.
   Figure 8 displays the optimal paths for total, opportunistic and stimulus spending for
our numerical example (with the same parameters as those behind Figure 7). Spending
starts at 2% of output above it’s efficient level. It then falls at a steady state reaching
  18 Another implication of equation (4) is that stimulus spending, unlike total spending, may be nonzero
even when the zero lower bound constraint is not currently binding and will never bind in the future. This
occurs whenever inflation is nonzero. Indeed, since total spending must be zero, stimulus spending must
be canceling out opportunistic spending. This makes sense. If we have promised positive inflation, for
example, then we require a positive gap. Opportunistic spending would call for lower spending, but doing
so would frustrate stimulating the promised inflation.


                                                    36
                 0.08


                 0.06


                 0.04


                 0.02


                    0


                 -0.02

                         0            1                  2                 3

Figure 8: Total spending (blue), opportunistic spending (green) and stimulus spending
(red) for a numerical example. Both the case with monetary commitment (circles) and
discretion (triangles) are shown.

almost 2% below its efficient level of output. In this example, spending is virtually all
opportunistic. Stimulus spending is virtually zero.
   Away from this benchmark, numerical simulations show that stimulus starts at zero, it
has a sinusoidal shape, switching signs once. When κσλ > 1 it first becomes positive, then
turns negative, eventually asymptoting to zero from below; when κσλ < 1 the reverse
pattern obtains: first negative, then turns positive, eventually asymptoting to zero from
above. In most cases, stimulus spending is a small component of total spending.
   The results highlight that positive stimulus spending is just not a robust feature of
the optimum for this model. Opportunistic spending does affect private consumption,
by affecting the path for inflation. In particular, by leaning against the wind, it promotes
price stability, mitigates both deflations and inflations. However, the effects are inciden-
tal, in that they would be obtained by a policy maker choosing spending that ignores
these effects.




                                            37
6      Spending with Discretionary Monetary Policy

I now relax the assumption of full commitment and consider a mixed case, where mon-
etary policy is discretionary, as in Section 3, while government spending is carried out
with commitment during the trap.
     More specifically, consider the liquidity trap scenario, where r (t) < 0 for t < T and
r (t) ≥ 0 for t ≥ T. Once the liquidity trap is over, monetary policy will implement the
flexible-price equilibrium, so that c(t) + (1 − Γ) g(t) = 0 and π (t) = 0 for all t ≥ T.
During the trap, the nominal interest rate is set to zero, i (t) = 0 for t < T. In contrast,
the government spending can be credibly announced, at least for some time. I initially
assume that spending after T is chosen with discretion, implying that g(t) = 0 for t ≥ T.
I then consider the case with commitment on the entire path for government spending,
for all t ∈ [0, ∞).
     Government spending may be a powerful tool in this scenario. Absent spending, de-
flation and depression prevail. But, as I argued above, spending can avoid both, achieving
a zero output gap and inflation rate, c(t) + (1 − Γ) g(t) = π (t) = 0 for all t ≥ 0. It does so
by filling in the gap left by consumption. Of course, this simple plan is suboptimal. Next,
I study optimal spending commitments.



6.1      Commitment to spending during the liquidity trap

The planning problem is essentially the same as before19 with the additional constraint
that
                                          π ( T ) = c( T ) = 0.
    19 Except
          that we may impose i (t) = 0 for t < T since this is chosen by the monetary authority. However,
the optimum will also feature this interest rate path.




                                                   38
Once again the optimality condition gives

                                                  κ (1 − Γ )
                                      ĝ(t) =                µπ (t)
                                                       η̂

with the law of motion for the co-states as before. Thus, just as before, stimulus spending
is initially zero.
   It is difficult to formally characterize the rest of the solution. I make progress by con-
sidering small stimulus spending interventions, starting from spending. Specifically, con-
sider appending the constraint

                                       ˆ    ∞
                                                e−ρt g(t)2 dt ≤ G,
                                        0


to the planning problem. Here G is a parameter. Setting G = 0 implies the no commit-
ment outcome, without spending or stimulus, which involves deflation and depression.
For G > 0 large enough the constraint no longer binds. The idea is to characterize the
optimum for small enough G > 0. This allows us to use the above formula for spending,
with the costates evaluated at the original no spending and no discretion equilibrium.

Proposition 9. ĝ(0) = 0. For small enough G > 0, ĝ(t) ≥ 0 and is strictly increasing in t.
Moreover, total spending is positive g(t) > 0 for all t ∈ [0, T ).

   Simulations support that this pattern generally carries over for the case where G is
chosen freely. Figure 8 confirms this for the numerical example from the previous sec-
tions. In this example, total spending is quite large and relatively flat. As opportunistic
spending falls, stimulus spending rises and compensates.



6.2    Commitment to spending after the liquidity trap

I now relax the assumption that fiscal policy cannot commit past T. Thus, I now consider
a situation where spending is chosen for the entire future { g(t)}∞
                                                                  t=0 , allowing for g ( t ) 6 = 0


                                                     39
for t ≥ T.
   This problem can be simplified by looking at the subproblem from t ≥ T. Clearly for
any positive consumption c( T ) > 0 the optimum calls for i (t) = 0 and g(t) = g̃(t) for
t ∈ [ T, T + ∆] and g(t) for t > T + ∆, where

                                                                               ˆ
                                                           σ −1                    t
                                  g̃(t) = −(1 − Γ)c( T ) +                             r (s)ds
                                                           1−Γ                     T


and ∆ is defined so that g̃( T + ∆) = 0. Such a plan implies a tail cost

                                                         ˆ    ∆
                                       Ψ(c( T )) ≡ η              e−ρs η g̃( T + s)2 ds.
                                                          0


The planning problem can be rewritten as

                              ˆ   T
                          1                                           
                min                   e−ρt c(t)2 + λ̂π (t)2 + η̂ ĝ(t)2 dt + e−ρT Ψ(c( T ))
               x̂,π,i, ĝ 2   0


subject to


                                      ċ(t) = σ−1 (i (t) − r (t) − π (t))

                                  π̇ (t) = ρπ (t) − κ (ψc(t) + (1 − Γ) ĝ(t))

                                      i (t) ≥ 0,


                                                        π ( T ) = 0.

Under this formulation c( T ) is a free variable, but the planner incurs a cost Ψ(c( T )). The
new optimality condition (replacing c( T ) = 0) is the transversality condition


                                                   µc ( T ) = Ψ0 (c( T )).


A similar result applies in this case. For a small intervention, stimulus spending is pos-


                                                              40
itive and increasing. Now, however, spending after the trap is negative, to promote a
boom in consumption c( T ), which helps raise the level of consumption at earlier dates,
during the trap.



7       Conclusion

This paper has revisited monetary policy during a liquidity trap. The continuous time
setup up offers some distinct advantages in terms of the analysis and results that are
obtained. Some of my results support the findings from prior work based on simulations.
Pptimal monetary policy in the model is engineered to promote inflation and an output
boom. It does so, in part, by commiting to holding the nominal interest rate at zero for an
extended period of time.
    To the best of my knowledge, my results on government spending have no clear paral-
lel in the literature. In particular, the decomposition between opportunistic and stimulus
spending is novel and leads to unexpected results.
    When both fiscal and monetary policy are coordinated, I find that optimal govern-
ment spending starts at a positive level, but declines and become negative. However, I
show that most of these dynamics are explained by a cost-benefit motive for spending,
which, by definition, ignores the effects this spending has on private consumption and
inflation. At the model’s optimum, stimulus spending is always initially zero. Moreover,
depending on parameters. stimulus may be identically zero throughout or deviate from
zero changing signs. However, simulations show stimulus spending playing a modest
role.
    This situation can be very different when monetary policy is suboptimal due to the
lack of commitment. In this case, the model’s optimal policy calls for positive and in-
creasing stimulus spending during the trap and lower spending after the trap.




                                            41
References

Adam, Klaus and Roberto M. Billi, “Optimal Monetary Policy under Commitment with
  a Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, October
  2006, 38 (7), 1877–1905.

Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and Paolo Mauro, “Rethinking Macroeco-
  nomic Policy,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 09 2010, 42 (s1), 199–215.

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, “When is the govern-
  ment spending multiplier large?,” Journal of Political Economy, February 2011, 119 (1).

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, “The Science of Monetary Policy: A New
  Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, December 1999, 37 (4), 1661–
  1707.

Eggertsson, Gauti B., “Real Government Spending in a Liquidity Trap,” 2001.

  , “The Deflation Bias and Committing to Being Irresponsible,” Journal of Money, Credit
  and Banking, March 2006, 38 (2), 283–321.

  , “What Fiscal Policy is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?,” in “NBER Macroconomics
  Annual 2010, Volume 25” NBER Chapters December 2011, pp. 59–112.

   and Michael Woodford, “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary
  Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2003, 34 (2003-1), 139–235.

Galí, Jordi, Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New
  Keynesian Framework, Princeton University Press, 2008.

Jung, Taehun, Yuki Teranishi, and Tsutomu Watanabe, “Optimal Monetary Policy at the
  Zero-Interest-Rate Bound,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, October 2005, 37 (5),
  813–35.


                                              42
Krugman, Paul R., “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap,”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1998, 29 (1998-2), 137–206.

Long, James Bradford De and Lawrence H. Summers, “Is Increased Price Flexibility
  Stabilizing?,” American Economic Review, December 1986, 76 (5), 1031–44.

Summers, Lawrence, “Panel discussion: price stability ; How should long-term monetary
  policy be determined?,” Proceedings, Aug. 1991, 23 (3, part 2: Price Stability), 625–631.

Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy, Prince-
  ton University Press, 2003.

  , “Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier,” American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, January 2011, 3 (1), 1–35.




A      Proof of Proposition 1

Recall that π (t) = x (t) = 0 for t ≥ T. In integral form the equilibrium conditions for
t < T are

                                                                    ˆ       T
                                              x (t) =                            σ−1 (r (s) + π (s))ds,
                                                                        t
                                                                         ˆ       T
                                              π (t) = κ                              e−ρ(s−t) x (s)ds.
                                                                             t


Substituting inflation π (t) we can write this as a single condition for the output path
{ x (t)}
                                                    ˆ       T                            ˆ       T
                                                                                                                        !
                                   x ( t ) = σ −1                       r (s) + κ                    e−ρ(z−s) x (z)dz       ds.
                                                        t                                    s

Define the operator associated with the right hand side of this expression:

                           ˆ       T                ˆ           T
                                                                                                      !                     ˆ       T
                      −1                                                −ρ(z−s)
     T [ x ](t) = σ                    r (s) + κ                    e                  x (z)dz            ds = a(t) + κ                 m(z − t) x (z)dz
                               t                            s                                                                   t


                                                                                      43
                         ´T
with a(t) ≡ σ−1          t    r (z)dz and m(s) ≡ (σρ)−1 (1 − e−ρs ), note that m is nonnegative,
strictly increasing, with m(0) = 0 and lims→∞ m(s) = M ≡ (σρ)−1 > 0.
     The operator T maps the space of continuous functions on (−∞, T ] onto itself. An
equilibrium x ∗ is a fixed point T [ x ∗ ] = x ∗ . Since an equilibrium represents a solution to
an initial value problem for a linear ordinary differential equation, there is a unique fixed
point x ∗ . The T operator is linear and monotone (since m ≥ 0), so that if x a ≥ x b then
T [ x a ] ≥ T [ x b ].
     Fix an interval [t̂, T ]. Although T is not a contraction, starting from any continuous
function x0 that is bounded on [t̂, T ] and defining xn ≡ T n [ x0 ] we obtain a sequence that
converges uniformly on [t̂, T ] to the unique fixed point xn → x ∗ . To prove this claim, note
that since | x0 (t)| ≤ B and |r (t)| ≤ R then

                                                ˆ       T                                   
                                                                                        R
             | x1 (t) − x0 (t)| ≤ | a(t)| + κ               m(z − t) | x0 (t)| ≤          + B κM| T − t|.
                                                    t                                  κM

In turn

                                                                  ˆ   T
   | x2 (t) − x1 (t)| = | T [ x1 ](t) − T [ x0 ](t)| ≤ κ       m(z − t) | x1 (z) − x0 (z)| dz
                                                             t
                                               ˆ T
                                                                                              | T − t |2
                                                                                       
                                                                                R
                                      ≤ κM          | x1 (z) − x0 (z)| dz ≤        + B (κM)2             .
                                                 t                             κM                 2

By induction it follows that

                                                                              | T − t|n
                                                                      
                                                                  R
                              | xn (t) − xn−1 (t)| ≤                + B (κM)n           .
                                                                 κM               n!

It follows that
                                  ∞                                        
                                                                       R
                                  ∑ |xn − xn−1 (t)| ≤                 κM
                                                                         + B eκM|T −t| .
                                 n =1




                                                                 44
As a consequence for any m ≥ n

                                                    m                               ∞
                    | xn − xm (t)| ≤                ∑      | x j − x j−1 (t)| ≤     ∑        | x j − x j−1 (t)|
                                                j = n +1                          j = n +1


Since the right hand converges to zero as n → ∞, for any ε > 0 and t0 < T there exists an
N such that for all n, m ≥ N we have


                                                        | xn (t) − xm (t)| ≤ ε


for all t ≥ t0 . Thus, { xn } is a Cauchy sequence on a complete metric space, implying that
xn → x ∗ where x ∗ is a bounded function. Since the operator T is continuous it follows
that x ∗ is a fixed point x ∗ = T [ x ∗ ].
    Note that starting from the zero function x0 (t) = 0 for all t we obtain x1 (t) = a(t) < 0
for t < T. Since the operator T is monotone, the sequence { xn } is decreasing x0 ≥ x1 ≥
· · · ≥ xn ≥ · · · Thus, x ∗ (t) < x1 (t) < 0 for all t < T. This implies π ∗ (t) < 0 for t < T.
   Next I establish that both inflation and output x ∗ (t) and π ∗ (t) are monotone. Note
                              ´T
that ∂t∂ T [ x ](t) = a0 (t) − t m0 (z − t) x (z)dz. Since a0 (t) = −σ−1 r (t) > 0 and x ∗ (t) < 0
for t < T we have that T [ x ∗ ](t) = x ∗ (t) is strictly increasing in t for t < T. Likewise,
                                    ´∞
differentiating we find π̇ (t) = ρκ 0 e−ρz ( x (t + s) − x (t))ds, which implies π̇ ∗ (t) > 0 for
t < T given that x ∗ (t + s) ≥ x ∗ (t) with strict inequality for s > 0 and t + s ≤ T.
    Finally note that

                                        ˆ       T                                                 ˆ       T
                    ∗              −1                               ∗                        −1
                   x (t; T ) = σ                    (r (s; T ) − π (s; T ))ds ≤ σ                             r (s; T )ds
                                            t                                                         t

            ´T                                                                           ´T
and since     0   r (s; T )ds → −∞ as T → ∞ it follows that                                  t    r (s; T )ds → −∞, implying




                                                                  45
x ∗ (t; T ) → −∞ for t < T. Using that x ∗ (t, T ) ≤ 0, this implies that

                   ˆ       ∞                                                ˆ       t +1
    ∗                              −ρ(s−t) ∗
  π (t, T ) = κ                e                x (s; T )ds ≤ κ                            e−ρ(s−t) x ∗ (s; T )ds
                       t                                                        t
                                                                                                                                   ˆ       t +1
                                                                                                                   ∗
                                                                                                       ≤ κx (t + 1; T )                           e−ρ(s−t) ds
                                                                                                                                       t


As T → ∞ we have that x ∗ (t + 1; T ) → −∞, so it follows that π ∗ (t; T ) → −∞ for any t.



B       Proof of Proposition 2

Consider two values κ0 < κ1 with associated equilibria x0∗ and x1∗ . Let T [·; κ ] be the op-
erator defined in the proof of Proposition 1 associated with κ. Define the sequence xn =
T n [ x0∗ ; κ1 ]. Since x0∗ (t) < 0 for t < T, it follows that x1 (t) = T [ x0∗ ; κ1 ] < T [ x0∗ ; κ0 ] = x0 (t)
for t < T. Since the operator T [·; κ0 ] is monotone, this implies that { xn } is a declining
sequence. Since the sequence converges to x1∗ . This proves that x0∗ (t) > x1 (t) > · · · >
xn (t) > · · · > x1∗ (t) for t < T. This implies that π1∗ (t) < π0∗ (t) for t < T.
    To prove the limit result as κ1 → ∞ it suffices to show that T [ x0∗ ; κ1 ](t) → −∞ for all
t < T. This follows from

                                                          ˆ       T                                        ˆ       T
              T [ x0∗ ; κ1 ](t)          = a(t) + κ                   m(z − t) x0∗ (z)dz            ≤ κ1               m(z − t) a(z)dz
                                                              t                                                t

                                                                            ´T
and the result follows from the fact that                                       t    m(z − t) a(z)dz < 0 for all t < T. The same
implication for π ∗ (t; κ ) then follows.
    The following estimate for the loss function

                    ˆ          ∞                          ˆ       T/2                                                        ˆ   T/2
                                       −ρt                                  −ρt
             L≥                    e             2
                                             x (t) dt ≥                 e                     2
                                                                                    x (t; κ ) dt ≥ x ( T/2; κ )          2
                                                                                                                                       e−ρt dt
                           0                                  0                                                              0


where I have used that x is nonpositive and increasing. The result then follows since
x ( T/2; κ ) → −∞.

                                                                                    46
C      Proof of Proposition 3

Suppose i (t) > 0 for t ∈ (t0 , t0 + ε) with ε > 0. Then it must be that µ(t) = µ̇(t) = 0 for
t ∈ [t0 , t0 + ε). However, whenever µ̇ x (t) ≤ 0 we have


                                     µ̇˙ x (t) = − ẋ (t) + κ µ̇π (t) + ρµ̇ x (t)

                                            ≤ −σ−1 (i (t) − r (t) − π (t)) − κλπ (t)

                                            = σ−1 ( I ∗ (π (t), t) − i (t))


where I have used that µ x (t) ≥ 0.
    It follows that if I ∗ (π (t), t) < 0 for t ∈ (t0 − ε, t0 ) then µ̇˙ x (t) < 0. Since µ̇ x (t0 ) = 0 this
implies µ̇ x (t) > 0 for t ∈ (t0 − ε, t0 ). Given that µ x (t0 ) = 0 this then implies that µ x (t) < 0
for t ∈ (t0 − ε, t0 ), a contradiction with the optimality conditions.



D      Proof of Proposition 4

The initial conditions require µ x (0) = µπ (0) = 0. The non-negativity requirement for µ x
then requires µ̇ x (0) = − x (0) ≥ 0, implying x (0) ≤ 0.
    To establish that inflation must be positive at some point, consider the perturbation
x (t, ε) = x (t) + ε and

                   ˆ   ∞                                     ˆ    ∞                               ˆ   ∞
                               −ρs                                        −ρs                                               κ
    π (t, ε) = κ           e         x (t + s, ε)ds = κ               e         x (t + s)ds + κ           e−ρs εds = π (t) + ε.
                   0                                          0                                   0                         ρ

Note that the perturbation is feasible for all ε > 0 since higher inflation relaxes the ZLB
constraint σ ẋ (t) ≥ −r (t) − π (t). In terms of the loss function

                                                  ˆ     ∞
                                             1                                        
                                      L(ε) =                e−ρt x (t, ε)2 + λπ (t, ε)2 dt
                                             2      0




                                                                      47
we have

                    ˆ   ∞                                                 ˆ
                                                                         κ ∞ −ρt
                                                        
           0                    −ρt                κ          1
          L (0) =           e             x (t) + λ π (t) dt = π (0) + λ     e π (t)dt ≤ 0.
                    0                              ρ          κ          ρ 0

Hence, negative inflation π (t) ≤ 0 for all t ≥ 0 with strict inequality over some range,
implies L0 (0) < 0, a contradiction with optimality.
   Now suppose κσλ = 1. Suppose (π (t), x (t)) satisfy the ODE system (1a)–(1b) with
i (t) = 0 for t ∈ [0, T̂ ] with T̂ > T. Now set µπ (t) = 0 and define µ x (t) = σλπ (t) so that


                                               µ̇π = 0 = −λπ + σ−1 µ x


                            µ̇ x (t) = σλ(ρπ (t) − κx (t)) = − x (t) + ρσλπ (t)

are both satisfied. It follows that (π (t), x (t))t∈[0,T̂ ] together with π (t) = x (t) = 0 for t > T̂
is optimal if and only if π (t) ≥ 0 and π (0) = π ( T̂ ) = 0 and x ( T̂ ) = 0.
   To establish that x (t) must be positive for some t ≥ 0, proceed by contradiction. Sup-
pose x (t) ≤ 0 for all t ≥ 0. This implies that π (t) ≤ 0 for all t ≥ 0, a contradiction.




                                                         48
