                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       TRADE WARS AND TRADE TALKS WITH DATA

                                               Ralph Ossa

                                         Working Paper 17347
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17347


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2011




I am grateful to the editor Penny Goldberg and two anonymous referees. I would also like to thank
Kyle Bagwell, Kerem Cosar, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Giovanni Maggi, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, Bob Staiger,
Jon Vogel, and seminar participants at various universities and conferences for very helpful comments
and suggestions. Seyed Ali Madanizadeh provided excellent research assistance. This work is supported
by the Business and Public Policy Faculty Research Fund at the University of Chicago Booth School
of Business. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Ralph Ossa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade Wars and Trade Talks with Data
Ralph Ossa
NBER Working Paper No. 17347
August 2011, Revised January 2014
JEL No. F11,F12,F13

                                              ABSTRACT

How large are optimal tariffs? What tariffs would prevail in a worldwide trade war? How costly would
be a breakdown of international trade policy cooperation? And what is the scope for future multilateral
trade negotiations? I address these and other questions using a unified framework which nests traditional,
new trade, and political economy motives for protection. I find that optimal tariffs average 62 percent,
world trade war tariffs average 63 percent, the government welfare losses from a breakdown of international
trade policy cooperation average 2.9 percent, and the possible government welfare gains from future
multilateral trade negotiations average 0.5 percent. Optimal tariffs are tariffs which maximize a political
economy augmented measure of real income.


Ralph Ossa
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
ralph.ossa@chicagobooth.edu
1    Introduction

I propose a ‡exible framework for the quantitative analysis of noncooperative and cooperative

trade policy. It is based on a multi-country multi-industry general equilibrium model of

international trade featuring inter-industry trade as in Ricardo (1817), intra-industry trade

as in Krugman (1980), and special interest politics as in Grossman and Helpman (1994). By

combining these elements, it takes a uni…ed view of trade policy which nests traditional, new

trade, and political economy motives for protection. Speci…cally, it features import tari¤s

which serve to manipulate the terms-of-trade, shift pro…ts away from other countries, and

protect politically in‡uential industries. It can be easily calibrated to match industry-level

tari¤s and trade.

    I use this framework to provide a …rst comprehensive quantitative analysis of noncoop-

erative and cooperative trade policy, focusing on the main players in recent GATT/WTO

negotiations. I begin by considering optimal tari¤s, i.e. the tari¤s countries would impose

if they did not have to fear any retaliation.1 I …nd that each country can gain considerably

at the expense of other countries by unilaterally imposing optimal tari¤s. In the complete

version with lobbying, the mean welfare gain of the tari¤ imposing government is 1.9 percent,

the mean welfare loss of the other governments is -0.7 percent, and the average optimal tari¤

is 62.4 percent. These averages are of a comparable magnitude in the baseline version in

which political economy forces are not taken into account.

    I then turn to an analysis of Nash tari¤s, i.e. the tari¤s countries would impose in a

worldwide trade war in which their trading partners retaliated optimally. I …nd that countries

can then no longer bene…t at the expense of one another and welfare falls across the board

so that nobody is winning the trade war. Intuitively, each country is imposing import tari¤s

in an attempt to induce favorable terms-of-trade and pro…t shifting e¤ects. The end result is

a large drop in trade volumes which is leaving everybody worse o¤. In the complete version

with lobbying, the mean government welfare loss is -2.9 percent and the average Nash tari¤ is

63.4 percent. These averages are again quite similar in the baseline version in which political

economy forces are not taken into account.
   1
     They are optimal in the sense of maximizing the political economy augmented measure of real income
given by equation (3).


                                                  2
       I …nally investigate cooperative tari¤s, i.e. the tari¤s countries would negotiate to in

e¢ cient trade negotiations. I consider trade negotiations starting at Nash tari¤s, factual

tari¤s, and zero tari¤s following a Nash bargaining protocol. I …nd that trade negotiations

yield signi…cant welfare gains, that a large share of these gains has been reaped during past

trade negotiations, and that free trade is close to the e¢ ciency frontier. In the complete

version with lobbying, trade negotiations starting at Nash tari¤s, factual tari¤, and zero

tari¤s yield average government welfare gains of 3.6 percent, 0.5 percent, and 0.2 percent,

respectively. These averages are again quite similar in the baseline version in which political

economy forces are not taken into account.

       I am unaware of any quantitative analysis of noncooperative and cooperative trade policy

which is comparable in terms of its scope. I believe that this is the …rst quantitative framework

which nests traditional, new trade, and political economy motives for protection. Likewise,

there is no precedent for estimating noncooperative and cooperative tari¤s at the industry level

for the major players in recent GATT/WTO negotiations. The surprising lack of comparable

work is most likely rooted in long-binding methodological and computational constraints. In

particular, the calibration of general equilibrium trade models has only been widely embraced

quite recently following the seminal work of Eaton and Kortum (2002). Also, the calculation

of disaggregated noncooperative and cooperative tari¤s is very demanding computationally

and was simply not feasible without present-day algorithms and computers.

       The most immediate predecessors are Perroni and Whalley (2000), Broda et al (2008), and

Ossa (2011). Perroni and Whalley (2000) provide quantitative estimates of noncooperative

tari¤s in a simple Armington model which features only traditional terms-of-trade e¤ects.

Ossa (2011) provides such estimates in a simple Krugman (1980) model which features only

new trade production relocation e¤ects. Both contributions allow trade policy to operate only

at the most aggregate level so that a single tari¤ is assumed to apply against all imports from

any given country.2 Broda et al (2008) provide detailed statistical estimates of the inverse

export supply elasticities faced by a number of non-WTO member countries. The idea is to
   2
    Neither contribution computes cooperative tari¤s. The work of Perroni and Whalley (2000) is in the
computable general equilibrium tradition and extends an earlier contribution by Hamilton and Whalley (1983).
It predicts implausibly high noncooperative tari¤s of up to 1000 percent. See also Markusen and Wigle (1989)
and Ossa (2012a).




                                                     3
test the traditional optimal tari¤ formula which states that a country’s optimal tari¤ is equal

to the inverse export supply elasticity it faces in equilibrium.3

    The paper further relates to an extensive body of theoretical and quantitative work. The

individual motives for protection are taken from the theoretical trade policy literature includ-

ing Johnson (1953-54), Venables (1987), and Grossman and Helpman (1994).4 The analysis

of trade negotiations builds on a line of research synthesized by Bagwell and Staiger (2002).

My calibration technique is similar to the one used in recent quantitative work based on the

Eaton and Kortum (2002) model such as Caliendo and Parro (2011). However, my analysis

di¤ers from this work in terms of question and framework. In particular, I go beyond an

investigation of exogenous trade policy changes by emphasizing noncooperative and coopera-

tive tari¤s.5 Also, I take a uni…ed view of trade policy by nesting traditional, new trade, and

political economy e¤ects.

    My application focuses on 7 regions and 33 industries in the year 2007. The regions are

Brazil, China, the EU, India, Japan, the US, and a residual Rest of the World and are chosen

to comprise the main players in recent GATT/WTO negotiations. The industries span the

agricultural and manufacturing sectors of the economy. My main data source is the most

recent Global Trade Analysis Project database (GTAP 8) from which I take industry-level

trade, production, and tari¤ data. In addition, I use United Nations trade data for the

time period 1994-2008 for my estimation of demand elasticities, and the International Trade

Centre’s Market Access Map tari¤ data as well as the United Nation’s TRAINS tari¤ data

for my calibration of political economy weights. A detailed discussion of the data including

the applied aggregation and matching procedures can be found in the appendix.

    To set the stage for a transparent presentation of the theory, it is useful to discuss the
   3
     This approach is not suitable for estimating the optimal tari¤s of WTO member countries. This is because
such countries impose cooperative tari¤s so that the factual inverse export supply elasticities they face are not
informative of the counterfactual inverse export supply elasticities they would face if they imposed optimal
tari¤s under all but the most restrictive assumptions.
   4
     Mathematically, the analyzed pro…t shifting e¤ect is more closely related to the production relocation e¤ect
in Venables (1987) than the classic pro…t shifting e¤ect in Brander and Spencer (1981). This is explained in
more detail in footnote 13. See Mrazova (2010) for a recent treatment of pro…t shifting e¤ects in the context
of GATT/WTO negotiations.
   5
     Existing work typically focuses on quantifying the e¤ects of exogenous tari¤ changes. Caliendo and Parro
(2011), for example, analyze the e¤ects of the North American Free Trade Agreement. One exception can be
found in the work of Alvarez and Lucas (2007) which includes a short discussion of optimal tari¤s in small
open economies.




                                                       4
elasticity estimation up-front. As will become clear shortly, I need industry-level estimates of

CES demand elasticities which do not vary by country. I obtain such estimates by applying

the well-known Feenstra (1994) method to the United Nations trade data pooled across the

main importers considered in my analysis. The results are listed in Table 1. As can be seen,

the variation in the elasticities appears plausible with homogeneous goods such as wheat

and rice having the largest values. Moreover, the mean elasticity of 3.4 is within the range

of previous …ndings in the literature, and I will also consider various scalings as sensitivity

checks. The interested reader can …nd a more detailed discussion of the elasticity estimation

in the appendix.

    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, I lay out the basic

setup, characterize the equilibrium for given tari¤s, demonstrate how to compute the general

equilibrium e¤ects of tari¤ changes, and discuss the welfare e¤ects of tari¤ changes. I then

turn to optimal tari¤s, world trade wars, and world trade talks.



2     Analysis

2.1    Basic setup

There are N countries indexed by i or j and S industries indexed by s. Consumers have

access to a continuum of di¤erentiated varieties. Preferences over these varieties are given by

the following utility functions:

                                                                                                 s
                                       X Z                                                   s       1 js
                               Q                 Mis                   s       1
                        Uj =       s                   xijs (   is )       s       d    is                              (1)
                                        i    0


where xijs is the quantity of an industry s variety from country i consumed in country j, Mis

is the mass of industry s varieties produced in country i,                         s   > 1 is the elasticity of substitution

between industry s varieties, and      js   is the fraction of country j income spent on industry s

varieties.

    Each variety is uniquely associated with an individual …rm. Firms are homogeneous

within industries and their technologies are summarized by the following inverse production




                                                         5
functions:
                                                     X       ijs xijs
                                             lis =                                                                   (2)
                                                         j    'is

where lis is the labor requirement of an industry s …rm in country i featuring iceberg trade

barriers     ijs   and a productivity parameter 'is . Each …rm has monopoly power with respect

to its own variety and the number of …rms is given exogenously.6

       Governments can impose import tari¤s but do not have access to other policy instruments.7

I denote the ad valorem tari¤ imposed by country j against imports from country i in industry

s by tijs and make frequent use of the shorthand                    ijs   tijs + 1 throughout. Government

preferences are given by the following objective functions:

                                                     X
                                             Gj =            js Wjs                                                  (3)
                                                         s



where Wjs is the welfare of industry s in country j and                       js       0 is the political economy
                                                                          1   P
weight of industry s in country j which is scaled such that               S        s   js   = 1. Welfare is given by
                                                                                                       Xjs
real income in this setup which can be de…ned at the industry level, Wjs                               Pj ,   and at the
                            Xj
aggregate level, Wj         Pj ,
                           where Xjs is the nominal income in industry s of country j, Pj is
                                             P
the ideal price index in country j, and Xj = s Xjs . Xjs consists of industry labor income,

industry pro…ts, and a share of aggregate tari¤ revenue, which I assume to be allocated to

industries based on employment shares.8

    Notice that governments simply maximize welfare if the political economy weights are
                            P
set equal to one since Wj = s Wjs . The interpretation of the political economy weights

is that one dollar of income accruing to industry s of country j counts                           js   as much in the

government’s objective function as one dollar of income accruing to an industry which receives
   6
      The model can also be solved and calibrated with free entry and …xed costs of production. I focus on a
version without free entry for two main reasons. First, because it features positive pro…ts and therefore lends
itself more naturally to an analysis of political economy considerations. Second, because it rules out corner
solutions with zero production in some sectors so that it can be implemented using a much simpler algorithm.
See footnote 13 for a further discussion of the model with free entry.
    7
      This restriction is motivated by the fact that import tari¤s have always been by far the most important
trade policy instruments in practice. However, it would be easy to extend the framework to also include
export subsidies, import quotas, or voluntary export restraints. See Bagwell and Staiger (2009a, 2009b) for
a discussion of the importance of this restriction for the theory of trade agreements in a range of simple new
trade models.
    8                                    L
      To be clear, Xjs = wj Ljs + js + Ljs j
                                             T Rj , where wj is the wage rate in country j, Ljs is employment in
industry s of country j, js are the pro…ts in industry s of country j, Lj is total employment in country j, and
T Rj is the tari¤ revenue of country j.


                                                       6
average political support. This formulation of government preferences can be viewed as a

reduced form representation of the "protection for sale" theory of Grossman and Helpman

(1994). However, it takes a somewhat broader approach by taking producer interests and

worker interests into account. As will become clear shortly, industry pro…ts and industry

labor income are proportional to industry sales so that this is the margin special interest

groups seek to a¤ect.


2.2   Equilibrium for given tari¤s

Utility maximization implies that …rms in industry s of country i face demands

                                                                                s
                                                 (pis       ijs ijs )
                                     xijs =                   1 s                     js Xj                   (4)
                                                            Pjs

where pis is the ex-factory price of an industry s variety from country i and Pjs is the ideal

price index of industry s varieties in country j. Also, pro…t maximization requires that …rms

in industry s of country i charge a constant markup over marginal costs


                                                                      s     wi
                                                 pis =                                                        (5)
                                                              s           1 'is

where wi is the wage rate in country i.

   The equilibrium for given tari¤s can be characterized with four condensed equilibrium

conditions. The …rst condition follows from substituting equations (2), (4), and (5) into the
                                                P
relationship de…ning industry pro…ts is = Mis      j pis ijs xijs wi lis :


                                 1 X                    s                 s     ijs wi        1   s

                        is   =             Mis    ijs                                                 js Xj   (6)
                                 s     j                          s           1 'is Pjs

The second condition combines equations (2), (4), and (5) with the requirement for labor
                    P
market clearing Li = s Mis lis :

                                                        X
                                           wi Li =                    is ( s          1)                      (7)
                                                              s



The third condition results from substituting equation (5) into the formula for the ideal price


                                                              7
                                                                            1
                       P                                   1        s   1       s
index Pjs =                i Mis (pis   ijs          ijs )                          :

                                                                                                                                              !       1
                                                       X                                s        wi    ijs ijs
                                                                                                                              1           s       1       s
                                     Pjs =                         Mis                                                                                                                    (8)
                                                               i                    s       1         'is

And the …nal condition combines equations (4) and (5) with the budget constraint equating

total expenditure to labor income, plus tari¤ revenue, plus aggregate pro…ts:

                                     X X                                                s         wiijs
                                                                                                                          1       s                                 X
                                                                                                                                                  s
               Xj = wj Lj +                                tijs Mis                                                                       ijs             js Xj +             js          (9)
                                            i          s                            s       1 'is Pjs                                                                    s



   Conditions (6) - (9) represent a system of 2N (S + 1) equations in the 2N (S + 1) un-

knowns wi , Xi , Pis , and                      is   which can be solved given a numeraire. An obvious problem,

however, is that this system depends on the set of unknown parameters fMis ;                                                                                             ijs ; 'is g    which

are all di¢ cult to estimate empirically.


2.3   General equilibrium e¤ects of tari¤ changes

I avoid this problem by computing the general equilibrium e¤ects of counterfactual tari¤

changes using a method inspired by Dekle at al (2007). In particular, conditions (6) - (9) can

be rewritten in changes as

                                                     X                                                                                    s   1
                                     bis =                         ijs (bijs )
                                                                                            s
                                                                                                 bi )1
                                                                                                (w            s
                                                                                                                          Pbjs                        bj
                                                                                                                                                      X                                  (10)
                                                           j

                                                                                        X
                                                                        bi =
                                                                        w                           is b is                                                                              (11)
                                                                                                s

                                                                        X                                                         1

                                                     Pbjs =                              bi bijs )1                   s       1       s
                                                                            i       ijs (w                                                                                               (12)

                   X X tijs Tijs                                                                                                                                 X
   bj = wj Lj w
                                                                                                                  s       1                                                  js
   X          bj +               b     bi )1
                                 tijs (w                                                        s
                                                                                                    Pbjs                      (bijs )                 s   bj +
                                                                                                                                                          X                       bjs    (13)
         Xj         i s   Xj                                                                                                                                         s   Xj

where a "hat" denotes the ratio between the counterfactual and the factual value, ijs
      P                       P                P s 1         .P P
                                                                      t 1
Tijs / n Tins , ijs    T
                    ijs ijs /       T
                               m mjs mjs , is     j   s
                                                        Tijs   t   n   t
                                                                          Tint , and Tijs
                             1   s
                 ijs   wi                   s
Mis    s
           s
               1 'is   Pjs            ijs            js Xj     is the factual value of industry s trade ‡owing from country

i to country j evaluated at world prices.

   Equations (10) - (13) represent a system of 2N (S + 1) equations in the 2N (S + 1) un-

                                                                                            8
knowns w    bi , Pbis , bis . Crucially, their coe¢ cients depend on
       bi , X                                                                    s   and observables only so

that the full general equilibrium response to counterfactual tari¤ changes can be computed

without further information on any of the remaining model parameters. Moreover, all re-

quired observables can be inferred directly from widely available trade and tari¤ data since
                            P P                              P P               P
the model requires Xj = i s ijs Tijs and wj Lj = Xj            i   s tijs Tijs  s js , where
       1 P                                             9
 js = s    j Tijs in this constant markup environment.

       Notice that this procedure also ensures that the counterfactual e¤ects of tari¤ changes

are computed from a reference point which perfectly matches industry-level trade and tari¤s.

Essentially, it imposes a restriction on the set of unknown parameters fMis ;                     ijs ; 'is g   such

that the predicted Tijs perfectly match the observed Tijs given the observed                        ijs   and the

estimated      s.   It is important to emphasize that the restriction on fMis ;             ijs ; 'is g   does not

deliver estimates of fMis ;      ijs ; 'is g   given the high dimensionality of the parameter space. To

obtain estimates of fMis ;      ijs ; 'is g,   one would have to reduce this dimensionality, for example,

by imposing some structure on the matrix of iceberg trade barriers.10

       One issue with equations (10) - (13) is that they are based on a static model which does

not allow for aggregate trade imbalances thereby violating the data. The standard way of

addressing this issue is to introduce aggregate trade imbalances as constant nominal transfers

into the budget constraints. However, this approach has two serious limitations which have

gone largely unnoticed by the literature. First, the assumption of constant aggregate trade

imbalances leads to extreme general equilibrium adjustments in response to high tari¤s and

cannot be true in the limit as tari¤s approach in…nity. Second, the assumption of constant

nominal transfers implies that the choice of numeraire matters since real transfers then change

with nominal prices.11

       To circumvent these limitations, I …rst purge the original data from aggregate trade im-

balances using my model and then conduct all subsequent analyses using this purged dataset.

The …rst step is essentially a replication of the original Dekle et al (2007) exercise using my
   9
     Notice that this system can be reduced to 2N equations in the 2N unknowns w             bi , by substituting
                                                                                      bi and X
for bis and Pbjs in conditions (11) and (13) using conditions (10) and (12). I work with this condensed system
in my numerical analysis to improve computational e¢ ciency.
  10
     I do not further pursue an estimation of fMis ; ijs ; 'is g in this paper, since the model relates Tijs and
fMis ; ijs ; 'is g with a standard gravity equation whose empirical success is widely known.
  11
     Essentially, the choice of numeraire re‡ects an assumption of how real aggregate trade imbalances change
in counterfactuals. This is explained in more detail in the appendix.


                                                         9
setup. In particular, I introduce aggregate trade imbalances as nominal transfers into the

budget constraint and calculate the general equilibrium responses of setting those transfers

equal to zero which allows me to construct a matrix of trade ‡ows featuring no aggregate

trade imbalances. I discuss this procedure and its advantages as well as the …rst-stage results

in more detail in the appendix.

   As an illustration of the key general equilibrium e¤ects of trade policy, the upper panel of

Table 2 summarizes the e¤ects of a counterfactual 50 percentage point increase in the US tari¤

on chemicals or apparel. Chemical products have a relatively low elasticity of substitution

of 2.34 while apparel products have a relatively high elasticity of substitution of 5.39. The

…rst column gives the predicted percentage change in the US wage relative to the numeraire.

As can be seen, the US wage is predicted to increase by 1.45 percent if the tari¤ increase

occurs in chemicals and is predicted to increase by 0.67 percent if the tari¤ increase occurs in

apparel.

   The second column presents the predicted percentage change in the quantity of US output

in the protected industry and the third column the simple average of the predicted percentage

changes in the quantity of US output in the other industries. Hence, US output is predicted

to increase by 5.73 percent in chemicals and decrease by an average 1.40 percent in all other

industries if the tari¤ increase occurs in chemicals. Similarly, US output is predicted to

increase by 33.35 percent in apparel and decrease by an average 0.97 percent in all other

industries if the tari¤ increase occurs in apparel.

   Intuitively, a US import tari¤ makes imported goods relatively more expensive in the US

market so that US consumers shift expenditure towards US goods. This then incentivizes US

…rms in the protected industry to expand which bids up US wages and thereby forces US …rms

in other industries to contract. Even though it is not directly implied by Table 2, it should be

clear that mirroring adjustments occur in other countries. In particular, …rms in the industry

in which the US imposes import tari¤s contract which depresses wages and allows …rms in

other industries to expand.




                                               10
2.4     Welfare e¤ects of tari¤ changes

Given the general equilibrium e¤ects of tari¤ changes, the implied welfare e¤ects can be
                                                                        js
              cj = X
computed from W    bj =Pbj , where Pbj =               s    Pbjs             is the change in the aggregate price

index. This framework features both traditional as well as new trade welfare e¤ects of trade

policy. This can be seen most clearly from a log-linear approximation around factuals. As I

explain in detail in the appendix, it yields the following relationship for the welfare change
                                         Wj
induced by tari¤ changes, where          Wj   is the percentage change in country j’s welfare and so

on:12

 Wj   X X Tijs               pjs       pis  X js                   js          pjs  X X tijs Tijs       Tijs        pis
    t                                      +                                       +
 Wj     s
          Xj                pjs       pis    s
                                               Xj              js             pjs     s
                                                                                           Xj          Tijs       pis
            i                                                                           i
                                                                                                               (14)

    The …rst term is a traditional terms-of-trade e¤ect which captures changes in country

j’s real income due to di¤erential changes in the world prices of country j’s production and

consumption bundles. Country j bene…ts from an increase in the world prices of its produc-

tion bundle relative to the world prices of its consumption bundle because its exports then

command more imports in world markets. The terms-of-trade e¤ect can also be viewed as a

relative wage e¤ect since world prices are proportional to wages given the constant markup

pricing captured by formula (5).

    Notice that this equivalence between terms-of-trade e¤ects and relative wage e¤ects implies

that changes in tari¤s always change the terms-of-trade in all industries at the same time.

This is because a tari¤ in a particular industry can only a¤ect the terms-of-trade in that

industry if it changes relative wages in which case it then also alters the terms-of-trade in all

other industries. This would no longer be true if the tight connection between prices across

industries within countries was broken by allowing for variable markups, changing marginal

costs, or more than one perfectly mobile factor of production.
  12
     As will become clear shortly, this welfare decomposition emphasizes international trade policy externalities
by focusing on terms-of-trade e¤ects and pro…t shifting e¤ects. While this seems most useful for the purpose
of this paper, one can also derive an alternative decomposition which highlights the distributional e¤ects of
trade policy. In particular, since nominal income consists of wage income (wj Lj ), industry pro…ts ( js ), and
tari¤ revenue (Rj ), changes in real income can be decomposed as W ^ j = wj Lj w^j + P js ^ js + Rj R^ j . If one
                                                                                  Xj   ^j
                                                                                       P         ^j
                                                                                            s Xj P       ^j
                                                                                                      Xj P
equates the notion of "consumer" with the notion of "worker", the …rst term can be interpreted as a weighted
change in consumer surplus, the second as a weighted change in producer surplus, and the third as a weighted
change in government surplus.



                                                       11
       The second term is a new trade pro…t shifting e¤ect which captures changes in country

j’s real income due to changes in country j’s aggregate pro…ts originating from changes in

industry output. It takes changes in industry pro…ts, nets out changes in industry prices,

and then aggregates the remaining changes over all industries using pro…t shares as weights.

These remaining changes are changes in industry pro…ts originating from changes in indus-

try output since industry pro…ts are proportional to industry sales in this constant markup

environment.13

       The last term is a combined trade volume e¤ect which captures changes in country j’s

real income due to changes in country j’s tari¤ revenue originating from changes in import

volumes. It takes changes in import values, nets out changes in import prices, and then

aggregates the remaining changes over all countries and industries using tari¤ revenue shares

as weights. These remaining changes are changes in import volumes since changes in import

values can be decomposed into changes in import prices and import volumes.14

       As an illustration, the lower panel of Table 2 reports the welfare e¤ects of the counter-

factual 50 percentage point increase in the US tari¤ on chemicals or apparel and decomposes

them into terms-of-trade and pro…t shifting components following equation (14). As can be

seen, US welfare increases by 0.17 percent if the tari¤ increase occurs in chemicals but de-

creases by 0.14 percent if the tari¤ increase occurs in apparel. The di¤erential welfare e¤ects

are due to di¤erential pro…t shifting e¤ects. While the terms-of-trade e¤ect is positive in both

cases, the pro…t shifting e¤ect is positive if the tari¤ increase occurs in chemicals and negative

if the pro…t increase occurs in apparel.

       The positive terms-of-trade e¤ects are a direct consequence of the increase in the US
  13
     While this e¤ect is similar to the classic pro…t shifting e¤ect from Brander and Spencer (1981), there is also
a close mathematical connection to the production relocation e¤ect from Venables (1987). It can be shown that
in a version of the model with free entry and …xed costs of production, the equivalent of equation (14) would
     V     P P T            pjs     pis    P P         T                 P P t T         Tijs
be Vjj t i s Xijs    j     pjs     pis
                                         + i s ijsXjijs s1 1 MMisis + i s ijsXjijs Tijs           pis
                                                                                                 pis
                                                                                                       , where the
second term can now be interpreted as a production relocation e¤ect. Essentially, tari¤s lead to changes in
industry output at the intensive margin without free entry and at the extensive margin with free entry.
  14
     Readers familiar with the analysis of Flam and Helpman (1987) may wonder why decomposition (14) does
not reveal that tari¤s can also be used to partially correct for a domestic distortion brought about by cross-
industry di¤erences in markups. The reason is simply that this decomposition only captures …rst-order e¤ects,
while the Flam and Helpman (1987) corrections operate through second-order adjustments in expenditure
shares. As will become clear in the discussion of e¢ cient tari¤s, they always push governments to impose
somewhat higher tari¤s on higher elasticity goods in an attempt to counteract distortions in relative prices.
While I take this force into account in all my calculations, I only emphasize it in the discussion of e¢ cient
tari¤s, as the key channels through which countries can gain at the expense of one another are terms-of-trade
and pro…t shifting e¤ects.


                                                        12
relative wage identi…ed above. The di¤erential pro…t shifting e¤ects are the result of cross-

industry di¤erences in markups which are brought about by cross-industry di¤erences in the

elasticity of substitution. Since the quantity of US output always increases in the protected

industry but decreases in other industries, the change in pro…ts which is due to changes in

industry output is always positive in the protected industry but negative in other industries.

The overall pro…t shifting e¤ect depends on the net e¤ect which is positive if the tari¤ increase

occurs in a high pro…tability industry such as chemicals and negative if it occurs in a low

pro…tability industry such as apparel.15

       Notice that the overall welfare e¤ects are smaller than the sum of the terms-of-trade and

pro…t shifting e¤ects in both examples. One missing factor is, of course, the trade volume

e¤ect from equation (14). However, this e¤ect is close to zero in both examples since the loss in

tari¤ revenue due to a decrease in import volumes in the protected industry is approximately

o¤set by the gain in tari¤ revenue due to an increase in import volumes in other industries.

The discrepancy therefore largely re‡ects the fact that equation (14) only provides a rough

approximation if tari¤ changes are as large as 50 percentage points since it is obtained from

a linearization around factuals.16

       To put these and all following welfare statements into perspective, it seems useful to pro-

vide a sense of the magnitude of the gains from trade. As I explain in detail in Ossa (2012b),

the gains from trade are typically larger in multi-sector models than in their single-sector

equivalents because they avoid an aggregation bias stemming from cross-industry heterogene-

ity in the trade elasticities. This model is no exception and predicts welfare losses of moving

from factual tari¤s to autarky of -9.9 percent for Brazil, -12.9 percent for China, -12.3 percent

for the EU, -10.8 percent for India, -13.0 percent for Japan, -20.8 percent for the Rest of the

World, and -13.5 percent for the US.17
  15                                                             P                  pjs
      As is easy to verify, equations (5) and (11) imply that s Xjsj         js
                                                                            js     pjs
                                                                                          = 0 if s = for all s so
that there is then no pro…t shifting e¤ect.
   16
      In particular, the overall reduction in imports associated with the increase in tari¤s also reduces the import
shares which leverage the improvement in relative world prices. This e¤ect does not appear in equation (14)
since changes in import shares are second order e¤ects.
   17
      The welfare losses of moving from free trade to autarky are -10.0 percent for Brazil, -13.1 percent for
China, -12.6 percent for the EU, -11.2 percent for India, -15.4 percent for Japan, -20.8 percent for the Rest of
the World, and -14.2 percent for the US. Most of the variation in the gains from trade is due to variation in
trade openness, just as in Ossa (2012b).




                                                        13
2.5      Optimal tari¤s

The above discussion suggests that governments have incentives to use import tari¤s to in-

crease relative wages generating a positive terms-of-trade e¤ect and expand high-pro…tability

industries generating a positive pro…t shifting e¤ect. However, these incentives combine with

political economy considerations as governments also seek to favor politically in‡uential indus-

tries. In particular, governments grant extra protection to high          is   industries as this increases

industry revenue by increasing industry sales. Recall from above that producers and workers
                                                                   1               1
simply split industry revenue using the constant shares             s
                                                                        and 1       s
                                                                                        . As a result, there

is no con‡ict of interest between producers and workers with respect to trade policy in this

environment.

       I compute optimal tari¤s using the Su and Judd (forthcoming) method of mathematical

programming with equilibrium constraints, as I explain in detail in the appendix. Essentially,

it involves maximizing the government’s objective function (3) subject to the equilibrium

conditions (10) - (13), which ensures relatively fast convergence despite the high dimensionality

of the optimization problem. I begin by discussing optimal tari¤s for the baseline version in

which      is   = 1 8 i and s. I then describe how I calibrate the political economy weights and

present the political economy results. To be clear, optimal tari¤s refer to tari¤s countries

would choose given all other countries’ factual tari¤s. They are regarded as an important

benchmark in the trade policy literature.

       Figure 1a summarizes the optimal tari¤s of each country for the baseline version in which

 is    = 1 8 i and s. It ranks all industries by elasticity of substitution and plots the optimal

tari¤s of each country with respect to all trading partners against the industry rank. As

can be seen, optimal tari¤s vary widely across industries and are strongly decreasing in the

elasticity of substitution, as one would expect given the pro…t shifting motive for protection.18

There is also some variation across countries and trading partners even though it is much less

pronounced. Optimal tari¤s are highly correlated across countries with the mean pairwise

correlation coe¢ cient being 91.2 percent. The median optimal tari¤ across all countries
  18
    Loosely speaking, governments choose the level of tari¤s to optimally manipulate the terms-of-trade and
the distribution of tari¤s to optimally shift pro…ts.




                                                    14
combined is 58.9 percent.19

       Table 3a lists the e¤ects of imposing the optimal tari¤s from Figure 1a individually for

each country, always showing the e¤ects on the tari¤ imposing country ("own") as well as the

averages of the e¤ects on all other countries ("other"). Recall that Gj = Wj if               is   = 1 8 i and

s so that the changes in government welfare and overall welfare are identical here. As can be

seen from the …rst to fourth column of Table 3a, each country can gain considerably at the

expense of other countries by unilaterally imposing optimal tari¤s. The average welfare gain

of the tari¤ imposing country is 2.2 percent. The average welfare loss of the other countries

is 0.7 percent. The reason each country can gain at the expense of other countries is that the

terms-of-trade and pro…t shifting e¤ects have a beggar-thy-neighbor character, as can be seen

from the …fth to eighth column of Table 3a.20

       Country sizes vary signi…cantly in my sample, with the largest countries (EU and Rest

of World) being around eight times larger than the smallest countries (Brazil and India) in

nominal income terms. This variation in country size matters for optimal tari¤s just as one

would expect. In particular, median optimal tari¤s are positively related to country size, as

one can see from the last column of Table 3a. Also, the trade policy externalities associated

with optimal tari¤s are positively related to country size, as one can see from columns two,

four, six, and eight of Table 3a. Japan is an outlier in Table 3a because of its extreme factual

trade policy. Most notably, Japan imposes factual tari¤s of up to 513 percent on rice which

implies that factual tari¤s are highly distortive so that a move to optimal tari¤s also brings

about sizeable e¢ ciency gains.

       The extreme protection of the Japanese rice industry is the result of the political in‡uence

this industry enjoys as a key constituent of the Japanese Liberal Democratic Party.21 And

political economy forces also provide a plausible explanation for the cross-industry variation

in factual tari¤s in other countries. For example, the …ve most protected US industries in

the sample are sugar, dairy, leather products, wearing apparel, and textiles which are all

perceived as having political clout. Interestingly, the most protected industries also tend to
  19
      To be precise, this is the average of the median optimal tari¤s reported in the last row of Table 3a.
  20
      I have also computed the e¤ects of optimal tari¤s on trade ‡ows. On average, trade ‡ows are predicted to
fall by 30.8 percent for the tari¤ imposing country and by 7 percent for all other countries.
   21
      See, for example, a Japan Times article from February 20, 2011 entitled "The sticky subject of Japan’s
rice protection".


                                                     15
be associated with the highest elasticities as one might suspect from inspecting the industry

ranking in Table 1. As a result, the cross-industry variation in factual tari¤s di¤ers from the

cross-industry variation in optimal tari¤s in the baseline case in which              is   = 1 8 i and s with

the rank correlation coe¢ cient averaging -16 percent.

    A natural approach to identifying the political economy weights would therefore be to

match the cross-industry distribution of optimal tari¤s to the cross-industry distribution of

factual tari¤s after controlling for their respective means. However, factual tari¤s are the result

of complex and un…nished trade negotiations so that their relationship to optimal tari¤s is

far from clear. I therefore instead match the cross-industry distribution of optimal tari¤s to

the cross-industry distribution of noncooperative tari¤s whenever measures of noncooperative

tari¤s are available from the MAcMap or TRAINS database.22 The MAcMap database is the

source of GTAP’s applied tari¤s which I use as factual tari¤s throughout. However, it also

separately lists the components of applied tari¤s including noncooperative tari¤s whenever

noncooperative tari¤s are imposed. The TRAINS database is an additional source of tari¤

data which I consult only when noncooperative tari¤s are unavailable from the MAcMap

database.

    The MAcMap database contains direct measures of noncooperative tari¤s for China,

Japan, and the US. These are tari¤s applied nondiscriminatorily against a number of non-

WTO member countries with which China, Japan, or the US do not have normal trade

relations.23 They are known as "general rate" tari¤s in the case of China and Japan, and

as "column 2 tari¤s" in the case of the US. They are signi…cantly higher than factual tari¤s

with the simple averages being 69 percent as opposed to 10 percent for China, 76 percent

as opposed to 21 percent for Japan, and 23 percent as opposed to 3 percent for the US.24
   22
      I refer to these tari¤s as noncooperative tari¤s because it is unclear whether they should be thought of
as measures of optimal tari¤s or Nash tari¤s. Similarly, it is also unclear whether I should match the cross-
industry distribution of optimal tari¤s or the cross-industry distribution of Nash tari¤s to the cross-industry
distribution of noncooperative tari¤s. While I choose optimal tari¤s for simplicity, I also show below that the
results would have looked very similar if I had chosen Nash tari¤s instead.
   23
      The particular countries are Andorra, Bahamas, Bermuda, Bhutan, British Virgin Islands, British Cayman
Islands, French Guiana, Occupied Palestinian Territory, Gibraltar, Monserrat, Nauru, Aruba, New Caledonia,
Norfolk Island, Palau, Timor-Leste, San Marino, Seychelles, Western Sahara, and Turks and Caicos Islands
for China; Andorra, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Lebanon, and Timor-
Leste for Japan; and Cuba and Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for the US.
   24
      The average reported for the US column 2 tari¤s might seem too low to readers closely familiar with
US tari¤ data. Notice, however, that the average is taken over GTAP sectors which gives a lot of weight to
agricultural industries. The simple average over all HS 6-digit US column 2 tari¤s in my dataset is 32 percent.


                                                      16
However, their ranking is highly correlated with the ranking of factual tari¤s with the rank

correlation coe¢ cients being 49 percent for China, 80 percent for Japan, and 28 percent for

the US.

       Moreover, the TRAINS database provides direct measures of noncooperative tari¤s for

the EU. They are known as "autonomous rate" tari¤s and are obtained from Annex I of

the EU’s Combined Nomenclature Regulation. Just like the abovementioned measures of

noncooperative tari¤s, these "autonomous rate" tari¤s used to apply to non-WTO member

countries with which the EU did not have normal trade relations. However, the EU no longer

makes use of them and now simply applies its most-favored nation tari¤s by default.25 The

"autonomous rate" tari¤s are again signi…cantly higher than factual tari¤s with the simple

average being 25 percent as opposed to 8 percent. They are also again highly correlated with

factual tari¤s with the rank correlation coe¢ cient being 78 percent.

       Finally, it might be argued that the factual tari¤s of Brazil and India re‡ect their nonco-

operative tari¤s to some extent. This is because Brazil and India choose to set their factual

tari¤s well below the bound tari¤s they have committed to in the WTO. In particular, the

MAcMap database suggests that the average "water in the tari¤", i.e. is the di¤erence be-

tween bound and factual tari¤s, is around 20 percentage points for Brazil and around 30

percentage points for India. Needless to say, these and the other measures of noncooperative

tari¤s have to be taken with a large grain of salt. However, it will turn out that all aggregate

results are quite robust to the choice of political economy weights which will considerably

mitigate this concern.

       Figure 1b shows the result of matching the distribution of optimal tari¤s to the distribution

of noncooperative tari¤s for the EU, China, Japan, and the US, and to the distribution of

factual tari¤s for Brazil, India, and the Rest of the World. The matching is conducted by

minimizing the residual sum of squares between the optimal tari¤s and the noncooperative or

factual tari¤s after controlling for their respective means.26 Since noncooperative tari¤s are

applied nondiscriminatorily I also restrict the optimal tari¤s to be applied nondiscriminatorily

for the purpose of this exercise. As can be seen, the model is largely able to replicate the
  25
     In the rare instances in which the "autonomous rate" is lower than the bound most-favored nation rate,
the EU actually still applies the "autonomous rate", albeit on a most-favored nation basis.
  26
     A more detailed discussion of the algorithm can be found in the appendix.


                                                    17
distributions of noncooperative and factual tari¤s as one would expect given the number of

free political economy parameters.27 However, it also overpredicts the levels of noncooperative

tari¤s for all countries other than China, an issue which can be addressed by adjusting the

elasticities of substitution, as I explain below.

       Japan’s most extreme noncooperative tari¤s are too close to prohibitive to be exactly

matched by my method of computing optimal tari¤s without imposing extreme convergence

tolerances. For example, Japans noncooperative tari¤ on rice is 721 percent which is virtually

indistinguishable from a tari¤ of, say, 800 percent as far as its quantitative implications are

concerned. I therefore restrict each optimal tari¤ corresponding to a noncooperative tari¤

higher than 225 percent to be at most as high as the noncooperative tari¤ itself and …nd

the lowest possible political economy weight which makes the optimal tari¤ hit that upper

bound. As can be seen from Figure 1b, this procedure applies only to the most extreme

noncooperative tari¤s of Japan.

       The resulting political economy weights are reported in the second to eighth column of

Table 1 in which I have marked the …ve highest values for each country with boxes for better

legibility. Overall, the estimates appear highly plausible. For example, the …ve most favored

US industries are found to be wearing apparel, dairy, textiles, beverages and tobacco products,

and wheat. With an average rank correlation of 70 percent, the political economy weights

are highly correlated across countries. With an average rank correlation of 78 percent, they

are also highly correlated with the elasticities. To understand the latter correlation, recall

that politically unmotivated governments impose lower tari¤s in higher elasticity industries.

As a result, even a completely ‡at schedule of observed noncooperative tari¤s could only be

rationalized with higher political economy weights in higher elasticity industries. What is

more, observed noncooperative tari¤s tend to be higher in higher elasticity industries as one

might expect from inspecting the industry ranking in Table 1.28
  27
     Given that there are as many free parameters as data points, one might expect the distributions of predicted
optimal tari¤s to be identical to the distributions of observed noncooperative and factual tari¤s except for their
means. Recall, however, that the political economy weights are constrained to be non-negative so that this
does not always have to be the case. In my application, this constraint only binds in the case of the EU’s wool
industry which explains the slight outlier in the corresponding graph (industry rank 3). This occurs because
the EU imports the vast majority of its wool which makes the optimal tari¤ very inelastic with respect to the
political economy weight.
  28
     For a number of reasons, it is hard to compare these estimates to the ones obtained by Goldberg and
Maggi (1999). First, Goldberg and Maggi (1999) estimate a dummy variable indicating whether or not an


                                                       18
    Table 3b lists the e¤ects of unilaterally imposed optimal tari¤s given the estimated political

economy weights in exactly the same format as the earlier Table 3a. A comparison of the last

rows of Table 3a and Table 3b reveals that the aggregate implications of optimal tari¤s with

lobbying are quite similar to the aggregate implications of optimal tari¤s without lobbying.

The unweighted welfare gains are now a bit smaller given that governments now maximize

weighted welfare. Also, the median optimal tari¤s are now a bit higher given that the optimal

tari¤ distribution is now more extreme. The main di¤erence is that pro…t shifting e¤ects

are now all but eliminated given that the cross-industry distribution of tari¤s is now driven

primarily by political considerations.

    Table 3c explores the sensitivity of the results in Tables 3a and 3b to alternative assump-

tions on the elasticity of substitution. In particular, it recalculates the averages reported in

the last rows of Tables 3a and 3b using scaled versions of the original elasticity estimates

reported in Table 1, where the scaling is such that the elasticities average to the values dis-

played in the …rst column of Table 3c (recall that the original elasticity estimates reported in

Table 1 average to 3.4 percent). The speci…c range is chosen to correspond to the range of

aggregate trade elasticities suggested by Simonovska and Waugh (2011). As can be seen, the

optimal tari¤s and their welfare e¤ects are strongly decreasing in the elasticities. Intuitively,

lower elasticities give countries more monopoly power in world markets which they optimally

exploit through higher tari¤s.29

    Recalculating the last row of Table 3b involves recalibrating the political economy weights

to ensure that the distribution of optimal tari¤s continues to match the distribution of non-

cooperative or factual tari¤s. The main e¤ect of increasing the elasticities is to decrease the

variance of the political economy weights as it makes the optimal tari¤s more sensitive to

changes in the political economy weights. At the same time, the ranking of the political

economy weights stays largely unchanged with the average rank correlation coe¢ cient across
industry is politically organized whereas I allow the political economy weights to vary continuously by industry.
Also, Goldberg and Maggi (1999) restrict attention to US manufacturing industries only whereas I consider
agricultural and manufacturing industries around the world. Finally, Goldberg and Maggi (1999) use an SIC
3-digit industry classi…cation which is hard to match to the GTAP sectors considered here.
  29
     The trade elasticities are the partial equilibrium elasticities of trade ‡ows with respect to trade costs and
equal 1     s here. Simonovska and Waugh (2011) obtain their results in the context of an Eaton and Kortum
(2002) model, which means that their results do not exactly apply here. However, it is now well-understood
that di¤erent gravity models share similar aggregate behaviors so that I still use their numbers as rough bounds.




                                                       19
speci…cations being 97 percent. Moreover, recalculating the last rows of Table 3a and 3b

also involves repurging the original data from aggregate trade imbalances following the same

procedure explained above.

       Since optimal tari¤s are strongly decreasing in the elasticities, increasing the elasticities

also reduces the di¤erences between optimal tari¤s and noncooperative or factual tari¤s for

all countries other than China for which the levels were already closely matched in Figure

1b. For example, the optimal tari¤s of the US almost perfectly match the noncooperative

tari¤s of the US in a version of Figure 1b drawn for the case in which the elasticities average

to 6.5. In light of this, it is tempting to calibrate the average elasticity to minimize the

di¤erences between optimal tari¤s and noncooperative or factual tari¤s. Recall, however,

that the measured noncooperative or factual tari¤s are highly imperfect proxies for the actual

noncooperative tari¤s so that I do not pursue this here.30;31


2.6      Trade wars

The above discussion of each country’s optimal tari¤s assumes that the other countries do not

retaliate which allows each country to bene…t considerably at the other countries’ expense.

I now turn to an analysis of the Nash equilibrium in which all countries retaliate optimally.

The Nash tari¤s are such that each government chooses its tari¤s to maximize its objective

function (3) given the tari¤s of all other governments as well as conditions (10) - (13). They

can be computed by iterating over the algorithm used to compute optimal tari¤s, as I discuss

in detail in the appendix. I refer to optimal tari¤s without retaliation as optimal tari¤s and
  30
      By giving an extra weight to real pro…ts in the government objective functions (3), one could also control
the level of optimal tari¤s from the political economy side. However, this would work in a highly implausible
fashion which is why I refrain from it here. In particular, the level of optimal tari¤s could then be decreased
by increasing the weights on real pro…ts in all industries. To see this, consider a tari¤ reduction which is such
that it leaves the scale of all industries unchanged. Such a tari¤ reduction would then increase real pro…ts in
all industries by reducing the aggregate price index while leaving nominal pro…ts in all industries unchanged
as nominal pro…ts are directly proportional to industry scale. Essentially, governments would then cater to
producer interests by subsidizing consumption since they cannot boost production in all industries at the same
time.
   31
      To get a sense of how a version of the model without pro…t shifting e¤ects behaves, I have also computed
optimal tari¤s in the baseline case without lobbying under the assumption that the elasticity of substitution is
equal to 3.42 in all industries which is the average of my elasticity estimates from Table 1. In this case, optimal
tari¤s would be uniform across industries and have a median of 44 percent. They would increase welfare in the
tari¤ imposing country by 1.5 percent on average and decrease welfare in all other countries by 0.5 percent on
average. Of course, the prediction that optimal tari¤s are uniform across industries should not be expected to
generalize to richer terms-of-trade only environments in which relative prices and relative wages are less closely
linked.


                                                        20
optimal tari¤s with retaliation as Nash tari¤s throughout.32

       Figure 2a summarizes the Nash tari¤s of each country for the baseline version in which

 is    = 1 8 i and s. It ranks all industries by elasticity of substitution and plots the Nash

tari¤s of each country with respect to all trading partners against the industry rank. As can

be seen, these Nash tari¤s are very similar to the optimal tari¤s from Figure 1a. The median

Nash tari¤ across all countries is 58.1 percent which is remarkably close to the average tari¤

of 50 percent typically reported for the trade war following the Smoot-Hawley Tari¤ Act of

1930.33 This trade war is the only full-‡edged trade war in economic history and therefore

an interesting benchmark for me. Of course, it can only serve as a rough reference point

given the di¤erences in the set of players and the timing of the experiment. I will therefore

also contrast the predicted Nash tari¤s with the abovementioned measures of noncooperative

tari¤s when I discuss the political economy case below.

       Table 5a lists the welfare e¤ects of Nash tari¤s in a similar format as Table 3a. The main

di¤erence is that there is now only a single multilateral tari¤ scenario under consideration

in contrast to the seven unilateral ones from Table 3a. As can be seen, countries can no

longer bene…t at one another’s expense and welfare falls across the board with the average

loss equaling -2.4 percent. This loss is much higher than the average loss from unilaterally

imposed optimal tari¤s since all countries now impose noncooperative tari¤s at the same time.

Intuitively, each country now increases its import tari¤s in an attempt to induce favorable

terms-of-trade and pro…t shifting e¤ects. The end result is a large drop in trade volumes

which leaves all countries worse o¤.34

       Notice that the welfare losses resulting from Nash tari¤s are quite similar across countries

with only Japan and the Rest of the World standing out. The relatively small welfare loss of

Japan is again mainly due to Japan’s highly distortive factual tari¤s which imply that Japan’s

Nash tari¤s are well below Japan’s factual tari¤s in agricultural industries such as rice. The

relatively large welfare loss of the Rest of the World is mainly due to the fact that the Rest
  32
     I have experimented with many di¤erent starting values without …nding any di¤erences in the results which
makes me believe that the identi…ed Nash equilibrium is unique. This is, of course, subject to the well-known
quali…cation that complete autarky is also always a Nash equilibrium.
  33
     See, for example, Bagwell and Staiger (2002: 43). The reported number is again the average of the median
Nash tari¤s reported in the last row of Table 5a.
  34
     On average, trade ‡ows are predicted to fall by 57.7 percent due to Nash tari¤s.




                                                     21
of the World is by far the most open economy in the sample with an overall import share

of 27 percent (the average across all other countries is 16 percent). Variation in openness is

also the reason why variation in country size is not as visible as in Table 3a, since the larger

countries also tend to be the more open ones here.

       Figure 2b turns to the political economy case and plots the Nash tari¤s computed using

the political economy weights from above against the same measures of noncooperative and

factual tari¤s shown in Figure 2a. As can be seen, the distribution of Nash tari¤s is also quite

closely in line with the distribution of noncooperative and factual tari¤s even though they have

not been directly matched.35 This suggest that the political economy weights would have been

very similar if they had been chosen to match the distribution of Nash tari¤s rather than the

distribution of optimal tari¤s to the distribution of noncooperative and factual tari¤s. This is

comforting since it is not entirely clear which point on the tari¤ reaction curves the measures

of noncooperative and factual tari¤s best represent.

       Table 5b summarizes the welfare e¤ects of Nash tari¤s in the political economy case. A

comparison of the last rows of Table 5a and Table 5b reveals that the aggregate implications

of Nash tari¤s are also quite similar with and without political economy forces. Similar to

what we observed with respect to optimal tari¤s, the unweighted welfare losses are a bit larger

in the political economy case given that governments now maximize weighted welfare. Also,

the median Nash tari¤s are a bit higher in the political economy case given that the tari¤

distribution is now more extreme. Notice that the average pro…t shifting e¤ects are very small

even without lobbying which is the case because all governments attempt to boost their most

pro…table industries at the same time.36

       Table 5c explores the sensitivity of the results in Tables 5a and 5b to alternative assump-

tions on the elasticity of substitution exactly in the same fashion as explained earlier for Table

3c. As can be seen, the Nash tari¤s and their welfare e¤ects are strongly decreasing in the

elasticity of substitution just like the optimal tari¤s discussed above. Indeed, the average
  35
     Just like the optimal tari¤s, the Nash tari¤s also overpredict the levels of noncooperative tari¤s for all
countries other than China. See the section on optimal tari¤s for a discussion of how this issue can be addressed.
  36
     While the relatively high government welfare loss in the Rest of the World is again the result of its relatively
high trade exposure, the relatively low government welfare loss of Japan is now driven by its relatively extreme
political economy. In particular, Japan is e¤ectively banning imports in its politically best connected industries
which limits the losses in government welfare but signi…cantly harms overall welfare.




                                                         22
welfare loss from Nash tari¤s almost goes to zero in the baseline version without lobbying.

This is because high factual tari¤s such as some of the agricultural tari¤s imposed by Japan

become more distortive the higher the elasticity so that a move to Nash tari¤s also entails

sizeable e¢ ciency gains. Recall that all welfare changes are computed relative to factual tari¤s

and not relative to free trade as in much of the theoretical literature.37


2.7      Trade talks

The ine¢ ciency of the Nash equilibrium creates incentives for international trade policy co-

operation. I now turn to an analysis of such cooperation by characterizing the outcome of

e¢ cient multilateral trade negotiations. As will become clear shortly, there is an entire e¢ -

ciency frontier so that I have to take a stance on the speci…c bargaining protocol. I adopt one

in the spirit of symmetric Nash bargaining according to which all governments evenly split
                                                b 1 s.t. G
all e¢ ciency gains. In particular, I solve max G        bj = G
                                                              b 1 8 j starting at Nash tari¤s,

thereby invoking the same threat point as most of the theoretical literature. Moreover, I also

report results starting at factual tari¤s and zero tari¤s in order to quantify the scope for

future mutually bene…cial trade liberalization and assess how close global free trade is to the

e¢ ciency frontier.

       Figures 3a, 3b, and 3c show the world cooperative tari¤s under these three regimes for

the baseline version in which         is   = 1 8 i and s. They rank all industries by the elasticity of

substitution and plot the cooperative tari¤s of each country with respect to all trading partners

against the industry rank. As can be seen, the cross-industry variation in the cooperative

tari¤s is very similar across the three …gures while the cross-country variation is changing

quite a bit. The cross-industry variation in the cooperative tari¤s counteracts distortions

in relative prices originating from cross-industry variation in markups. The cross-country

variation in the cooperative tari¤s induces terms-of-trade e¤ects which replicate international

side payments and ensure that all e¢ ciency gains are split equally as required by the bargaining
  37
     To get a sense of how a version of the model without pro…t shifting e¤ects behaves, I have again also com-
puted Nash tari¤s in the baseline case without lobbying under the assumption that the elasticity of substitution
is equal to 3.42 in all industries which is the average of my elasticity estimates from Table 1. In this case, Nash
tari¤s would be uniform across industries and have a median of 43 percent. They would decrease welfare by
1.8 percent on average. Just like before, the prediction that Nash tari¤s are uniform across industries should
not be expected to generalize to richer terms-of-trade only environments in which relative prices and relative
wages are less closely linked.


                                                        23
protocol.

       To better understand the cross-industry variation in cooperative tari¤s, notice that the

equilibrium in this economy is e¢ cient as long as relative prices equal relative marginal costs.38

If markups are the same across industries, this is the case without policy intervention so

that free trade is then …rst-best. If markups di¤er across industries, however, relative prices

are distorted without policy intervention but can be fully corrected by taxing imports and

domestic sales in the high elasticity industries and subsidizing imports and domestic sales

in the low elasticity industries. This is also what governments attempt in the cooperative

equilibrium with the important di¤erence that they are given no access to domestic policy

instruments. This is similar to the point of Flam and Helpman (1987).39

       To better understand the cross-country variation in cooperative tari¤s, notice that a combi-

nation of import tari¤s and import subsidies can induce terms-of-trade e¤ects which replicate

international side payments. As an illustration, consider the case of the US and Japan. If

the US imposes an across-the-board import tari¤, this improves the US terms-of-trade but

also increases the prices of Japanese goods relative to US goods in the US market with the

opposite occurring in Japan. If Japan now responds with the right across-the board import

subsidy, it is possible to further improve the US terms-of-trade but now decrease the prices

of Japanese goods relative to US goods in the US market back to their original level with

the opposite occurring in Japan. In this situation, Japan would then e¤ectively make a side

payment to the US. This is essentially the point of Mayer (1981).

       An unrealistic feature of the cooperative tari¤s summarized in Figures 3a, 3b, and 3c is that

they include import subsidies which are rarely found in practice. However, ruling out import

subsidies makes very little di¤erence in terms of the quantitative results in the baseline version

in which      is   = 1 8 i and s. Table 7a therefore lists the e¤ects of cooperative tari¤s under the

more realistic assumption that tari¤s cannot be negative. These restricted cooperative tari¤s
  38
     To see this, consider the e¤ects of a fully symmetric increase in markups starting at the e¢ cient benchmark
where prices equal marginal costs. On the demand side, consumption would be unchanged for all varieties since
relative prices would be unchanged and pro…ts would be fully redistributed to consumers. On the supply side,
output would be unchanged for all varieties since there is a …xed number of …rms, a …xed supply of workers,
and wages adjust to ensure full employment.
  39
     In the baseline version in which is = 1 8 i and s, moving from Nash tari¤s to cooperative tari¤s therefore
implies moving from a tari¤ schedule which is decreasing in the elasticity of substitution (governments attempt
to shift pro…ts) to one which is increasing in the elasticity of substitution (governments attempt to correct
markup distortions).


                                                       24
look like a raised and truncated version of the unrestricted cooperative tari¤s presented in

Figures 3a, 3b, and 3c. The di¤erent columns of Table 7a refer to negotiations starting at

Nash tari¤s, factual tari¤s, and free trade, and all changes are always computed relative to

these respective starting points.40

       As can be seen, trade negotiations starting at Nash tari¤s increase each country’s welfare

by 3.4 percent. Since this number relates the worst-case scenario to the best-case scenario,

it can be viewed as an upper bound on the value of multilateral trade policy cooperation.

The results for trade negotiations starting at factual tari¤s suggest that around 85 percent

of these gains have already been reaped during past trade liberalizations with future trade

negotiations only permitting additional welfare gains of 0.5 percent. Moreover, the results for

trade negotiations starting at free trade suggest that free trade is very close to the e¢ ciency

frontier as the potential gains from such negotiations are negligibly small. This implies that

tari¤s are not an e¤ective tool for correcting domestic distortions exactly as the standard

targeting principle predicts.

       The wage e¤ects reported in Table 7a re‡ect the equilibrium side payments which ensure

that all governments gain the same. For example, Brazil su¤ers less from the Nash equilibrium

than other countries because it is relatively closed to international trade. As a result, it

faces lower tari¤s than other countries in the cooperative equilibrium from Figure 3a which

explains the associated terms-of-trade gains apparent in Table 7a. Similarly, Japan gains a

lot by reducing its high factual tari¤s on rice and other agricultural products. This implies

that it needs to make transfers to all other countries if the Nash bargaining protocol is to be

satis…ed, which explains the high tari¤s it faces in the cooperative equilibrium from Figure

3b as well as the associated wage decline noted in Table 7a.

       Table 7b turns to the welfare e¤ects of cooperative tari¤s in the political economy case,

again focusing on the realistic scenario that tari¤s must be nonnegative. A comparison of

the last rows of Table 7a and Table 7b reveals that the aggregate implications of cooperative

tari¤s are also quite similar with and without lobbying. The unweighted welfare gains from
  40
    Without ruling out import subsidies, the mean welfare e¤ects would have been 3.5%, 0.6%, and 0.05%,
the mean wage e¤ects would have been 0.0%, 0.0%, and 0.0%, and the mean pro…t e¤ects would have been
0.3%, 0.4%, and 0.2%, for negotiations starting at Nash tari¤s, factual tari¤s, and zero tari¤s, respectively.
Comparing those numbers to the last row of Table 7a reveals that ruling out import subsidies indeed makes
very little di¤erence here.


                                                     25
negotiations starting at factual tari¤s or free trade are now a bit smaller since governments

now maximize weighted welfare. In contrast, the unweighted welfare gains from negotiations

starting at Nash tari¤s are now a bit larger because Nash tari¤s are now associated with

lower unweighted welfare. Interestingly, trade negotiations starting at Nash tari¤s make

households in all countries better o¤ even though they are conducted by politically motivated

governments. This is no longer true, however, for trade negotiations starting at factual tari¤s

or zero tari¤s, speci…cally in the cases of China, India, and Japan.41

       Table 7b further reveals that free trade is quite close to the e¢ ciency frontier even in the

political economy case. In particular, government welfare only increases by 0.2 percent in all

countries following trade negotiations starting at free trade. This suggests that a good rule

of thumb for achieving e¢ ciency in remaining trade negotiations might be to focus on tari¤

reductions in sectors in which factual tari¤s remain high. One complication, however, is that

a move to free trade does not make all governments better o¤ relative to factual tari¤s. For

example, Indian government welfare would fall by 0.9 percent since Indian factual tari¤s and

optimal tari¤s are closely alined in the political economy case.

       Table 7c explores the sensitivity of the results in Tables 7a and 7b to alternative assump-

tions on the elasticity of substitution exactly in the same fashion as explained earlier for

Tables 3c and 5c. As can be seen, the gains from trade negotiations starting at Nash tari¤s

are decreasing in the elasticity while the gains from trade negotiations starting at factual tar-

i¤s are increasing in the elasticity. The gains from trade negotiations starting at Nash tari¤s

are decreasing in the elasticity simply because the Nash tari¤s themselves are decreasing in

the elasticity. The gains from trade negotiations starting at factual tari¤s are increasing in

the elasticity simply because factual tari¤s get more distortive the higher the elasticity.42

       In practice, governments do not simply engage in multilateral Nash bargaining but instead
  41
      The strong political preferences of Japan also imply that restricting tari¤s to be nonnegative is not as
innocuous here as it was in the benchmark case without political economy forces. Without that restriction,
Japan would be able to make larger side payments to other countries thereby buying additional support for its
rice and wheat industry and imposing signi…cant distortions on its economy.
   42
      To get a sense of how a version of the model without pro…t shifting e¤ects behaves, I have again also
computed cooperative tari¤s in the baseline case without lobbying under the assumption that the elasticity of
substitution is equal to 3.42 in all industries which is the average of my elasticity estimates from Table 1. In
this case, cooperative tari¤s would be uniform across industries. They would increase welfare by 2.5 percent,
0.5 percent, and 0.0 percent for trade negotiations starting at Nash tari¤s, factual tari¤s, and zero tari¤s
respectively with the latter result simply re‡ecting that free trade would then be on the e¢ ciency frontier.




                                                      26
follow a rules-based negotiation approach guided by the principles of the General Agreement

on Tari¤s and Trade (GATT) and the World Trade Organization (WTO). The most prominent

one is the most-favored nation (MFN) principle which forces countries to impose the same

tari¤ against all trading partners for any given traded product. A comprehensive assessment

of the implications of this principle is di¢ cult in the context of this paper since MFN is

enforced at the tari¤-line level and therefore does not have to hold within the broad industry

categories considered here. Nevertheless, it seems useful to discuss the e¤ects of imposing

MFN to get a sense of some of the broader issues involved.

   Tables 4a, 4b, and 4c report the e¤ects of imposing optimal tari¤s subject to the constraint

of MFN in the same format as the Tables 3a, 3b, and 3c discussed above. As can be seen, the

results are virtually identical with and without MFN, as one might have suspected from the

lack of cross-country variation in Figure 1a. Tables 6a, 6b, and 6c then turn to the e¤ects of

MFN versions of the Nash tari¤s covered in Table 5a, 5b, and 5c. Again, the results are very

similar with and without MFN, as one might have suspected from the lack of cross-country

variation in Figure 2a. Overall, these results suggest that MFN by itself is hardly e¤ective in

pushing countries towards the e¢ ciency frontier. Incidentally, this is consistent with the fact

that the abovementioned "autonomous rate", "general rate", and "column 2" tari¤s of the

EU, China, Japan, and the US are all imposed nondiscriminatorily.

   Tables 8a, 8b, and 8c list the e¤ects of trade negotiations subject to the constraint of

MFN in the same format as Tables 7a, 7b, and 7c. Recall from the above discussion of

Figures 3a, 3b, and 3c that cross-country variation in the cooperative tari¤s induces terms-of-

trade e¤ects which replicate international side payments. Imposing MFN somewhat restricts

such side payments which implies slightly lower gains from trade negotiations starting at Nash

tari¤s or factual tari¤s. The main e¤ect of imposing MFN, however, is that it signi…cantly

reduces the di¤erence between changes in government welfare and overall welfare for trade

negotiations starting at Nash tari¤s or factual tari¤s in the political economy case. This is due

to the fact that a restriction of side payments limits the governments’ ability to coordinate

their support for each other’s politically in‡uential industries.

   An additional implication of the MFN principle is that it "multilateralizes" trade negotia-

tions between a subset of countries by forcing them to extend all negotiated tari¤ concessions


                                               27
to non-participating countries as well. This implication has been discussed quite controver-

sially in the theoretical literature. Some authors argue that it undermines multilateral trade

negotiations by allowing non-participating countries to free ride on the bargaining outcomes

of participating ones (e.g. Caplin and Krishna, 1988). Other authors argue that it solves a

bilateral opportunism problem resulting from a trade bloc’s ability to manipulate its external

terms-of-trade (e.g. Bagwell and Staiger, 2005).43 While a comprehensive quantitative analy-

sis of these issues is beyond the scope of this paper, a simple thought experiment nevertheless

sheds some interesting light on them.

       In particular, consider the trade war equilibrium in the baseline version in which                is   =1

8 i and s and suppose that the EU, Japan, and the US reciprocally reduce their tari¤s

against one another by the same percentage while the other countries keep their trade war

tari¤s in place. The Northwest panel of Figure 4 shows the average welfare e¤ects of this

tari¤ reduction under the assumption that the liberalizing countries also keep their trade war

tari¤s against all other countries in place. As can be seen, this non-MFN tari¤ reduction

bene…ts the liberalizing countries and harms the other countries. The welfare loss of the other

countries is explained by a deterioration of their terms-of-trade which can be seen from the

associated relative wage e¤ects in the Northeast panel of Figure 4. It is the result of a shift

in US, EU, and Japanese consumer expenditure towards the cheaper liberalized goods.44

       Suppose now that the EU, Japan, and the US undertake the same tari¤ reductions but

extend them to the other countries according to the MFN principle while the other countries

still keep their trade war tari¤s in place.45 As can be seen from the Southwest panel of Figure

4, the liberalizing countries …rst gain and then lose from this MFN-tari¤ reduction while the

other countries are left much better o¤. The welfare gain of the other countries is explained

by an improvement of their terms-of-trade which can be seen from the associated relative

wage e¤ects in the Southeast panel of Figure 4. This is due to the fact that the liberalizing

countries make tari¤ concessions to the other countries without receiving anything in return.
  43
     See chapter 5 of Bagwell and Staiger (2002) for a detailed review of the relevant literature.
  44
     The associated pro…t shifting e¤ects are minimal since the tari¤ reduction occurs proportionately across
industries.
  45
     Recall that the trade war equilibrium is very similar with and without imposing MFN so that it does not
really matter which one is taken as a staring point. For simplicity, I focus on the trade war equilibrium subject
to MFN in all thought experiments captured in Figure 4.




                                                       28
Overall, MFN therefore seems to protect "outsider" countries from welfare losses associated

with liberalizations among "insider" countries. However, it also makes "insider" liberalizations

much less attractive by more than neutralizing their adverse external e¤ects.

       Readers familiar with the work of Bagwell and Staiger (2005) will recall that MFN neu-

tralizes external terms-of-trade e¤ects in their framework if the liberalizing parties keep their

bilateral terms-of-trade unchanged. While the thought experiment underlying Figure 4 sim-

ply considers proportional tari¤ cuts, the bilateral terms-of-trade of the liberalizing countries

are still largely unchanged so that this does not explain why the Bagwell and Staiger (2005)

result does not apply. Instead, the key is the presence of product di¤erentiation which breaks

the direct link between countries’bilateral terms-of-trade and makes MFN tari¤ concessions

excessive to the extent that the neutralization of external terms-of-trade e¤ects is the goal. As

an illustration, consider Chinese and Japanese electronics producers competing for customers

in the US and suppose that the US and Japan agree to a reciprocal trade liberalization which

leaves the world price of Japanese electronics unchanged:

       If the US reduces its tari¤s against Japan by 10 percent, the price of Japanese electronics

in the US market falls by 10 percent. The repercussions this has on the world price of

Chinese electronics depend on the degree of substitutability between Chinese and Japanese

electronics. If they are perfect substitutes, as in Bagwell and Staiger (2005), the Chinese

world price falls by 10 percent because otherwise Chinese electronics become uncompetitive

in the US market. If they are imperfect substitutes, as in the model developed here, the drop

in the Chinese world price is less extreme because Chinese electronics are then less susceptible

to Japanese competition. While a 10 percent (i.e. MFN) tari¤ reduction against China is

therefore required to neutralize the negative e¤ect of the US-Japanese trade liberalization

on the Chinese world price with perfect substitutes, such a tari¤ reduction is excessive with

imperfect substitutes, which explains my …ndings in Figure 4.46
  46
    While I only provide an intuitive discussion of this point in the interest of brevity, a formal analysis is
available from me upon request.




                                                      29
3    Conclusion

I proposed a ‡exible framework for the quantitative analysis of noncooperative and cooperative

trade policy which nests traditional, new trade, and political economy motives for protection.

I used this framework to provide a …rst comprehensive quantitative analysis of noncooperative

and cooperative trade policy, addressing some natural questions emerging from the theoretical

trade policy literature. I began by considering optimal tari¤s, i.e. the tari¤s countries would

impose if they did not have to fear any retaliation. I then turned to an analysis of Nash

tari¤s, i.e. the tari¤s countries would impose in a worldwide trade war in which their trading

partners retaliated optimally. I …nally investigated cooperative tari¤s, i.e. the tari¤s countries

would negotiate to in e¢ cient trade negotiations with and without being restricted by the

GATT/WTO’s most-favored nation clause.

    The interpretation of my results depends on whether the framework is taken as a main-

tained or tested hypothesis. In the former case, they can be viewed as answers to questions of

immediate policy relevance: for example, as revealing what would have happened if a trade

war had broken out in the wake of the recent …nancial crisis; or as suggesting how much there

is to gain from future multilateral trade negotiations. In the latter case, they can be inter-

preted as suggestive of the plausibility of some of the leading models of trade policy making:

for example, as demonstrating that the predicted noncooperative tari¤s can be brought in line

with observed noncooperative tari¤s by choosing plausible political economy weights; or as

showing that the underlying trade policy externalities can be su¢ ciently strong to reasonably

justify a lengthy process of multilateral trade negotiations.

    Given the near-absence of prior quantitative analyses of noncooperative and cooperative

trade policy, the framework could be extended in many ways and used to address a whole

host of related questions emerging from the large qualitative trade policy literature. As one

of many examples, one could elaborate on the role played by the GATT/WTO principles

of reciprocity and nondiscrimination as formalized by Bagwell and Staiger (1999) and ask

whether they are helpful or harmful for achieving and maintaining global e¢ ciency. This could

entail a quantitative analysis of the long-standing debate associated with Bhagwati (1991) of

whether free trade agreements, which are allowed under GATT/WTO rules as an important



                                               30
exception to the principle of nondiscrimination, represent building-blocks or stumbling-blocks

on the way towards full multilateral cooperation.




                                             31
4     Appendix

4.1   Data

My main data source is the eighth version of the Global Trade Analysis Project database

(GTAP 8) from which I take industry-level trade, production, and tari¤ data for the year

2007. The GTAP 8 database is a carefully cleaned, fully documented, publicly available,

and globally consistent database covering 129 countries and 57 industries which span the

agricultural, manufacturing, and service sectors of the economy. The GTAP 8 database is

itself based on a number of underlying databases. In particular, its trade data is mainly

drawn from the UN’s Comtrade database, its production data is mainly built from national

input-output tables, and its tari¤ data is mainly taken from the International Trade Centre’s

Market Access Map database. Additional information is available directly from the GTAP

website under https://www.gtap.agecon.purdue.edu.

    For my estimation of the demand elasticities, I further make use of the NBER-UN trade

data for the time period 1994-2008 which covers most countries in the world. The data is

originally at the SITC-Rev2 4-digit level and I convert it, …rst, to the SITC-Rev3 4-digit level

using a concordance from the Center for International Data at UC Davis and, second, to the

GTAP sector level using a concordance which I manually constructed with the help of various

concordances available from the GTAP website. This involved combining the original GTAP

sectors "raw milk" and "dairy products" into a new GTAP sector "raw and processed dairy",

the original GTAP sectors "paddy rice" and "processed rice" into a new GTAP sector "raw

and processed rice", and the original GTAP sectors "raw and processed sugar" and "sugar

cane, sugar beet" into a new GTAP sector "sugar".

    For my calibration of the political economy weights of China, Japan, and the US, I also

make direct use of the International Trade Centre’s Market Access Map database (MAcMap).

The MAcMap data provides exhaustive and consistent measures of tari¤ protection across

the world. Particular care has been taken to transform speci…c tari¤s into ad valorem equiva-

lents which is especially relevant for agricultural industries. While the database includes the

measure of noncooperative tari¤s described in the main text for China for the year 2007, I

have to use data from the year 2005 for the US and Japan. A small number observations are


                                              32
missing for Japan which I replace with Japan’s applied MFN rate. The data is originally at

the HS 6-digit level and I convert it to the GTAP sector level using a concordance available

from the GTAP website.

   For my calibration of the political economy weights of the EU, I make use of the UN’s

Trade Analysis and Information System (TRAINS) database which is made available using

the World Integrated Trade Solutions (WITS) software of the World Bank. The database

does not contain the measure of noncooperative tari¤s described in the main text for the year

2007, so I use the next closest alternative which is from the year 2000. The data is originally

at the HS 6-digit level and I convert it to the GTAP sector level using a concordance from

the WITS-TRAINS website.


4.2   Elasticity estimation

I estimate the import demand elasticities using the method of Feenstra (1994) which identi…es

them from variation in the variances and covariances of demand and supply shocks across

countries and over time. I base my estimation on the instructions in Feenstra (2010) in which

the method is particularly clearly explained. My estimating equation is equation (2.21) in

Feenstra (2010) which I estimate using weighted least squares following the code provided

in Appendix 2.2 of Feenstra (2010). However, I do not focus on a single importer, but pool

across the main importers considered in my analysis.

   Speci…cally, I pool across the importers Brazil, China, India, Japan, the US, and the

EU-25 countries Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,

France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,

The Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Spain, and the United King-

dom. I use all exporters available in the data. In my estimation, all results turn out to be

real numbers so that I do not need to resort to the grid search method proposed by Broda

and Weinstein (2006).

   Given that pro…t shifting e¤ects feature prominently in my analysis, one might wonder

how the cross-industry variation in markups implied by my elasticity estimates compares to

the cross-industry variation in other markup estimates in the literature. To address this, I

have compared the cross-country averages of the markup estimates reported in Tables 3 and 4

                                              33
of Martins et al (1996) to the markup estimates implied by the elasticity estimates in my Table

1. This was possible only for 23 of the 33 industries I consider since Martins at al (1996) do

not provide estimates for agricultural industries. Encouragingly, the estimates are positively

related with only one industry clearly standing out (beverages and tobacco products). The

overall correlation is 30 percent if the outlier is included and 45 percent otherwise.


4.3    Elimination of aggregate trade imbalances

To purge the trade data of aggregate trade imbalances, I essentially replicate the original Dekle

et al (2007) exercise using my model. In particular, I introduce aggregate trade imbalances as

nominal transfers into the budget constraints and allow them to change exogenously so that

equation (13) becomes

                   X X tijs Tijs                                                          X                    N Xj0
 b j = wj L j w
                                                             s   1                                js
 X            bj +               b     bi )1
                                 tijs (w         s
                                                      Pbjs           (bijs )   s   bj +
                                                                                   X                   bjs
        Xj          i s   Xj                                                                  s   Xj            Xj
                                                                                                                 (15)
                P P
where N Xi         j   s (Tijs   Tjis ) is taken from the data. I then use equations (10), (11),
                                                                bi ; Pbis ; bis resulting from setting
                                                           bi ; X
(12), and (15) to solve for the general equilibrium e¤ects w

N Xj0 = 0 while keeping all tari¤s unchanged. I …nally use these general equilibrium e¤ects to
                                                                                                   s    1
calculate the e¤ects on trade ‡ows using the relationship Tbijs = (w
                                                                   bi )1              s
                                                                                          Pbjs              bj , which
                                                                                                            X

delivers a trade matrix without aggregate trade imbalances.

   Aggregate trade imbalances are quite large in the raw data. In particular, exports minus

imports as a ratio of exports plus imports equal 17 percent for Brazil, 21 percent for China,

8 percent for the EU, -4 percent for India, 28 percent for Japan, -9 percent for the Rest of

the World, and -22 percent for the US. Given the elasticities listed in Table 1, the predicted

changes in exports and imports resulting from an elimination of aggregate trade imbalances

are -15 percent and 20 percent for Brazil, -17 percent and 28 percent for China, -9 percent

and 6 percent for the EU, 1 percent and -8 percent for India, -18 percent and 44 percent for

Japan, 6 percent and -11 percent for the Rest of the World, and 16 percent and -26 percent

for the US.

   As indicated in the main text, calculating the counterfactual e¤ects of trade policy changes

using the purged data and equations (10), (11), (12), and (13) has two main advantages over


                                                 34
the standard approach which would call for using the raw data and equations (10), (11),

(12), and (15) with aggregate net exports kept unchanged. First, the assumption of constant

aggregate trade imbalances leads to extreme general equilibrium adjustments in response to

high tari¤s and cannot be true in the limit as tari¤s approach in…nity. Second, the assumption

of constant nominal transfers implies that the choice of numeraire matters since real transfers

then change with nominal prices.

   While the …rst point should be obvious, the second point may not be immediately clear.
                                                                            N Xj
To see the problem, notice that country j’s real income depends on           Pj    in the presence

of aggregate trade imbalances if they are introduced as nominal transfers into the budget

constraints. If N Xj is held …xed, changes in real income therefore depend on changes in Pj

which, in turn, depend on the choice of numeraire. As a result, changes in all real variables

then depend on the choice of numeraire which can be a serious problem. Notice that N Xj

can generally not be held …xed in real terms since it also has to satisfy the global adding up
          P
constraint j N Xj = 0. Notice also that the numeraire is not an issue in the original Dekle

et al (2008) exercise since aggregate net exports are then set equal to zero anyway.


4.4   Algorithm

As indicated in the main text, calculating disaggregated noncooperative and cooperative tari¤s

is very intensive computationally due to the high dimensionality of the problem which has been

a major barrier to progress in the area. I overcome this barrier with a combination of modern

computing power and an e¢ cient algorithm based on the idea of mathematical programming

with equilibrium constraints as formulated in Su and Judd (forthcoming). Using a high-end

desktop computer and standard MATLAB software, it takes about 4 days to calculate all

results which are reported in the paper.

   I compute US optimal tari¤s by maximizing the government’s objective function (3) sub-

ject to the equilibrium conditions (10) - (13) using the algorithm suggested by Su and Judd

(forthcoming). To minimize the dimensionality of the problem, I do not literally use equations

(10) - (13) but substitute …rst for bis using equation (10) and then for Pbjs using equation (12).

As an alternative, I have also experimented with computing optimal tari¤s directly from the

…rst-order conditions which can also be manipulated in the spirit of Dekle et al (2008). How-

                                               35
ever, I eventually abandoned this approach since it did not su¢ ciently improve performance

to justify the substantial added complication.

   I compute world Nash tari¤s using a similar approach as Perroni and Whalley (2000) and

Ossa (2011). Starting at factual tari¤s, I compute each country’s optimal tari¤s, then impose

these optimal tari¤s, and let each country reoptimize given all other countries’optimal tari¤s,

and so on, until the solution converges in the sense that no country has an incentive to deviate

from its tari¤s. I have experimented with many di¤erent starting values without …nding any

di¤erences in the result which makes me believe that the identi…ed Nash equilibrium in unique.

This is, of course, subject to the well-known quali…cation that complete autarky is also always

a Nash equilibrium.
                                                    b 1 subject to the equilibrium conditions
   I compute world cooperative tari¤s by maximizing G
                                          bj = G
(10) - (13) as well as the condition that G    b 1 for all j using again the algorithm suggested

by Su and Judd (forthcoming). I either start from Nash tari¤s, factual tari¤s, or zero tari¤s

and again substitute …rst for bis using equation (10) and then for Pbjs using equation (12)

to reduce the dimensionality of the problem. As discussed in the main text, there is an

entire frontier of e¢ cient tari¤s due to the existence of de facto side payments and restricting
bj = G
G    b 1 for all j can be thought of as …nding the point on that frontier which also lies on a

45 degree line from the origin.

   I compute the political economy weights using a simple iterative procedure. Starting with

an initial guess, I always increase the political economy weights in industries in which the

predicted optimal tari¤ is below the targeted noncooperative tari¤, and decrease the politi-

cal economy weights in industries in which the predicted optimal tari¤ is above the targeted

optimal tari¤, always controlling for the cross-industry mean. I continue this procedure until

the distribution of predicted optimal tari¤s converges to the distribution of targeted nonco-

operative tari¤s, as in Figure 1b. For Japan’s most extreme noncooperative tari¤s, I follow a

slightly modi…ed procedure as explained in the main text.




                                               36
4.5     Derivations

4.5.1    Derivation of equation (14)

Equilibrium conditions (8) and (9) can be approximated as

                                   Pjs       X         ijs Tijs    wi          ijs
                                                                      +                                         (16)
                                  Pjs                   Xj        wi          ijs
                                             i


               Xj        wj Lj wj X X tijs Tijs                    tijs        Tijs         X      js    js
                                 +                                        +             +                       (17)
              Xj          Xj wj     s
                                         Xj                       tijs        Tijs             s
                                                                                                   Xj   js
                                         i

These approximations imply

               Pj        X X Tijs      pis X X tijs Tijs pis X X tijs Tijs tijs
                                          +                  +                                                  (18)
              Pj             s
                                 Xj   pis    s
                                                  Xj     pis   s
                                                                    Xj     tijs
                         i                        i                                 i


  Xj     X X Tijs          pjs X js               js          pjs  X X tijs Tijs Tijs X X tijs Tijs tijs
                              +                                   +                   +
 Xj           s
                    Xj    pjs   s
                                  Xj             js          pjs      s
                                                                          Xj     Tijs     s
                                                                                             Xj     tijs
          i                                                         i                   i
                                                                                                 (19)
                                                                   Wj          Xj        Pj
which immediately combines to equation (14) since                  Wj         Xj        Pj .   Notice that changes in

pro…ts which are due to changes in prices are attributed to the terms-of-trade e¤ect. Notice

also that changes in the price index which directly result from changes in tari¤s cancel with

changes in tari¤ revenue which directly result from changes in tari¤s.




                                                             37
References

 [1] Alvarez, F. and R. Lucas. 2007. "General Equilibrium Analysis of the Eaton-Kortum

    Model of International Trade." Journal of Monetary Economics 54(6): 1726-1768.

 [2] Bhagwati, J. 1991. "The World Trading System at Risk." Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-

    versity Press.

 [3] Bagwell, K. and R. Staiger. 1999. "An Economic Theory of GATT." American Economic

    Review 89(1): 215-248.

 [4] Bagwell, K. and R. Staiger. 2005. "Multilateral Trade Negotiations, Bilateral Oppor-

    tunism and the Rules of the GATT/WTO." Journal of International Economics 67:

    268-294.

 [5] Bagwell, K. and R. Staiger. 2006. The Economics of the World Trading System. Cam-

    bridge, MA: MIT Press.

 [6] Bagwell, K. and R. Staiger. 2009a. "Delocation and Trade Agreements in Imperfectly

    Competitive Markets." Manuscript, Stanford University.

 [7] Bagwell, K. and R. Staiger. 2009b. "Pro…t Shifting and Trade Agreements in Imperfectly

    Competitive Markets." Manuscript, Stanford University.

 [8] Bagwell and Staiger. 2011. "What Do Trade Negotiators Negotiate About? Empirical

    Evidence from the World Trade Organization." American Economic Review 101(4): 1238-

    1273.

 [9] Brander, J. and B. Spencer. 1981. "Tari¤s and the Extraction of Foreign Monopoly Rents

    under Potential Entry." Canadian Journal of Economics 14: 371-389.

[10] Broda, C., N. Limao, and D. Weinstein. 2008. "Optimal Tari¤s and Market Power: The

    Evidence." American Economic Review 98(5): 2032-2065.

[11] Broda, C. and D. Weinstein. 2006. "Globalization and the Gains from Variety." Quarterly

    Journal of Economics 121(2): 541-585.


                                            38
[12] Caliendo, L. and F. Parro. 2011. "Estimates of the Trade and Welfare E¤ects of NAFTA."

    Manuscript, University of Chicago.

[13] Dekle, R., J. Eaton, and S. Kortum. 2007. "Unbalanced Trade." American Economic

    Review Papers and Proceedings 97(2): 351-355.

[14] Eaton, J. and S. Kortum. 2002. "Technology, Geography, and Trade." Econometrica

    70(5): 1741-1779.

[15] Feenstra, R. 1994. "New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices."

    American Economic Review 84(1): 157-177.

[16] Feenstra, R. 1996. "US Imports, 1972-1994: Data and Concordances." NBER Working

    Paper 5515

[17] Feenstra, R. 2010. Product Variety and the Gains from International Trade. Cambridge,

    MA: MIT Press.

[18] Flam, H., Helpman, E. 1987. "Industrial Policy under Monopolistic Competition." Jour-

    nal of International Economics 22: 79-102.

[19] Goldberg, P. and G. Maggi. 1999. "Protection for Sale: An Empirical Investigation."

    American Economic Review 89(5): 1135-1155.

[20] Grossman, G. and E. Helpman. 1994. "Protection for Sale." American Economic Review

    84(4): 833-850.

[21] Hamilton, B. and J. Whalley. 1983. "Optimal Tari¤ Calculations in Alternative Trade

    Models and Some Possible Implications for Current World Trading Arrangements." Jour-

    nal of International Economics 15: 323-348.

[22] Johnson, H. 1953-54. "Optimum Tari¤s and Retaliation." Review of Economic Studies

    21(2): 142-153.

[23] Martins, J., S. Scarpetta, and D. Pilat. 1996. "Mark-up ratios in manufacturing indus-

    tries." OECD Working Paper 162.



                                            39
[24] Markusen, J. and R. Wigle. 1989. "Nash Equilibrium Tari¤s for the United States and

    Canada: The Roles of Country Size, Scale Economies, and Capital Mobility." Journal of

    Political Economy 97(2): 368-386.

[25] Mayer, W. 1981. "Theoretical Considerations on Negotiated Tari¤ Adjustments." Oxford

    Economic Papers 33: 135-153.

[26] Mrazova, M. 2011. "Trade Agreements When Pro…ts Matter." Manuscript, London

    School of Economics.

[27] Krugman, P. 1980. "Scale Economies, Product Di¤erentiation, and the Pattern of Trade."

    American Economic Review 70(5): 950-959.

[28] Ossa, R. 2011. "A "New Trade" Theory of GATT/WTO Negotiations." Journal of Po-

    litical Economy 119(1): 122-152.

[29] Ossa, R. 2012a. "Pro…ts in the "New Trade" Approach to Trade Negotiations". American

    Economic Review 102(3): 466-469.

[30] Ossa, R. 2012b. "Why Trade Matters After All". NBER Working Paper 18113.

[31] Perroni, C. and J. Whalley. 2000. "The New Regionalism: Trade Liberalization or Insur-

    ance?" Canadian Journal of Economics 33(1): 1-24.

[32] Pierce, J. and P. Schott. 2009. "Concording US Harmonized System Codes Over Time."

    NBER Working Paper 15548.

[33] Ricardo, D. 1817. "On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation." London,

    United Kingdom: John Murray.

[34] Simonovska, I. and M. Waugh. 2011. The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evidence.

    Manuscript, New York University.

[35] Su, C. and K. Judd. Forthcoming. "Constrained Optimization Approaches to Estimation

    of Structural Models." Econometrica.

[36] Venables, A. 1987. "Trade and Trade Policy with Di¤erentiated Products:             A

    Chamberlinian-Ricardian Model." Economic Journal 97: 700-717.

                                            40
                                        TABLE 1: Parameter estimates
                                         s      BRA         CHN       EU      IN D     JP N       ROW     US
  Wheat                               10.07     1.29        1.68     1.66     1.67     1.91       1.27   1.24
  Rice                                 7.01     1.23        1.64     1.51     1.38     1.91       1.23   1.19
  Dairy                                5.89     1.24        1.29     1.56     1.29     1.46       1.25   1.34
  Wearing apparel                      5.39     1.29        1.46     1.22     1.13     1.03       1.22   1.48
  Other metals                         4.47     1.11        0.80     1.06     1.05     0.94       1.08   1.16
  Vegetable oils, etc                  4.03     1.13        1.19     1.09     1.50     0.96       1.08   1.03
  Bovine meat products                 3.89     1.05        1.16     1.44     1.05     0.95       1.11   1.07
  Leather products                     3.67     1.18        1.13     1.06     0.97     1.17       1.08   1.22
  Ferrous metals                       3.67     1.10        0.73     1.04     1.04     0.90       1.03   1.09
  Other manufactures                   3.53     1.15        1.22     1.06     1.00     0.86       1.04   1.23
  Other cereal grains                  3.32     0.98        1.22     1.26     1.04     1.72       1.41   0.91
  Oil seeds                            3.21     0.97        1.01     0.87     1.20     1.79       1.20   1.04
  Other meat products                  3.20     1.03        1.09     1.12     1.04     0.91       1.11   0.96
  Beverages and tobacco products       2.92     1.01        1.45     1.28     1.51     0.93       1.09   1.24
  Bovine cattle, etc.                  2.91     0.92        0.56     1.07     0.92     0.94       0.91   0.81
  Textiles                             2.87     1.04        1.19     0.96     0.91     0.82       0.99   1.26
  Other transport equipment            2.84     0.91        0.76     0.94     0.74     0.73       0.90   1.03
  Plant-based …bers                    2.80     0.96        0.58     0.77     0.82     0.73       0.90   0.81
  Wool, etc                            2.76     0.91        0.85     0.00     0.86     1.37       0.91   0.64
  Motor vehicles, etc                  2.75     0.99        1.18     0.99     0.96     0.73       0.92   0.90
  Metal products                       2.70     1.01        0.96     0.94     0.84     0.75       0.91   1.06
  Sugar                                2.69     0.92        1.22     1.10     1.34     1.27       1.00   0.85
  Other food products                  2.62     0.90        1.01     0.98     1.05     0.93       0.96   0.89
  Paper products, etc.                 2.56     0.93        0.67     0.88     0.81     0.73       0.86   0.91
  Other crops                          2.53     0.92        0.64     0.87     1.12     0.74       0.93   0.80
  Electronic equipment                 2.49     0.91        0.82     0.87     0.61     0.66       0.84   1.00
  Other mineral products               2.47     0.92        0.87     0.87     0.80     0.72       0.89   1.02
  Other machinery, etc.                2.46     0.94        0.76     0.86     0.79     0.73       0.83   1.00
  Vegetables, etc.                     2.42     0.82        0.96     0.83     1.01     0.90       0.90   0.80
  Chemical products, etc.              2.34     0.85        0.74     0.84     0.73     0.71       0.81   0.96
  Wood products                        2.32     0.90        0.77     0.79     0.72     0.71       0.83   0.90
  Forestry                             2.20     0.77        0.78     0.66     0.61     0.70       0.76   0.61
  Other animal products                1.91     0.68        0.59     0.56     0.50     0.72       0.73   0.53
  Mean                                 3.42     1.00        1.00     1.00     1.00     1.00       1.00   1.00

Notes: The entries under    s are the estimated elasticities of substitution. The entries under   BRA until   US
are the estimated political economy weights for each country which are scaled to have a mean of one. The
boxes highlight the industries with the …ve highest values of      for each country.




                                                       41
                        TABLE 2: E¤ects of 50 percentage point increase in US tari¤
                                           General equilibrium e¤ects
                         US wage             US production (protected)          US production (other)
        Chem.            1.45%                       5.73%                             -1.40%
        Appar.           0.67%                       33.35%                            -0.97%
                                                Welfare e¤ects
                        US welfare            Terms-of-trade e¤ect              Pro…t shifting e¤ect
        Chem.            0.17%                       0.34%                             0.12%
        Appar.           -0.14%                      0.16%                             -0.15%

Notes: The entries under "General equilibrium e¤ects" are the percentage change in the US wage normalized
such that the average wage change across all countries is zero (column 1), the percentage change in the quantity
of output in the US chemicals or apparel industry (column 2), and the average of the percentage changes in
the quantity of output in the other US industries (column 3). The entries under "Welfare e¤ects" are the
percentage change in US welfare (column 1), the component due to terms-of-trade e¤ects (column 2), and the
component due to pro…t shifting e¤ects (column 3). The values in column 2 and 3 do not add up to the value
in column 1 because they are computed using equation (14) which is a linear approximation. Here, all changes
are computed relative to factual tari¤s.




                                                      42
                                 TABLE 3a: Optimal tari¤s without lobbying
                       gvt. welfare             welfare            wage              pro…ts       opt. tari¤
                     own     other       own       other    own      other    own         other    median
           Brazil   1.1%     -0.1%       1.1%      -0.1%   18.2%     -3.0%   0.8%         -0.0%    56.1%
           China    1.8%     -0.6%       1.8%      -0.6%   17.6%     -2.9%   0.5%         -0.1%    59.3%
           EU       1.9%     -1.0%       1.9%      -1.0%   22.5%     -3.7%   0.1%         -0.2%    61.3%
           India    1.7%     -0.1%       1.7%      -0.1%    8.7%     -1.5%   2.7%         -0.1%    54.0%
           Japan    4.0%     -0.3%       4.0%      -0.3%   18.6%     -3.1%   1.7%         -0.1%    59.6%
           RoW      2.9%     -1.7%       2.9%      -1.7%   19.0%     -3.2%   1.1%         -0.6%    61.5%
           US       2.3%     -0.9%       2.3%      -0.9%   23.8%     -4.0%   0.6%         -0.1%    60.3%
           Mean     2.2%     -0.7%       2.2%      -0.7%   18.3%     -3.1%   1.1%         -0.2%    58.9%


                                    TABLE 3b: Optimal tari¤s with lobbying
                       gvt. welfare            welfare             wage              pro…ts       opt. tari¤
                    own      other       own      other     own      other    own         other    median
           Brazil   0.9%     -0.1%       1.0%     -0.1%    18.1%     -3.0%   0.3%         -0.0%     54.2%
           China    1.5%     -0.4%       1.5%     -0.5%    13.3%     -2.2%   0.1%         -0.0%     60.7%
           EU       2.2%     -1.2%       1.7%     -1.1%    27.0%     -4.5%   -0.9%        0.1%      69.0%
           India    0.5%     -0.0%       0.7%     -0.0%    11.4%     -1.9%   0.6%         -0.0%     49.9%
           Japan    2.6%     -0.4%       1.0%     -0.4%    30.0%     -5.0%   -1.4%        0.1%      77.5%
           RoW      2.9%     -1.7%       2.6%     -1.8%    21.9%     -3.7%   -0.1%        -0.2%     68.9%
           US       2.5%     -0.9%       2.1%     -0.9%    26.4%     -4.4%   -0.2%        0.0%      56.4%
           Mean     1.9%     -0.7%       1.5%     -0.7%    21.2%     -3.5%   -0.2%        0.0%      62.4%


                              TABLE 3c: Sensitivity of optimal tari¤s w.r.t.          s
                                      Without lobbying (all values are means)
                       gvt. welfare            welfare             wage             pro…ts        opt. tari¤
           mean     own     other        own      other     own      other   own          other    median
            3.5     2.2%    -0.6%       2.2%      -0.6%    17.6%     -2.9%   1.1%         -0.2%    56.8%
            5.0     1.7%    -0.4%       1.7%      -0.4%    9.1%      -1.5%   1.1%         -0.2%    34.3%
            6.5     1.5%    -0.2%       1.5%      -0.2%    5.4%      -0.9%   1.1%         -0.2%    24.6%


                                       With lobbying (all values are means)
                       gvt. welfare            welfare             wage             pro…ts        opt. tari¤
           mean     own     other        own      other     own      other   own          other    median
            3.5     1.8%    -0.6%       1.5%      -0.6%    20.2%     -3.4%   -0.2%        0.0%     60.1%
            5.0     1.2%    -0.4%       0.9%      -0.4%    10.5%     -1.7%   -0.2%        0.0%     35.5%
            6.5     1.1%    -0.3%       0.7%      -0.3%    6.5%      -1.1%   -0.2%        0.0%     25.6%

Notes: The entries under "gvt. welfare" are the percentage changes in G, the entries under "welfare" are the
percentage changes in W, the entries under "wage" are the percentage changes in w normalized such that the
average wage change across all countries is zero, the entries under "pro…ts" are the percentage changes in total
pro…ts due to changes in industry output, and the entries under "opt. tari¤" are the medians of the optimal
tari¤s. The entries under "own" are the e¤ects on the tari¤ imposing country while the entries under "other"
are the averages of the e¤ects on all other countries. The last rows of Tables 3a and 3b report averages. Table
3c reports only such averages.




                                                           43
                           TABLE 4a: Optimal tari¤s without lobbying under MFN
                       gvt. welfare             welfare            wage              pro…ts     opt. tari¤
                     own     other       own       other    own      other    own      other     median
           Brazil   1.1%     -0.1%       1.1%      -0.1%   18.2%     -3.0%   0.8%      -0.0%     56.2%
           China    1.8%     -0.6%       1.8%      -0.6%   17.6%     -2.9%   0.5%      -0.1%     59.9%
           EU       1.9%     -1.0%       1.9%      -1.0%   22.4%     -3.7%   0.1%      -0.2%     60.9%
           India    1.7%     -0.1%       1.7%      -0.1%    8.7%     -1.5%   2.7%      -0.1%     54.0%
           Japan    4.0%     -0.3%       4.0%      -0.3%   18.6%     -3.1%   1.7%      -0.1%     59.6%
           RoW      2.8%     -1.7%       2.8%      -1.7%   19.0%     -3.2%   1.1%      -0.6%     63.0%
           US       2.3%     -0.9%       2.3%      -0.9%   23.8%     -4.0%   0.6%      -0.1%     60.8%
           Mean     2.2%     -0.7%       2.2%      -0.7%   18.3%     -3.1%   1.1%      -0.2%     59.2%


                            TABLE 4b: Optimal tari¤s with lobbying under MFN
                       gvt. welfare            welfare             wage              pro…ts     opt. tari¤
                    own      other       own      other     own      other    own       other    median
           Brazil   0.9%     -0.1%       1.0%     -0.1%    18.1%     -3.0%   0.3%      -0.0%      54.2%
           China    1.5%     -0.4%       1.5%     -0.5%    13.3%     -2.2%   0.1%      -0.0%      61.7%
           EU       2.2%     -1.2%       1.7%     -1.1%    27.0%     -4.5%   -0.9%      0.1%      68.9%
           India    0.5%     -0.0%       0.7%     -0.0%    11.4%     -1.9%   0.6%      -0.0%      49.9%
           Japan    2.6%     -0.4%       1.0%     -0.4%    30.0%     -5.0%   -1.4%      0.1%      77.8%
           RoW      2.9%     -1.7%       2.5%     -1.8%    22.0%     -3.7%   -0.1%     -0.2%      68.7%
           US       2.5%     -0.9%       2.1%     -0.9%    26.4%     -4.4%   -0.2%      0.0%      57.5%
           Mean     1.9%     -0.7%       1.5%     -0.7%    21.2%     -3.5%   -0.2%      0.0%      62.7%


                       TABLE 4c: Sensitivity of optimal tari¤s w.r.t.         s under MFN
                                      Without lobbying (all values are means)
                       gvt. welfare            welfare             wage             pro…ts      opt. tari¤
           mean     own      other       own      other     own      other   own       other     median
            3.5     2.2%    -0.6%       2.2%      -0.6%    17.6%     -2.9%   1.1%      -0.2%     57.2%
            5.0     1.7%    -0.4%       1.7%      -0.4%    9.0%      -1.5%   1.1%      -0.2%     34.4%
            6.5     1.5%    -0.2%       1.5%      -0.2%    5.4%      -0.9%   1.1%      -0.2%     24.7%


                                       With lobbying (all values are means)
                       gvt. welfare            welfare             wage             pro…ts      opt. tari¤
           mean     own      other       own      other     own      other   own       other     median
            3.5     1.8%    -0.6%       1.5%      -0.6%    20.3%     -3.4%   -0.2%      0.0%     60.4%
            5.0     1.2%    -0.4%       0.9%      -0.4%    10.5%     -1.8%   -0.2%      0.0%     35.6%
            6.5     1.1%    -0.3%       0.7%      -0.3%    6.5%      -1.1%   -0.2%      0.0%     25.7%

Notes: The entries under "gvt. welfare" are the percentage changes in G, the entries under "welfare" are the
percentage changes in W, the entries under "wage" are the percentage changes in w normalized such that the
average wage change across all countries is zero, the entries under "pro…ts" are the percentage changes in total
pro…ts due to changes in industry output, and the entries under "opt. tari¤" are the medians of the optimal
tari¤s. The entries under "own" are the e¤ects on the tari¤ imposing country while the entries under "other"
are the averages of the e¤ects on all other countries. The last rows of Tables 4a and 4b report averages. Table
4c reports only such averages.




                                                           44
                                  TABLE 5a: Nash tari¤s without lobbying
                        gvt. welfare           welfare          wage           pro…ts   Nash tari¤
            Brazil        -1.9%               -1.9%           1.3%            0.4%         56.4%
            China         -2.2%               -2.2%           0.5%            -0.2%        58.6%
            EU            -2.6%               -2.6%           2.7%            -0.9%        59.1%
            India         -2.2%               -2.2%           -9.3%           1.9%         54.5%
            Japan         -0.8%               -0.8%           -0.6%           0.7%         58.5%
            RoW           -5.0%               -5.0%           -0.8%           -0.6%        59.7%
            US            -2.2%               -2.2%           6.3%            -0.3%        59.6%
            Mean          -2.4%               -2.4%           0.0%            0.2%         58.1%


                                    TABLE 5b: Nash tari¤s with lobbying
                        gvt. welfare           welfare          wage           pro…ts   Nash tari¤
            Brazil        -2.7%               -2.5%           -4.6%           0.5%         54.7%
            China         -3.4%               -2.9%           -7.1%           0.3%         62.9%
            EU            -2.2%               -2.7%           5.6%            -1.2%        69.4%
            India         -3.6%               -3.3%           -10.5%          0.8%         54.1%
            Japan         -1.0%               -2.8%           11.4%           -1.7%        77.6%
            RoW           -5.3%               -5.6%           -1.3%           -0.1%        68.5%
            US            -2.0%               -2.4%           6.5%            -0.2%        56.6%
            Mean          -2.9%               -3.2%           0.0%            -0.2%        63.4%


                               TABLE 5c: Sensitivity of Nash tari¤s w.r.t.       s
                                   Without lobbying (all values are means)
             mean        gvt. welfare          welfare          wage           pro…ts    Nash tari¤
             3.5          -2.3%               -2.3%            0.0%           0.2%         56.0%
             5.0          -1.0%               -1.0%            0.0%           0.3%         34.4%
             6.5          -0.3%               -0.3%            0.0%           0.2%         25.4%


                                       With lobbying (all values are means)
             mean        gvt. welfare          welfare          wage           pro…ts    Nash tari¤
             3.5          -2.8%               -3.0%            0.0%           -0.2%        61.2%
             5.0          -1.5%               -1.7%            0.0%           -0.1%        36.2%
             6.5          -0.8%               -1.1%            0.0%           -0.1%        26.4%

Notes: The entries under "gvt. welfare" are the percentage changes in G, the entries under "welfare" are the
percentage changes in W, the entries under "wage" are the percentage changes in w normalized such that the
average wage change across all countries is zero, the entries under "pro…ts" are the percentage changes in total
pro…ts due to changes in industry output, and the entries under "Nash tari¤" are the medians of the Nash
tari¤s. The last rows of Tables 5a and 5b report averages. Table 5c reports only such averages.




                                                         45
                            TABLE 6a: Nash tari¤s without lobbying under MFN
                        gvt. welfare           welfare          wage           pro…ts   Nash tari¤
            Brazil        -1.8%               -1.8%           2.0%            0.5%         56.4%
            China         -2.3%               -2.3%           0.0%            -0.2%        59.4%
            EU            -2.5%               -2.5%           3.1%            -0.9%        58.7%
            India         -2.1%               -2.1%           -9.3%           1.9%         54.9%
            Japan         -0.7%               -0.7%           -0.7%           0.8%         58.6%
            RoW           -5.0%               -5.0%           -1.0%           -0.6%        60.4%
            US            -2.2%               -2.2%           5.8%            -0.3%        60.0%
            Mean          -2.4%               -2.4%           0.0%            0.2%         58.3%


                             TABLE 6b: Nash tari¤s with lobbying under MFN
                        gvt. welfare           welfare          wage           pro…ts   Nash tari¤
            Brazil        -2.5%               -2.4%           -3.7%           0.5%         54.7%
            China         -3.5%               -2.9%           -7.4%           0.3%         63.6%
            EU            -2.1%               -2.6%           6.1%            -1.2%        69.1%
            India         -3.6%               -3.3%           -10.5%          0.8%         54.3%
            Japan         -1.1%               -2.9%           10.7%           -1.7%        77.9%
            RoW           -5.3%               -5.6%           -1.4%           -0.1%        66.9%
            US            -2.1%               -2.5%           6.1%            -0.2%        57.8%
            Mean          -2.9%               -3.2%           0.0%            -0.2%        63.5%


                         TABLE 6c: Sensitivity of Nash tari¤s w.r.t.     s under MFN
                                   Without lobbying (all values are means)
             mean        gvt. welfare          welfare          wage           pro…ts    Nash tari¤
             3.5          -2.3%               -2.3%            0.0%           0.2%         56.2%
             5.0          -1.0%               -1.0%            0.0%           0.3%         34.5%
             6.5          -0.2%               -0.2%            0.0%           0.2%         25.4%


                                       With lobbying (all values are means)
             mean        gvt. welfare          welfare          wage           pro…ts    Nash tari¤
             3.5          -2.8%               -3.0%            0.0%           -0.2%        61.2%
             5.0          -1.5%               -1.7%            0.0%           -0.1%        36.4%
             6.5          -0.8%               -1.1%            0.0%           -0.1%        26.6%

Notes: The entries under "gvt. welfare" are the percentage changes in G, the entries under "welfare" are the
percentage changes in W, the entries under "wage" are the percentage changes in w normalized such that the
average wage change across all countries is zero, the entries under "pro…ts" are the percentage changes in total
pro…ts due to changes in industry output, and the entries under "Nash tari¤" are the medians of the Nash
tari¤s. The last rows of Tables 6a and 6b report averages. Table 6c reports only such averages.




                                                         46
                                TABLE 7a: Cooperative tari¤s without lobbying
                 gvt. welfare                 welfare                     wage                      pro…ts
          Nash     Fact.   Free      Nash    Fact.       Free    Nash    Fact.    Free    Nash      Fact.     Free
 Brazil   3.4%     0.5%    0.03%     3.4%    0.5%       0.03%    9.2%    6.1%     0.1%    -0.7%    -0.7%      0.0%
 China    3.4%     0.5%    0.03%     3.4%    0.5%       0.03%    0.0%    0.2%     -0.2%   -0.8%    -0.9%      0.2%
 EU       3.4%     0.5%    0.03%     3.4%    0.5%       0.03%    -2.1%   2.7%     0.1%     1.0%     0.3%      0.0%
 India    3.4%     0.5%    0.03%     3.4%    0.5%       0.03%    5.8%    -4.0%    -0.1%   -0.9%     1.0%      0.2%
 Japan    3.4%     0.5%    0.03%     3.4%    0.5%       0.03%    -2.7%   -9.4%    0.6%     1.4%     1.8%      -0.2%
 RoW      3.4%     0.5%    0.03%     3.4%    0.5%       0.03%    -6.0%   1.8%     -0.2%    0.6%    -0.2%      0.3%
 US       3.4%     0.5%    0.03%     3.4%    0.5%       0.03%    -4.2%   2.8%     -0.3%    0.4%     0.3%      0.2%
 Mean     3.4%     0.5%    0.03%     3.4%    0.5%       0.03%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%     0.1%     0.2%      0.1%


                                   TABLE 7b: Cooperative tari¤s with lobbying
                 gvt. welfare                 welfare                      wage                      pro…ts
          Nash     Fact.   Free     Nash    Fact.        Free    Nash    Fact.     Free    Nash     Fact.      Free
 Brazil   3.6%     0.5%    0.2%     3.5%     0.5%       0.28%    10.7%    3.3%     1.4%    -0.7%    -0.1%      0.6%
 China    3.6%     0.5%    0.2%     1.0%    -1.6%     -1.25%     -4.7%   -8.0%    -3.1%    -2.3%    -2.1%     -1.4%
 EU       3.6%     0.5%    0.2%     4.0%     0.3%     -0.01%     -2.7%    0.9%     0.8%    1.4%     0.0%      -0.1%
 India    3.6%     0.5%    0.2%     3.6%     0.8%     -0.86%     5.7%     0.6%    -0.7%    -0.6%    0.2%      -0.7%
 Japan    3.6%     0.5%    0.2%     4.9%     0.5%     -0.44%     -0.8%    1.5%     1.0%    1.7%     0.5%      -0.5%
 RoW      3.6%     0.5%    0.2%     4.2%     0.7%       0.28%    -4.7%    1.1%     1.0%    0.4%     0.3%       0.5%
 US       3.6%     0.5%    0.2%     4.1%     0.6%       0.15%    -3.5%    0.6%    -0.4%    1.0%     1.0%       1.0%
 Mean     3.6%     0.5%    0.2%     3.6%     0.3%     -0.27%     0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.1%     0.0%      -0.1%


                            TABLE 7c: Sensitivity of cooperative tari¤s w.r.t.       s
                                    Without lobbying (all values are means)
                 gvt. welfare                  welfare                    wage                     pro…ts
  mean    Nash     Fact.    Free     Nash     Fact.      Free     Nash   Fact.    Free    Nash     Fact.     Free
   3.5    3.3%     0.5%    0.03%     3.3%     0.5%       0.03%    0.0%   0.0%     0.0%    0.1%     0.2%      0.1%
   5.0    2.2%     0.8%    0.01%     2.2%     0.8%       0.01%    0.0%   0.0%     0.0%    -0.1%    0.1%      0.1%
   6.5    1.7%     1.1%    0.01%     1.7%     1.1%       0.01%    0.0%   0.0%     0.0%    -0.2%    0.0%      0.1%


                                       With lobbying (all values are means)
                 gvt. welfare                  welfare                    wage                     pro…ts
  mean    Nash     Fact.    Free     Nash     Fact.      Free     Nash   Fact.    Free    Nash     Fact.     Free
   3.5    3.5%     0.5%     0.2%     3.5%     0.3%      -0.26%    0.0%   0.0%     0.0%    0.1%     0.0%     -0.1%
   5.0    2.3%     0.7%     0.3%     2.2%     0.4%      -0.29%    0.0%   0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%      0.1%
   6.5    1.8%     1.0%     0.4%     1.7%     0.6%      -0.33%    0.0%   0.0%     0.0%    0.1%     0.0%      0.2%

Notes: The entries under "gvt. welfare" are the percentage changes in G, the entries under "welfare" are the
percentage changes in W, the entries under "wage" are the percentage changes in w normalized such that the
average wage change across all countries is zero, and the entries under "pro…ts" are the percentage changes in
total pro…ts due to changes in industry output. The individual columns refer to trade negotiations starting at
Nash tari¤s, factual tari¤s, and free trade, respectively. The last rows of Tables 7a and 7b report averages.
Table 7c reports only such averages.




                                                          47
                           TABLE 8a: Cooperative tari¤s without lobbying under MFN
                 gvt. welfare                 welfare                     wage                        pro…ts
          Nash     Fact.     Free    Nash     Fact.      Free    Nash    Fact.      Free    Nash     Fact.      Free
 Brazil   3.3%     0.3%     0.03%    3.3%     0.3%      0.03%    10.5%   3.3%      0.0%     -0.4%    -0.5%      0.1%
 China    3.3%     0.3%     0.03%    3.3%     0.3%      0.03%    -0.3%   -0.6%     -0.2%    -0.5%    -0.9%      0.2%
 EU       3.3%     0.3%     0.03%    3.3%     0.3%      0.03%    -2.3%   1.2%      0.1%     0.9%     0.2%       0.0%
 India    3.3%     0.3%     0.03%    3.3%     0.3%      0.03%    5.2%    -5.9%     -0.2%    -0.4%    1.0%       0.3%
 Japan    3.3%     0.3%     0.03%    3.3%     0.3%      0.03%    -2.9%   0.6%      0.7%     1.2%     0.5%      -0.1%
 RoW      3.3%     0.3%     0.03%    3.3%     0.3%      0.03%    -6.0%   0.5%      -0.2%    0.3%     -0.1%      0.3%
 US       3.3%     0.3%     0.03%    3.3%     0.3%      0.03%    -4.2%   0.8%      -0.2%    0.3%     0.5%       0.2%
 Mean     3.3%     0.3%     0.03%    3.3%     0.3%      0.03%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%     0.2%     0.1%       0.1%


                            TABLE 8b: Cooperative tari¤s with lobbying under MFN
                 gvt. welfare                 welfare                     wage                        pro…ts
          Nash     Fact.    Free     Nash    Fact.       Free    Nash    Fact.      Free    Nash     Fact.      Free
 Brazil   3.4%     0.3%     0.1%     3.3%    0.3%       0.17%    10.2%   2.5%       0.6%    -0.6%    -0.2%      0.5%
 China    3.4%     0.3%     0.1%     2.2%    -0.5%    -0.24%     -1.0%   -5.1%     -0.3%    -1.1%    -1.1%      -0.2%
 EU       3.4%     0.3%     0.1%     3.8%    0.2%     -0.10%     -3.6%   0.2%       0.2%    1.2%     0.0%       -0.2%
 India    3.4%     0.3%     0.1%     3.4%    0.5%     -0.30%     4.2%    0.9%      -0.2%    -0.6%    0.2%       -0.3%
 Japan    3.4%     0.3%     0.1%     4.5%    0.3%     -0.41%     -0.7%   0.4%      -0.6%    1.3%     0.4%       -0.4%
 RoW      3.4%     0.3%     0.1%     4.0%    0.5%       0.07%    -5.5%   0.4%       0.2%    0.5%     0.2%       0.3%
 US       3.4%     0.3%     0.1%     3.8%    0.4%       0.08%    -3.5%   0.7%       0.1%    0.7%     0.3%       0.4%
 Mean     3.4%     0.3%     0.1%     3.6%    0.2%     -0.11%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%    0.2%     0.0%       0.0%


                      TABLE 8c: Sensitivity of cooperative tari¤s w.r.t.         s under MFN
                                     Without lobbying (all values are means)
                 gvt. welfare                  welfare                    wage                      pro…ts
  mean    Nash     Fact.     Free     Nash    Fact.      Free    Nash    Fact.     Free    Nash     Fact.      Free
   3.5    3.2%     0.3%      0.03%    3.2%    0.3%       0.03%    0.0%   0.0%      0.0%    0.2%     0.1%       0.1%
   5.0    2.1%     0.6%      0.01%    2.1%    0.6%       0.01%    0.0%   0.0%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.1%
   6.5    1.6%     0.8%      0.01%    1.6%    0.8%       0.01%    0.0%   0.0%      0.0%    -0.1%    -0.1%      0.1%


                                       With lobbying (all values are means)
                 gvt. welfare                  welfare                    wage                      pro…ts
  mean    Nash     Fact.     Free     Nash    Fact.      Free    Nash    Fact.     Free    Nash     Fact.      Free
   3.5    3.3%     0.3%      0.09%    3.5%    0.3%      -0.11%    0.0%   0.0%      0.0%    0.2%     0.0%       0.0%
   5.0    2.0%     0.4%      0.14%    2.1%    0.3%      -0.15%    0.0%   0.0%      0.0%    0.1%     -0.1%      0.1%
   6.5    1.5%     0.4%      0.20%    1.7%    0.3%      -0.20%    0.0%   0.0%      0.0%    0.1%     -0.2%      0.1%

Notes: The entries under "gvt. welfare" are the percentage changes in G, the entries under "welfare" are the
percentage changes in W, the entries under "wage" are the percentage changes in w normalized such that the
average wage change across all countries is zero, and the entries under "pro…ts" are the percentage changes in
total pro…ts due to changes in industry output. The individual columns refer to trade negotiations starting at
Nash tari¤s, factual tari¤s, and free trade, respectively. The last rows of Tables 8a and 8b report averages.
Table 8c reports only such averages.




                                                          48
                                                                                                                              Optimal tarif f s US
                                                                             100



                                                                             80
                                                       Optimal tariff in %




                                                                             60



                                                                             40                                     Brazil
                                                                                                                    China
                                                                                                                    EU
                                                                             20                                     India
                                                                                                                    Japan
                                                                                                                    RoW
                                                                              0
                                                                                   1   3   5                      7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33
                                                                                                                 Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)

                                  Optimal tarif f s Brazil                                                                   Optimal tarif f s China                                                Optimal tarif f s EU
                      100                                                                                        100                                                                   100
Optimal tariff in %




                                                                                           Optimal tariff in %




                        50                                                                                         50                                            Optimal tariff in %     50



                         0                                                                                          0                                                                     0
                           1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                                               1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                          1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33
                      Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)                                              Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)                         Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)

                                  Optimal tarif f s India                                                                    Optimal tarif f s Japan                                               Optimal tarif f s ROW
                      100                                                                                        100                                                                   100
Optimal tariff in %




                                                                                           Optimal tariff in %




                                                                                                                                                                 Optimal tariff in %




                        50                                                                                         50                                                                    50




                         0                                                                                          0                                                                     0
                           1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                                               1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                          1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33
                      Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)                                              Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)                         Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)



                                                                               Figure 1a: Optimal tari¤s without lobbying




                                                                                                                                   49
                                                                                                                            Optimal tarif f s US
                                                                              250
                                                                                                                Data
                                                                                                                Model
                                                                              200
                                                        Optimal tariff in %




                                                                              150



                                                                              100



                                                                              50



                                                                               0
                                                                                    1   5                         9       13       17         21       25          29                          33
                                                                                                              Industry rank (lowest tarif f to highest tarif f )

                                   Optimal tarif f s Brazil                                                                Optimal tarif f s China                                                     Optimal tarif f s EU
                      250                                                                                     250                                                                        250
Optimal tariff in %




                                                                                        Optimal tariff in %




                                                                                                                                                                   Optimal tariff in %
                      200                                                                                     200                                                                        200
                      150                                                                                     150                                                                        150
                      100                                                                                     100                                                                        100
                       50                                                                                      50                                                                         50
                        0                                                                                       0                                                                          0
                          1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                                            1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                               1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33
                      Industry rank (lowest tarif f to highest tarif f )                                      Industry rank (lowest tarif f to highest tarif f )                         Industry rank (lowest tarif f to highest tarif f )

                                   Optimal tarif f s India                                                                 Optimal tarif f s Japan                                                    Optimal tarif f s RoW
                      250                                                                                     800                                                                        250
Optimal tariff in %




                                                                                        Optimal tariff in %




                                                                                                                                                                   Optimal tariff in %




                      200                                                                                     600                                                                        200
                      150                                                                                                                                                                150
                                                                                                              400
                      100                                                                                                                                                                100
                       50                                                                                     200                                                                         50

                        0                                                                                       0                                                                          0
                          1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                                            1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                               1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33
                      Industry rank (lowest tarif f to highest tarif f )                                      Industry rank (lowest tarif f to highest tarif f )                         Industry rank (lowest tarif f to highest tarif f )



                                                                                    Figure 1b: Optimal tari¤s with lobbying




                                                                                                                                 50
                                                                                                                      Nash tarif f s US
                                                                       100



                                                                       80
                                                    Nash tariff in %




                                                                       60



                                                                       40                                  Brazil
                                                                                                           China
                                                                                                           EU
                                                                       20                                  India
                                                                                                           Japan
                                                                                                           RoW
                                                                        0
                                                                             1   3   5                   7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33
                                                                                                        Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)

                                Nash tarif f s Brazil                                                                Nash tarif f s China                                                Nash tarif f s EU
                   100                                                                                  100                                                                100
Nash tariff in %




                                                                                     Nash tariff in %




                     50                                                                                   50                                            Nash tariff in %     50



                      0                                                                                    0                                                                  0
                        1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                                         1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                       1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33
                   Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)                                        Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)                      Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)

                                Nash tarif f s India                                                                 Nash tarif f s Japan                                               Nash tarif f s ROW
                   100                                                                                  100                                                                100
Nash tariff in %




                                                                                     Nash tariff in %




                                                                                                                                                        Nash tariff in %




                     50                                                                                   50                                                                 50




                      0                                                                                    0                                                                  0
                        1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                                         1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                       1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33
                   Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)                                        Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)                      Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)



                                                                             Figure 2a: Nash tari¤s without lobbying




                                                                                                                          51
                                                                                                                       Nash tarif f s US
                                                                        250
                                                                                                          Data
                                                                                                          Model
                                                                        200
                                                     Nash tariff in %




                                                                        150



                                                                        100



                                                                        50



                                                                         0
                                                                              1      5                      9       13       17         21       25          29                       33
                                                                                                        Industry rank (lowest tarif f to highest tarif f )

                                 Nash tarif f s Brazil                                                                Nash tarif f s China                                                     Nash tarif f s EU
                   250                                                                                  250                                                                     250
                   200                                                                                  200                                                                     200
Nash tariff in %




                                                                                     Nash tariff in %




                                                                                                                                                             Nash tariff in %
                   150                                                                                  150                                                                     150
                   100                                                                                  100                                                                     100
                    50                                                                                   50                                                                      50
                     0                                                                                    0                                                                       0
                       1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                                         1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                            1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33
                   Industry rank (lowest tarif f to highest tarif f )                                   Industry rank (lowest tarif f to highest tarif f )                      Industry rank (lowest tarif f to highest tarif f )

                                  Nash tarif f s India                                                                Nash tarif f s Japan                                                    Nash tarif f s RoW
                   250                                                                                  800                                                                     250
                   200                                                                                                                                                          200
Nash tariff in %




                                                                                     Nash tariff in %




                                                                                                                                                             Nash tariff in %




                                                                                                        600
                   150                                                                                                                                                          150
                                                                                                        400
                   100                                                                                                                                                          100
                    50                                                                                  200                                                                      50

                     0                                                                                    0                                                                       0
                       1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                                         1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                            1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33
                   Industry rank (lowest tarif f to highest tarif f )                                   Industry rank (lowest tarif f to highest tarif f )                      Industry rank (lowest tarif f to highest tarif f )



                                                                                  Figure 2b: Nash tari¤s with lobbying




                                                                                                                           52
                                                                                                                                          Cooperativ e tarif f s US
                                                                                       50



                                                             Cooperative tariff in %




                                                                                        0

                                                                                                                                                                               Brazil
                                                                                                                                                                               China
                                                                                                                                                                               EU
                                                                                                                                                                               India
                                                                                                                                                                               Japan
                                                                                                                                                                               RoW
                                                                                       -50
                                                                                             1   3   5                          7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33
                                                                                                                               Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)

                                    Cooperativ e tarif f s Brazil                                                                        Cooperativ e tarif f s China                                               Cooperativ e tarif f s EU
                            50                                                                                                   50                                                                        50
Cooperative tariff in %




                                                                                                     Cooperative tariff in %




                             0                                                                                                    0                                            Cooperative tariff in %      0



                           -50                                                                                                  -50                                                                       -50
                               1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                                                         1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                              1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33
                          Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)                                                        Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)                             Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)

                                    Cooperativ e tarif f s India                                                                         Cooperativ e tarif f s Japan                                              Cooperativ e tarif f s ROW
                            50                                                                                                   50                                                                        50
Cooperative tariff in %




                                                                                                     Cooperative tariff in %




                                                                                                                                                                               Cooperative tariff in %




                             0                                                                                                    0                                                                         0




                           -50                                                                                                  -50                                                                       -50
                               1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                                                         1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                              1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33
                          Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)                                                        Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)                             Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)



                                            Figure 3a: Cooperative tari¤s without lobbying starting at Nash tari¤s




                                                                                                                                                 53
                                                                                                                                          Cooperativ e tarif f s US
                                                                                       50



                                                             Cooperative tariff in %




                                                                                        0

                                                                                                                                                                               Brazil
                                                                                                                                                                               China
                                                                                                                                                                               EU
                                                                                                                                                                               India
                                                                                                                                                                               Japan
                                                                                                                                                                               RoW
                                                                                       -50
                                                                                             1   3   5                          7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33
                                                                                                                               Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)

                                    Cooperativ e tarif f s Brazil                                                                        Cooperativ e tarif f s China                                               Cooperativ e tarif f s EU
                            50                                                                                                   50                                                                        50
Cooperative tariff in %




                                                                                                     Cooperative tariff in %




                             0                                                                                                    0                                            Cooperative tariff in %      0



                           -50                                                                                                  -50                                                                       -50
                               1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                                                         1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                              1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33
                          Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)                                                        Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)                             Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)

                                    Cooperativ e tarif f s India                                                                         Cooperativ e tarif f s Japan                                              Cooperativ e tarif f s ROW
                            50                                                                                                   50                                                                        50
Cooperative tariff in %




                                                                                                     Cooperative tariff in %




                                                                                                                                                                               Cooperative tariff in %




                             0                                                                                                    0                                                                         0




                           -50                                                                                                  -50                                                                       -50
                               1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                                                         1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                              1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33
                          Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)                                                        Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)                             Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)



                                          Figure 3b: Cooperative tari¤s without lobbying starting at factual tari¤s




                                                                                                                                                 54
                                                                                                                                          Cooperativ e tarif f s US
                                                                                       50



                                                             Cooperative tariff in %




                                                                                        0

                                                                                                                                                                               Brazil
                                                                                                                                                                               China
                                                                                                                                                                               EU
                                                                                                                                                                               India
                                                                                                                                                                               Japan
                                                                                                                                                                               RoW
                                                                                       -50
                                                                                             1   3   5                          7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33
                                                                                                                               Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)

                                    Cooperativ e tarif f s Brazil                                                                        Cooperativ e tarif f s China                                               Cooperativ e tarif f s EU
                            50                                                                                                   50                                                                        50
Cooperative tariff in %




                                                                                                     Cooperative tariff in %




                             0                                                                                                    0                                            Cooperative tariff in %      0



                           -50                                                                                                  -50                                                                       -50
                               1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                                                         1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                              1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33
                          Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)                                                        Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)                             Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)

                                    Cooperativ e tarif f s India                                                                         Cooperativ e tarif f s Japan                                              Cooperativ e tarif f s ROW
                            50                                                                                                   50                                                                        50
Cooperative tariff in %




                                                                                                     Cooperative tariff in %




                                                                                                                                                                               Cooperative tariff in %




                             0                                                                                                    0                                                                         0




                           -50                                                                                                  -50                                                                       -50
                               1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                                                         1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33                                              1 5      9 13 17 21 25 29 33
                          Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)                                                        Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)                             Industry rank (lowest sigma to highest sigma)



                                             Figure 3c: Cooperative tari¤s without lobbying starting at zero tari¤s




                                                                                                                                                 55
                                                                  Non-MFN liberalization among EU, Japan, and US                                                              Non-MFN liberalization among EU, Japan, and US
                                                       1.5                                                                                                         1.5

                                                                           Liberalizing countries                                                                                      Liberalizing countries

                                                                           Other countries                                                                                             Other countries
                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                         1
Average welfare change in %




                                                                                                                                Average wage change in %
                                                                                                                                                                   0.5

                                                       0.5

                                                                                                                                                                     0



                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                   -0.5




                                                       -0.5                                                                                                         -1
                                                              0       20            40              60          80   100                                                  0       20            40              60          80   100
                                                                           Tarif f cut relativ e to Nash in %                                                                          Tarif f cut relativ e to Nash in %




                                                                    MFN liberalization among EU, Japan, and US                                                                  MFN liberalization among EU, Japan, and US
                                                         4                                                                                                          15

                                                                           Liberalizing countries                                                                                      Liberalizing countries

                                                                           Other countries                                                                          10                 Other countries
                                                         3


                                                                                                                                                                     5
                         Average welfare change in %




                                                                                                                                        Average wage change in %




                                                         2

                                                                                                                                                                     0

                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                    -5


                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                   -10



                                                         -1                                                                                                        -15
                                                              0       20            40              60          80   100                                                  0       20            40              60          80   100
                                                                           Tarif f cut relativ e to Nash in %                                                                          Tarif f cut relativ e to Nash in %




                                                                             Figure 4: Discriminatory versus nondiscriminatory tari¤ reductions




                                                                                                                           56
