                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    GENDER GAPS ACROSS COUNTRIES AND SKILLS:
                   SUPPLY, DEMAND AND THE INDUSTRY STRUCTURE

                                          Claudia Olivetti
                                         Barbara Petrongolo

                                        Working Paper 17349
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17349


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




We wish to thank Claudia Goldin, Steve Pischke and Gianluca Violante for their suggestions on earlier
versions of this paper, and Craig Riddel for invaluable help with the Canadian LFS. We also thank
Briana Ballis, Maria Burtseva and Michael Harris for excellent research assistance and the NSF for
financial suppport (grant SES-0820127). Helpful comments from seminar participants at Bocconi
University, Boston University, the 2009 Summer Meetings of the Econometric Society, the 2009 ESPE
Conference, the 2010 Eale/Sole Conference, the 2010 Research on Money and Markets conference
and the ESOP-ISF conference on Gender and Households are also gratefully aknowledged. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Claudia Olivetti and Barbara Petrongolo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Gender Gaps across Countries and Skills: Supply, Demand and the Industry Structure
Claudia Olivetti and Barbara Petrongolo
NBER Working Paper No. 17349
August 2011
JEL No. E24,J16,J31

                                               ABSTRACT

The gender wage gap varies widely across countries and across skill groups within countries. Interestingly,
there is a positive cross-country correlation between the unskilled-to-skilled gender wage gap and
the corresponding gap in hours worked. Based on a canonical supply and demand framework, this
positive correlation would reveal the presence of net demand forces shaping gender differences in
labor market outcomes across skills and countries. We use a simple multi-sector framework to illustrate
how differences in labor demand for different inputs can be driven by both within-industry and between-industry
factors. The main idea is that, if the service sector is more developed in the US than in continental
Europe, and unskilled women tend to be over-represented in this sector, we expect unskilled women
to suffer a relatively large wage and/or employment penalty in the latter than in the former. We find
that, overall, the between-industry component of labor demand explains more than half of the total
variation in labor demand between the US and the majority of countries in our sample, as well as one-third
of the correlation between wage and hours gaps. The between-industry component is relatively more
important in countries where the relative demand for unskilled females is lowest.


Claudia Olivetti
Boston University
Department of Economics
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
olivetti@bu.edu

Barbara Petrongolo
Centre for Economic Performance
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
and School of Economics and Finance
Queen Mary University
B.Petrongolo@lse.ac.uk
1     Introduction
Alongside clear advances in the labor market prospects of women over the past few decades,
there is evidence of sizable pay and employment disparity still remaining with respect to
men in most countries, and the goal of gender equality has recently been stated as one of
the Eight U.N. Millennium Development Goals (U.N., 2009).
    It is well known that gender pay and employment gaps vary widely across OECD countries
(Blau and Kahn, 2003; Olivetti and Petrongolo, 2008). What is probably less known is that
there are also large international differences in how gender gaps vary within countries across
levels of human capital. For example, in the US, the UK, Nordic countries, Germany and
the Netherlands, the gender wage gap is either rising with levels of education, or roughly
flat. When moving towards the south of Europe and Ireland, gender wage penalties are
largest among the unskilled. Large variations in gender wage gaps are also accompanied by
substantial variation in the corresponding gaps in hours worked. In particular, gender gaps
in hours everywhere fall with levels of education, but such gradient is highest in southern
Europe and Ireland, where employment rates of unskilled women are lowest. This pattern of
variation yields a positive cross-country correlation between the unskilled-to-skilled difference
in the wage gap and the corresponding difference in the hours gap (see Figure 3). Based
on a canonical supply and demand framework, positive co-variation in skill differentials in
quantities and prices would not be consistent with international differences in labor supply
alone, and reveals instead the presence of net demand forces shaping gender differences
in labor market outcomes across skills and countries. Thinking along these lines, the labor
demand hypothesis has the potential to explain why the labor market prospects of less-skilled
women are more vulnerable in some countries than others.
    In this paper we exploit a rich pattern of variation in gender gaps, between- and within-
countries, in order to identify gender biases in labor demand across skill groups in a number
of OECD countries. Demand forces may have in turn both within- and between-industry
components. While within-industry forces reflect differences in gender and skill intensities
within sectors, between-industry forces reflect differences in the sectoral composition of the
economy, where different sectors may have different skill and gender intensities. The former
may include skill-biased technical change, changes in prices of other inputs, outsourcing,
gender comparative advantages, or discrimination. The latter may instead be driven by
differences in product demand, in sector-specific productivity growth, in the rate of mar-
ketization of home production, or international trade. Building on this decomposition, we
link the variation in gender gaps to the process of structural transformation, and investigate
whether unskilled women suffer relatively larger labor market penalties in some countries be-
cause their female-intensive sectors are relatively less-developed. For example, if the service
sector is larger in the US than in southern Europe, and unskilled women tend to be over-


                                               2
represented in services, we expect unskilled women to suffer a relatively large wage and/or
employment penalty in the latter than in the former.
    We use micro data that are as comparable as possible across countries, namely the US
Current Population Survey, the Canadian Labor Force Survey, and the European Community
Household Panel Survey, in order to obtain a measure of net demand differences by gender
and levels of education. Our first result is that everywhere except in the UK, Germany and
the Netherlands, there is a stronger gender bias in the demand for unskilled than skilled
labor, relative to the US. That is, the demand for unskilled female labor is relatively higher
in the US than in most countries in our sample. This finding cannot be explained by cross-
country differences in the process of women’s selection into paid employment, as we obtain
very similar results when we correct observed wages for sample selection. We also provide
suggesting evidence that cross-country variation in gender gaps is not driven by institutional
or cultural factors that may affect the relative demand and supply of female labor differently
across skill groups and countries, as the partial correlation between gender gaps in quantities
and prices remains firmly positive when we control for a number of institutional and cultural
indicators.
    Based on a simple model of a multi-sector economy, we illustrate how the variation
in the male bias in labor demand may be driven by cross-country differences in labor input
intensities within industries, or differences in product demand across industries with different
input intensities. Using a ten-fold industry classification, we decompose differences in labor
demand between each country in our sample and the US into within- and between-industry
components, and find that both play important roles in explaining international differences
in labor demand, with wide variation in their relative importance across countries.
    For realistic values of the elasticity of substitution between male and female labor inputs,
the between-industry component explains more than a half of the demand differential with
respect to the US in the majority of countries, and namely Nordic countries, the Nether-
lands, Austria, Ireland, France and southern Europe. This result is mostly driven by the
different weight of the broad service sector between these countries and the US. The inter-
pretation is that the service sector in the US is larger than in other countries, and in this
sector the unskilled gender bias in labor demand is smaller than the skilled one. In the
remaining countries, there is either a smaller gender bias in the demand for unskilled than
skilled labor relative to the US, or the within-industry component of labor demand differ-
ences largely dominates the between-industry one. In other words, the between-industry
component tends to be relatively more important in cases where the demand for unskilled
females is relatively low. Finally, adjusting unskilled-to-skilled wage gaps across countries
for the between-industry component of labor demand reduces the corresponding correlation
with hours gaps by two thirds, from 0.41 to 0.14.
    The within-industry component of labor demand differences is also sizable in most coun-


                                               3
tries, as most sectors in the US tend to be more unskilled-women intensive than elsewhere.
In particular, we find that international differences in the occupational structure within in-
dustries drive a large fraction of the within-industry component of labor demand. This is not
surprising. For example, if the manufacturing sector is more unskilled-female intensive in
the US than in other countries, then this sector also tends to have an occupational structure
that is relatively more favorable to unskilled women in the US than in other countries.
    By looking at the role of the industry structure in shaping gender gaps across skills
and countries, this paper brings together two strands of literature. First, there exists a
literature on the driving forces of the international variation in the gender gap. Our previous
work (Olivetti and Petrongolo, 2008) stresses that, if there is overall positive selection into
employment, employed women tend to have relatively high-wage characteristics. Thus low
female employment rates become consistent with low wage gaps simply because low-wage
women are less likely to feature in the observed wage distribution. Work by Blau and Kahn
(1996, 2003) emphasize the role of international differences in overall inequality: if women
tend to have on average lower wage characteristics than men, higher overall inequality would
translate such differences into a wider gender pay gap. We contribute to this literature by
uncovering the skill dimension of gender inequalities, relating the variation in gender gaps
across skills and countries to demand and supply forces.
    Second, this paper is related to a large literature on the labor market impact of structural
transformation. In the micro literature, seminal work by Katz and Murphy (1992) shows
that an important fraction of changes in the US wage distribution from 1963 to 1987 can
be explained by a within-sector rise in demand for skilled labor, in turn led by increasing
computerization of production processes (Autor, Katz and Krueger, 1998). More recently,
Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003) propose a task-based view of technological progress, having
conceptualized work as a series of tasks that can be classified into routine or non-routine
activities, and Autor and Dorn (2009) show how recent employment and wage polarization in
the US might have been driven by the reduced usage of routine tasks following the adoption
of new technologies.1 In the macroeconomic literature, Ngai and Pissarides (2008) illustrate
how long-run trends in aggregate market hours in the US are related to the secular decline
of agriculture and the rise of services, and Rogerson (2008) relates differences in market
hours between continental Europe and the US to the smaller weight of the service sector in
European economies. Both papers highlight the marketization of services that have home
substitutes as a key force driving structural transformation and variation in market hours.
    Our approach complements existing micro and macro studies along two main dimensions.
First, we introduce gender and skill dimensions in the analysis of the labor market effects
   1
     See Goos and Manning (2007) for a study of polarization in the UK labor market, and Goos, Manning
and Salomons (2010) for an application to a number of European countries. See also Black and Spitz-Oener
(2010), for a study of the impact of routinization on the gender wage gap in West Germany.



                                                   4
of structural transformation. If skilled and unskilled women tend to be over-represented in
different industries, special attention should be paid to the impact of the industry structure
on female labor market outcomes across the skill distribution. Second, we emphasize inter-
national differences in both gender gaps and the industry structure, and illustrate the role of
the between-industry component of labor demand in shaping international variation in the
gender gap.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our data sets and provides evidence
on the variation of gender gaps across skills and countries, highlighting the presence of net
demand forces underlying such variation. Section 3 proposes a simple theoretical framework
that illustrates the relationship between gender gaps across skills and gender biases in labor
demand. Section 4 shows that international variation in employment selection, institutions or
cultural norms fails to explain the observed correlations between hours and wage gaps, while
variation in the share of services may have a better potential at that. Section 5 generalizes
our theoretical framework to a multi-sector economy in which differences in labor demand
can be decomposed in measurable within- and between-industry components. Section 6
presents our decomposition results and shows that the between-industry component explains
an important portion of the total variation in labor demand between the US and the majority
of countries in our sample, as well as of the evolution of cross-country differences between
1970 and 2000. Section 7 concludes.


2    Some preliminary evidence
In this section we present descriptive evidence on gender gaps by levels of education for the
US, Canada and thirteen European countries. These are: UK, Finland, Denmark, Germany,
Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Ireland, France, Italy, Spain, Portugal and Greece. For
the US we use data from the March Current Population Survey (CPS) for the years 1995-
2002, where each year’s survey contains detailed information on the previous year’s labor
market variables. This choice of sample period is made to ensure consistency with European
data, extracted from the European Community Household Panel Survey (ECHPS), which is
only available from 1994-2001 and provides contemporaneous information on labor market
variables. For Canada we use data from the march Labor Force Survey (LFS) for the years
1997-2004. Questions on wages and earnings are first included in the Canadian LFS in 1997,
and in order to use eight survey years for Canada as for most other countries we extend the
Canadian sample until 2004.
    While the data are quite different in structure - for the US and Canada we use repeated
cross-sections, for Europe we have an unbalanced panel - the information we exploit from
these data is as consistent as possible across countries. We select individuals ages 25-54 who
are not in full-time education, retired, military, or self employed, and use information on


                                              5
gender, age, educational qualifications, industry, occupation, weekly hours and wages.
    Weekly hours are obtained for the US as total annual hours in the previous year, divided
by the number of weeks worked. For Canada and Europe, we use information on usual
hours in the survey week. This allows for a more consistent measure of working hours across
countries, as the information on current hours in the CPS refers to actual rather than usual
hours. Hourly wages are obtained for the US as gross wage and salary income in the previous
year, divided by annual hours worked. For Canada, we use information reported on gross
hourly earnings. For Europe, wages are obtained by dividing current gross monthly wage
and salary earnings by actual hours worked, as we do not have a measure of usual earnings in
the ECHPS. Our core sample includes individuals with positive earnings and non zero hours.
As the definition as well as the adoption of part-time work varies widely across countries,
we do not restrict the analysis to full-time workers.
    Information on educational attainment is only available in the ECHPS by broad cate-
gories, i.e. less than upper secondary high school, upper secondary school completed, and
higher education. These correspond to ISCED 0-2, 3, and 5-7, respectively. We thus attempt
to reproduce this threefold distinction for the US and Canada, where available categories
of education are 15 and 7, respectively. For the US, the low education group includes all
individuals who have not completed 12th grade, the middle group includes those who have
completed 12th grade but do not have a college degree, and the high-education group includes
those who have completed a college degree. For Canada the three categories include those
who have not completed secondary education, those who have completed upper secondary
education but do not have a college degree, and those with a college degree, respectively.
Education shares in the population for each country are reported in Table A1.
    Our analysis below is focused on a two-fold distinction between skilled and unskilled, so
one would need to somehow reorganize the three educational categories available into two
groups. An obvious solution would be to merge the mid-education group to either the low-
or high-education group. This is equivalent to treating secondary school graduates as either
pure non-graduate equivalents or pure college equivalents. A method to illustrate which one
of these two options is more appropriate consists in using wage regressions to determine the
extent to which the wages of high school graduates co-move with the wages of non-graduates
and college graduates, respectively, as also performed in Katz and Murphy (1992). We thus
regress mean wages for high school graduates by year, country and gender on mean wages for
dropouts and college graduates, plus controls for year, country and gender. The regression
results show that a person with a high school degree is equivalent to a total of 0.984 of a
person without a school diploma (with a standard error of 0.061), and -0.014 of a person
with a college degree (s.e. = 0.029). We thus merge the low- and middle-education groups
to form our unskilled labor group, and the skilled group is represented by college graduates.
This classification also has the advantage to define as skilled a group whose qualifications


                                             6
are measured relatively consistently across countries.
    Figure 1 shows cross country variation in the gender wage gap for the skilled and the
unskilled. The values represented in the bar chart are obtained as coefficients on a male
dummy in regressions for log hourly wages that only control for gender and year effects,
using population weights. All estimates are significantly different from zero at the 1 percent
significance level. In Nordic countries and a group of continental European countries includ-
ing Germany, Netherlands, Austria and France, the gender wage gap is higher for the skilled
than for the unskilled, though it can be noted that the proportional difference is stronger in
Nordic countries than in other countries. In the rest of the sample the wage gap is instead
higher for the unskilled than for the skilled. While in the US such difference is rather small,
at least in proportional terms, it becomes quite sizable in other countries, and especially in
Canada, Ireland, Italy and Greece. Although the correlation is far from perfect, countries
with low average wage gaps are also countries in which the wage gap tends to fall with years
of education.
    Figure 2 presents corresponding information for gender gaps in working hours. The
values displayed are the gender difference in the (log of the) hours to population ratio, where
hours are obtained as the sum of usual weekly hours by gender, skill and country, and the
population is the corresponding head count. In all countries except Finland the gender gap
in hours worked falls substantially with the level of education, but the gradient is much
stronger in Belgium, Ireland and Southern Europe than elsewhere.
    This rich variation in gender gaps can be broadly summarized by looking at the correlation
between the skill differential in the wage and hours gaps. In Figure 3 we plot the difference
between the unskilled and the skilled wage gap (i.e. the difference between each couple of
country bars in Figure 1) against the difference between the unskilled and the skilled hours
gap (i.e. the corresponding difference from Figure 2). The correlation between them is
positive, equal to 0.41. There is clearly no outlier country that drives this correlation, and
excluding each country in turn from the sample we obtained correlation estimates ranging
from 0.32 (excluding Finland) to 0.52 (excluding Canada). Thus despite some variation
in the correlation obtained across different samples, its range of variation remains firmly
positive. Positive co-movements of quantity and price differentials presented here points in
the direction of demand factors possibly shaping the variation in gender gaps across skills
and countries. The next section more formally models gaps in labor demand and supply for
an economy with CES technology, and works out implications for wage and hours gaps.


3    A simple theoretical illustration
Let’s consider an economy that produces output Q employing a combination of skilled and
unskilled labor, denoted by S and U respectively, according to the following CES production


                                              7
function:
                                    Q = [αS ρ + (1 − α) U ρ ]1/ρ ,                                (1)
where α is a technology parameter representing the relative weight of skilled labor in output
production. The elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled labor is given by
σ = 1/(1 − ρ), with ρ ≤ 1.
   The economy is populated by male and female workers, indexed by M and F respectively,
who can be either skilled or unskilled. We assume that skilled and unskilled labor inputs are
both described by CES aggregators of female and male labor:
                                             ρS                          ρS
                      S = [β S (BM S MS )          + (1 − β S ) (BF S FS ) ]1/ρS                  (2)
                                              ρU                          ρU
                      U = [β U (BM U MU )          + (1 − β U ) (BF U FU ) ]1/ρU ,                (3)

where MS , MU , FS and FU represent the four types of labor inputs, BM S , BM U , BF S and
BF U are the associated labor-augmenting technological parameters, and β S and β U index
the share of work activities performed by men from each skill group. Finally, ρS and ρU
determine the elasticity of substitution between male and female labor in each skill group
according to σ S = 1/(1 − ρS ) and σ U = 1/(1 − ρU ), respectively.
   Under perfect competition in the labor market, all inputs are paid their marginal pro-
ductivity, and thus the gender wage ratio of skill i = S, U is given by:
                                              (σi −1)/σi  −1/σi
                         WM i      βi     BM i              Mi
                               =                                     ,
                         WF i    1 − β i BF i               Fi
where WM i and WF i denote real wages. Taking logs we obtain:

                                    ∆wi = β  ei − 1 ∆hi ,                                          (4)
                                                    σi
                                          
                   WM i
where ∆wi = ln WF i and ∆hi = ln M           Fi
                                               i
                                                   are the skill-specific gender gaps in wages
                              ei ≡ 1 {σ i ln[β i /(1 − β i )] + (σ i − 1) ln[BM i /BF i ]} denotes the
and hours respectively, while β       σi
skill-specific gender bias in labor demand.
    Given the gender wage gap in (4), and assuming that elasticities of substitution between
male and female labor are constant across skills (σ S = σ U = σ), one can obtain the within-
country skill difference in gender wage gaps as:

                                              e − 1 (∆hU − ∆hS ) .
                                                
                        ∆wU − ∆wS = β    e −β
                                          U    S                                         (5)
                                                     σ
The within-country variation in wage gaps across skill levels is thus driven by both differ-
ences in relative demand for each skill group (βe −β  e ) and differences in relative supplies
                                                 U      S
(∆hU − ∆hS ).
   Finally, we are interested in how the double difference in (5) varies across countries. To
ease this comparison, assume for simplicity that elasticities of substitution between male and

                                                     8
female labor inputs are constant across both countries and skills, and denoted by σ, and that
the only factors that vary across countries are relative demands and supplies of labor inputs.
Thus the (triple) difference in wages across genders, skills and countries can be expressed as

                                                 eS − 1 ∆C (∆hU − ∆hS ) ,
                                                  
                      ∆C (∆wU − ∆wS ) = ∆C βeU − β                                                   (6)
                                                      σ
where ∆C indicates the differential between a generic country C in our sample and the US. 
    Equation (6) helps us clarifying our interpretation of Figure 3. Let’s imagine ∆C βe −β e =
                                                                                        U    S
0, i.e. relative demand for labor inputs does not vary across countries. In this case equation
(6) implies a negative cross-country relationship between (∆wU − ∆wS ) and (∆hU − ∆hS ),
with a slope equal to the inverse of the elasticity of substitution. In fact, the positive re-
lationship that we observe in Figure 3 can only be rationalized by underlying net relative
demand differences. Before exploring the nature of cross-country differences in labor de-
mand, the next section will consider a few caveats to a demand-story interpretation of the
observed variation in gender gaps.


4         Sample selection, institutions and culture
A rich variety of factors may in principle drive the correlation between wage and hours
gaps and, especially when cross-country differences are considered, an obvious culprit would
be variation in institutions or something as broad as “social norms”. One may think that
institutions such as maternity leave legislation can potentially affect relative demand and
supply of female labor, and if responses are skill specific, they may affect the cross country
variation of gender gaps by skill. Similarly, culture and the perceived role of women in
society may vary across countries and skill groups.
    We will assess the role of these factors in two ways. First, to the extent that institutions
and social norms have an impact on women’s (and possibly men’s) participation into paid
employment, we will control for different patterns of employment selection across countries
and skills. Second, we will directly look at partial correlations between wage and hours gaps,
having controlled for (available indices of) attitudes towards female work and labor market
institutions at the country level.
    Concerning selection, it should be noted that the demographic groups considered are
indeed characterized by very different employment rates. In particular, gender gaps in em-
ployment to population ratios vary from less than 10 percentage points in some cases in our
sample, to nearly 60 percentage points in others. Thus it makes sense to worry about the
way in which different pattern of employment selection across genders, skills and countries
may affect our results, if at all.2
    2
        Blau and Kahn (2006) and Mulligan and Rubinstein (2008) find that employment selection mechanisms


                                                     9
    Specifically, we relate the observed positive association between wage and hours gaps to
underlying differences in labor demand, but one could think of alternative mechanisms that
would drive similar correlation patterns, based for example on different social norms driving
different patterns of employment selection across countries. Imagine, for the sake of the
argument, that in southern Europe it would be socially acceptable for an educated woman
to take a skilled job, but it would not seem proper for an uneducated woman to take an
unskilled job as a cleaner or waitress, unless she is ‘forced’ by economic conditions in her
household. As a result, fewer uneducated women would work, and those who work would
be negatively selected, i.e. they may be married to relatively low-wage husbands, and would
have low-wage characteristics themselves, resulting in higher wage gaps at the bottom of the
wage distribution. This hypothetical outcome, although observationally equivalent to some
of the patterns observed in Figures 1 and 2, would not be driven by differences in demand
forces, but simply by differences in the quality composition of the employed workforce in
different countries. Below we thus assess the impact of employment selection mechanisms
on the observed correlations between wage and hours gaps.
    We use a very simple method for controlling for selection, that is we impute wages to the
nonemployed based on their observable characteristics, and then estimate median wage gaps
on the resulting enlarged wage distribution.3 By relying on median, as opposed to mean,
wage gaps, the only information that is exploited about imputed wages is their position with
respect to the median of the potential wage distribution, not the actual imputed level. Our
imputation follows two alternative rules. With the first rule, we impute wages below the
median (by gender and skill) to all those who are unemployed, as opposed to nonparticipants,
and we leave the potential wages of nonparticipants as missing. The underlying idea is that
the unemployed are receiving wage offers (if any) below their reservation wage, while the
employed have received at least one wage offer above their reservation wage. At given
reservation wages, the unemployed have lower potential wages than the observed wages of
the employed, and are thus assigned an imputed wage below the median. With the second
rule, we assign wages below the median to non working individuals whose partners have
can explain part of the evolution of the gender wage gap in the US over time, and our previous work (Olivetti
and Petrongolo, 2008) has emphasized the importance of employment selection in interpreting international
differences in gender wage gaps. None of these studies, however, investigate the role of selection along the
skill dimension.
    3
      An even simpler way to deal with sample selection would be to control for the observed characteristics
of the employed population when estimating pay gaps. As our groups are already defined along gender
and education dimensions, the obvious further control to be considered would be age, as a proxy for labor
market experience. We thus estimated gender pay gaps having controlled for age and age squared in the
corresponding regressions (as well as for time effects), and obtained a correlation between the unskilled to
skilled difference in the adjusted pay gaps and the corresponding difference in the hours gap equal to 0.66.
Controlling for age actually raises - rather than explain - the observed correlation between gender pay and
employment gaps. In other words, the implied differences in labor demand forces would be even stronger if
we were controlling for differences in the average age of gender/skill groups across countries.



                                                     10
total income in the bottom quartile of their gender/skill-specific distribution, based on the
assumption of assortative mating along wage attributes.4
    Figure 4 shows scatter plots of gender gaps using selection-corrected median wages. In
panel A wage imputation is based on unemployed versus nonparticipant status, while in
panel B it is based on spouse income. The two panels give almost identical results, i.e.
the correlation between wage and employment gaps stays firmly positive once we control for
selection into paid work. If anything, such correlation is higher than when we use uncorrected
wage gaps in Figure 3. Hence we find no evidence at all that employment selection behavior
may explain the observed variation of gender gaps by skill.
    We next look at how the partial correlation between the skill differential in wage gaps
and the skill differential in hours gaps is affected if one controls for institutional or cultural
indicators. Such correlations are reported in Table 1, with the associated p−values. In
column 1 no other controls are included, corresponding to the exercise represented graphically
in Figure 3, and the correlation between the two variables is positive and significant at the
10 percent level. Columns 2-4 control for three institutional variables in turn, and namely:
(i) the generosity of maternity leave legislation, which may affect both demand and supply
of female skills; (ii) a measure of the marginal tax rate for second earners, which would
predominantly affect the labor supply behavior of (unskilled) women; and (iii) the strictness
of employment protection legislation, which may affect demand for high-turnover workers
relative to others. In columns 2 and 3 the correlation between wage and hours gaps is only
slightly reduced with respect to column 1, while in column 4 it somewhat increases. While
these institutional factors may affect the relative labor market position of skilled and/or
unskilled women (and we will not expand further on these effects here), the point these
partial correlations make is that there is some residual labor demand story that shapes
observed skill/gender differentials.
    Columns 5-8 control for indexes of women’s and men’s attitudes towards traditional
gender roles. Column 5 controls for the proportion of women who agree with the statement:
“When jobs are scarce, men should have more right to a job than women”, and column 6
controls for the corresponding proportion of men. Columns 7 and 8 control for the proportion
of women and men, respectively, who agree with the statement “Being a housewife is just as
fulfilling as working for pay”. None of these variables can wash away the positive correlation
between wage and hour gaps. In fact such correlation tends to be considerably higher in
columns 6 and 8 than in column 1, and is always significant (at least) at the 10 percent level.
   4
    See Olivetti and Petrongolo (2008) for a discussion of the theoretical underpinnings of this methodology.
Our preferred selection correction method in that paper consisted in imputing wages to the nonemployed in
some base year using wage observations from adjacent waves in panel data. Here we are unable to follow
this approach. The reason is that for the US and Canada we do not have panel data, and for European
countries the overall sample size is relatively small, and thus we need to pool all waves in the panel in order
to be able to work on cells defined by gender, skill, industry and country.


                                                      11
    Columns 9-10 control for wage bill shares in various sectors in the economy, proxying
for the between-industry component of labor demand. While the wage bill shares of the
primary, manufacturing and construction sectors if anything raise the partial correlation
between gender wage and hours gaps, this becomes negative as soon as the share of six
broad services sectors is controlled for. Moreover, controlling for the weight of service sectors
help explain two thirds of the overall cross-country variation, giving the highest R2 across
specifications in this table. Finally, column 11 controls for the IT capital share in total
capital compensation, which may affect demand for skills and genders within industries.
This reduces the correlation between gender wage and hours gaps in both size and statistical
significance, but it remains positive.
    Of course the list of variables considered is not exhaustive, and given the basic specifica-
tion and small sample size one should take these correlations with more than some caution,
but one could very simply relate the evidence reported in Table 1 to the relationship between
pay gaps, hours gaps and demand forces, as represented in equation (6). Only if one were
able to properly account for demand differences across countries, ∆C β    eU − βeS , would the
the partial correlation between wage and hours gap turn negative. Table 1 has shown that
a number of institutional or cultural factors would not be able to account for such demand
differences, while the weight of services in the economy seem to do a better job at that.
Taking stock of these pieces of evidence, the next section explicitly introduces a sectoral
dimension into a simple model for labor demand.


5     A multisector economy
Differences in labor demand across genders, skills and countries may have both within- and
between-industry components. The within-industry component reflects differences in gender
or skill intensities that happen within sectors. These are typically attributed to non-neutral
technological progress, changes in prices of other inputs, gender comparative advantages,
or taste and/or statistical discrimination. Between-industry forces reflect changes in the
sectoral composition of the economy, where different sectors may have different skill and
gender intensities. These may stem from differences in product demand, differences in sector-
specific productivity growth, in the rate of marketization of home production, or international
trade. Among all these, factors that will be relevant for our analysis are those that can drive
cross-country differences between high- and low-skill gender gaps.

5.1    Shift share analysis
Following this distinction, we can decompose the difference between the wage bill share of
a given factor k (k = M S, M U, F S, F U ) between each country and the US into a term


                                               12
reflecting differences in labor allocation across sectors, and a term reflecting differences in
gender and skill intensities within sectors. In what follows we denote wage bill shares by
lower case y and wage bills by upper case Y, and index by 0 the reference country (US) and
by C = 1, ..., 14 other countries in the sample. Thus the difference in wage bill shares of
input k between country C and the US can be expressed as
                                                    X                   
                              X           YjC   Yj0            YkjC   Ykj0
                  ykC − yk0 =      γ kj       −      +     γj       −        ,              (7)
                                j
                                          YC    Y0      j
                                                               YjC     Yj0

where j indexes sectors, YkjC denotes the wage bill of input k in sector j in country C,
        P                                                     P
YjC =      k YkjC denotes  the sectoral wage bill, YC =         j YjC denotes the aggregate wage
                                                      
                         YkjC     Ykj0                    YjC  Yj0
bill and finally γ kj = YjC + Yj0 /2 and γ j = YC + Y0 /2 are decomposition weights.
No time subscripts are used as all magnitudes are averages for the period 1994-2001, or a
subsample of this if not all waves are available. The first term in equation (7) represents the
cross-country difference in the wage bill share of input k that is attributable to differences
in the size of industries that employ input k, while the second term reflects cross-country
differences in input-k intensities within industries. The γ kj and γ j terms serve as weights
on the between- and within industry components, respectively, obtained as cross country
averages.
    While the cross-industry variation is the main dimension through which we analyze cross-
country differences in this study, the above decomposition can be used to look into other
dimensions of the structure of labor demand. In particular, one may be interested in the
role of the occupational structure in shaping labor demand patterns across countries, and
this links to a growing “task-based” approach to changes in labor demand, which focuses
on the impact of technological change on the occupational structure (see Autor, Levy and
Murnane, 2003, and Acemoglu and Autor, 2011, for a comprehensive review of the subsequent
literature). As changes in the occupational structure may take place within industries, one
can further decompose the within-industry component in (7) into a between-occupation and
a within-occupation component, according to the following expression:
                                               
                       X           YjC      Yj0
        ykC − yk0 =         γ kj        −
                        j
                                   YC        Y0
                                  "                          X                          #
                          X         X            YjqC   Yjq0                 YkjqC   Ykjq0
                       +       γj        γ kjq        −       +       γ jq         −          , (8)
                           j         q
                                                 Y jC   Y j0       j
                                                                             Y jqC   Y jq0


where the first term is the usual between-industry component as in (7), and the second term
highlights between- and within-occupations components, with occupationsbeing indexed by
                                                                               Y       Y
q. The γ kjq and γ jq are decomposition weights, and specifically γ kjq = YkjqC  jqC
                                                                                     + Ykjq0
                                                                                         jq0
                                                                                             /2
                        
             Y      Y
and γ jq = YjqCjC
                  + Yjq0
                      j0
                           /2, where YkjqC represents wage bills by group, industry, occupation
and country, and YjqC represents wage bills by industry, occupation and country.

                                                13
5.2     A multisector model of labor demand
Before quantifying the components of the shift-share decomposition above, we incorporate
such decomposition into a multi-sector model of labor demand. This will help link the
variation in labor demand to cross-country differences in the strenght of the male-bias in
each industry or to differences in product demand across industries with different gender
and skill intensities.
    Following the standard approach in this literature,5 we consider an economy with J
industries, and assume that output in each industry j, Qj , is produced combining skilled
and unskilled labor according to a CES production function like (1), with constant elasticity
of substitution across sectors, denoted by σ = 1/(1 − ρ).6
    In our model skilled and unskilled labor inputs are further CES aggregators of male
and female labor according to equations (2) and (3), respectively, with constant elasticities
of substitution σ i = 1/(1 − ρi ), but with sector-specific technology parameters β ij , BM ij
and BF ij , implying that the various labor inputs are not equally productive across sectors.
                                    P
Aggregate output is given by Q = j Aj Qj , where Aj denotes total factor productivity in
industry j.
    The relative demand for the output of industry j relative to a reference industry r is
assumed to be given by the unit price elasticity function
                                             Qj
                                                = θ j Pj ,                                          (9)
                                             Qr
where Pj denotes the price of Qj relative to Qr and θj is a demand shifter that reflects
consumer tastes, international trade and other factors affecting relative product demand for
the output of industry j.
   For the special case of a Cobb-Douglas economy (σ = σ S = σ U = 1), it can be shown
that under the assumptions of perfect competition and perfect mobility in the labor market
the gender wage gap for skill group i is given by:
                                                ei − ∆hi ,
                                          ∆wi = β                                                  (10)

which is equivalent to expression (4) of the aggregate economy, with σ i = 1 and the qualifi-
cation that                                   P                !
                                                   β  θ j
                                 ei = ln P j ij
                                 β                                                     (11)
                                              j (1 − β ij )θ j

is now a function of the different skill intensities within industries (β ij ) and consumer’s
demand across industries (θj ). This highlights the within- and between-industry components,
respectively, in the gender bias in labor demand.
  5
   See Katz and Autor (1999).
  6
   This assumption, that is common in this literature, is made for empirical tractability, see Bound and
Johnson (1992, footnote 7).

                                                  14
    The next step consists in measuring the quantities of interest for our decomposition.
Given (10), the total cross-country difference in the gender bias in labor demand is given by
the log difference in wage bill shares. That is, denoting by ∆C β e the cross-country difference
                                                                   i
in β
   e , (10) implies
     i
                                    e = ∆C ln yM i − ∆C ln yF i .
                                 ∆C β                                                       (12)
                                      i

    Turning to between- and within-industry components, the assumption of Cobb-Douglas
preferences and technology throughout this economy allows us to measure the β ij terms
of equation (11) as wage bill shares of a given input in industry j, and the θj terms as
                                                                        P
shares of total revenue accruing to an industry j, having normalized j Pj Qj = 1. That
is, β ij = YM ij /Yj and θj = Yj /Y , implying that cross-country differences in β
                                                                                 e can be
                                                                                   i
decomposed in simply measurable within- and between-industry components. These are
shown to be (approximately) equal to:
                          P YM ijC  YjC Yj0             P YF ijC  YjC Yj0  
                                         −                                 − Y0
    ∆C β ebetween = ln 1 + j YjC     YC   Y0
                                                 − ln  1 +
                                                              j YjC     YC
                                                                                     (13)
          i
                                   yM i0                             yF i0

and

                                                                                                             
                            P     YjC       YM ijC       YM ij0                  P YjC       YF ijC       YF ij0
       within                   j Yc         YjC
                                                     −    Yj0                    j Yc         YjC
                                                                                                      −    Yj0
  ∆C β
     e
       i        = ln 1 +                                           − ln 1 +                                      , (14)
                                            yM i0                                            yF i0

respectively.7 These two expressions can be evaluated using the between- and within-industry
components from our shift-share analysis and the data on the wage-bill share by demographic
group (reported in Table A2). In particular, all terms in the numerators in (13) and (14)
are obtained as terms of the shift share decomposition illustrated in equation (7).
    The above framework can be generalized by representing Sj and Uj as CES aggregators
of male and female labor, with a skill-invariant elasticity of substitution σ S = σ U = σ, while
keeping demand for industry output and sector-level technology as Cobb-Douglas. In this
case, the total cross-country difference to be explained is

                     ∆C βei = ∆C ln yM i − ∆C ln yF i + (σ − 1)∆C ∆wi ,                 (15)
                                       
where ∆C ∆wi = ln W   M iC
                     WF iC
                             − ln   WM i0
                                    WF i0
                                            for i = S, U . We show that the between-industry
component of (15) can be simply obtained by multiplying equation (13) by σ. The within-
industry component can be obtained as the difference between (15) and (33).8
   7
     See Appendix A, Subsection 8.1, for derivation of (11) and its total differential, and derivation of (13)
and (14).
   8
     See Appendix A, Subsection 8.2, for derivation.


                                                                  15
6       Results
6.1     Shift-share analysis of wage bill shares
In order to assess within- and between-industry components of the observed variation in
labor demand, we start by providing a simple shift-share analysis of differences in wage
bill shares, as illustrated in equation (7), based on a ten-fold industry classification for
each country.9 While this classification is arguably rather coarse, a finer one is effectively
prevented by both small cell size (by country, gender, skill and industry) and issues of
cross-country comparability of more disaggregate industries. The weight of each industry in
the total economy for each country is reported in Table A3, together with its demographic
composition.
    The results are reported in Table 2. Columns 1 and 2 report gender differences in wage
bill shares for the unskilled and for the skilled, respectively, and column 3 reports double
differences, i.e. the difference between column 1 and column 2. Whereas gender differences
in wage bill shares are relatively similar across skill groups in the US, the UK, Denmark
and Germany, they are much larger for unskilled than skilled workers in Austria, Ireland
and southern Europe, indicating a relatively stronger gender bias in labor demand for the
unskilled in the latter group of countries. In column 4 we report triple differences, i.e. cross-
country differences between each country and the US in the unskilled-to-skilled differentials
reported in column 4. The interpretation of these figures is that in Canada the unskilled to
skilled difference in wage bill gaps is 12.48 percentage points higher than in the US. Except
for the UK, such differences are everywhere positive, indicating a relatively stronger gender
gap in wage bill shares for the unskilled in all the other countries, relative to the US.
    Columns 5 and 6 decompose triple differences in wage bill shares into a between- and a
within-industry component, according to expression (7). The between-industry component is
typically smaller than the within-industry component. However, there are some noteworthy
country differences. The weight of the between-industry components is relatively high in
Austria, Finland, Ireland and southern Europe (with the exception of Italy), where the
total to be explained is largest (see column 4). Other countries where the between-industry
component is also high are the UK and Germany, in which the total is instead negative or
positive and small, respectively. In all other countries both the total difference relative to
the US and its between-industry component are relatively small.
    Finally column 8 reports the proportion of the within-industry component that can be
explained by differences in the occupational structure across countries, according to expres-
    9
    Industry classification is as follows: (1) agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing; mining and quarry-
ing; electricity, gas and water supply; (2) manufacturing; (3) construction; (4) transport and storage; post
and telecommunications; (5) wholesale and retail trade; hotels and restaurants; (6) financial intermedia-
tion, insurance and real estate; (7) education; (8) health and social work; (9) other services; (10) public
administration and defense.


                                                     16
sion (8). For the sake of cell size, we consider three broad occupation groups, and namely
(1) managers, professionals and technical occupations; (2) middle-skill occupations, includ-
ing clerical and sales occupations, skilled manual and laborer occupations; and (3) service
occupations, including all jobs that involve helping, caring for, or assisting others. This
is the three-fold occupational classification emphasized by Acemoglu and Autor (2011) in
order to illustrate polarization of labor demand. Interestingly, we find that the weight of the
between-industry component in the total to be explained (column 7) and the weight of the
between-occupation component in the within-industry component (column 8) are positively
correlated, and in particular the latter is positive and relatively larger in the UK, Canada,
Germany, Belgium, Ireland and southern Europe. In other words, countries where the indus-
try structure favors a certain labor input, relative to the US, tend to have an occupational
structure that also tends to favor the same inputs, relative to the US.
    Table 3 provides more disaggregate evidence on our shift share analysis, by showing the
role of specific industries to the between- and within-industry components of differences in
wage bill shares. The upper panel of the table shows that services play the strongest role
in driving the between-industry component in most countries. In other words, between-
industry differences in wage bill shares are mostly driven by international differences in the
weight of services, where unskilled women are relatively over-represented. The lower panel in
turn shows that all industries of the economy tend to contribute significantly to the within-
industry component of differences in wage bill shares. That is, most industries in the US
tend to be relatively more unskilled-women intensive than the corresponding industries in
other countries.
    As the broad service industry is the one that contributes the most to the between-industry
component, in the upper panel of Table 4 we further disaggregate its contribution into six
one-digit industries, namely (1) transport and storage; post and telecommunications; (2)
wholesale and retail trade; hotels and restaurants; (3) financial intermediation and read
estate; (4) education; (5) health and social work; (6) other services. It seems from these
figures that the most important one-digit industry for the between-industry component is
finance, insurance and real estate, followed by education and transportation. The role of the
finance industry mostly stems from its contribution to the difference in the gender gap in
labor demand for the skilled between each country and the US. In other words, the finance
sector is more intensive in the use of skilled men than skilled women, and given that its
weight is larger in the US, this yields a lower gender gap in wage bill shares for the skilled
in almost all countries than in the US. This in turn delivers a highly positive unskilled-to-
skilled difference. A similar argument holds for the education sector, although on a smaller
scale. For the transportation industry it is instead its role on the unskilled gender gap in
wage bill shares that matters the most, as this industry is relatively smaller in the US,
and it employs relatively fewer unskilled women than men. Moving to the within-industry


                                              17
component in the lower panel, one can detect an important contribution coming from all 1-
digit service industries except education and health. This is the case because transportation,
trade, finance and other services are all relatively more unskilled-women intensive in the US
than elsewhere.
    One potential criticism to our analysis is that the simple educational classification used
here is based on definitions of qualifications that may not be completely consistent across
countries, and also delivers relative group sizes that vary widely across countries. To try to
overcome these potential drawbacks, we perform a robustness test based on an alternative
skill classification of the population. We first estimate country level wage regressions for
males and females separately, including education dummies, age and its square, a marital
dummy and year dummies. We then use the resulting wage predictions as continuous human
capital indicators. The main difference with respect to the previous classification is that age
and marital status are considered as further determinants of an individual’s human capital
level, and that the predicted human capital level is continuous rather than discrete. We
finally construct skill categories by classifying as skilled those with predicted human capital
levels in the top tercile of their gender-country specific distribution of predicted wages, and
unskilled those in the two bottom terciles. Both raw wage gaps across skills and countries and
the results of the shift share decomposition obtained with this alternative definition of skills
(here not reported) were very close to those based on educational attainment categories.10

6.2     Historical evidence
The results of the shift-share analysis above show that over the mid 1990s-early 2000s all
countries in our sample, except for the UK, display a relatively stronger gender gap in wage
bill shares for the unskilled, relative to the US. We also find that an important portion of
this differential is explained by variation in the share of services. This sub-section contains a
short digression that investigates how these cross-country differences have evolved over the
past four decades.
    Micro data that are both harmonized across countries and going far back in time are not
easily available. But for the purpose of our analysis it suffices to have information on labor
inputs by gender, skill and industry, which we gather using the EU KLEMS database and
either censuses or labor force surveys for countries not covered by the EU KLEMS. However,
as wage bill shares by gender and skill are not available from the EU KLEMS, the analysis
of this section is based on shares in the hours bill. Appendix B gives details of these further
  10
    As a further robustness test, we also controlled for occupation (three categories, as described above)
in wage regressions, and then again defined as skilled those with predicted wages in the top tercile. We
obtained a larger between-industry component of wage bill share differences than that reported in Table 3,
consistent with considerable sorting of occupations across industries so that, say, in countries where services
are relatively more important, there is relatively higher demand for service occupations.



                                                      18
data sources and measurement issues.
    Table 5 reports gender gaps in hours worked and the corresponding shift share analysis
over time. The structure of the Table is the same as in Table 2, except that here we report
information for (up to) four points in time for each country.
    Columns 1 and 2 report gender differences in hours shares for the unskilled and for the
skilled, respectively, and column 3 reports the difference between the two. We first observe
that, for both skill groups, the gender gap in hours shares decreases over time in all countries,
especially so in the US and Canada. This finding is consistent with results obtained by
Heathcote et al. (2010), who show that a large part of the increase in US women’s labor
force participation over the 1980s and the 1990s can be attributed to a gender biased demand
shift. The most noteworthy finding, however, concerns the unskilled-to-skilled differential.
In 1971, the gender differential in hours shares in the US is about 26 percentage points higher
for the unskilled than for the skilled. By 1991 this double differential drops to approximately
5 percentage points, and stabilizes thereafter, showing convergence over time in skill-specific
gender gaps. This tendency can also be detected for all other countries, although the double
differential remains substantially higher in 2001 in Europe than in the US. In particular,
it could be noted that in Italy, Spain and Greece (as well as the Netherlands) the double
differential in 2001 is in the range of 20-25 percentage points, reaching values that are very
similar to that recorded in the US at the start of the sample period. Interestingly, the size
of services was growing in all countries during this period,11 although its level is at all points
in time higher in the US than in southern Europe (see Rogerson, 2008, for a discussion on
this point). Thus countries that were lagging behind the US in their process of structural
transformation, also had slower convergence in gender gaps in labor demand across skills.
    Column 4 reports the usual triple differences, i.e. the difference for each value of column 3
and the corresponding US value, and columns 5 and 6 decompose triple differences in hours
shares into between- and within-industry components. Column 7 finally reports the part
of the between-industry component that is due to the evolution of services. The between-
industry component tends to fall over time in most countries, following the expansion of
services, but remains relatively high at the end of the sample period in southern Europe.
    In summary, we find evidence that the industry structure plays an important role in
shaping international differences in skill-specific gender gaps, as well as in their evolution
(and convergence) over time. We next assess the role of between- and within-industry forces
based on our multi-sector model of labor demand.
  11
     Within the broad service sector, the industry that has been growing the most in the US is finance, insur-
ance and real estate, consistently with the role of this industry in driving the between-industry component
of labor demand across countries, as shown in the previous sub-section.




                                                     19
6.3     A model-based decomposition of the gender bias in labor de-
        mand
We have shown in Section 5 that the components of the shift-share analysis can be used to
assess the extent to which the variation in the male bias in labor demand may be driven by
cross-country differences in labor input intensities within industries (β ij ), or differences in
product demand across industries with different input intensities (θj ).
    The results of this decomposition are reported in Table 6. Column 1 reports the triple
difference in log wage bill shares, described in expression (12). Column 2 reports its between
industry component (obtained using expression (13)), and column 3 reports its weight on
the total difference. This decomposition corresponds to the Cobb-Douglas case, and is
conceptually similar to the simple share analysis reported in Table 2, with the noteworthy
difference that here we are decomposing log, as oppose to absolute, wage bill differences, as
implied by the CES model for labor demand. The results are qualitatively similar to those
reported in Table 2. The notable exception is that, comparing column 4 in Table 2 to column
1 in Table 6, the sign of the triple difference in wage bill shares switches from positive to
negative for Germany and the Netherlands, as we move from absolute to log differences.
However, the sign of the between-industry component in column 2 of Table 6 is unchanged
from Table 2 for all countries, and its relative weight in the triple difference in labor demand
tends to be higher than in the shift-share analysis.
    The rest of the Table reports decomposition results for the case in which Sj and Uj are
CES aggregators of male and female labor inputs, with σ = 2.5. This extension is important
as the few empirical studies in this area have consistently found values of the male-female
elasticity of substitution greater than 1. Hamermesh (1993) reviews two such studies that
report values of the male-female elasticity of substitution of 2 and 2.3 for the UK and
Australia, respectively (Layard, 1983; Lewis, 1985). More recently, Weinberg (2000) obtains
an estimate for this parameter for the US of 2.4, which is remarkably similar to the values
obtained for Australia and the UK, and Acemoglu, Autor and Lyle (2004) obtain a slightly
higher estimate of about 3. Given this range of estimates, we choose to report results based
on σ = 2.5, which roughly coincides with the mean of existing estimates.
    As equation (33) implies, the between-industry component varies proportionally with σ,
which is what we empirically observe comparing columns 2 and 5 of Table 6. This is not the
case for the within-industry component.12 Thus the total difference to be explained varies
less than proportionally with σ. It follows that the relative importance of the between-
industry component in the total variation in labor demand increases with σ. In particular,
adopting a value for σ of 2.5, we find that the between-industry component explains about
  12
     This can be seen from equation (29) in Appendix A, where the between-industry component term θj is
raised to the power σ, but the within-industry component BM hj is raised to the power 1 − σ.



                                                  20
half or more of the variation in labor demand everywhere except Canada, Germany, Belgium
and Spain.
    A very stylized way to provide a quantitative assessment of the importance of the between-
industry component of labor demand for the observed variation in gender gaps consists in
going back to our simple correlation analysis of Figure 1, and asking what sort of correla-
tion between the unskilled-to-skilled wage gap and the corresponding hours gap one would
observe, having corrected wage gaps for the between-industry component of labor demand
obtained in Table 6.
    For example, using equation (6), the corrected triple difference in log wages in the Cobb-
Douglas case would be
                                                   between
                                                              ebetween ,
                                                                      
                        ∆C (∆wU − ∆wS ) − ∆C β     e
                                                     U      − β S                         (16)

where ∆C β  ebetween is given by equation (13). Note that, for the CES case, the corrected
             i
triple difference remains the same as in equation (16), given equations (6) and (33). This
implies that the wage gap adjusted for the between-industry component of labor demand is
independent of the elasticity of substitution between male and female labor inputs.
    Figure 5 plots the unskilled-to-skilled difference in the adjusted wage gap according to
(16), versus the unskilled-to-skilled difference in the hours gap. Once the between-industry
component of labor demand is removed from relative wages, the correlation between wage
and hours gaps falls to 0.14, and it is not significantly different from zero. In other words,
the between-industry component of differences in labor demand can explain two thirds of
the observed correlation between wage and hours gaps across skills and countries.
    While we have no direct evidence on the forces driving differences in the industry struc-
ture across countries, an explanation that has often been put forward is based on differ-
ences in the rate of marketization of activities that can be both performed in the market
or within the household, like childcare, elderly care, cooking, house repairs, gardening etc.
If outsourced to the market, all these activities would be part of the broad service sector.
Freeman and Schettkat (2005) provide rich evidence on the marketization hypothesis, based
on both time-use data and expenditure data across countries, and conclude that this hy-
pothesis contributes substantially to the hours gap across the Atlantic. In a similar vein,
Rogerson (2008) relates the relative poor performance of continental EU labor markets to a
relatively under-marketized service industry. Marketization of services can in turn be hin-
dered in continental Europe by higher tax rates, which distort market-home substitution,
and the slow down in productivity growth. Ngai and Pissarides (2011) provide evidence on
this mechanism for a number of OECD countries by showing that taxation and subsidies
decrease and raise hours, respectively, in sectors that have close home substitutes.
    Using a tenfold industry classification, Table 4 above has shown that the between-industry
component of differences in labor demand between each country and the US is positive for

                                             21
most service industries, which arguably include activities that can otherwise be performed in
the household, like childcare (included in education), elderly care (included in health), and
various personal services (included in other services). Thus under-marketization of these
activities in Europe is consistent with our results, but the marketization hypothesis does
not seem to be the only or main story shaping international differences in labor demand,
because we noted in Table 4 the substantial contribution of the finance industry to the
between-industry component of differences in labor demand, and arguably there is not much
substitution between market and household provision within this industry. There are thus
important differences in the industry composition of consumer’s demand, that cannot be
explained by substitution between market and home production.


7     Conclusions
This paper uncovers a strong, positive correlation between the unskilled-to-skilled wage gap
and the corresponding hours gap across countries, thus pointing at significant (net) demand
forces shaping gender differences in labor market outcomes across skills. Of course, when
cross-country differences are considered, one should also allow for the role of institutions
and/or social norms, that would differently affect the labor supply prospects of various skill
groups in different countries, but we provide some evidence that neither of them seem to
wash away or even dampen the observed correlation between wage and hours gaps.
    Our findings point to a lack of demand as the main cause for the dismal labor market
outcomes of less-skilled women in some of the countries in our sample. Moreover, when we
decompose such demand differences into a between- and within-industry component, we find
that both play important roles. The within-industry component is explained by the fact that
most sectors in the US tend to be more unskilled-women intensive than in the majority of
other countries. The between-industry component is instead explained by the larger share of
services in the US, as the relative demand for unskilled women is higher in services than in
other sectors of the economy. In particular, for realistic values of the elasticity of substitution
between male and female labor inputs, the between-industry component explains about half
or more of the variation in labor demand in all countries in the sample except Canada,
Germany, Belgium and Spain. Adjusting unskilled-to-skilled wage gaps across countries for
the between-industry component of labor demand reduces the corresponding correlation with
hours gaps from 0.41 to 0.14.




                                                22
8      Appendix A: Details on the multisector model of la-
       bor demand
8.1    The Cobb-Douglas case
In a multisector model, equations (2) and (3) can be re-written as
                                                ρS                               ρS
                    Sj = [β Sj (BM Sj MSj )          + (1 − β Sj ) (BF Sj FSj ) ]1/ρS        (17)

and
                                            ρU                                   ρU
                   Uj = [β U j (BM U j MU j )        + (1 − β U j ) (BF U j FU j ) ]1/ρU ,   (18)
where the technology parameters β ij , BM ij and BF ij , i = S, U , are industry-specific, while
the elasticities of substitution σ i = 1/(1 − ρi ) are kept constant.
   Under perfect competition in the labor market, all inputs are paid their marginal pro-
ductivity, thus male wages for skill group i in industry j are given by:
                               ∂Qj         1/σ−1   1/σ −1/σ       1−1/σ   −1/σ
                  WM ij = Pj        = θ j Qj     αMij i     β ij BM ij i Mij i ,             (19)
                               ∂Mij

after normalizing QR = 1.
    We assume further a Cobb-Douglas economy with σ = σ S = σ U = 1, which implies
                                                          αθj β ij
                                          WM i =                   ,                         (20)
                                                           Mij

after imposing WM ij = WM i due to perfect mobility of labor across industries.
                                             P            P
    Summing up across industries implies WM i j Mij = α j θj β ij , which can be solved for
WM i :
                                                          P
                                                      α      θj β ij
                                                             j
                                       WM i =                        .                       (21)
                                                            Mi
Combining (21) with a similar expression for female wages delivers the following gender wage
gap for skill group i :
                                     ∆wi = β e − ∆hi ,                                   (22)
                                               i

with                                                  P                  !
                                                       β ij θj
                                   β
                                   e = ln
                                     i           P j                         ,               (23)
                                                  j (1 − β ij )θ j

which coincides with expression (11) in the text.
   We next evaluate the total cross-country differential of expression (23):
             P                  P               P                    P
                j β ijC ∆C θj + j θjC ∆C β ij     j 1 − β ijC ∆C θj + j θjC ∆C β ij
     ∆C β
        e =
          i                                   −                                              (24)
                            yM iC                              yF iC

                                                      23
                P                             P
where yM iC =     j   β ijC θjC and yF iC =         j (1     − β ijC )θjC .

   Rearranging, we obtain ∆C β
                             ei = ∆C β  ebetween + ∆C β
                                                      ewithin , where:
                                         i              i
                             P                   P               
                   between      j β ijC ∆C θ j     j 1  −  β ijC   ∆C θj
             ∆C βe
                   i       =                   −                                                                      (25)
                                  yM iC                   yF iC
                             P YM ijC  YjC Yj0  P YF ijC  YjC                                         Yj0
                                                                                                               
                                j YjC       YC
                                               − Y0           j YjC     YC
                                                                           −                             Y0
                           =                          −
                                        yM iC                       yF iC
and
                                 P                             P
                                 θjC ∆C β ij                        θjC ∆C β ij
                 ewithin
              ∆C β           =
                                     j
                                              −
                                                                   j
                                                                                                                      (26)
                   i
                                  yM iC                              yF iC
                               P YjC  YM ijC                   YM ij0
                                                                        P
                                                                                 YjC
                                                                                        
                                                                                            YF ijC       YF ij0
                                                                                                                  
                                j Yc     YjC
                                              −                    Yj0         j Yc          YjC
                                                                                                     −    Yj0
                             =                                           −
                                        yM iC                                               yF iC
represents the between- and within-industry components, respectively.
    For ease of exposition we have expressed the whole decomposition above in terms of in-
finitesimal changes in relevant variables. When applied to cross-country differences, these
are approximated with the finite-change equivalent in equations (25) and (26). These two
components sum up exactly to the total (24) only for infinitesimal changes in relevant mag-
nitudes, while this decomposition is approximate for finite changes. However, we noted in
our data that the approximation involved was typically very small.

8.2    The more general CES case
Under the CES assumptions, equation (19) implies
                                                                                   !1/σ
                                         ασ                 θσj β σij BM
                                                                       σ−1   1−σ
                                                  P
                                                        j                ij Mij
                               WM i =                                                     ,                           (27)
                                                                 Mi
and the log gender wage gap for group i is equal to
                                          1 e        
                                  ∆wi =      β i − ∆hi ,                                                              (28)
                                          σ
where:
                                                                                        !
                                                            θσj β σij BM
                                                                       σ−1   1−σ
                                                  P
                                                        j                ij Mij
                              β
                              e = ln
                                i                                      σ                     .                       (29)
                                                  θσj       1 − β ij BFσ−1        1−σ
                                         P
                                              j                              ij Fij

    One can next differentiate β e with respect to θj to obtain the between-industry component
                                   i
of cross-country differences in β i :
                                   e
                                                                        σ
                  σ j β σijC BMσ−1       1−σ σ−1
                                                         σ j 1 − β ijC BFσ−1          1−σ σ−1
                   P                                      P
        between                  ijC  MijC   θjC ∆C θj                         ijC FijC θ jC ∆C θ j
   ∆C β
      e
        i       =    P      σ     σ−1      1−σ σ       −   P                σ   σ−1     1−σ σ
                                                                                                    .
                        j β ijC B M  ijC M ijC θ jC           j 1 −  β ijC     B       F
                                                                                 F ijC ijC  θ jC
                                                                                                 (30)

                                                              24
Using the first order condition for wages (i.e. (19) for male wages and the corresponding one
                                           σ
for female wages), the β σijC and 1 − β ijC terms can be solved for as
                                                             σ
                                                           wM   i Mij
                                           β σij =         σ                                                     (31)
                                                      ασ θj BM ij Mij1−σ
                                                               σ−1

                                               σ           wFσ i Fij
                                    1 − β ij        =                  1−σ .                                     (32)
                                                      ασ θσj BFσ−1ij Fij

Substituting (31) and (32) into (30) gives
                             P                 −1           P               −1
                  between      j w M iC MijC θ jC ∆C θ j     j wF iC FijC θ jC ∆C θ j
             ∆C β i
                e         =σ                             −σ                           .
                                    wM iC MiC                     wF iC FiC
Finally, using θjC = YjC /YC and finite-change approximations yields
                               P                                                                        
                                       YM ijC       YjC        Yj0           P YF ijC       YjC       Yj0
                   between            j YjC         YC
                                                          −    Y0            j YjC          YC
                                                                                                  −   Y0
             ∆C β
                e
                  iC         = σ                                        +                                  .   (33)
                                               yM iC                                    yF iC


9      Appendix B: EU-Klems data
Time series evidence on the evolution of labor demand for various labor inputs in the coun-
tries considered can be obtained using data from the EU KLEMS Growth and Productivity
Accounts. This database includes industry-level measures of output and input growth, and
derived variables such as multi-factor productivity, for several European countries, Canada,
Australia, Japan and the US. Its coverage starts in 1970 and is annual thereafter.13 Although
these data have been constructed by using growth accounting as an organizing principle, they
can be used for our application since they derive industry-level measures of labor inputs for
18 demographic groups defined by gender, skill (low, medium and high) and age (15 to 29,
30 to 49 and 50 plus). Unfortunately disaggregated labor input data are not available for
some of the countries in our sample, and namely France, Greece, Ireland, and Portugal.
Thus we augment the EU KLEMS sample using a variety of data sources. For Greece and
Portugal we use IPUMS-International public-use Census data available for 1971-2001 and
1991-2001, respectively. For France we use data from the Enquete Emploi for the period
1981-2001. Unfortunately, we could not obtain publicly available data for Ireland so this
country is not included in the time series analysis. Using these different data sources we
build an unbalanced panel of 14 countries, containing harmonized industry-level measures
of labor inputs of interest. Specifically, we show evidence for four data points, 1971, 1981,
1991 and 2001, or as subset of these years when not all data points are available for some
country.
  13
    The database is publicly available at http://www.euklems.net. See O’Mahony and Timmer (2009) for a
description of the methodology employed in constructing the database.

                                                          25
    For all the countries in our sample we construct crosswalks by industry in order to
replicate the tenfold industry classification as in our main cross-section analysis (crosswalks
available upon request). In order to define skill groups consistently with the rest of our anal-
ysis, we define as skilled those in the high-skill group in the EU KLEMS, corresponding to
college graduates, and as unskilled all the others (see Timmer et. al, 2007, for a detailed de-
scription of measurement issues in EU KLEMS). Similarly, for France, Greece and Portugal,
we define as skilled those with college education.
    While our main shift share analysis is based on wage bill shares, historical evidence that
we obtain from the EU KLEMS is based on hours shares. This is because, as discussed
in O’Mahony and Timmer (2009), imputation of missing wage information by demographic
group in the EU KLEMS makes gender comparisons of wage bill shares unfeasible for some
of the countries covered. Moreover, the IPUMS-International data available for Greece and
Portugal do not include information on earnings.




                                              26
References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron and David H. Autor. 2011. Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implica-
     tions for Employment and Earnings, in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Hand-
     book of Labor Economics, Vol. 4B, Amsterdam: Elsevier-NorthHolland, pp. 1043-1171.

 [2] Acemoglu, Daron, Autor, David H. and David Lyle. 2004. Women, War, and Wages:
     The Effect of Female Labor Supply on the Wage Structure at Mid-century. Journal of
     Political Economy, 112 (3), 497-551.

 [3] Autor, David H., Katz, Lawrence F. and Alan B. Krueger. 1998. Computing Inequality:
     Have Computers Changed The Labor Market? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113
     (4): 1169-1213.

 [4] Autor, David H., Levy, Frank and Richard J. Murnane. 2003. The Skill Content of
     Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Investigation. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics 118 (4): 1279–1333.

 [5] Autor, David H. and David Dorn. 2010. Inequality and Specialization: The Growth of
     Low-Skill Service Jobs in the United States. NBER Working Paper No. 15150.

 [6] Black, Sandra E., and Alexandra Spitz-Oener. 2009. Explaining Women’s Success: Tech-
     nological Change and the Skill Content of Women’s Work. Review of Economics and
     Statistics, 92 (1), 187-194.

 [7] Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 1996. Wage Structure and Gender Earnings
     Differentials: An International Comparison. Economica 63: 29-62.

 [8] Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2003. Understanding International Differ-
     ences in the Gender Pay Gap. Journal of Labor Economics 21: 106–144.

 [9] Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2006. The US Gender Pay Gap in the 1990s:
     Slowing Convergence? Industrial and Labor Relations Review 60: 45-66.

[10] Bound, John, and George Johnson. 1992. Changes in the Structure of Wages in
     the 1980s: An Evaluation of Alternative Explanations. American Economic Review,
     LXXXII: 371–392.

[11] Fortin, Nicole M. 2005. Gender Role Attitudes and the Labour Market Outcomes of
     Women Across OECD Countries. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 21: 416-438.

[12] Freeman, Richard B. and Ronald Schettkat. 2005. Marketization of Household Produc-
     tion and the EU-US Gap in Work. Economic Policy 20: 6-50.

                                           27
[13] Goos, Maarten, and Alan Manning. 2007. Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The Rising Polariza-
     tion of Work in Britain. Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (1): 118–33.

[14] Goos, Maarten, Manning, Alan and Anna Salomons. 2010. Explaining Job Polarization
     in Europe: The Roles of Technology, Globalization and Institutions. CEP Discussion
     Paper No. 1026.

[15] Hamermesh, Daniel S. 1993. Labor Demand Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

[16] Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten and Gianluca Violante. 2010. The Macroeco-
     nomic Implications of Rising Wage Inequality in the United States. Journal of Political
     Economy 118 (4): 681-722.

[17] Katz Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy. 1992. Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987:
     Supply and Demand Factors. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107 (1): 35-78.

[18] Katz, Lawrence F. and David H. Autor. 1999. Changes in the Wage Structure and
     Earnings Inequality, in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor
     Economics, vol. 3A, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, pp. 1463-1555.

[19] Layard, Richard. 1982. Youth Unemployment in Britain and the United States Com-
     pared, in Richard B. Freeman and David A. Wise, eds., The Youth Labor Market Prob-
     lem: Its Nature, Causes, and Consequences, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.
     499-542.

[20] Lewis, Philip E. T. 1985. Substitution Between Young and Adult Workers in Australia.
     Australian Economic Papers 24: 115-126.

[21] Mulligan, Casey B., and Yona Rubinstein. 2008. Selection, Investment, and Women’s
     Relative Wages Over Time. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (3): 1061-1110.

[22] Nickell, W. 2006. The CEP-OECD Institutions Data Set. CEP Discussion Paper No.
     759.

[23] Ngai, L. Rachel and Christopher A. Pissarides. 2008. Trends in Hours and Economic
     Growth. Review of Economic Dynamics 11 (2): 239-256.

[24] Ngai, L. Rachel and Christopher A. Pissarides. 2011. Taxes, Social Subsidies and the
     Allocation of Work Time. American Economic Journal - Macroeconomics, forthcoming.

[25] Olivetti, Claudia, and Barbara Petrongolo. 2008. Unequal Pay or Unequal Employment?
     A Cross-Country Analysis of Gender Gaps. Journal of Labor Economics 26: 621-654.



                                            28
[26] O’Mahony, Mary and Marcel P. Timmer. 2009. Output, Input and Productivity Mea-
     sures at the Industry Level: The EU KLEMS Database. The Economic Journal 119:
     F374–F403.

[27] Rogerson, Richard. 2008. Structural Transformation and the Deterioration of European
     Labor Markets. Journal of Political Economy 166: 235-258.

[28] Timmer, Marcel P., O’Mahony, Mary and Bart van Ark. 2007. The EU KLEMS Growth
     and Productivity Accounts: An Overview. Available at textit www.euklems.net

[29] United Nations. 2009. UN Millennium Development Goals Report. New York: United
     Nations.

[30] Weinberg, Bruce A. 2000. Computer Use and the Demand for Female Workers. Industrial
     and Labor Relations Review 53: 290-308.




                                           29
                                                     Figure 1
                           Gender gaps in (log) hourly wages by educational attainment


                0.35
                0.30
                0.25
                0.20
                0.15
                0.10
                0.05
                0.00




                                                    Unskilled        Skilled


Notes. The skilled are those with a college degree; the unskilled are all others. Values displayed are coefficients on a male
dummy from log wage regressions by country and education, which control for gender and year effects, using population
weights. All estimates are significant at the 1% level. Sample: men and women aged 25-54, excluding military, students, and
self employed. Sample period: 1994-2001, except for Canada (1997-2004), Finland (1996-2001) and Austria (1995-2001).
Source: CPS, Canadian LFS, and ECHPS.

                                                    Figure 2
                           Gender gaps in (log) weekly hours by educational attainment

                1.20

                1.00

                0.80

                0.60

                0.40

                0.20

                0.00




                                                    Unskilled        Skilled


Notes. Values displayed are gender differences in log(hours/population) by country and skill, using population weights. See
notes to Figure 1 for samples and source.




                                                            30
                                                                          Figure 3
                                              Unskilled-to-skilled difference in gender gaps across countries.




                                       .2
                                       .15                                             Ire
   Wage gap: Unskilled minus Skilled




                                       .1




                                                            Can
                                                                                             corr = 0.41        Gre
                                       .05




                                                                          UK
                                                                                 Ita
                                                                      Por                       Bel
                                                      US                                                          Spa
                                        0




                                                                    Ger
                                                                   Fra
                                                                  Aus           Net
                                       -.05




                                                       Den
                                                Fin



                                                0      .1         .2     .3     .4       .5     .6         .7           .8   .9
                                                                   Hours gap: Unskilled minus Skilled


Notes. Wage and hours gap are defined in notes to Figures 1 and 2, respectively.




                                                                               31
                                                                                       Figure 4
                                                Unskilled-to-skilled difference in gender gaps across countries: The role of selection

                                           Panel A: Wage gaps corrected for selection based on unemployed versus nonparticipant status




                                                    .2
Median wage gap: Unskilled minus Skilled




                                                    .15
                                                                                                    Ire

                                                                         Can
                                                    .1



                                                                                                                             Gre
                                                                                     Por                  Bel
                                                                                                                               Spa
                                                                                       UK
                                                    .05




                                                                   US
                                                                                                          corr = 0.50
                                                                                              Ita
                                                    0




                                                                                 Fra

                                                                                             Net
                                                   -.05




                                                                    Den        Aus


                                                                                 Ger
                                                    -.1




                                                            Fin



                                                             0      .1         .2     .3     .4       .5     .6         .7           .8   .9
                                                                                Hours gap: Unskilled minus Skilled



                                                  Panel B: Wage gaps corrected for selection based on quartile of spouse income

                                                                                                    Ire
                                                    .2
Median wage gap: Unskilled minus Skilled




                                                    .15




                                                                         Can
                                                                                                                             Gre
                                                    .1




                                                                                       UK                 Bel
                                                                   US                Por
                                                                                              Ita
                                                                                                                               Spa
                                                    .05




                                                                                                          corr = 0.47
                                                    0




                                                                                 Fra
                                                                                             Net
                                                   -.05




                                                                    Den        Aus

                                                                                 Ger
                                                    -.1




                                                            Fin



                                                             0      .1         .2     .3     .4       .5     .6         .7           .8   .9
                                                                                Hours gap: Unskilled minus Skilled

Notes. Selection corrected wage gaps are described on pages 10 and 11 in the text. Hours gap are defined in notes to Figure
2. See notes to Figure 1 for samples and sources.


                                                                                            32
                                                                             Figure 5
                                                 Unskilled-to-skilled difference in gender gaps across countries.
                                      Wage gaps adjusted for the between-industry component of differences in labor demand.




                                            .1
                                                                                  UK
                                            .05
  Wage gap: Unskilled minus Skilled




                                                                Can
                                                                                             Ire
                                                          US
                                                                                       Net
                                            0




                                                                                       Ita            Bel
                                                                      Fra
                                           -.05




                                                                                                                 Gre
                                                                                                                       Spa
                                                                                                   corr = 0.14
                                                           Den
                                            -.1




                                                  Fin
                                                                            Ger
                                           -.15




                                                                      Aus Por
                                            -.2




                                                    0      .1         .2     .3     .4       .5     .6           .7          .8   .9
                                                                       Hours gap: Unskilled minus Skilled


Notes. Adjusted wage gaps are obtained from equation (16) in the text. Notes. Hours gap are defined in notes to Figure 2. See
notes to Figure 1 for samples and sources.




                                                                                       33
                                                                                 Table 1
                                          Unskilled-to-skilled difference in gender gaps across countries: Partial correlations.

                         1            2               3              4             5               6              7               8              9             10          11
Partial correlation    0.410        0.370           0.370         0.482         0.418           0.658           0.408          0.595           0.598        -0.260        0.301
[p-value]             [0.072]      [0.037]         [0.105]       [0.116]       [0.087]          [0.08]         [0.081]        [0.023]         [0.038]       [0.231]      [0.220]

R-squared             0.168         0.307           0.178         0.282         0.169           0.355           0.168          0.447           0.424         0.675        0.260
Observations            15            15              15            14            15              15              15             15              15            15           14

                                                 Marginal                                  Attitudes about gender roles                      Wage bill shares in:
                                  Maternity      Tax Rate,                                                                                                                 ICT
 Other controls                                                    EPL                                                                      Primary;          Six
                                   Leave          Second                     Scarce Jobs      Scarce Jobs    Housewife      Housewife                                     share
                                                  Earner                                                                                    Manuf;          service
                                                                             (Women)            (Men)        (Women)         (Men)
                                                                                                                                             Constr.      industries

    Notes. The Table reports partial correlations and p-values between the unskilled-to-skilled wage gap and the unskilled-to-skilled hours gap, controlling for other factors in
    turn. Wage and hours gaps are defined in notes to Figures 1 and 2, respectively. The R2 figures come from the corresponding regressions. Other controls. Column (2):
    Maximum length of maternity leave in weeks. Source: OECD Family Database, Table PF2.1.A, available at:
    http://www.oecd.org/document/4/0,3343,en_2649_34819_37836996_1_1_1_1,00.html. Reference year: 2006. Column (3): Marginal income tax rate for the spouse of a two-
    earner married family with 2 children in which the head earns 100% of the average gross wage (APW) and the spouse earns 33% of the APW. Source: Column 6, Table 7 in
    OECD Taxing Wages 2000-2001. Available at http://www.oecd.org/document/34/0,3746,en_2649_34897_44993442_1_1_1_1,00.html. Reference year: 2000. Column (4):
    Employment Protection Legislation for regular work. Source: Nickell (2006). Reference year: 2000. Columns (5) and (6): Attitudes toward gender roles, measured as mean
    response in World Value Survey to the statement `When jobs are scarce, men should have more right to a job than women' (0-1 scale: 0 indicates no agreement with the
    statement, 1 indicates complete agreement with the statement). Women’s views in Column 5; Men’s views in Column 6. Columns (7)-(8): Attitudes toward gender roles
    measured as mean response in World Value Survey to the statement `Being a housewife is just as fulfilling as working for pay' (0-1 scale: 0 indicates no agreement with the
    statement, 1 indicates complete agreement with the statement). Women’s views in Column 7; Men’s views in Column 8. Source: Fortin (2005, Appendix Table 2, Columns
    1,3,9,11). Sample period: Average over 1990-1993, 1995-1997, and 1999-2001. Columns (9) and (10): Wage bill shares obtained on our main sample (three extra regressors
    in Column 9, six extra regressors in column 10, referring to transport, storage and post and telecommunications; wholesale and retail trade and hotels and restaurants;
    financial intermediation and real estate; education; health; other services. Column (11): IT capital share in total capital compensation. Source: EU Klems, March 2008 release
    (available at http://www.euklems.net/). In columns (4) and (11) data for Greece are not available.




                                                                                         34
                                                      Table 2
                         Shift share decomposition of differences in wage bill shares (x100)
                     1             2            3             4            5             6             7             8
                       Gender gaps                                                                                 % of
                    in wage bill shares                                                                           within
                                                           Cross-      Between        Within      % between      industry
                                            Difference
Countries                                    (1)-(2)
                                                          country      industry      industry      industry     component
                 Unskilled      Skilled                  difference   component     component     100*(5)/(4)     that is
                                                                                                                 between
                                                                                                                occupation
US                 11.29         10.36         0.93           -             -             -            -              -
Canada             15.77          2.37        13.41        12.48          1.13         11.35         9.09          23.65
UK                 9.58          15.44        -5.86        -6.79         -1.38         -5.41         20.31         36.82
Finland            12.42         -0.53        12.95        12.02          1.97         10.05         16.37        -28.47
Denmark            10.14          4.43         5.72         4.79          0.60          4.19         12.51        -38.40
Germany            18.00         12.48         5.52         4.59          3.62          0.98         78.72         22.10
Netherlands        24.35         11.81        12.55        11.62         -1.45         13.07        -12.48         -7.57
Belgium            15.80          5.64        10.17         9.24          0.56          8.68         6.04          23.97
Austria            30.42          2.82        27.60        26.67          3.88         22.79         14.54          6.29
Ireland            21.78          8.05        13.74        12.81          3.13          9.68         24.46         19.34
France             16.85          6.70        10.15         9.22          0.40          8.82         4.35         -20.28
Italy              26.09          3.68        22.41        21.49          1.88         19.61         8.74          17.56
Spain              27.15         10.19        16.96        16.04          2.05         13.99         12.79         15.20
Portugal           22.35         -2.17        24.52        23.59          4.76         18.83         20.19         10.53
Greece             24.67          7.78        16.89        15.97          3.12         12.84         19.57         29.85

Notes. Wage bill shares for the US are computed as shares of previous-year annual earnings, for Canada they are computed as
shares of current weekly earnings and for European countries they are computed are shares of current monthly earnings. See
notes to Figure 1 for samples and source. Decomposition based on equations (7) and (8) in the text.




                                                            35
                                                      Table 3
                            Further decomposition of triple differences in gender gaps
                           in wage bill shares (×100) between each country and the US.
                                              Three broad industries.

                                                         Primary,
                                                          Manuf.                       Public
                                              Total                  Services
                                                             &                         Admin.
                                                        Construct.
                                                 1            2          3                4
                                                   Between component
                           Canada              1.13         0.05       1.15             -0.06
                           UK                 -1.38        -1.55       0.50             -0.33
                           Finland             1.97        -0.10       2.01              0.06
                           Denmark             0.60        -0.62       1.42             -0.21
                           Germany             3.62         1.66       1.92              0.04
                           Netherlands        -1.45        -1.51      -0.10              0.16
                           Belgium             0.56        -1.61       2.13              0.04
                           Austria             3.40         2.40       0.65              0.35
                           Ireland             3.13        -0.12       2.86              0.39
                           France              0.40        -0.94       1.36             -0.01
                           Italy               1.88         0.36       0.88              0.64
                           Spain               2.05         1.03       0.98              0.04
                           Portugal            4.76         1.92       1.86              0.99
                           Greece              3.12        -0.70       3.30              0.53
                                                    Within component
                           Canada             11.35        10.57       0.17              0.61
                           UK                 -5.41        -2.35      -2.37             -0.70
                           Finland            10.05         5.95       4.17             -0.06
                           Denmark             4.19         1.94       2.23              0.02
                           Germany             0.98         1.98      -2.37              1.37
                           Netherlands        13.07         8.43       2.77              1.87
                           Belgium             8.68         2.46       4.85              1.37
                           Austria            22.62        13.04       6.75              2.84
                           Ireland             9.68         6.20       0.69              2.79
                           France              8.82         4.74       2.89              1.19
                           Italy              19.61        10.68       5.30              3.63
                           Spain              13.99         3.99       8.60              1.40
                           Portugal           18.83         7.03       7.41              4.39
                           Greece             12.84         5.05       4.83              2.96

Notes. Figures represent the contribution of each broad industry to the shift-share analysis reported in Table 4. The primary
sector includes: agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing; mining and quarrying; electricity, gas and water supply.




                                                            36
                                                       Table 4
                           Further decomposition (II) of triple differences in gender gaps
                            in wage bill shares (×100) between each country and the US.
                                             Detailed service industries.

                         Total
                                      Transport        Trade         Finance      Education       Health          Other
                        Services
                           1               2              3          4                 5             6              7
                                                     Between component
      Canada               1.15          -0.06         -0.05       1.46               0.11         -0.33           0.01
      UK                   0.50           0.12          0.21      -0.09               0.14          0.00           0.12
      Finland              2.01           0.69          0.15       1.07               0.08          0.05          -0.02
      Denmark              1.42           0.08         -0.38       1.31               0.02          0.44          -0.03
      Germany              1.92           0.01          0.13       1.77              -0.19          0.19           0.01
      Netherlands         -0.10           0.56         -0.28       0.23              -0.01         -0.67           0.07
      Belgium              2.13           0.24          0.04       0.77               1.11          0.05          -0.09
      Austria              0.65           0.47          0.00       0.15              -0.23          0.26           0.00
      Ireland              2.86           0.94         -0.06       1.51               0.43          0.01           0.03
      France               1.36           0.34         -0.05       0.77               0.13          0.00           0.17
      Italy                0.88           0.46         -0.45       0.93               0.04         -0.15           0.05
      Spain                0.98           0.29         -0.10       0.68               0.18         -0.06           0.00
      Portugal             1.86           0.13         -0.02       0.75               0.70          0.13           0.16
      Greece               3.30           1.17         -0.03       1.58               0.47          0.10           0.00
                                                      Within component
       Canada              0.17           2.39          1.81       0.39              -1.20         -4.20           0.99
       UK                 -2.37          -0.62         -1.36      -0.06              -0.10         -0.15          -0.09
       Finland             4.17           1.32         -0.43       2.37              -0.13          0.11           0.93
       Denmark             2.23          -0.01          2.55      -1.97              -1.04          1.97           0.74
       Germany            -2.37           1.16         -0.20       1.21              -1.55         -2.98           0.00
       Netherlands         2.77           2.80          3.08       4.12              -3.61         -3.82           0.19
       Belgium             4.85           1.71          0.41       1.39               0.34          0.49           0.53
       Austria             6.75           3.47          0.89       6.53              -0.56         -4.41           0.82
       Ireland             0.69           2.40          0.96       0.75              -0.86         -2.82           0.27
       France              2.89           1.52          1.49       1.57              -0.88         -0.28          -0.53
       Italy               5.30           3.20          2.68       4.04              -3.04         -2.79           1.21
       Spain               8.60           1.00          2.63       4.37              -0.16          0.49           0.27
       Portugal            7.41           1.33          3.59       4.47               0.18         -1.04          -1.12
       Greece              4.83           1.40          2.29       1.90              -0.68         -0.77           0.69

Notes. Figures represent the contribution of each 1-digit service industry to the shift-share analysis reported in Table 4. See
main text for the exact definition of industries.




                                                               37
                                                     Table 5
           Shift share decomposition of differences hours shares (x100) over the period 1971-2001
                                 1            2            3             4            5           6           7
                           Gender gaps in Hours Shares Difference     Cross-      Between      Within     Services
        Country     Year                                             country      industry    industry   component
                            Unskilled       Skilled     (1)-(2)
                                                                    difference   component   component   of Between
         USA        1971       33.67         7.69        25.98            .            .           .           .
                    1981       19.82          9.1        10.72            .            .           .           .
                    1991       12.6          6.99         5.61            .            .           .           .
                    2001       10.55         5.19         5.36            .            .           .           .
        Canada      1971       38.35         4.28        34.07         8.09         2.66         5.43       -0.09
                    1981       27.92         4.68        23.24         12.52        2.77         9.75       1.36
                    1991       19.37         3.89        15.49         9.87         2.78         7.09       1.23
                    2001       16.67         2.88        13.79         8.43         2.03         6.4        1.47
          UK        1971       16.82         0.92         15.9        -10.08        5.63       -15.71       2.45
                    1981       16.98         3.09        13.89         3.16         4.83        -1.67       2.21
                    1991       8.54          3.72         4.82         -0.79        3.71         -4.5        1.4
                    2001       6.99          3.61         3.38         -1.98        1.05        -3.03       0.54
        Finland     1971       17.83         2.01        15.82        -10.15       15.70       -25.85        2.76
                    1981       11.67         2.16         9.51         -1.22       10.66       -11.88        3.16
                    1991        5.53         0.40         5.13         -0.49         6.53       -7.02        1.72
                    2001        8.84         -2.06       10.90          5.54         4.44        1.10        1.08
       Denmark      1981       12.80         1.74        11.05          0.33        -2.45        2.77       -3.08
                    1991        7.96         1.81         6.15          0.54        -1.86        2.40       -2.75
                    2001        8.66         1.56         7.11          1.74        -1.42        3.17       -2.09
       Germany      1991       11.68         3.08         8.60          2.98         7.65       -4.67        3.00
                    2001        8.34         3.00         5.34         -0.02         3.12       -3.14        0.83
      Netherlands   1981       47.26         3.48        43.78         33.06         0.89       32.16       -0.84
                    1991       37.46         4.18        33.29         27.67         1.82       25.85        0.38
                    2001       28.82         3.55        25.26         19.90         0.58       19.32        0.02
        Belgium     1981       26.45         3.04        23.41         12.69         3.94        8.74        2.15
                    1991       19.26         3.46        15.81         10.19         3.83        6.36        2.02
                    2001       12.92         3.33         9.60          4.24         1.20        3.03        1.18
        Austria     1981       17.12         1.97        15.15          4.43         4.88       -0.45        2.84
                    1991       15.41         2.71        12.70          7.08         2.95        4.13        2.10
                    2001       14.96         1.81        13.16          7.79         2.32        5.48        1.20
        France      1981       11.24         1.14        10.10         -0.62        -3.04        2.41        3.05
                    1991        8.20         1.06         7.15          1.53        -0.02        1.55        4.46
                    2001        6.62         0.74         5.87          0.51        -2.94        3.45        2.29
         Italy      1971       36.94         1.56        35.37          9.40       11.05        -1.65        0.16
                    1981       34.09         1.85        32.24         21.52         8.81       12.71        2.76
                    1991       26.58         1.94        24.64         19.03         6.18       12.84        2.86
                    2001       21.69         1.67        20.02         14.66         4.49       10.17        1.84
         Spain      1981       40.21         2.50        37.71         26.99         9.26       17.73        1.49
                    1991       32.61         1.86        30.75         25.13         8.69       16.44        2.10
                    2001       25.43         1.00        24.43         19.06         8.86       10.21        2.27
        Portugal    1991       18.54         0.28        18.26         12.65       11.94         0.71        3.40
                    2001       12.54         -1.88       14.42          9.06         8.82        0.24        2.95
        Greece      1971       54.10         4.28        49.82         23.84       10.75        13.26        3.98
                    1981       41.03         4.86        36.16         25.44       11.37        14.07        4.32
                    1991       30.04         4.01        26.03         20.41         6.45       13.97        3.20
                    2001       25.38         1.55        23.83        18.47        6.34        12.14        2.64
Data Sources: France: Enquete Emploi. Greece and Portugal: IPUMS-International. All other countries: EU_KLEMS. See
Appendix B for more details on samples and sources.


                                                            38
                                                 Table 6
                   Model-based decomposition of the gender bias in labor demand (×100)

                                          σ=1                                   σ = 2.5
                                 1          2          3              4            5         6
                               Triple
                                         Between                  Triple diff   Between
                               diff in               (2)/(1)                               (2)/(1)
                                         industry                  in labor     industry
                               labor                  x100                                  x100
                                          compt.                   demand        compt.
                              demand
        Canada                  17.14      4.88       28.46         32.19        12.20      37.89
        UK                     -26.53     -3.75       14.12        -20.29        -9.37      46.15
        Finland                 44.76      7.32       16.34         39.07        18.29      46.81
        Denmark                 15.23      3.62       23.74         9.76          9.04      92.60
        Germany                -34.99     11.12      -31.79        -42.45        27.81     -65.51
        Netherlands             -9.75     -4.37       44.83        -19.40       -10.93      56.36
        Belgium                 43.79      5.89       13.45         42.68        14.72      34.50
        Austria                 26.09     11.91       45.66         16.42        29.78     181.40
        Ireland                 16.87     14.66       86.92         35.60        36.65     102.98
        France                  19.09      2.31       12.08         7.22          5.77      79.88
        Italy                   12.31      8.11       65.91         14.69        20.28     138.02
        Spain                   52.51      7.66       14.59         50.93        19.15      37.61
        Portugal                71.54     18.76       26.22         72.33        46.89      64.83
        Greece                  49.12     13.44       27.36         58.04        33.61      57.90

Notes. Columns 1 reports triple differences in labor demand for the Cobb-Douglas case (see equation (11)),
column 2 reports their between-industry component (see equation (12)), and column 3 reports the proportion of
the total explained by the between-industry component. Column 4 reports triple differences in labor demand for
the CES case with σ=2.5 (see equation (14)), column 5 reports their between-industry component (see equation
(32)), and column 6 reports the proportion of the total explained by the between-industry component.




                                                     39
                                                    Appendix Tables

                                                     Table A1
                               Distribution of Population by Educational Attainment

                                              Males                              Females
                                Educ.= 1     Educ.= 2    Educ.= 3     Educ.= 1   Educ.= 2   Educ.= 3
                 US              0.065        0.233       0.166        0.068      0.275      0.193
                 Canada          0.095        0.297       0.076        0.093      0.349      0.089
                 UK              0.166        0.088       0.191        0.275      0.105      0.176
                 Finland         0.112        0.245       0.140        0.109      0.246      0.147
                 Denmark         0.093        0.217       0.158        0.092      0.193      0.247
                 Germany         0.085        0.215       0.190        0.095      0.192      0.224
                 Netherlands     0.084        0.274       0.121        0.121      0.308      0.093
                 Belgium         0.111        0.242       0.109        0.158      0.280      0.099
                 Austria         0.124        0.161       0.180        0.143      0.170      0.223
                 Ireland         0.060        0.382       0.040        0.136      0.333      0.050
                 France          0.194        0.154       0.089        0.241      0.234      0.088
                 Italy           0.140        0.211       0.120        0.180      0.203      0.147
                 Spain           0.212        0.187       0.048        0.282      0.220      0.050
                 Portugal        0.259        0.088       0.115        0.322      0.091      0.124
                 Greece          0.370        0.064       0.033        0.413      0.067      0.053

Notes. Educ.=1 includes individuals with less than upper secondary education; Educ.=2 includes individuals who have
completed upper secondary education; Educ. =3 includes individuals who have completed college education or above. See
notes to Fig. 1 for samples and sources.


                                                      Table A2
                                    Wage bill shares of four demographic groups

                                                 No college degree          College degree
                                                 Males      Females       Males      Females
                       US                        0.297       0.184        0.311       0.207
                       Canada                    0.452       0.139        0.294       0.115
                       UK                        0.287       0.186        0.344       0.183
                       Finland                   0.309       0.189        0.255       0.247
                       Denmark                   0.310       0.202        0.268       0.220
                       Germany                   0.436       0.248        0.221       0.095
                       Netherlands               0.469       0.212        0.222       0.096
                       Belgium                   0.309       0.145        0.304       0.242
                       Austria                   0.587       0.274        0.084       0.055
                       Ireland                   0.438       0.209        0.219       0.134
                       France                    0.384       0.210        0.237       0.169
                       Italy                     0.550       0.285        0.101       0.064
                       Spain                     0.416       0.141        0.277       0.167
                       Portugal                  0.495       0.264        0.114       0.128
                       Greece                    0.422       0.157        0.252       0.169

See notes to Figure 1 for samples and sources.



                                                            40
                                               Table A3
                        Wage Bill Shares of Four Demographic Groups by Sector

                                                                Finance,
         Primary                        Transp.,   Trade,
                                                                Insuranc                      Other     Public
            &        Manuf.   Constr.   Storage,   Hotels,                  Educ.   Health
                                                                    e,                       Services   Admin.
         Utilities                      Comm.       Rest.
                                                                Real Est.
                                                             USA
 MU       0.539      0.414    0.718      0.456     0.375          0.164     0.056   0.057     0.198     0.282
 FU       0.095      0.157    0.054      0.150     0.260          0.190     0.138   0.254     0.260     0.188
 MS       0.288      0.332    0.197      0.285     0.252          0.427     0.281   0.243     0.280     0.343
 FS       0.078      0.097    0.031      0.108     0.114          0.219     0.525   0.446     0.261     0.186
Sector
          0.039      0.189    0.060      0.059     0.150          0.193     0.093   0.099     0.045     0.073
Share
                                                        Canada
 MU       0.737      0.688    0.868      0.752     0.504      0.274         0.102   0.114     0.444     0.373
 FU       0.114      0.175    0.072      0.169     0.375      0.384         0.187   0.628     0.312     0.288
 MS       0.120      0.109    0.051      0.061     0.074      0.221         0.292   0.065     0.141     0.208
 FS       0.029      0.028    0.009      0.017     0.047      0.121         0.418   0.193     0.103     0.132
Sector
          0.067      0.182    0.046      0.057     0.138          0.128     0.104   0.116     0.068     0.094
Share
                                                             UK
 MU       0.586      0.441    0.519      0.470     0.345          0.216     0.027   0.064     0.241     0.252
 FU       0.113      0.145    0.045      0.148     0.299          0.170     0.114   0.328     0.260     0.202
 MS       0.236      0.353    0.411      0.332     0.263          0.449     0.311   0.177     0.286     0.370
 FS       0.065      0.060    0.025      0.051     0.093          0.165     0.548   0.430     0.214     0.176
Sector
          0.005      0.230    0.037      0.073     0.121          0.197     0.100   0.099     0.032     0.106
Share
                                                        Finland
 MU       0.528      0.507    0.845      0.551     0.294       0.193        0.059   0.035     0.194     0.174
 FU       0.164      0.155    0.026      0.116     0.288       0.179        0.111   0.377     0.164     0.145
 MS       0.219      0.226    0.111      0.230     0.240       0.366        0.314   0.118     0.264     0.392
 FS       0.089      0.112    0.018      0.103     0.177       0.262        0.517   0.470     0.378     0.289
Sector
          0.020      0.240    0.055      0.089     0.113          0.127     0.098   0.156     0.037     0.065
Share
                                                       Denmark
 MU       0.656      0.484    0.665      0.498     0.477     0.168          0.058   0.068     0.305     0.192
 FU       0.134      0.185    0.061      0.206     0.258     0.183          0.095   0.300     0.230     0.252
 MS       0.191      0.246    0.238      0.230     0.152     0.493          0.379   0.120     0.246     0.278
 FS       0.019      0.085    0.036      0.066     0.113     0.156          0.468   0.513     0.219     0.278
Sector
          0.014      0.190    0.063      0.064     0.101          0.149     0.096   0.151     0.067     0.106
Share
                                                       Germany
 MU       0.471      0.530    0.720      0.629     0.420     0.340          0.051   0.132     0.339     0.413
 FU       0.197      0.170    0.058      0.169     0.384     0.312          0.151   0.528     0.277     0.256
 MS       0.244      0.273    0.190      0.165     0.127     0.261          0.371   0.123     0.258     0.197
 FS       0.089      0.027    0.032      0.037     0.069     0.087          0.428   0.217     0.126     0.134
Sector
          0.010      0.338    0.086      0.060     0.107          0.102     0.063   0.084     0.043     0.108
Share
                                                      Netherlands
 MU       0.658      0.665    0.850      0.725     0.569       0.409        0.099   0.145     0.375     0.478
 FU       0.225      0.131    0.076      0.134     0.273       0.213        0.118   0.485     0.235     0.172
 MS       0.085      0.167    0.063      0.094     0.123       0.292        0.490   0.170     0.280     0.265
 FS       0.032      0.037    0.011      0.047     0.034       0.086        0.292   0.200     0.110     0.085
Sector
          0.010      0.165    0.058      0.076     0.119          0.174     0.097   0.143     0.033     0.125
Share




                                                     41
                                             Table A3 (continued)
                            Wage Bill Shares of Four Demographic Groups by Sector

                                                                     Finance,
               Primary                        Transp.,   Trade,
                                                                     Insuranc                     Other     Public
                  &        Manuf.   Constr.   Storage,   Hotels,                Educ.   Health
                                                                         e,                      Services   Admin.
               Utilities                      Comm.       Rest.
                                                                    Real Est.
                                                             Belgium
    MU          0.463      0.485    0.686      0.623     0.378         0.197    0.037   0.053      0.303     0.393
    FU          0.063      0.119    0.024      0.088     0.282         0.137    0.074   0.286      0.192     0.168
    MS          0.333      0.311    0.237      0.219     0.208         0.442    0.333   0.190      0.303     0.287
     FS         0.141      0.086    0.053      0.071     0.132         0.225    0.556   0.472      0.202     0.152
Sector Share    0.006      0.217    0.040      0.067     0.070         0.155    0.157   0.118      0.070     0.100
                                                              Austria
    MU          0.697      0.744    0.901      0.833     0.513         0.551    0.120   0.165      0.474     0.598
    FU          0.160      0.179    0.073      0.138     0.454         0.285    0.178   0.662      0.354     0.257
    MS          0.143      0.069    0.026      0.029     0.025         0.113    0.274   0.072      0.099     0.122
     FS         0.000      0.008    0.000      0.000     0.007         0.051    0.428   0.101      0.073     0.023
Sector Share    0.011      0.245    0.096      0.071     0.146         0.107    0.075   0.087      0.050     0.112
                                                              Ireland
    MU          0.644      0.578    0.850      0.689     0.477         0.264    0.046   0.138      0.372     0.526
    FU          0.043      0.183    0.036      0.110     0.350         0.267    0.062   0.538      0.327     0.147
    MS          0.305      0.189    0.108      0.166     0.125         0.326    0.394   0.102      0.179     0.243
     FS         0.009      0.049    0.005      0.035     0.048         0.142    0.499   0.221      0.123     0.084
Sector Share    0.017      0.212    0.063      0.092     0.108         0.122    0.127   0.098      0.038     0.123
                                                              France
    MU          0.639      0.525    0.790      0.581     0.450         0.250    0.076   0.129      0.187     0.368
    FU          0.241      0.151    0.048      0.136     0.269         0.198    0.144   0.374      0.369     0.272
    MS          0.094      0.250    0.123      0.196     0.190         0.382    0.316   0.139      0.237     0.208
     FS         0.026      0.074    0.039      0.087     0.091         0.170    0.464   0.358      0.208     0.151
Sector Share    0.007      0.225    0.053      0.069     0.132         0.155    0.107   0.102      0.032     0.119
                                                                Italy
    MU          0.705      0.680    0.909      0.800     0.578         0.478    0.145   0.277      0.540     0.599
    FU          0.243      0.234    0.044      0.148     0.375         0.294    0.403   0.420      0.364     0.252
    MS          0.046      0.065    0.042      0.043     0.026         0.184    0.163   0.209      0.063     0.099
     FS         0.005      0.020    0.006      0.008     0.020         0.044    0.289   0.094      0.033     0.050
Sector Share    0.026      0.246    0.054      0.071     0.097         0.093    0.114   0.111      0.060     0.129
                                                               Spain
    MU          0.745      0.528    0.786      0.536     0.513         0.358    0.028   0.080      0.367     0.326
    FU          0.105      0.122    0.026      0.082     0.257         0.168    0.064   0.188      0.338     0.116
    MS          0.134      0.311    0.170      0.278     0.162         0.310    0.362   0.282      0.171     0.342
     FS         0.017      0.040    0.019      0.104     0.068         0.163    0.546   0.450      0.123     0.216
Sector Share    0.022      0.219    0.086      0.073     0.135         0.123    0.105   0.079      0.045     0.113
                                                             Portugal
    MU          0.705      0.599    0.907      0.622     0.594         0.427    0.081   0.083      0.231     0.584
    FU          0.277      0.314    0.048      0.174     0.341         0.196    0.237   0.433      0.572     0.248
    MS          0.011      0.068    0.038      0.155     0.051         0.272    0.174   0.124      0.102     0.083
     FS         0.007      0.020    0.007      0.050     0.014         0.105    0.508   0.360      0.095     0.084
Sector Share    0.028      0.164    0.099      0.065     0.148         0.105    0.135   0.075      0.038     0.145
                                                              Greece
    MU          0.707      0.516    0.847      0.618     0.459         0.216    0.024   0.124      0.383     0.467
    FU          0.225      0.218    0.022      0.062     0.270         0.203    0.045   0.249      0.238     0.137
    MS          0.037      0.186    0.115      0.288     0.164         0.350    0.403   0.294      0.218     0.262
     FS         0.030      0.080    0.017      0.032     0.107         0.231    0.527   0.333      0.161     0.135
Sector Share    0.008      0.170    0.070      0.114     0.145         0.100    0.129   0.074      0.038     0.151

Notes. MU= unskilled males, FU = unskilled females, MS= skilled males, FS= skilled females, where Unskilled= No College
Degree (educ=1+2), Skilled= College Degree (educ=3). See notes to Figure 1 for samples and sources.




                                                          42
