                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  DEREGULATION, CONSOLIDATION, AND EFFICIENCY:
                       EVIDENCE FROM U.S. NUCLEAR POWER

                                          Lucas W. Davis
                                         Catherine Wolfram

                                        Working Paper 17341
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17341


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




We are thankful to Catie Hausman for outstanding research assistance. Comments from Matt Barmack,
Severin Borenstein, Paul Joskow, Per Peterson, Scott Taylor and seminar participants at Colorado,
UC Davis, the AERE Summer Conference, the NBER EASE Conference and the NBER Summer
Institute substantially improved the paper. This work was funded by a grant from the California Energy
Commission. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Lucas W. Davis and Catherine Wolfram. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Deregulation, Consolidation, and Efficiency: Evidence from U.S. Nuclear Power
Lucas W. Davis and Catherine Wolfram
NBER Working Paper No. 17341
August 2011
JEL No. D21,D40,L51,L94,Q48

                                              ABSTRACT

For the first four decades of its existence the U.S. nuclear power industry was run by regulated utilities,
with most companies owning only one or two reactors. Beginning in the late 1990s electricity markets
in many states were deregulated and almost half of the nation’s 103 reactors were sold to independent
power producers selling power in competitive wholesale markets. Deregulation has been accompanied
by substantial market consolidation and today the three largest companies control more than one-third
of all U.S. nuclear capacity. We find that deregulation and consolidation are associated with a 10 percent
increase in operating efficiency, achieved primarily by reducing the frequency and duration of reactor
outages. At average wholesale prices the value of this increased efficiency is approximately $2.5 billion
annually and implies an annual decrease of almost 40 million metric tons of carbon dioxide emissions.


Lucas W. Davis
Haas School of Business
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
ldavis@haas.berkeley.edu

Catherine Wolfram
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
wolfram@haas.berkeley.edu
1.       Introduction

       Market deregulation has been one of the dominant economic trends worldwide over
the last 30 years. Economic theory implies that competition provides incentives for firms to
increase efficiency, cut costs, and make prudent investments in capacity and technological
innovation. A broad literature has developed in economics evaluating this transformation
from both theoretical and empirical perspectives. Among the markets that have received
the most attention are airlines, financial services, telecommunications, transportation and
energy.1

       Over this period many industries have also been characterized by large increases in
the degree of market consolidation. Here economic models describe a basic tradeoff
between economies of scale and the ability of larger firms to exercise market power. Again,
government plays a central role, with antitrust policies determining the degree of
concentration in a variety of different important markets. An extensive literature in
industrial organization provides a guide for assessing the potential impact of consolidation
on a number of market outcomes, including pricing, costs, investment and entry. Though
firms confronting a potential merger review often argue that there will be cost efficiencies
from consolidation, there is comparatively little evidence evaluating such claims.2

       This paper examines an unprecedented period of deregulation and consolidation in
the U.S. nuclear power industry. For four decades all nuclear power reactors in the United
States were owned by regulated utilities. Few utilities owned more than one or two reactors
and utilities received a rate of return on their capital investments that was largely
disconnected from operating efficiency. Beginning in the late 1990s electricity markets in
many states were deregulated and 48 of the nation’s 103 nuclear power reactors were sold
to independent power producers selling power in competitive wholesale markets. These
divestitures have led to substantial market consolidation and today the three largest
companies control more than one‐third of all U.S. nuclear capacity.




1 See Joskow and Rose (1989), Winston (1993), Peltzman and Winston (2000), and Joskow (2005) for reviews of
this literature.
2 Several empirical papers examine the effect of market structure on efficiency. See, for example, Olley and Pakes

(1996), Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak (2000), Focarelli and Panetta (2003) and Syverson (2004). Most of
these papers focus on efficiencies gained from reallocations across firms.

                                                        1
      There are a number of reasons why the U.S. nuclear power industry is a particularly
good candidate for a study of the relationship between deregulation, consolidation, and
efficiency. First, electricity is a homogeneous good that is accurately and consistently
measured across space and time. Second, nuclear reactors produce electricity at very low
marginal cost so they are always used as “baseload” generation, meaning they are not
turned off during periods of low demand. These two facts provide us with a substantial
advantage over previous studies that have attempted to measure firm‐level productivity as
they allow us to use publicly available data to construct a highly reliable and consistent
measure of operating efficiency that is not contaminated by differences in product quality
across firms, unobserved demand, or local market price shocks.3 Third, during the relevant
period there is very little entry or exit of nuclear reactors, mitigating concerns about
selection that substantially complicate similar analyses. Fourth, deregulation and
consolidation occurred rapidly and for only half of all reactors, lending credibility to the
empirical analysis by facilitating comparisons both across reactors and over time.

         Using a unique 40‐year monthly panel of all nuclear reactors in the United States we
find that deregulation and consolidation are associated with a 10 percent increase in
operating efficiency, achieved primarily by reducing the frequency and duration of reactor
outages. Efficiency gains were experienced broadly across reactors of different types,
manufacturers, and vintages, with the largest increases in the spring and fall during the
peak months for refueling. We also examine explicitly the role of consolidation, comparing
efficiency gains across companies that operate different numbers of reactors. While we find
evidence that consolidation led to improved operating efficiency, it explains little of the
overall increase.

      Our results imply a substantial increase in electricity production. In 2009 U.S. nuclear
reactors produced 800 billion kilowatt hours of electricity, about 20% of total U.S.
electricity generation. We estimate that the increase in electricity production due to
deregulation and consolidation exceeds 40 billion kilowatt hours annually. At current
average wholesale prices, the value of the increased electricity production is approximately
$2.5 billion annually. This increase is almost pure efficiency gain, achieved without building
a single new plant or constructing a single additional mile of transmission capacity.


3 Adequately controlling for demand‐side factors is a key challenge in the broader productivity literature. See
Syverson (2011) for a recent survey.

                                                      2
      In addition, because the increased electricity production displaces mostly coal‐ and
natural‐gas‐ fired power, these gains in efficiency also have substantial implications for the
environment, implying an annual decrease of 38 million metric tons of carbon dioxide
emissions. Using a conservative estimate for the social cost of carbon dioxide ($20 per ton)
this is an additional $760 million in benefits annually. To put this into perspective, this is
more carbon abatement than was achieved by all the U.S. wind and solar generation
combined during the same period. Whereas there are explicit programs directed at
promoting low‐carbon energy in the case of wind and solar, this decrease in carbon
emissions is noteworthy because deregulation is not usually envisioned as a means for
achieving environmental goals.4

      Finally, we perform a similar analysis for an available measure of reactor safety.
Whereas economic theory provides clear predictions for operating efficiency, the effect of
deregulation on safety is ambiguous and depends on whether safety is a complement or a
substitute to operating efficiency (MIT 2003, Hausman 2011). We find that divestiture and
consolidation are associated with a decrease in the number of emergency shutdowns, also
known as “scrams.” The point estimate is relatively noisy (p‐value .09), but is estimated
with enough precision to reject increases larger than 5%. Safety is inherently much more
difficult to measure than operating efficiency and although we view these results as
suggestive, scrams are a highly imperfect measure of safety and as more and richer data
become available it will be important to revisit this important issue.

      Our results are relevant to current policy discussions about the future of U.S. nuclear
power. Concerns about climate change, energy security and volatile fossil‐fuel prices have
emboldened proponents of nuclear power, with some even forecasting a nuclear
“renaissance.” No new reactors have come online in the United States since the mid‐1990s,
but between 2007 and 2009 the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) received license
applications for 26 proposed new nuclear reactors.5 Several recent studies (MIT 2003, MIT
2009, Joskow and Parsons 2009) compare the lifetime costs of nuclear to other generating




4 Moreover, estimates from Borenstein (2008) and Joskow (2011) imply that to have obtained this same level of

carbon abatement through wind or solar generation would cost more than $10 billion annually. Borenstein
(2008) calculates an implied carbon dioxide mitigation cost of $300‐600/ton for rooftop solar photovoltaics.
Joskow (2011) calculates an implied carbon dioxide mitigation cost of $300/ton for the Cape Wind offshore
wind project.
5 See Table 9 in U.S. NRC. “Information Digest 2010‐2011” NUREG‐1350, Volume 22, published August 2010.



                                                     3
alternatives and highlight the importance of nuclear operating efficiency in these
calculations.

      The format of the paper is as follows. Section 2 provides background information
about the nuclear power industry and the broader electricity market. Sections 3 and 4
describe the data and empirical strategy. Section 5 includes the main results, presenting
estimates of the effect of divestiture and consolidation on nuclear reactor efficiency for a
variety of different specifications including a set of regressions aimed at addressing
potential concerns about selection bias. Section 6 presents additional results aimed at
better understanding the mechanisms driving the increase in efficiency, including ancillary
evidence on investments in reactor capacity as well as on the frequency and duration of
outages. Section 7 offers concluding comments.



2        Background

2.1      Nuclear Power in the U.S. Electricity Industry

      Electricity is generated using several different technologies. In the United States the
most important sources in terms of total electricity production are coal (45%), natural gas
(23%), nuclear (20%), hydro (7%), and wind, solar, and other renewables (4%).6 Nuclear
reactors are expensive to build, but then produce power at lower marginal cost than most
other generating technologies. Coal and natural gas plants produce power at higher
marginal cost, but require smaller initial capital investments.7 The other key difference
between nuclear and other forms of electricity generation is the ease with which output can
be adjusted to meet variable electricity demand. Nuclear power reactors typically take
several days to ramp up or ramp down, and thus are usually shut down only for refueling,
maintenance or in an emergency. At the other end of the spectrum are natural gas peaking
plants which can be turned on and off almost instantly and with very low startup cost.

      These features imply that nuclear reactors are typically used to provide baseload
power, 24 hours a day. This explains why in the United States nuclear power accounts for


6 These shares are from 2009 according to U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration,

Annual Energy Review 2009, released August 2010, Table 8.2a “Electricity Net Generation.”
7 MIT (2009) reports fuel costs (per MWh) of $23 and $48 for coal‐ and natural gas‐fired power plants but only

$7 for nuclear power, based on fuel prices of $2.60, $7.00, and $0.67 per million BTU and average heat rates of
8,870, 6,800, and 10,400 BTU per kilowatt hour, respectively.

                                                      4
only 10% of capacity but produces 20% of total electricity.8 As electricity demand peaks
during the day, other forms of generation come online to meet this demand. In the United
States, the fraction of electricity generated by nuclear reactors is small enough that there is
enough demand to keep nuclear reactors operating even during the lowest consumption
periods in the middle of the night.

       Because nuclear power is baseload, the operating behavior of plants is largely
unaffected by changes in electricity demand. Average fuel costs for nuclear plants ($7 per
MWh) are low compared to wholesale prices, so nuclear operators strive to minimize
planned and unplanned outages.9 From an empirical perspective this is extremely
advantageous because it makes it easier to focus on structural changes on the supply side of
the market, and essentially eliminates concerns about these changes being correlated with
observed or unobserved changes in demand.10 Similarly, the entry or exit of other
generating units does not typically have any effect on how nuclear plants are operated
because in all cases the reactors continue to provide baseload generation. In contrast, coal
and natural gas plants produce power at higher marginal cost, so these facilities are turned
on and off in response to demand fluctuations. Consequently, empirical studies of fossil‐fuel
generation must include adequate controls or risk confounding changes in demand with
changes in efficiency.11

       Nuclear plants are very large so even small improvements in operating efficiency


8 U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, Annual Energy Review 2009, released August
2010, Tables 8.11a “Electric Net Summer Capacity” and 8.2a “Electricity Net Generation.” In 2009, nuclear power
accounted for 9.8% of net summer capacity and 20.2% of total net generation.
9 This includes ore purchase, yellow cake conversion, and enrichment (MIT 2009). Fuel costs are by far the

largest component of variable operating costs for nuclear plants. Variable operations and maintenance costs
(excluding fuel) are $0.51 per MWh according to U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration,
Assumptions to the Annual Energy Outlook 2010, Table 8.2. ``Cost and Performance Characteristics of New
Electricity Generating Technologies” so fuel costs are over 90% of the marginal cost of nuclear power.
10 Adequately controlling for demand‐side factors is a key challenge in the broader productivity literature. For

example, in his recent survey, Syverson (2011) makes the point that, “[b]ecause producer‐specific prices are
unobserved in most business‐level microdata, output is typically measured by revenue divided by an industry‐
level deflator. This means that within‐industry price differences are embodied in output and productivity
measures. If prices reflect in part idiosyncratic demand shifts or market power variation across producers—a
distinct likelihood in many industries—then high “productivity” businesses may not be particularly
technologically efficient. Much of the literature described above therefore documents the joint influence of
productivity and demand factors that show up in within‐industry price variation” (p.357).
11 There may be a second‐order effect of demand‐ and supply‐side factors on nuclear power operations since

higher prices will make it even more profitable to keep the nuclear reactor online. Owners may invest more in
ensuring that the reactor continues to operate if they face high prices. Below we present evidence suggesting
that, at least in the very short‐run, nuclear outages are not timed to match short‐run fluctuations in market
prices. Also, the gains from divestitures do not vary by geographic region, even though average wholesale prices
do.

                                                       5
imply substantial amounts of electricity. Consider, for example, a typical two‐reactor
2000MW nuclear plant. At typical wholesale electricity prices ($60 per MWh), a plant that
operates 80% of the year produces power worth approximately $840 million dollars
annually. An increase from 80% to 85% increases revenues by $52 million dollars annually,
$120,000 for each additional hour that the plant is operating. Given the low marginal cost of
nuclear generation, this is essentially all profit.



2.2     The Regulation and Deregulation of the U.S. Electricity Industry

      Traditionally electricity was regarded as a natural monopoly. In the standard
regulatory model still used in many states today, investor‐ and, in some cases, municipally
and federally‐owned utilities receive exclusive rights to provide electricity within given
geographic areas and are allowed to charge rates set by cost‐of‐service regulation. These
vertically‐integrated utilities typically perform all the activities required to supply
electricity to residential, commercial, and industrial customers including generating
electricity, operating the transmission and distribution networks, and providing retail
services such as billing and customer service.

      Under cost‐of‐service regulation, rates are set to allow utilities to recover their
recurring operating expenses as well as earn a rate of return on all capital investments in
generating equipment as long as that equipment is "used and useful" (F.P.C. vs. Hope
Natural Gas Co., 320 U.S. 591, 1944). This creates little incentive for companies to operate
their plants efficiently, including their nuclear reactors, because they receive this
compensation regardless of the level of performance. Poor operating efficiency at a utility’s
nuclear plant means that it must operate other higher‐cost generating units more. Rates are
then adjusted, however, to reflect these higher operating costs making the regulated utility
essentially indifferent between the generating facilities in its portfolio. While in theory a
regulator could disallow costs for a utility with poor nuclear operating efficiency, this rarely
happens in practice. Nuclear power production is highly idiosyncratic and all plants
occasionally have problems that lead to suboptimal operating efficiency. Knowing which
problems are due to bad luck and which are due to poor management is a challenging,




                                                 6
unwelcome job for a utility commission, who customarily leave day‐to‐day operating
decisions to the utility company management.12

       Recognizing that traditional cost‐of‐service regulation provides little incentive for
cost‐minimization, several states implemented some form of incentive regulation in the
1980s and early 1990s.13 These policies varied from state to state but in all cases were
designed to create incentives for firms to increase output and cut costs. Some states
implemented incentive programs tied to the operation of particular plants, including
nuclear plants.

       In perhaps the best‐known example, the California Public Utility Commission agreed
in 1988 to allow Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E) to collect a fixed price for every
kilowatt hour of electricity produced by the Diablo Canyon nuclear plant. As the outcome of
a lawsuit settlement, the price was fixed for over ten years and was not to be adjusted to
reflect cost savings or capacity factor improvements at the plant. This created an incentive
for PG&E to increase plant efficiency, and, indeed, the plant’s capacity factor increased
substantially after the plan was implemented. In a classic case of the ratchet effect, state
regulators adjusted the price downward six years into the scheme, in the face of PG&E’s
huge profits at the previously negotiated price.

       In other states, incentive regulation was less precisely linked to particular plants, but,
for instance, allowed the utility to earn a higher rate of return if it maintained a pre‐
specified average availability across all of its plants. At the end of 1990, sixty nuclear
reactors, operating in sixteen states were subject to some form of incentive regulation
(Verma, Mitnick and Marcus, 1999). Empirical work at the time found that the incentive
programs had mixed success at raising average capacity factors at nuclear plants.

       Another mechanism that potentially creates incentives for operating efficiency is
regulatory lag. Particularly during periods of low inflation for input costs, several years can
elapse between rate cases. (It is very rare to have a rate case initiated by a party other than
the utility.) Between rate cases, utilities are essentially facing a price‐cap, which gives them
incentives to minimize costs in the short run (Joskow, 1973). In the mid to late 1990s, for



12 There were a number of cases in which regulators disallowed construction costs for nuclear plants (Lyon and
Mayo, 2005).
13 Knittel (2002) studies the impact of incentive regulation in the U.S. electricity industry on fossil‐fuel‐powered

generating plants.

                                                         7
example, there were very few rate cases, partly as state regulatory commissions began
hearings on deregulation.

      In part as a response to the limitations of cost‐of‐service regulation, several states
began to deregulate their electricity markets beginning in the late 1990s. See White (1996)
and Joskow (1997) for overviews of the deregulation process. In most states, the
deregulation process separated electricity generation, which most economists believe is
potentially competitive, from transmission and distribution. Wholesale electricity markets
were established in several different regions, and these markets facilitated the growth of
independent (nonutility) power producers. Regulators also strongly encouraged utilities to
sell all or part of their existing electric generating portfolios.

      Divestitures fulfilled several goals. First, they helped jumpstart the nascent nonutility
sector. Many regulators were concerned that vertically integrated companies could distort
the wholesale markets, as they would serve as both buyers and sellers into these markets,
as well as owners of the transmission grid to which any nonutility supplier would need
access. Vertical separation alleviated these concerns. Also, the proceeds from the
divestitures reimbursed the utilities for any unrecovered costs, thereby avoiding the
“stranded cost” problem. Divestitures peaked between 1998 and 2002, during which time
over 300 electric generating plants were sold and reclassified as independent power
producers. Divestitures continued at a slower pace 2003‐2010, and by the end of the decade
35% of U.S. electricity capacity was controlled by independent power producers.14

      The timing of the nuclear plant divestitures followed the broader industry trend. By as
late as the end of 1998, all U.S. nuclear reactors were still owned by traditional electric
utilities. Then between 1999 and 2002, a total of 36 reactors were divested and reclassified
as independent power producers. An additional 12 reactors were divested between 2004
and 2007. See Appendix Table 1 for a complete list of divestitures.

      A number of empirical papers have evaluated the effects of U.S. electricity
restructuring, including its impact on the efficiency of the wholesale power markets
(Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak, 2000; Bushnell, Mansur and Saravia, 2008; and Hortacsu
and Puller, 2008), consumer responses to retail competition (Hortacsu, Madanizadeh and
Puller, 2011) and improvements in inter‐regional cost‐minimization across power plants

14 Table 1.1 in U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, Electric Power Annual, DOE/EIA‐

0226, revised April 2011.

                                                     8
(Mansur and White, 2010). Several closely related studies examine the effects of electricity
restructuring on plant operations, although much of the existing work has focused on
electricity production from fossil‐fuel plants. See, e.g., Wolfram (2004), Bushnell and
Wolfram (2005), Fabrizio, Rose, and Wolfram (2007), and Craig and Savage (2011).

       Nuclear power has received less attention. Zhang (2007) examines the impact of
electricity restructuring on nuclear plant operating efficiency during the period 1992‐1998,
prior to the beginning of plant divestitures. Our analysis adds 10+ years of additional data
from the key period after deregulation, as well as 20+ years of data from before 1992. Both
Zhang (2007) and Fabrizio, Rose, and Wolfram (2007), in their study of fossil‐fuel plants,
restrict their analyses to the period before divestitures as both studies use data on plant
inputs and output from the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission’s (FERC) Form 1, which
is for electric utilities but and not for independent power producers. Our study uses publicly
available data sources that are unique to nuclear reactors. Because the safety of nuclear
reactor operations are subject to heavy regulatory scrutiny, all nuclear plants including
independent power producers are required to report monthly reactor status to the
Department of Energy as well as daily reactor status to the NRC. This information is
available for all plants and years and is available for each individual reactor inside multi‐
reactor plants, unlike the information available from FERC.15



2.3      Market Power

       Both academics and regulators have devoted considerable attention to identifying and
mitigating market power in deregulated wholesale markets (see, e.g., Wolfram 1999,
Borenstein, Bushnell, and Wolak 2002, and Joskow and Kahn, 2002). To prevent the
exercise of market power, regulators have established bid caps, set up market monitoring
commissions, and blocked an attempted merger.16

       Whatever market power was present during the time period we study, it is unlikely to
have influenced nuclear plant operations. Operators of nuclear reactors typically will not

15 This distinction is important because in the United States it is common for reactors in multi‐reactor plants to
be very different. For example, the Millstone nuclear power plant in Connecticut has two reactors that were
completed nine years apart (1975 and 1986), of different design capacities (870 and 1156 megawatts), and
made by different manufacturers (Combustion Engineering and Westinghouse).
16 For example, a 2004 proposed merger between Exelon and Public Service Enterprise Group of New Jersey was

eventually called off, in part because the companies balked at the regulators’ proposed market‐power mitigation
measures.

                                                        9
attempt to exercise market power unilaterally. Previous work has examined the scope for
electricity generators to exercise market power in wholesale electricity markets by
submitting bids above marginal cost (see, e.g., Borenstein, Bushnell, and Wolak 2002).
However, because the marginal cost of nuclear power is low relative to typical market
clearing prices, the operator of a nuclear plant would need to submit a bid substantially
above its marginal cost in order to influence prices. And bidding above marginal cost is
risky because if demand ends up being different than expected, or if other generators bid
differently than expected, the nuclear plant can find itself out of the queue and not
producing power. This is particularly costly for a nuclear plant because it means that it does
not receive the substantial inframarginal rent that it would otherwise receive. Moreover,
because of the long ramping times for nuclear reactors, it may be several days before the
plant can operate again at full power.

     The real scope for market power comes, instead, from companies that operate a
portfolio of nuclear and non‐nuclear generating plants. A diversified company may find it
profitable to withhold capacity from plants whose marginal costs are closer to the expected
market clearing price. Indeed, the incentive to exercise market power with these units is
increasing in the amount of inframarginal capacity that the company has (nuclear or other
low marginal cost technologies). It is clear that the market consolidation that occurred in
the U.S. nuclear industry beginning during the late 1990s has increased the scope for
market power, and in future work it would be interesting to examine this behavior
explicitly. It is worth emphasizing, however, that regardless of whether or not a company
withholds output from its marginal plants, it still will make sense for the company to
continue to operate its nuclear power plants as much as possible.



3      Data Description

     This study is conducted using the most comprehensive dataset ever compiled on the
operating efficiency of U.S. nuclear power reactors. Our primary dataset describes forty
years of monthly operating efficiency for the universe of U.S. nuclear power reactors. This
long panel is important because it allows us to use a variety of different approaches for
addressing possible concerns about selection and pre‐existing trends. We also put
considerable effort into constructing detailed histories of the companies that own and


                                             10
operate nuclear reactors – information that we use to construct our measures of divestiture
and consolidation. The 40‐year monthly panel was constructed using data from the U.S.
Department of Energy’s Power Plant Report (EIA‐923).17 The Power Plant Report is a
monthly survey of operators of nuclear reactors and other large electric generating facilities
that includes total electricity generation and other information.18 The compiled dataset
provides a complete record of monthly generation for all reactors from 1970 to 2009. Of the
103 reactors used in our analysis, only two began commercial operation prior to 1970 so
the dataset includes the entire operating history for all but two reactors.19 Reactor outages
are recorded as zeros. There are no missing observations.

       During the relevant period there is very little entry or exit of nuclear reactors. This
simplifies the analysis considerably because it mitigates concerns about selection bias that
have been an important issue in analyses of deregulation in other markets (e.g. Olley and
Pakes 1996). We include in the main analysis all U.S. nuclear power reactors that were
operating as of January 1, 2000. This excludes a small number of reactors that were closed
during the 1990s, including Millstone 1 and San Onofre 1. No nuclear reactors have been
closed in the United States since 1998. As of 2011 there are 104 operating nuclear reactors
in the United States. We have 103 in our panel because we have excluded Browns Ferry 1
which was closed for more than two decades between 1985 and 2007.

       The most commonly reported measure of nuclear reactor operating efficiency is the
capacity factor,

                                                             (       )
                                                                                         ∗ 100.               (1)
                                                                     ∗


17 Previous versions of the EIA‐923 were the EIA‐906 and EIA‐759.
18 Reactor operators report monthly net electricity generation in megawatt hours (MWh). With electricity
generation there is a distinction between gross generation and net generation, where net generation accounts
for the electricity consumed by the plant itself and therefore can be negative during shutdowns. Power plants
are supposed to report net generation rather than gross generation, but the presence of many exact zeros,
particularly during the 1970s and 1980s suggests that at least some plants during some years were reporting
gross generation instead. Fortunately in practice the difference is negligible for nuclear power plants because
on‐site electricity consumption averages less than 1% of total electric generation.
19 During 1970‐1985 and 2001‐2002, generation in the Power Plant Report is reported at the plant level but not

reported separately for individual reactors within multi‐reactor plants. Of the 65 plants in our sample, 29 have
one reactor, 33 have two reactors and 2 plants have three reactors (Oconee and Palo Verde). During these years
for multi‐reactor plants we impute reactor‐level measures of generation by assigning plant‐level generation to
each reactor proportionately to each reactor’s capacity. This imputation is unlikely to bias our results because
divestitures tend to occur at the same time for all reactors in multi‐reactor plants. The one exception is Indian
Point where prior to 2001 the plant's two active reactors had different owners. It turns out, however, that
because of this ownership structure the Power Plant Report includes reactor‐level generation for Indian Point
for all years, making no imputation necessary. Later in the paper we re‐estimate the model at the plant level and,
as expected, the results are very similar.

                                                       11
Capacity factor is calculated as the ratio of actually generated power and maximum
potential generation. Usually reported in percent as it is here, the capacity factor is a
convenient summary measure of efficiency that is easily interpretable and facilitates
comparisons of efficiency across reactors of different sizes.

       For our baseline estimates we use a closely related measure,

                                                                 (        )
                                                             (       )∗
                                                                                      ∗ 100.                   (2)

When reactor design capacity is equal to maximum potential generation these two
measures are identical. The important difference between (1) and (2) is that reactor design
capacity does not change over time whereas maximum potential generation may change
over the lifetime of a reactor. Consequently, the latter measure reflects both the intensity
with which the reactor is used and changes over time in maximum potential generation.
Whereas capacity factor never exceeds 100, our measure can exceed 100 for a reactor that
on average during a period operates at a level of generation above the reactor design
capacity. Later in the paper we examine these two components separately, but for the
baseline estimates it is valuable to have a single measure.20 We use the reactor design
capacities reported in U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration,
Nuclear Power Generation and Fuel Cycle Report 1997, “Appendix C: Nuclear Units Ordered
in the United States, 1953‐1996.”

       The Power Plant Report also contains information about reactor operators including
whether the reactor operator is a utility or a nonutility. We use this information to construct
an indicator variable for reactors that have been divested. We identify divestitures in the
Power Plant Report as the first month in which a reactor changes its status from utility to
nonutility.21 These same data were also used to describe industry consolidation. For each


20 For our baseline estimates we might have alternatively used net generation itself (without this scaling) or net
generation in logs. We prefer the scaled measure to net generation without scaling because U.S. reactors vary
widely in design capacity. Net generation in logs would help address this issue, but is not well suited to our
application because we have a large number of zeros and negative numbers for net generation.
21 See Appendix Table 1 for the complete list of divestitures. Because this variable is central for our analysis we

put considerable effort into cross‐checking divestiture dates against alternative sources. Our primary alternative
source of divestiture dates is the U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, Electric Power
Monthly, which in March issues between 2000 and 2003 includes a table ``Electric Utility Plants That Have Been
Sold and Reclassified” listing generating facilities that have been reclassified as non‐utilities. For the years in
which Electric Power Monthly is not available we cross‐checked the divestiture dates against SEC filings from the
companies involved in the transaction. In the vast majority of cases the different sources report the same
divestiture date. For a small number of cases in which there were minor discrepancies in divestiture dates
between the different sources we rely on SEC filings. Also in some cases the Power Plant Report identifies the

                                                        12
reactor and month observation we calculate the number of other reactors operated by that
reactor’s operator.22 In cases where companies are subsidiaries of other companies we treat
this as the same company. Where this is unclear we used SEC filings to determine the
ownership structure.23 Much, but not all, of the variation in consolidation is driven by
divestitures so our careful treatment of the divestiture dates and operator changes helps
ensure the accuracy of this measure.

       We also use data from the U.S. NRC’s Power Reactor Status Reports. These data are
available for a shorter time period (1999‐2009), but are available daily compared to
monthly for the Power Plant Report. With higher frequency data, we can evaluate reactor
outages with considerably more detail. Reactors are required to submit daily reports to the
NRC describing capacity factor in percent. Reactors reporting less than 100% provide a
brief explanation and reactors that are completely shutdown report whether the outages
was due to a manual shutdown (e.g. refueling or maintenance) or an automatic shutdown,
also known as a “scram.” The daily data are a complete panel with no missing observations
during this 11 year period; a total of 4,017 total days.

       We augment the operating data from the Power Plant Report and Power Reactor Status
Reports with time‐invariant reactor characteristics including reactor type, reactor
manufacturer, and the date that each reactor began commercial operation from the NRC
Information Digest 2010‐2011 (NUREG‐1350, Volume 22), published August 2010, Appendix
A “U.S. Commercial Power Reactors.” Table 1 provides descriptive statistics. Panel A reports
reactor characteristics. Reactor openings peaked during the 1970s and 1980s and most
reactors had been operating for more than 10 years when divestitures began in 1999. The
descriptive statistics show that U.S. reactors consist of two different reactor types produced
by four different reactor manufacturers.24 Later in the paper we evaluate whether operating



year but not the month of divestiture and we have used the alternative sources to determine the exact month.
22 The Power Plant Report elicits information about reactor “operators” rather than “owners.” For most reactors

there is no distinction between the two. However, there are few reactors with multiple owners. In these cases
typically the reactor is operated by the majority owner. There are also a small number of cases in which reactor
owners signed operating contracts with outside companies.
23 One complication is that AmerGen, at the time of some of the divestitures was 50% owned by Exelon and 50%

owned by British Energy. In the baseline specification we treat these reactors as being wholly owned by Exelon.
Results are essentially identical when we alternatively calculate consolidation for these reactor‐month
observations by multiplying by .50 the number of reactors owned by each of the co‐owners. The simple
correlation between the two consolidation measures exceeds .99.
24 In a nuclear reactor enriched uranium creates a chain reaction that creates heat that is used to produce

electricity. Heat is produced either in the form of super‐heated water in a pressurized water reactor or as steam

                                                       13
efficiency differs systematically across these different designs.

      Panel B in Table 1 describes operating efficiency and outages. Mean net generation as
a percent of design capacity increases substantially over our sample period from 61%
during the 1970s to 92% during the 2000s. The daily reactor status data from the NRC
reveals that reactors tend to operate either at full capacity or not at all. In our sample, 77%
of all daily observations are 100% capacity factor and 9% are 0% capacity factor. It is
relatively common for reactors to operate between 90% and 99% but capacity factors
between 1% and 89% are less common and usually indicate a reactor that is ramping up or
ramping down, rather than a reactor that is permanently operating at an intermediate
power level. For 45% of all observations between 1% and 89% we find that there is a
reactor shutdown within 7 days, compared to 23% for reactors operating 90‐99%, and only
5% for reactors operating at 100%.

      Finally, the table describes reactor outages over the period 1999‐2009. By far the
most common explanation for reactor outages is refueling. Here we have defined refueling
as any outage in which refueling was occurring, regardless of whether or not other forms of
maintenance were occurring at the same time. A smaller fraction of shutdowns are for
maintenance not related to refueling. Finally, about 2% of shutdown‐days were due to an
automatic shutdown triggered by one of the reactor’s safety systems. Also known as
“scrams,” this is when an operating nuclear reactor is shut down suddenly by rapid
insertion of control rods, typically as a result of equipment or operator error. Whereas
planned outages begin with a gradual decrease in power levels over several days, scrams
shut down a reactor rapidly, putting great stress on plant equipment. There are a total of
831 scrams in our data, or 0.73 scrams per reactor year.



4        Empirical Strategy

4.1      Graphical Analysis

       Figure 1 plots net generation as a percent of design capacity by year for reactors that
were divested compared to all other reactors. The figure also plots on a different scale the
number of operating reactors by year. Early in the sample there were few operating

in the case of a boiling water reactor. In our sample General Electric produced only boiling water reactors and
the other three manufacturers produced only pressurized water reactors.

                                                      14
reactors but by the 1990s all of the reactors in the sample are online. Net generation
increases steadily throughout the forty‐year period, from near 50% of reactor capacity to
above 90%. Worldwide, nuclear operating efficiency has followed a similar upward
trajectory through the 1980s and 1990s.25 This industry‐wide increase is usually attributed
primarily to learning‐by‐doing (Joskow and Rozanski, 1979, Lester and McCabe 1993). “For
a complicated piece of equipment like a nuclear power plant this type of learning includes
the identification and correction of particular technical `bugs’ as well as increasing the
ability of workers to use and maintain the equipment more effectively” (Joskow and
Rozanski, 1979). Every piece of equipment in a nuclear reactor has now been studied for
decades and inventive engineers have continued to find technical refinements,
improvements, and adaptations that increase reliability.

         For most of the sample the mean efficiency for divested reactors tracks reasonably
closely the mean efficiency for all other reactors. During the 1980s and 1990s the mean
efficiency for divested reactors tends to be somewhat lower than the mean efficiency for all
other reactors. Then beginning in the late 1990s, the mean efficiency for divested reactors
increases sharply and continues to increase during the 2000s. For every year between 2003
and 2009 the mean efficiency for divested reactors is higher than the mean efficiency for all
other reactors. This period of increased mean efficiency corresponds with the years after
which most divestitures had occurred. Although it is impossible to make definitive
statements based on this time series, the pattern is consistent with a causal relationship
between deregulation and operating efficiency with a group of reactors that were perennial
underachievers converted almost immediately into a group of reactors that consistently
outperform the rest of the industry. In the following subsections we turn to a regression
framework that allows us to examine the relationship between divestiture, consolidation,
and efficiency while controlling for a number of potentially important confounding factors.

         It is also worth highlighting the pronounced dip in efficiency during the late 1990s
among reactors that were subsequently divested. We have examined this period carefully
and this dip in efficiency can be explained by several extended outages. During 1996, 1997,
and 1998, ten reactors experience 12+ month outages – seven of which were reactors that
were subsequently divested.26 In Section 5.4 we discuss potential concerns about selection


25   World Nuclear Association, “Optimized Capacity: Global Trends and Issues,” undated.
26   In 1995 President Bill Clinton appointed Shirley Jackson to serve as the chair of the NRC. As part of a new

                                                        15
bias and show that the results are similar in alternative specifications that exclude these
long outages. One might have been concerned, in particular, that operators could have
overhauled these reactors during the outages, potentially leading to improved long‐run
operating efficiency even in the absence of divestiture. We show in Section 5.4, however,
that the results are similar excluding reactors that experienced long outages in 1996‐1998.
Although it is reassuring that our estimates are similar in these alternative specifications,
for the main results it is important to use all observations including these periods of
unusually poor operating efficiency. Divestiture makes plant operators acutely aware of the
financial cost of outages. Extended outages, in particular, are disastrous for independent
power producers, so they have incentive to go to great lengths to reduce their probability.

       Finally, the figure also raises the possibility of learning spillovers from divested to
non‐divested reactors. It seems at least plausible that part of the potential gains from
deregulation and consolidation would come in the form of learning about best practices,
knowledge that at least in theory might quickly spread to regulated utilities. To the extent
that these spillovers are important, our estimates of the effect of deregulation and
consolidation would be biased downward. It is interesting to note, however, that while
operating efficiency steadily increased during the 2000s among divested reactors, it was
essentially flat at all other reactors. The companies such as Exelon that have made a
business out of buying nuclear reactors claim that their operating success is difficult to
duplicate, and this lack of recent improvement among non‐divested reactors may provide
some empirical support for that argument.27



4.2      Covariate Balance

       The regression analysis described in the following sections is based on comparisons
between divested and non‐divested reactors, with the operating efficiency of non‐divested
reactors providing a counterfactual for what would have occurred at the divested reactors

reactor oversight program developed by Jackson, NRC inspectors identified dozens of problems at several
different reactors culminating in the long outages observed during this period. Public concern about nuclear
safety peaked following a March 1996 Time Magazine cover story, “Nuclear Warriors,” March 4, 1996 by Eric
Pooley and subsequent Senate investigation (see U.S. General Accounting Office, “Nuclear Regulation: Preventing
Problem Plants Requires More Effective NRC Action,” GAO/RCED‐97‐145, May 1997).
27 In testimony before the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities in 2005, Exelon argued that, “[a] person does not

become a great baseball player simply by reading best hitting and fielding practices, people do not become great
business leaders simply by reading a book on best practices, and you certainly cannot run nuclear power plants
just by reading procedures.”

                                                       16
during the 2000s had they not been divested. Whether or not this counterfactual is
reasonable depends on whether the groups are ex ante similar, in terms of both observable
and unobservable characteristics. Formal tests of unobserved characteristics are impossible
but studies have argued that research designs that balance observable characteristics suffer
less from omitted variables bias (Altonji, Elder, and Tamer 2005). In addition, when
observable characteristics are similar between groups the exact functional form for the
estimating equation becomes less important.

     Table 2 compares all divested reactors with all other reactors. Many of the
characteristics are similar in the two groups. Mean reactor capacity and mean reactor age,
for example, are very similar. The table also reports p‐values from tests that the means are
equal. For none of the first four characteristics is the difference in means statistically
significant. The table also describes reactor type and reactor manufacturer. The percentages
differ between the two groups, but both groups include reactors of both types and from all
four manufacturers. The most striking difference between the two groups is their
geographic location. The divested reactors are primarily in the Northeast and Midwest,
whereas two‐thirds of the non‐divested reactors are in the South. These differences reflect
the geographic pattern of where electricity deregulation occurred in the United States.

     Given the underlying differences between the two groups, we will be careful to control
for reactor characteristics in the analysis that follows. The core of our strategy, detailed in
the following subsection, is to emphasize within‐reactor changes in efficiency over time,
which allows us to control for time‐invariant observable and unobservable reactor
characteristics. Then in Section 5.4 we assess empirically whether selection bias or
differential trends by reactor type could be influencing our estimates. We report results, for
example, from alternative specifications which restrict the analysis to Census regions for
which there is common support and which reweight the sample using propensity scores.
The results from these robustness tests tend to be very similar to our baseline results,
leading us to believe that, despite the underlying differences, the non‐divested reactors
provide a reasonably accurate counterfactual for how operating efficiency would have
evolved in divested reactors in the absence of deregulation.




                                              17
4.3      Estimating Equation

       This section describes the estimating equation used for our baseline estimates of the
effect of divestiture on reactor operating efficiency. The approach is described by the
following regression equation,

                           it   =        0
                                             +   1
                                                     1[   ]it +   2
                                                                      + δi + ωt + εit .                    (3)

Here i indexes reactors and t indexes months, and in the baseline specification we include
all reactor‐month observations from the period 1970‐2009, over 36,000 total observations.
The dependent variable              it   is net generation as a percent of design capacity. Because the
dependent variable is measured in percent all coefficient estimates should be interpreted as
percentage points. The covariate of interest is 1[                            ]it , an indicator variable for
reactors that have been sold and reclassified as non‐utilities. The coefficient of interest                 1
                                                                                                                is
the effect of divestiture on efficiency in percentage points. A positive coefficient provides
evidence that, everything else equal, divested reactors have better operating efficiency than
they would have achieved absent the divestiture.

       We report results from specifications that include a range of different control
variables. In the full specification we control for a cubic in reactor age (                )28, reactor fixed
effects (δi ), and month‐of‐sample fixed effects (ωt ). The reactor fixed effects play an
important role in the regression, controlling for observed and unobserved physical
characteristics such as size, reactor type, reactor manufacturer, cooling technology and
other factors. The month‐of‐sample fixed effects are also important, particularly given the
pronounced upward trend in efficiency throughout almost the entire sample period
observed in Figure 1. Finally, the error term εit captures unobserved differences in
efficiency across reactor‐months.29 In all results we cluster standard errors at the plant level
allowing for arbitrary correlation over time and across reactors in multi‐reactor plants.



28 Joskow and Rozanski (1979) discuss two mechanisms by which reactor efficiency would tend to increase with
age. First, there may be problems with the reactor as initially constructed (e.g. improperly installed equipment)
that must be corrected. Second, there may be reactor‐specific learning‐by‐doing by which operations and
maintenance personnel become progressively more effective as they understand the idiosyncrasies of a
particular reactor.
29 Our least‐squares estimates describe the conditional mean of
                                                                       it for a set of explanatory variables. An
alternative would have been to estimate a stochastic frontier production function describing the maximum
amount of output obtainable from a given input bundle (see Aigner and Chu, 1968 and Aigner, Lovell and
Schmidt, 1977). The disadvantage of this approach is that it requires one to make parametric assumptions about
the error term. To examine the robustness of our results, in alternative results not reported we estimated

                                                          18
      Unbiased estimation of          1
                                          using least‐squares requires that the error term (εit ) is
uncorrelated with 1[                 ]it conditional on the available covariates. Our preferred
specification includes reactor fixed effects so underlying time‐invariant differences between
divested and non‐divested reactors would not bias the results. However, the orthogonality
condition could be violated if divestitures are correlated with trends in reactor efficiency.
For example, if the reactors being divested are systematically those with more positive
trends in efficiency this would bias upwards the estimates of                1
                                                                                 . We return to this issue in
Section 5.4 and discuss several institutional details which provide reassurance that the
divested reactors were not selected based on trends in operating efficiency or on the
likelihood that particular reactors could be improved after market restructuring.



4.4      Interpreting our Estimating Equation

       Several existing studies estimate production functions or cost functions with data
from power plants. See, for example, Christensen and Greene (1976), Kleit and Terrell
(2001) and Knittel (2002).30 Papers that specify a production function estimate the
relationship between output, usually measured as annual kilowatt‐hours produced, and
inputs, usually including capital, labor, fuel, and, occasionally, materials. Papers that specify
cost functions estimate the relationship between costs, input prices and output. With both
approaches, studies typically use cross‐sectional data on fossil‐fuel plants, and impose a
functional form on the production or cost function, such as Cobb‐Douglas or translog.31
       Although equation (3) is not a production function, we interpret the coefficient on
1               , the variable of interest, as a measure of efficiency gains. Our dependent
variable, net generation scaled by design capacity, is a measure of output much like what
has been used in previous studies that estimate production functions. Where our estimation
equation differs from previous work is that we do not explicitly include inputs. By far the


equation (3) using a stochastic frontier model with a composite error term composed of an inefficiency term
assumed to be half‐normal bounded above by zero and a normally‐distributed idiosyncratic term. With this
alternative model the estimated coefficient for 1[       ]it is similar but somewhat smaller than the baseline
estimates presented later in the paper.
30 In related work, Bushnell and Wolfram (2005) and Fabrizio, Rose and Wolfram (2007) estimate factor‐

demand equations, derived from a production function.
31 Fabrizio, Rose and Wolfram (2007) describe how certain functional form assumptions may not be appropriate

for power plants and specify a production function which is Leontief in fuel inputs plus capital, labor, and
materials. They derive factor demand equations for labor, materials and fuel, and hold capital fixed with plant
fixed effects.

                                                      19
most important input for nuclear power production is the capital embodied in the plant
itself. Capital costs represent about 80% of the total cost of nuclear power, compared to, for
example, only 15% for natural gas generation (Joskow and Parsons, 2009). Our preferred
specifications include reactor fixed effects, which control for time‐invariant differences in
capital inputs across reactors. Also, month‐of‐sample fixed effects control for industry‐wide
changes in nuclear production (e.g., due to increased automation, or changes due to NRC
regulations). Thus while we do not explicitly model reactor output as a function of inputs,
these fixed effects control for important variation in inputs, implying that the divestiture‐
related changes we estimate reflect efficiency improvements. In particular, the coefficient
on 1                  in (3) measures how far the utility owners were from the production
frontier, which we define based on the production of the nonutility owners.
       After the plant itself, the other important inputs for nuclear power production are
labor and fuel, each accounting for about 10% of the total cost of nuclear power.32 Neither
labor nor fuel consumption are observed at the plant‐level in the United States after the
divestitures. In our analysis, industry‐wide changes in these inputs are controlled for with
the time fixed effects, and time‐invariant cross‐plant differences are captured with the
reactor fixed effects. Divestiture creates incentives for firms to increase output and
decrease costs along all margins, including labor and fuel efficiency, so there may have been
time‐varying, reactor‐specific changes in these inputs. Thus, if anything, we are likely
underestimating the gains from divestiture by not controlling for reactor‐level variation in
inputs.
       For labor, the available evidence suggests that the amount by which we are
underestimating efficiency is small. We do not have a large enough sample to perform a
rigorous statistical analysis, but for seven divested plants that we can follow from 1998 to
2002, average employment dropped by 20 percent, while at 24 non‐divested plants for
which we have comparable data, average employment dropped by 7.5 percent.33 This


32 Du and Parsons (2009), Table 6C, reports the valuation of cost cash flows at a nuclear power plant by project
year and expenditure category. As a percent of total project cost the largest category is construction cost (72%),
followed by labor and other non‐fuel operations and maintenance costs (11%), fuel and waste fees (10%), and
incremental capital costs (7%). Plant‐level data on incremental capital costs are not available. An important
exception are investments undertaken to increase the capacity of a plant. The timing of these so called "uprates"
are observed and we examine them explicitly in Section 6.
33 The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) collects and reports the average employment per year at

plants owned by investor‐owned utilities, but not at plants owned by independent power producers, making it
impossible to use FERC data for such an analysis. Fortunately, during 2001 and 2002 the Department of Energy
collected employment information for a subset of U.S. nuclear plants and we have been able to obtain those data
and match them with average annual employment from the FERC Form 1.

                                                       20
differential improvement in labor efficiency is consistent with existing evidence of modest
labor reductions after divestiture at fossil‐fuel‐fired plants (Shanefelter 2010). Combining
this with national‐level data on salaries allows us to approximate the total change in labor
expenditures.34 In 2009, the industry employed 62,000 workers at a total cost of $6.4 billion
(approximately $103,000 annually per worker in wages, including bonuses). The plants in
our sample employed roughly 800 workers each in the later part of our sample period, so if
divested owners reduced their annual wage bill by 15% more than the utilities, they would
save roughly $12 million dollars. Given that the average plant has two reactors, this
aggregates up to less than $300 million in savings across all of the divested reactors.
Although substantial, this is small compared to the approximately $2.5 billion in additional
revenue from increased output.

      Aggregate data for uranium fuel consumption suggests that there has not been a
substantial change in efficiency along this margin. Between 1994 and 2009 total uranium
fuel consumption in the United States increased at almost exactly the same rate as nuclear
electric generation.35 This suggests that in practice there is little substitution between
uranium fuel and other inputs in nuclear power production. Moreover, the marginal cost of
uranium is so low relative to wholesale electricity prices that as long as the reactor is
available (i.e., not in an outage), the operator should procure fuel to generate as much
electricity as possible. More precisely, we are assuming nuclear production is Leontief in the
availability of the plant (YAvl), which is a function of capital and labor, and fuel (F): YAct =
min(YAvl(K,L),F), where YAct is the actual plant output. Marginal fuel costs are so low,
however, that the fuel constraint is never binding and YAct = YAvl. Since YAct is the dependent
variable in equation (3), 1[Divested]it measures changes in the efficiency of producing
availability and is not a function of fuel inputs.




34 The Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages reports state and national
information about employment and wages by NAICS code. Nuclear power generation has its own NAICS code
(221113) but data is withheld for any geographic industry level in which there are fewer than three firms,
effectively preventing these data from being disclosed at the state‐level for the nuclear industry.
35 According to U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, Uranium Marketing Annual

Report, August 2010, the amount of uranium loaded into U.S. nuclear power reactors increased 22% from 40.4
million pounds in 1994 to 49.4 million pounds in 2009. During the same period according to U.S. Department of
Energy, Annual Energy Review 2009, “Table 9.2 Nuclear Power Plant Operations” nuclear electricity net
generation increased 25% from 640 billion kilowatt hours to 799 billion kilowatt hours.

                                                     21
5        Main Results

5.1      The Effect of Divestiture on Reactor Efficiency

       Table 3 reports baseline estimates of the effect of divestiture on nuclear operating
efficiency. Estimated coefficients and standard errors corresponding to 1[                               ]it are
reported from five separate regressions. The dependent variable in all regressions is net
generation as a percent of design capacity (equation 2). Controlling only for month‐of‐
sample fixed effects in column (1), divestiture is associated with a 6.5 percentage point
increase in efficiency. As the mean of scaled net generation in our sample for non‐divested
plants in 2000 was 87%, the increase in divestiture is equivalent to an increase to
approximately 94%. The coefficient is statistically significant with a p‐value less than 0.001.

       Column (2) adds reactor fixed effects and the coefficient increases to 10.4. This
increase reflects the fact that the divested reactors tended to underperform relative to other
reactors during the extended pre‐period, as can be seen in Figure 1. Columns (3), (4), and
(5) add reactor age, weight observations by reactor capacity, and collapse the dataset to the
plant level, respectively, and the results are similar.

       Even with the full set of control variables the R2 from these regressions is reasonably
low. As we show in detail later in the paper, most of the variation in efficiency comes from
reactor outages. The month‐of‐sample fixed effects capture, for example, that reactor
outages tend to peak during particular months of the year, but the low R2 reflects the fact
that neither the month‐of‐sample fixed effects not any other covariate is particularly
effective at predicting the exact month in which an outage will occur for a particular reactor.

       This is a substantial increase in efficiency. In the United States, nuclear power is a $40
billion dollar annual market, accounting for 20% of total electricity production.36 In 2009,
independent power producers in the United States owned 46,649 megawatts of nuclear
capacity, so a 10.2 percentage point increase in efficiency implies 42 billion kilowatt hours
of additional electricity production.37 This is $2.5 billion dollars worth of power annually,

36 According to U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, Annual Energy Review 2009,
released August 2010, Table 8.2a “Electricity Net Generation,” nuclear plants in 2009 produced 799 out of 3,953
billion kilowatt hours of electricity produced in the United States. In calculating the size of the nuclear power
market we assumed an average wholesale price of $60 per megawatt hour.
37 U.S. nuclear capacity by producer type is described in U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information

Administration, Annual Energy Review 2009, released August 2010, Table 1.1 “Existing New Summer Capacity.” A
10.2 percentage point increase in net generation is (.102)(46,649)(24 hours/day)(365 days/year)(1000
kilowatts/megawatt) = 42 billion kilowatt hours.

                                                       22
almost enough power to meet electricity demand for all the households in New England.38

       Moreover, this increase in efficiency is large enough to have substantial implications
for the environment. Based on average emission levels from the U.S. electricity sector, the
increase in operating efficiency associated with divestiture implies an annual decrease of 38
million metric tons of carbon dioxide emissions.39 Using a conservative estimate for the
social cost of carbon dioxide ($20 per ton) this implies an additional $760 million in
benefits annually.40 To put this into perspective, we are finding that the increase in
electricity production associated with divestiture is more than all the electricity produced
by U.S. wind and solar generation combined over this period.41 This reflects, in part, the fact
that there was little U.S. wind and solar generation until the end of the 2000s. However, it
also makes the point that even modest improvements in operating efficiency can have
substantial environmental implications when that technology makes up a large share of the
total market.

       These benefits from divestiture must be weighed against several additional costs. The
marginal cost of generating power with a nuclear reactor is low, but not zero. Average fuel
costs for nuclear power ($7 per MWh) imply an annual increase in fuel expenditures of




38 This calculation assumes an average wholesale price of $60 per megawatt hour. U.S. Department of Energy,
Energy Information Administration, “Wholesale Market Data from Intercontinental Exchange” reports daily
average wholesale prices for six major trading hubs. Over the period 2001‐2009 the average wholesale price
was $61.00. According to U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, “Electric Power
Monthly 2010,” Table 5.4.B. “Retail Sales of Electricity to Ultimate Customers,” residential customers in New
England (Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Vermont) consumed 46 billion
kilowatt hours of electricity in 2009.
39 From U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, Annual Energy Review 2009, released

August 2010, Table 12.7a “Emissions from Energy Consumption for Electricity Generation” total carbon dioxide
emissions in 2008 for electricity generation were 2.48 billion metric tons. From Table 8.2a “Electricity Net
Generation,” total electricity generation from fossil fuels was 2.73 trillion kilowatt hours. Thus 42 billion
kilowatt hours of fossil fuel‐based power implies (2.48)(42)(1,000,000)/(2.73) = 38 million metric tons of
carbon dioxide emissions. In practice increased nuclear production will displace whatever form of power
production is marginal in a particular market during a particular day and hour. However, modeling all the
different wholesale markets in the United States at an hourly level during this 10+ year period since
deregulation goes beyond the scope of the analysis.
40 Federal Interagency Working Group (2010) presents a range of values for the social cost of carbon dioxide

according to different discount rates and for different time periods that is intended to capture changes in net
agricultural productivity, human health, property damages from increased flood risk, and other factors. In Table
15A.1.1 with a 3% discount rate (their “central value”) for 2010 they find a social cost of carbon dioxide of
$21.40 (in 2007 dollars) per metric ton of carbon dioxide. In 2010 dollars this is approximately $22.
41 According to U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, Annual Energy Review 2009,

released August 2010, Table 8.2a “Electricity Net Generation,” during the period 2000‐2009 U.S. wind and solar
generation combined averaged 26 billion kilowatt hours annually. The average total capacity of divested
reactors over the same period is 36,517 megawatts so a 10.2 percentage point increase in net generation is
(.102)(36,517)(24 hours/day)(365 days/year)(1000 kilowatts/megawatt) = 32 billion kilowatt hours annually.

                                                      23
approximately $300 million.42 An additional potential cost is labor, though as we described
earlier in the paper, the available data suggest that, if anything, the number of workers in
divested reactors has actually declined relative to utility reactors. Storing the additional
spent uranium fuel creates additional costs. It is difficult to quantify the external costs of the
additional spent fuel but available estimates in the literature indicate that the private costs
of dry cask storage are small.43 Finally, companies with substantial inframarginal generating
capacity, including nuclear reactors, find it more profitable to exercise market power.44 A
comprehensive accounting of the costs and benefits of divestiture would need to include
these additional costs, as well as additional benefits such as decreased emissions of local
pollutants, and, in the long‐run, decreased investment in new generating capacity.45



5.2      Heterogeneous Effects

       Table 4 reports estimates from four separate regressions which describe the effect of
divestiture by reactor design, reactor manufacturer, reactor vintage, and type of sale. In
each case the indicator variable 1[                      ]it is interacted with indicator variables for the
different categories as listed in the row headings. The estimated coefficients on these
interaction terms are positive in all eleven cases and statistically significant at the 1% level
in ten out of eleven cases. In none of the four regressions can one reject the null hypothesis

42 MIT (2009) reports fuel costs of $7 per MWh for nuclear power based on fuel prices of $0.67 per million BTU

and average heat rates of 10,400 BTU per kilowatt hour. A 42 billion kilowatt hour increase would then imply
$294 million annually in additional fuel expenditures.
43 In the United States there is no federal spent fuel storage facility and no facilities for the reprocessing of spent

fuel. Currently, spent fuel is stored on site in storage pools or, increasingly, in dry cask storage. According to U.S.
NRC, Information Digest 2010‐2011 NUREG‐1350, Volume 22, published August 2010, the total amount of spent
fuel in the United States increases by 2,000 tons annually, so a 10% increase in spent fuel from half of the
nation’s reactors is approximately 100 tons annually. A 2008 report commissioned by the U.S. Department of
Energy reports that private lifetime costs for dry cask storage including licensing, construction, procurement,
loading, and maintenance are $120 per kilogram which (ignoring any potential economies of scale) implies $11
million in additional costs. See Idaho National Laboratory, Advanced Fuel Cycle Cost Basis INL/EXT‐07‐12107,
Module E2 “Dry Storage of Spent Nuclear Fuel” for details.
44 A precise modeling of the relevant wholesale markets, participants’ contractual positions, and the extent to

which the divestitures increased the incentive of participating companies to exercise market power goes beyond
the scope of the paper.
45 In future work it would also be interesting to examine the distribution of these costs and benefits. The

environmental impacts accrue globally for carbon dioxide, regionally for criteria pollutants, and locally for
changes in storage of spent uranium fuel. The private benefits of operating efficiency, however, are shared
primarily between ratepayers and shareholders, with the exact division of gains depending on how electricity
prices were impacted. In a perfectly competitive market, increased production from nuclear reactors shifts the
supply curve for electricity to the right, replacing higher‐cost forms of generation and decreasing average
wholesale electricity prices. Exactly how much electricity prices have actually come down is an empirical
question that depends on demand‐ and supply‐side factors.


                                                         24
of equal coefficients. The uniformity of the results across columns (1‐3) indicates that the
efficiency gains were experienced broadly across different types of reactors.

      The regression in column (4) tests whether efficiency gains differed depending on the
type of sale. Of the 48 total divestitures, 19 (40%) were external sales in which reactors
were sold to the highest bidder. With the other 29 divestitures, reactors were sold to
independent power producers that were affiliated with the original owners. One might have
expected external sales to lead to increased efficiency gains due to superior matching of
operators to reactors. The results in column (4) provide some suggestive evidence for this
hypothesis, but the point estimates for both types of sales are large, positive, and
statistically significant.

      Figure 2 plots point estimates and 95th percentile confidence intervals for a regression
that allows the effect of divestiture to differ across calendar months. All twelve coefficient
estimates are positive and statistically significant at the 5% level. The largest point
estimates are for May and November ‐‐ historically the peak months for refueling
shutdowns because of the relatively low level of electricity demand. During these months
there is more scope for increasing efficiency compared to, for example, the peak summer
months when most reactors were running at close to full power even prior to the
divestitures.



5.3     The Effect of Consolidation on Reactor Efficiency

      The divestitures between 1999 and 2007 transferred operation of many reactors from
companies subject to traditional cost‐of‐service regulation to independent power producers
selling power in competitive wholesale markets. At the same time, however, the divestitures
consolidated reactor operations among a smaller set of companies. Economists have long
recognized the potential efficiency gains from consolidation in the nuclear power industry.
Joskow (1982) explains,

        “The way reactors are built and operated must be changed… At present,
        more than forty utilities have nuclear‐power plants operating or under
        construction. Some of these utilities are very large, while others are very
        small. It is at least arguable that there are opportunities for economies of
        scale in the construction and safe operation of nuclear facilities that are not
        being exploited because of the fragmented ownership pattern that flows


                                              25
         from the present structure of the electric‐utility industry in the United
         States.” (page 250)

       Figure 3 describes consolidation in U.S. nuclear power operation over the period
1970‐2009. We calculate for each reactor‐month the number of other reactors operated by
each reactor operator. The figure plots annual means of this variable separately for those
reactors that were divested 1999‐2007 and all other reactors. The figure illustrates how
divestitures have led to an unprecedented degree of consolidation in the industry. As late as
the mid‐1990s, there was relatively little consolidation. The average reactor was operated
by a company that operated less than three other reactors, and most reactors were
operated by companies that operated only one or two other reactors. By the end of 2009,
however, reactors were operated by companies that operated an average of more than six
other reactors and the three largest companies (Entergy, Exelon, and NextEra) operated
about one‐third of all nuclear capacity in the United States.

       In principle, consolidation could improve operating efficiency in several ways.
Whereas a utility with a single reactor may rely on contract employees to perform
infrequent tasks, such as refueling outages, which take place on average every eighteen
months, a consolidated nuclear company can hire highly skilled employees and train them
to appreciate the idiosyncrasies of the company’s reactor fleet. A chairman of a major
nuclear company explains, “you need to have a significant number of highly qualified staff
across all the range of disciplines, and it’s more cost‐effective to service a number of plants
than to service a single plant.”46 Also, within a consolidated company, employees can
disseminate best practices for refueling and maintenance.47 These effects are in addition to
incentives created by a divestiture, in which the operator, regardless of its size, becomes the
residual claimant on any revenues earned from increased efficiency.

       It is instructive to consider the variation in our data that will help distinguish a
consolidation effect from the divestiture effect. First, there were many changes in operators
that were not associated with divestitures but that changed the level of consolidation in the

46 Robin Jeffrey, deputy chairman of British Energy quoted in “Shut Down: Can Nuclear Plants Survive
Deregulation? The Jury is Still Out,” Wall Street Journal, September 14, 1998. British Energy purchased several
plants in the United States including Clinton and Three Mile Island 1 through a joint venture with Amergen.
47 Anecdotal evidence suggests that this has indeed occurred. Gary Leidich, the president of FirstEnergy Nuclear

described the company’s acquisition of three nuclear plants as follows. “It was three separate facilities, each
pretty much doing their own thing. Now it‘s a corporate organization with a fleet approach.” Quoted in
“Executive Vows Strong Focus on Plant Safety” in The Plain Dealer, Cleveland Ohio, March 9, 2004. This fleet
approach means, for example, that plant operators have a daily 7:30 a.m. conference call for discussing potential
problems and managers at FirstEnergy travel from plant to plant.

                                                       26
industry. For example, when Toledo Edison, Duquesne Lighting Company, and Centerior
were combined to form First Energy in 1997, the four reactors operated by those
companies may have experienced improved operations. Second, there are several reactors
that are operated by companies that control both divested and cost‐of‐service regulated,
utility reactors. For example, Entergy began as a Southern investor‐owned utility and
continues to operate reactors in Arkansas, Mississippi, and Louisiana. As of 2009, Entergy
operates eleven reactors, five of which are located in these Southeastern states which have
not restructured their electricity markets. This explains why the pale line in Figure 3,
reflecting the average number of reactors operated by operators of non‐divested reactors
increased after 2000. It is possible that these plants benefited from Entergy’s acquisition of
the divested plants, through the mechanisms we identified above.

       Table 5 reports regression estimates. Column (1) presents the baseline estimate,
identical to the third column in Table 3. In column (2), we expand the estimating equation
to include our consolidation variable. The coefficient estimate on consolidation is 0.48,
implying that increasing by one the number of other reactors operated by the same
operator improves efficiency by about half a percentage point.48 Although the coefficient is
estimated with some noise (p‐value 0.09), the point estimate is large enough to be
economically important. The range of the consolidation variable is 0 to 16 so the point
estimate implies that a change from the minimum to the maximum for this variable would
increase efficiency by 7.7 percentage points, an effect about as large as the point estimate on
1[            ]it .

       Columns (3) and (4) report results from alternative specifications using narrower
measures of consolidation. One might have expected economies‐of‐scale in operation to be
particularly large for companies that own multiple reactors of the same type (pressurized
water versus boiling water) or manufactured by the same firm. Accordingly, in these
specifications consolidation is measured using only reactors of the same type or
manufacturer, respectively. The point estimates are similar to the point estimate in column
(2) suggesting that the gains from consolidation come from broad changes in operations
and maintenance, rather than from specific changes related to the technical characteristics




48 In alternative results not reported we tested for nonlinear effects by including a square term and by allowing

for different bins (0‐4, 5‐8, 9‐12, and 13‐16) and in neither case do we find evidence of a nonlinear effect.

                                                       27
of particular reactor designs.49 It is difficult to draw strong conclusions, however, because
the parameter estimates are again imprecisely estimated.

       We performed several robustness checks to verify our interpretation of these results.
First, while the variation in our data allows us to estimate both a divested and a
consolidation effect, the degree of consolidation is certainly higher among divested plants,
as depicted in Figure 3. In column (5) we re‐estimate the specification reported in column
(2) using only reactors that were never divested and dropping the divestiture indicator
variable. The coefficient on the number of reactors controlled by the same operator is larger
than the coefficient reported in column (2) and statistically significant (p‐value 0.016),
suggesting that gains from the large divested companies are not biasing the coefficient
estimate upward.

       Finally, in column (6) we collapse our data to the plant level and estimate spillovers
from an operator having an additional plant in its fleet. The effect is nearly twice as large as
the estimated effect in the reactor‐level regression, reflecting that the typical reactor is
housed at a two‐reactor plant so that the mean of the consolidation variable in the plant‐
level specification is about half as large. In the plant‐level regression the coefficient on the
consolidation variable is statistically significant at the two percent level (p‐value 0.013).50

       In additional unreported results we also considered a number of specifications aimed
at assessing potential interactions between divestiture and consolidation. When we include
an interaction term between divestiture and consolidation the point estimates on both the
interacted and uninteracted consolidation terms are positive but neither are statistically


49 In related work, Lester and McCabe (1993) compare operating efficiency of U.S. and French nuclear reactors.

In part because the United States was a pioneer in nuclear power generation, there was a great deal of
technological advancement and learning during the period reactors were being built, and consequently there are
many different designs, even among reactors by the same manufacturer. In contrast, France adopted a single
reactor design (essentially a copy of the Westinghouse pressurized water reactor) and 58 out of 59 French
reactors operating as of 2009 are this same type (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2010, Nuclear Power
Reactors of the World, Table 14). Lester and McCabe argue that this standardization has increased learning‐by‐
doing in plant operation and test empirically for differential learning‐by‐doing among reactors of different
designs.
50 An interesting question is whether these efficiency gains could have been realized through operating

contracts, perhaps with only a few highly consolidated operating companies nationwide. Testimony from Exelon
before the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities in 2005 about a proposed merger with PSEG suggests that the
answer is no. “The Operating Services Agreement (OSA) does not provide sufficient financial incentive for Exelon
to agree to a similar agreement in the absence of the merger. The OSA diverts significant Exelon management
attention from other business opportunities… and does not allow Exelon sufficient financial incentive or
operational control to bring Salem and Hope Creek performance up to Exelon’s fleet‐wide performance levels. In
short, if it had made business sense for Exelon and PSEG to enter into an OSA in the absence of a merger, than we
would have done so a long time ago.”

                                                       28
significant. We also tested for a change in operating efficiency among non‐divested reactors
when reactors operated by the same company are divested. If there are spillovers within
companies then one might have expected an increase in operating efficiency among these
reactors. On the other hand, if companies are able to shift resources, such as skilled
operators, between divested and non‐divested reactors, then one might have expected a
decrease in operating efficiency. In the regression the estimated effect of divestiture on non‐
divested reactors is small and not statistically significant, providing no evidence for either
hypothesis. However, there are only nine non‐divested reactors operated by companies that
operate at least one divested reactor so these results are too imprecisely estimated to draw
strong conclusions.
      Much of the consolidation in the U.S. nuclear industry has occurred through the
growth of particular companies, including Exelon and Entergy. Although the results in Table
5 are consistent with economies of scale, it could also be that there is persistent
heterogeneity in management quality across companies and that divestiture has reallocated
plants to companies with more effective managers. In alternative, unreported results we
include indicator variables for Exelon, Entergy, and NextEra (the three companies that own
the most U.S. reactors as of 2009 – collectively over one third of all reactors).51 The
estimated coefficient corresponding to divestiture remains large and highly statistically
significant. The point estimate on consolidation is essentially unchanged but the standard
error grows considerably.

      Overall the results provide some mild evidence of efficiency gains from industry
consolidation. The point estimates corresponding to the consolidation measure are only
statistically significant in columns (5) and (6) but are consistently positive and large enough
to be economically important. Also interesting is that the estimate corresponding to
divestiture is consistently large, statistically significant, and reasonably similar across
specifications, indicating that it is divestiture and not consolidation driving the large share
of the efficiency gains.




51
  Interestingly, prior to deregulation there is little evidence that these companies were the best‐managed. The
three largest U.S. nuclear companies as of 2009 are Exelon (formerly Commonwealth Edison), Entergy, and
NextEra (formerly FPL Group). Between 1990 and 1998, reactors owned by these three companies had lower
operating efficiency on average than other U.S. reactors.

                                                      29
5.4     Considering Possible Concerns about Selection Bias

      This subsection evaluates potential concerns about selection bias and differential
trends in operating efficiency. From an empirical design perspective, the ideal experiment
would be to take the entire population of nuclear reactors and then randomly select a
subsample of reactors to divest. From the mean characteristics reported in Table 2 is it clear
that the recent experience in the U.S. nuclear industry falls short of this ideal. Our preferred
specification includes reactor fixed effects which control for observed and unobserved
mean differences between reactors. Still, one could be concerned that the reactors that were
divested had different pre‐existing trends. One possibility, for example, would be that
reactors were selected based on which reactors stood the most to gain from restructuring.
Although it is impossible to completely rule out these concerns, there are several features
about how deregulation occurred in practice that substantially decrease the scope for
selection bias in this context.

      First, in almost all cases decisions about divestiture were made at the state level, not
at the reactor level. In all but one state, either all of the state’s nuclear reactors were
divested or none of the state’s reactors were divested. The one exception is the state of
Michigan, where one reactor was divested but the other three reactors were not. Given that
Michigan is an unusual case, we find it reassuring that our results are essentially identical
when the four reactors in Michigan are excluded from the sample. See column (1) in Table 6.

      Second, almost all nuclear reactors were divested in states where deregulation
occurred. The fourteen states that have deregulated their electricity markets (as of 2011)
are Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, and Texas. With the
exception of Michigan, all of the nuclear reactors in all of these states have been divested. An
interesting case is California which divested a substantial amount of the fossil‐fuel‐fired
power plants in the late 1990s before suspending deregulation after the California Energy
Crisis in 2000. Neither of the state’s two nuclear power plants (Diablo Canyon or San
Onofre) have been divested, potentially raising concerns about selection. Again, however,




                                              30
we find it reassuring that excluding these reactors from the sample the estimated coefficient
is essentially unchanged.52 See column (2).

       Third, in states where electricity deregulation did not occur, nuclear reactors were not
divested in almost all cases. Here the two exceptions are Iowa and Wisconsin. These states
did not deregulate their electricity markets but have divested a considerable fraction of
their generating facilities. Once again, however, when these reactors are dropped from the
sample the coefficient estimate corresponding to 1[                        ]it is essentially unchanged. See
column (3).

       Fourth, most of the divestitures occurred over a relatively short period of time so
differential timing of divestitures cannot explain the results. Of the 48 reactors that were
divested, 36 were divested during a three and a half year period between July 1999 and
November 2002. When we re‐estimate the model using January 1, 2001 as the divestiture
date for all divested reactors, the estimated coefficient on 1[                                 ]it is smaller
(consistent with attenuation bias), but still positive and statistically significant (7.9 with a t‐
statistic of 3.31). See column (4).

       Thus there is a strong but not perfect correlation between deregulation and nuclear
divestitures. Although this greatly reduces the scope for reactor‐by‐reactor selection bias, it
raises the broader question of whether state‐level decisions about whether to deregulate or
not were influenced by potential efficiency gains in nuclear reactors, or whether these
decisions were driven by some other factor that is correlated with trends in operating
efficiency. Again it is impossible to completely rule out these concerns but the existing
literature about the determinants of deregulation provides an important point of reference.




52 California is also an interesting case because of the experience with incentive regulation described in Section
2.2. Throughout the analysis, the comparison group in our regressions includes nuclear plants subject to
traditional cost‐of‐service regulation as well as plants operating under different forms of incentive regulation.
Sappington (2001) identifies 16 states in which electric utilities were operating as of 2001 under some form of
incentive regulation. Only 10 of the states have nuclear reactors. When we reestimate the model using as a
comparison group only reactors operating in these 10 states the estimate is 10.1 (3.0). This suggests that the
divestiture gains are no smaller when compared to reactors facing incentive regulation, consistent with a small
existing literature (e.g. Verma, Kitna, and Marcus, 1999) that finds little robust evidence that incentive
regulation increases operating efficiency. Whereas after divestiture there is no question about who is the
residual claimant for future operating profits, it may be difficult for public utility commissions to credibly
commit to incentive‐based programs as was ultimately the case with the California Public Utility Commission
and the Diablo Canyon plant.




                                                       31
Deregulation came out of a broader discussion about the electricity market as a whole,
including all forms of generation, unbundling transmission and distribution, and
introducing retail choice. The idea that competition would create incentives for more
efficient operation of nuclear power reactors was only one small piece of this larger
discussion. A number of studies have examined the determinants of deregulation and
determined that the best predictors are liberal politics and high electricity prices (see, e.g.,
White 1996). Differences in electricity rates across states have much more to do with the
type of generating equipment in each state’s generation portfolio, rather than the efficiency
with which it is operated. For example, utilities with access to federally subsidized
hydropower typically have lower rates than other utilities. And again, our preferred
specification includes reactor fixed effects which control for time‐invariant differences
across reactors and the states in which they are located.

       In practice there is a distinct geographic pattern to deregulation, with most divested
reactors in the Northeast and most non‐divested reactors in the South. Is there something
different about reactor operation in these different regions? For example, could the weather
in the Northeast region be more conducive to increasing efficiencies above 90%? The
answer is probably not. Outdoor temperature, or more importantly, the temperature of
cooling water, does affect electricity production, but within the relevant range of
temperatures the effect is too small to matter. Moreover, the daily data show that divested
reactors have fewer outages throughout the year, not just during the winter. This finding
would be difficult to reconcile with some region‐specific climate‐driven factor. Columns (5)
and (6) present additional robustness tests, excluding from the regression all reactors in the
Northeast and weighting never‐divested reactors using propensity weights.53 Point
estimates in these specifications are again very similar. Both specifications are demanding
tests of the data which require excluding more than half of the divested reactors from the
sample and the fact that the point estimates are again positive and statistically significant at
the 1% level provides additional evidence that the observed efficiency gains are not driven
by selection.


53The idea of propensity score weighting is to reweight the observations in the comparison group to balance the
mean characteristics of divested reactors. Propensity scores were estimated using a logit regression where the
dependent variable is an indicator variable for reactors that were ever divested. Regressors include mean design
capacity, reactor age as of December 1998, and indicators for reactor type, manufacturer, and census region.
This specification necessarily excludes all reactors in the Northeast census region where all reactors were
divested as well as all reactors in the West census region where none of the reactors were divested.

                                                      32
      The specifications described in columns (7)‐(10) are aimed at assessing potential
related concerns about long outages during the period 1996‐1998 that cause the
pronounced “dip” in efficiency in Figure 1. The point estimates drop somewhat in these
specifications but remain large and highly statistically significant, providing evidence that
the baseline estimates are not driven by these long outages. It is not surprising that point
estimates are smaller in these regressions because they exclude periods of unusually poor
operating efficiency among divested reactors prior to divestiture. We include the long
outages in our main results as they are part of the divestiture effect we seek to measure.
Deregulation changes incentives, making reactor operators financially responsible for long
outages such as these. For an independent power producer, the financial implications of a
12+ month outage are devastating, and we do not think it is a coincidence that the incidence
of outages has decreased substantially among divested reactors. In the following section we
turn to daily data on reactor status which allows us to examine these outages explicitly.

      Finally, column (11) addresses potential bias related to plant closures during the
1990s. An attractive feature of the analysis is that there is very little entry or exit during the
period of divestitures, substantially mitigating concerns about selection bias.54 One could
potentially be concerned, however, about differential closures during the years leading up
to the period of divestitures. Between 1993 and 1998, five full‐scale (100MW+) commercial
reactors were closed, all located in states that subsequently deregulated their electricity
markets and divested nuclear plants.55 It is possible that impending divestitures encouraged
owners to close plants at which they expected performance to degrade while comparable
plants in non‐divesting states remained open. Over their lives, the five closed plants did not
have particularly low output. In fact, their average through 1995 was slightly higher than all
divested reactors, but they were distinctly worse (six percentage points) than divested
reactors in the first half of 1990s. To bound the possible bias introduced by the closure of
these five reactors, we matched them with reactors of similar vintage and size that were not
divested. We then calculated changes in net output from the fifteen years before the closure
to the fifteen years after for the matched sample, and used those changes to impute post‐
closure output from the five reactors based on their fifteen‐year average net output before

54 Since 1998 no nuclear reactors have been closed in the United States, and the only “opening” is Browns Ferry
1 which reopened in 2007 after an outage that lasted more than two decades. Between 1970 and 1998, 20
reactors were closed, though nearly half of these closures were small experimental reactors.
55 The five plants were Maine Yankee (Maine), Haddam Neck and Millstone 1 (Connecticut) plus Zion 1 and Zion

2 (Illinois).

                                                      33
the close. These estimates, therefore, reflect what would have happened to the plants had
they been operated similarly to the plants of similar vintage and size in states that did not
divest. The coefficient on 1[Divested]it declines slightly to 8.6 percentage points, suggesting
that the decisions to close reactors, even if related to the impending divestitures, likely does
not explain much of the estimated divestiture effect.


6        Understanding the Mechanisms behind Post‐Divestiture Gains

6.1      Mechanisms – Graphical Analysis

      We next turn to ancillary evidence aimed at understanding the mechanisms driving
this observed increase in efficiency. One possible explanation is that divested reactors may
have been more likely to increase their maximum generating capacity. U.S. nuclear power
reactors are licensed with the NRC to operate at a particular maximum heat level. However,
plant operators can petition to have this maximum thermal capacity increased. This is
known as an “uprate.”56 Since 1970 nuclear uprates in the United States have added 6,000
megawatts of total electric capacity ‐‐ the equivalent of 6 new 1000 megawatt reactors.

      Figure 4 plots mean licensed thermal capacity for divested and non‐divested reactors
over the period 1970‐2009. The sample of reactors here and throughout the analysis in this
section is again all reactors that were operating as of January 1, 2000. Capacity is expressed
as a percent of the original license. During the early 1970s all reactors operated at their
original licensed capacities. During the late 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, there were 4, 10, and
33 total uprates, respectively. Uprates increase sharply beginning around 2000, and there
are 81 total uprates between 2000 and 2009.57 Independent power producers have been
more likely to perform uprates, though investor‐owned utilities have been active as well. In
Section 6.2 we turn to a regression analysis with these same data in order to determine
whether the difference in uprates is statistically significant after controlling for covariates.

       Other possible explanations for the increase in operating efficiency include an
increase in operating days or an increased capacity factor when operating. In order to


56 Nuclear thermal capacity can be increased by using highly‐enriched uranium or by reducing the use of

materials that moderate the nuclear reaction. Typically nuclear fission is moderated using control rods made of
boron or other elements which absorb neutrons.
57 Technological advances in fuel rod construction provide part of the explanation for why uprates have become

more common since the 1990s. Innovations in metallurgy have increased the thermal capacity of fuel rods,
allowing them to run hotter without leaking radioactivity.

                                                      34
examine these mechanisms we turn to the daily data from the NRC. Whereas the analysis in
Section 5 uses monthly data for a 40‐year period 1970‐2009, these daily data are available
only for 1999‐2009. This makes this alternative dataset less useful for the primary
empirical exercise in the paper – constructing a counterfactual for how reactor efficiency in
divested reactors would have evolved in the absence of divestiture. Nonetheless, the fact
that these data are available at a very high frequency makes them particularly valuable for
examining reactor outages.

      Figure 5 plots the fraction of U.S. reactors not operating by day over the period 1999‐
2009. The figure reveals a pronounced seasonal pattern of outages. Each year outages peak
twice, once during the spring and again once in the fall. At the peaks between 15% and 30%
of reactors are not operating during a given day. At the troughs, less than 5% of all reactors
are not operating. Figure 6 investigates this pattern further, illustrating how the fraction of
reactors not operating by day has changed over time. Mean outages are plotted separately
for divested and non‐divested reactors. At the beginning of the sample the annual pattern
for both groups is reasonably similar but by the end of the sample outages are considerably
less frequent among divested reactors. This holds for almost all days during the entire year,
with particularly large differences during the late spring and late fall.

      Figures 7 and 8 provide additional evidence about the pattern of outages over time.
The first figure plots the mean number of outage days per year 1999‐2009. Both time series
are relatively noisy but it is interesting that mean outages among divested reactors is below
mean outages among all other reactors for every year between 2004 and 2009, with some
suggestion that the gap may be increasing over time. Figure 8 plots the mean number of
scrams per hour of reactor operation. There is a substantial and reasonably steady decrease
in scrams industry‐wide, and little evidence of a divergence between divested and non‐
divested reactors. In the following subsection we estimate regressions which allow us to
test whether divestiture has had a statistically significant impact on either measure.

      While divested reactors appear to have fewer outages, during operation they do not
appear to be operating at a higher capacity factor. Figure 9 plots mean capacity factor by
day of year for operating reactors. Divested and non‐divested reactors follow a very similar
pattern, peaking in the winter and summer when almost all reactors are operating at full
power. Across all days 2005‐2009 mean capacity factor for operating reactors is almost
exactly identical for both groups, 97.96 for divested reactors versus 98.02 for non‐divested

                                               35
reactors.58 These high capacity factors reflect the fact that, when operating, nuclear reactors
are typically run at full power. A large fraction of the observations of capacity factor that are
below 100%, moreover, are from reactors that are ramping down to or out of outages –
rather than reactors that are being consistently run below 100%. The seasonal pattern
makes sense when interpreted in this context because the somewhat lower capacity factors
during spring and fall are during the periods in which outages are more common, and thus a
larger fraction of operating reactors are ramping up and down.



6.2      Mechanisms – Regression Analysis

       Table 7 reports regression estimates that complement the graphical analysis in the
previous subsection. These ancillary regressions continue to tease out the mechanisms
driving the increase in efficiency post‐divestiture. Regression estimates corresponding to an
indicator variable for reactors that have been divested are reported for seven different
dependent variables including maximum capacity, the number and length of reactor
outages, and capacity factor while operating. Overall, the regression results are consistent
with the basic pattern of behavior observed in the graphical analysis.

       Panel (A) examines maximum generating capacity. Regression coefficients are
reported for two different measures of capacity and for three different specifications which
add control variables as one moves from left to right. In the first row the dependent variable
is the maximum observed level of net generation over the previous twelve operating
months as a percentage of reactor design capacity. In the third column, controlling for
reactor fixed effects and reactor age, divestiture is associated with a 1.7 percent increase,
although the coefficient is not statistically significant. The second measure of capacity is
licensed maximum thermal capacity. As described above, plant operators can petition to
have their maximum thermal capacity increased, and the regression estimates in this row
can be seen as a test of whether divested plants were more likely to perform uprates. The
coefficient estimates in this row are similar in magnitude to the coefficients in the first row,
but again not statistically significant.59 Viewed together with Figure 4 the regression


58 In interpreting these means it is important to keep in mind that capacity factor is measured relative to
maximum thermal capacity and that divested reactors have been more likely than other reactors to receive
uprates. The fact that divested reactors appear to be operating at approximately the same percentage of a higher
maximum capacity implies a higher level of total electricity generation.
59 One notable feature of Figure 4 is that during the late 1990s the mean thermal capacity among subsequently



                                                      36
estimates in these two rows provide suggestive evidence of a relationship between
divestiture and increases in generating capacity.

         Modest uprates (2‐3%) can be performed with little or no equipment replacement,
but larger uprates typically require modifications to non‐nuclear equipment such as
high‐pressure turbines, condensate extraction pumps, motors, and transformers. The cost
of these modifications ranges from $750 to $900 per kilowatt of added capacity.60 Thus, a
large (e.g. 8%) uprate for the median‐sized reactor in our sample (794 MW) could cost $50‐
$60 million. Although not negligible, this is small compared to the value of the increased
electrical generation and tiny compared to the cost of building a new nuclear reactor.

       Panel (B1) focuses on reactor operating days and shutdowns. The first dependent
variable is an indicator variable for whether the reactor is operating. In our sample this is
91% of all reactor‐day observations. The estimated coefficients in this row range from 3.5
to 3.9 percent. This is a large effect relative to the mean, implying that divestiture is
associated with a decrease in outages of about one‐third, equivalent to an increase of 13‐14
operating days per year per reactor. These results are consistent with the graphical analysis
above and indicate that the pattern of decreased outages observed in Figures 6 and 7
remains after controlling for the available covariates.61

       Although they represent a small share of total outages, automatic shutdowns or
“scrams” are particularly interesting because they have been used in previous studies as a
measure of reactor safety (see, for example, David, Maude‐Griffin, and Rothwell 1996). All


divested reactors appears to lag behind the mean thermal capacity for all other reactors. This corresponds with
the period of long outages discussed in Section 4.1 and 5.4. The capacity increases among divested reactors do
not appear during or immediately after these outages. Indeed it is not until 2001 and 2002 that the large uprates
are observed in Figure 4. As a robustness check, we have also estimated the regressions in panel (A) excluding
1995‐1998 and the results are almost identical.
60 This cost range comes from Tom Weir, the Senior Vice President for Engineering at Framatome ANP (now

Areva), a leading international nuclear firm as quoted in Fabian, Thecla, "New Plant from Old," Nuclear
Engineering International, September 12, 2005. At $900 per kilowatt of added capacity, typical average
wholesale electricity prices ($60 per MWh), and a 90% capacity factor a reactor owner would pay for the
investment in about 2 years.
61 We also tested whether divested reactors are systematically more likely to be operating when wholesale

electricity prices are high. Using daily data from U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration,
“Wholesale Market Data from Intercontinental Exchange” for six major trading hubs from 2001‐2009 we
estimated alternative specifications with the divestiture indicator, the wholesale price, and the interaction
between the two. Including these additional covariates has essentially no impact on the estimated coefficient for
divestiture and the estimated coefficient corresponding to the interaction term is close to zero and not
statistically significant. From Figure 5 it is clear that both investor‐owned utilities and independent power
producers tend overwhelmingly to perform refueling and maintenance during the spring and fall when
wholesale prices are low. Given that outages are already being performed during these periods and that most
outages are planned long in advance, there seems to be little scope for increased efficiency along this margin.

                                                       37
three point estimates in this row are negative. The coefficients in the second and third
columns are not statistically different from zero (p‐value .09 for both), but are estimated
with enough precision to reject increases larger than 5%.62 Moreover, these point estimates
are large compared to the mean, implying a 30% decrease in scrams after divestiture. This
is consistent with a widely‐held view in the nuclear industry that there are
complementarities between safety and operating efficiency.63 Profit maximization requires
that reactors run reliably for thousands of hours a year, and component failures and other
forms of unplanned outages are bad for both safety and profits. This is true both in the
short‐run and in the long‐run, as reactors with poor safety records receive increased
regulatory scrutiny and an increased probability of extended safety‐related shutdowns. It is
important to keep in mind, however, that this is only one, highly‐imperfect, measure of
nuclear reactor safety so these results should be interpreted with caution.

       Panel (B2) pushes further on reactor outages – asking whether the decrease in outage
days is being driven by fewer or shorter outages. In the third column, divestiture is
associated with an 8% decrease in the number of outages per year, and a 36% decrease in
the mean outage length, but neither are statistically significant.64 The lack of precision
makes it impossible to make definitive statements but it appears that outage length may be
the more important of the two. Taking the point estimates literally, a reduction of 6.9 days
per outage multiplied by the mean number of outages per year (1.7) yields a reduction of
almost 12 outage days per year, whereas a reduction of .13 outages per year multiplied by
the mean outage length (19.1) yields a reduction of only 2.5 outage days per year.

       Finally, Panel (C) examines capacity factor conditional on operating. Consistent with
the graphical analysis above, the regression estimates in this row provide no evidence that
reactors that have been divested are operated at higher intensity when they are operating.


62 Hausman (2011) finds similar results examining a variety of different safety measures including “initiating
events” of which scrams are a subset.
63 For example, Hubert Miller of the NRC explains, “Most people have gotten the understanding if you…

emphasize safety and managing things better, it has a positive effect on the bottom line,” as quoted in Matthew L.
Wald “Despite Fear, Deregulation Leaves Nuclear Reactors Working Harder, Longer, and Safer,” New York Times,
February 18, 2001.
64 An alternative would have been to model outage length using a duration model. For instance, we could have

used a Cox proportional hazard model to describe the probability than an outage ends. The advantage of least
squares, however, is that it is more transparent and requires weaker identifying assumptions. Duration models
are particularly well suited for contexts in which there is a large amount of censoring. Outages are relatively
short and frequent compared to the sample length so this is not particularly important. A duration model would
also allow us to examine how the probability that an outage finishes varies with the duration of the spell (e.g.
positive or negative duration dependence), but again this is not particularly important in this context.

                                                       38
After adding reactor fixed effects the estimates are positive but small in magnitude and not
statistically significant.

       In summary, Table 7 describes three possible mechanisms that could lead to
increased monthly generation at divested reactors. A reactor will generate more electricity
if it produces more when at maximum capacity (panel A), is available more days (panel B),
or produces at a higher capacity factor when available (panel C). The results suggest that
the increase in operating efficiency is primarily explained by the first two channels: an
increase in maximum capacity and a decrease in outages. These two factors together imply
a total increase in efficiency about as large as the baseline estimate in Section 5.65



7        Conclusion
       This paper examines an unprecedented period of deregulation and consolidation in
the U.S. nuclear power industry. We analyze operating efficiency before, during, and after
market restructuring using a unique, high‐quality dataset that describes reactor‐level
operations over a 40‐year period. We find that deregulation and consolidation are
associated with a 10% increase in operating efficiency, with similar increases across
reactors of different types, manufacturers, and vintages. This central result is robust across
a variety of alternative sets of control variables and specification checks. In additional
analyses aimed at understanding the mechanisms driving these results we show that the
increase in operating efficiency has occurred, most importantly, by decreasing the number
of outage days per year.
       These results provide some of the clearest evidence to date of efficiency gains from
the deregulation of electricity markets. As predicted by economic theory, removing
regulation has provided incentives for firms to increase efficiency, reduce costly outages,
and make prudent investments in capacity. As plants have been sold to private companies
the financial cost of poor operating efficiency has transferred from ratepayers to
shareholders, and companies like Exelon and Entergy have responded by achieving the
highest levels of nuclear reactor operating efficiency in history. Each additional operating



65The total increase in operating efficiency implied in Table 7 is similar to the point estimate in column (1) of
Table 3. The point estimates in columns (2‐5) of Table 3 indicate a somewhat larger total increase in part
because with the longer pre‐period available in the monthly data once reactor fixed effects are included the
coefficient estimates are larger, reflecting the fact that divested reactors tended to underperform during the
1980s and 1990s.

                                                       39
hour for a typical nuclear power plant represents about $120,000 in profit – and these
companies have worked hard to make sure their plants are operating as much as possible.

      Our paper also highlights an important relationship between nuclear operating
efficiency and the environment. We find that over this period the increase in electricity
production from nuclear plants associated with divestiture implies more carbon abatement
than all U.S. wind and solar generation combined. This reflects the fact that nuclear
generation represents a large share of the electricity market, particularly compared to wind
and   solar   which   are   growing   but   continue      to   represent   a   relatively   small
share. Nonetheless, one of the broader lessons from our analysis is that even modest
improvements in the operating efficiency of conventional technologies can have substantial
environmental implications when that technology makes up a large share of the total
market.

      It is important to emphasize that operating efficiency is only one part in a broader set
of considerations in evaluating the overall impact of electricity deregulation. Much of the
economic literature has focused on how industry restructuring affects incentives for
investment behavior, and entry/exit, as well as on the potential for centralized wholesale
markets to increase efficiency. These considerations likely have significant consequences
for welfare, particularly in the long‐run. A related and perhaps even more important issue is
the effect of restructuring on the risk of nuclear accidents. Our results provide mild
evidence that one measure of reactor safety may have actually improved with divestiture,
but this remains an important priority for future work.




                                             40
References
Aigner, Dennis J. and Shih‐Fan Chu. 1968. “On Estimating the Industry Production Function,” American
Economic Review, 58: 826‐839.
Aigner, Dennis J., C.A. Knox Lovell, and Peter Schmidt. 1977. “Formulation and Estimation of Stochastic
Frontier Production Function Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 6: 21‐37.
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder and Christopher R. Taber. 2005. “Selection on Observed and Unobserved
Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1), 151‐184.
Averch, Harvey and Leland L. Johnson. 1962. "Behavior of the Firm Under Regulatory Constraint,” American
Economic Review 52(5): 1052–1069.
Borenstein, Severin. 2008. “The Market Value and Cost of Solar Photovoltaic Electricity Projection,” CSEM
Working Paper # 176.
Borenstein, Severin, James Bushnell, and Frank Wolak. 2002. “Measuring Market Inefficiencies in
California’s Restructured Wholesale Electricity Market,” American Economic Review, 92(5): 1376‐1405.
Bushnell, James, Erin Mansur and Celeste Saravia. 2008. “Vertical Arrangements, Market Structure, and
Competition: An Analysis of Restructured U.S. Electricity Markets,” American Economic Review, 98(1): 237‐266.
Bushnell, James B. and Catherine Wolfram. 2005. “Ownership Change, Incentives and Plant Efficiency: The
Divestiture of U.S. Electric Generation Plants,” CSEM Working Paper Number 140.
Christensen, Lauritis R. and William H. Greene. 1976. “Economies of Scale in U.S. Electric Power Generation.”
Journal of Political Economy. 84(4): 655‐76.
Craig, J. Dean and Scott J. Savage. 2011. “Market Restructuring, Competition and the Efficiency of Electric
Generation: Plant‐Level Evidence from the United States 1996 to 2006”, University of Colorado Working Paper.
David, Paul A., Roland Maude‐Griffin and Geoffrey Rothwell. 1996. “Learning by Accident? Reductions in the
Risk of Unplanned Outages in U.S. Nuclear Power Plants After Three Mile Island.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,
13: 175‐198.
Fabrizio, Kira R., Nancy L. Rose, and Catherine D. Wolfram. 2007. “Do Markets Reduce Costs? Assessing the
Impact of Regulatory Restructuring on U.S. Electric Generation Efficiency.” American Economic Review, 97(4),
1250‐1277.
Focarelli, Dario and Fabio Panetta. 2003. “Are Mergers Beneficial to Consumers? Evidence from the Market
for Bank Deposits.” American Economic Review, 93(4): 1152‐1172.
Hausman, Catherine. 2011. “Corporate Incentives and Nuclear Safety.” UC Berkeley Working Paper, May 2011.
Hortacsu, Ali and Chad Syverson. 2007. “Cementing Relationships: Vertical Integration, Foreclosure,
Productivity, and Prices.” Journal of Political Economy, 115(2): 250‐301.
Hortacsu, Ali and Steve Puller. 2008. “Understanding Strategic Bidding in Multi‐Unit Auctions: A Case Study of
the Texas Electricity Spot Market.” RAND Journal of Economics, 39(1): 86–114.
Hortacsu, Ali, Seyed Ali Madanizadeh and Steve Puller. 2011. “Power to Choose: An Analysis of Consumer
Behavior in the Texas Retail Electricity Market.” Working paper.
Joskow, Paul L. 1973. “Pricing Decisions of Regulated Firms: A Behavioral Approach.” Bell Journal of Economics
4(1): 118‐140.
Joskow, Paul L. 1982. “Problems and Prospects for Nuclear Energy in the United States.” in Energy, Economics,
and the Environment, ed. Gregory A. Daneke, Lexington: D.C. Heath and Company.
Joskow, Paul L. 1997. “Restructuring, Competition and Regulatory Reform in the U.S. Electricity Sector.” Journal
of Economic Perspectives 11: 119‐138.
Joskow, Paul L. 2005. “Regulation and Deregulation After 25 Years: Lessons Learned for Research in Industrial
Organization.” Review of Industrial Organization 26 (2), 169‐193.
Joskow, Paul L. 2011. “Comparing the Costs of Intermittent and Dispatchable Electricity Generating
Technologies.” American Economic Review, 101(3): 238‐241.



                                                       41
Joskow, Paul L. and Edward Kahn. 2002. “A Quantitative Analysis of Pricing Behavior in California’s Wholesale
Electricity Market During Summer 2000.” Energy Journal 23(4), 1‐35.
Joskow, Paul L. and John E. Parsons. 2009. “The Economic Future of Nuclear Power.” Daedalus, 138(4): 45‐59.
Joskow, Paul L. and Nancy L. Rose. 1989. “The Effects of Economic Regulation.” In Handbook of Industrial
Organization, North Holland.
Joskow, Paul L. and Nancy L. Rose. 1985. “The Effects of Technological Change, Experience, and Environmental
Regulation on the Construction Cost of Coal‐Burning Generating Units.” RAND Journal of Economics 16(1), 1‐17.
Joskow, Paul L. and George A. Rozanski. 1979. “The Effects of Learning by Doing on Nuclear Plant Operating
Reliability.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 61(2), 161‐168.
Kleit, Andrew and Dek Terrell. 2001. “Alternative Regulatory Methods and Firm Efficiency: Stochastic Frontier
Evidence from the U.S. Electricity Industry.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(3), 523‐530.
Knittel, Christopher R. 2002. “Alternative Regulatory Methods and Firm Efficiency: Stochastic Frontier
Evidence from the U.S. Electricity Industry.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(3), 530‐540.
Mansur, Erin and Matthew White. 2010. “Market Organization and Efficiency in Electricity Markets.” Working
paper.
Lester, Richard K. and Mark J. McCabe. 1993. “The Effect of Industrial Structure on Learning By Doing in
Nuclear Power Plant Operation.” RAND Journal of Economics, 24(3), 418‐438.
Lyon, Thomas P. and John P. Mayo. 2005. “Regulatory Opportunism and Investment Behavior: Evidence from
the Electric Utility Industry.” RAND Journal of Economics 37: 628‐644.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). 2003. “The Future of Nuclear Power: An Interdisciplinary MIT
Study.” MIT Energy Initiative.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). 2009. “The Future of Nuclear Power: An Interdisciplinary MIT
Study.” MIT Energy Initiative.
Olley, G. Steven and Ariel Pakes. 1996. “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment
Industry.” Econometrica, 64(6), 1263‐1297.
Peltzman, Sam and Clifford Winston. 2000 Deregulation of Network Industries: What’s Next? Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution
Sappington, David E.M., Johannes P. Pfeifenberger, Philip Hanser, and Gregory N. Basheda. 2001. “The
State of Performance‐Based Regulation in the U.S. Electric Industry.” Electricity Journal, 14(8), 71‐79.
Shanefelter, Jennifer K. 2008. “Restructuring, Ownership and Efficiency: The Case of Labor in Electricity
Generation.” Department of Justice Working Paper, EAG 200812.
Syverson, Chad. 2004. “Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example.” Journal of Political Economy,
112(6), 1181‐1222.
Syverson, Chad. 2011. “What Determines Productivity?” Journal of Economic Literature, 49(2), 326‐365.
Verma, Kiran, Barry M. Mitnick, and Alfred A. Marcus. 1999. “Making Incentive Systems Work: Incentive
Regulation in the Nuclear Power Industry.” Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 9 (3), 395‐436.
White, Matthew. 1996. “Power Struggles: Explaining Deregulatory Reforms in Electricity Markets.” Brookings
Papers on Microeconomics, 201‐267.
Winston, Clifford. 1993. “Economic Deregulation: Days of Reckoning for Microeconomists.” Journal of Economic
Literature, 31(3): 1263‐1289.
Wolfram, Catherine. 1999. “Measuring Duopoly Power in the British Electricity Spot Market.” American
Economic Review, 89(4): 805‐826.
Wolfram, Catherine. 2004. “The Efficiency of Electricity Generation in the U.S. After Restructuring.” in James
Griffin and Steve Puller, eds., Electricity Deregulation: Choices and Challenges. University of Chicago Press:
Chicago, IL.
Zhang, Fan. 2007. “Does Electricity Restructuring Work? Evidence From The U.S. Nuclear Energy Industry.”
Journal of Industrial Economics, 55(3): 397‐418.

                                                      42
                     Figure 1: Net Generation Scaled By Reactor Design Capacity, 1970‐2009


100                             Reactors Divested 1999-2007
                                All Other Reactors
                                Number of Operating Reactors
90
80
70
60




                                                                          103 Operating Reactors
50
40




                    1970               1980               1990             2000                    2010


                    Figure 2: The Effect of Divestiture on Operating Efficiency by Month of Year
               20
               15
Percentage Points
               10
               5
               0




                      January      March          May            July    September         November




                                                         43
      Figure 3: Number of Reactors Operated by the Same Operator, 1970‐2009



  9
                   Reactors Divested 1999-2007
  6
  3
  0                All Other Reactors




        1970              1980                  1990      2000             2010




Figure 4: Licensed Thermal Capacity as a Percent of Original License, 1970‐2009
108




                 Reactors Divested 1999-2007
                 All Other Reactors
106
104
102
100




      1970              1980                   1990      2000              2010




                                           44
                            Figure 5: Fraction of Reactors Not Operating By Day, 1999‐2009



             .3
             .25
             .2
             .15
             .1
             .05
             0




                       1999                  2001                2003                                   2005               2007                     2009


                              Figure 6: Fraction of Reactors Not Operating By Day of Year

                                            1999-2001                                                                           2002-2004
.05 .1 .15 .2 .25




                                                                                  .05 .1 .15 .2 .25
0




                                                                                  0




                    Jan 1   Mar 1   May 1     Jul 1     Sep 1   Nov 1   Dec 31                          Jan 1   Mar 1   May 1     Jul 1     Sep 1   Nov 1   Dec 31



                                            2005-2007                                                                           2008-2009
.05 .1 .15 .2 .25




                                                                                  0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25
0




                    Jan 1   Mar 1   May 1     Jul 1     Sep 1   Nov 1   Dec 31                          Jan 1   Mar 1   May 1     Jul 1     Sep 1   Nov 1   Dec 31



                                                                  Reactors Divested 1999-2007
                                                                  All Other Reactors




                                                                             45
                Figure 7: Mean Number of Outage Days Per Year, 1999‐2009


50
40
30
20




                    Reactors Divested 1999-2007
                    All Other Reactors
10




         1999          2001            2003        2005         2007       2009


   Figure 8: Mean Number of Scrams per Hour of Reactor Operation, 1999‐2009
.0002
.00015
.0001
.00005




                    Reactors Divested 1999-2007
                    All Other Reactors
0




         1999          2001            2003        2005         2007       2009




                                              46
Figure 9: Mean Capacity Factor by Day of Year for Operating Reactors, 2005‐2009


100
98
96




                                                    Reactors Divested 1999-2007
                                                    All Other Reactors
94




      Jan 1    Mar 1       May 1       Jul 1       Sep 1        Nov 1        Dec 31




                                      47
                          TABLE 1
   Descriptive Statistics: U.S. Nuclear Power Reactors


        A.   Reactor Characteristics (103 total reactors)


Number of Reactors By Vintage
      1960s                                                  2
      1970s                                                 50
      1980s                                                 46
      1990s                                                  5

Number of Reactors By Type
      Pressurized Water Reactors                            69
      Boiling Water Reactors                                34

Number of Reactors By Manufacturer
      Westinghouse                                          48
      General Electric                                      34
      Combustion Engineering                                14
      Babcock and Wilcox                                    7

Notes: Our sample includes all reactors that were operating as
of January 1, 2000. Vintage, reactor type, and reactor
manufacturer come from the NRC Information Digest 2010‐
2011 (NUREG‐1350, Volume 22), published August 2010.
Vintage is defined as the decade the reactor began commercial
operation.




                             48
                                 TABLE 1 (continued)
                Descriptive Statistics: U.S. Nuclear Power Reactors


                     B.   Operating Efficiency and Reactor Outages


Net Generation as a Percent of Design Capacity (Department of Energy)
       1970s                                                                         61%
       1980s                                                                        61%
       1990s                                                                        75%
       2000s                                                                        92%



Daily Reactor Status 1999‐2009 (Nuclear Regulatory Commission)
       Percentage of Daily Observations at 100% Capacity Factor                     77%
       Percentage of Daily Observations at 90% ‐ 99%                                  9%
       Percentage of Daily Observations at 1% ‐ 89%                                   4%
       Percentage of Daily Observations at 0%                                         9%


Outages 1999‐2009 (Nuclear Regulatory Commission)
       Percentage of Outage Days Manual Shutdown for Refueling                      73%
       Percentage of Outage Days Manual Shutdown for Other Reasons                  24%
       Percentage of Outage Days Automatic Shutdown (“scram”)                         2%

Notes: This table describes operating efficiency and reactor outages for the 103 U.S.
nuclear power reactors that were operating in the United States as of January 1, 2000.
Capacity factor in the first four rows was calculated by the authors by dividing generation
levels from U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, Power Plant
Report (EIA‐906), 1970‐2009 by design capacity (in MWe) from U.S. Department of
Energy, Energy Information Administration, Nuclear Power Generation and Fuel Cycle
Report 1997, “Appendix C: Nuclear Units Ordered in the United States, 1953‐1996.” Daily
reactor status and explanations for outages come from U.S. NRC, Power Status Reports.




                                           49
                                                       TABLE 2
                            Comparing Divested With Non‐Divested Nuclear Reactors


                                                                             (1)               (2)             (3)

                                                                          Reactors         All Other         p‐value
                                                                          Divested         Reactors         (1) vs (2)
                                                                         1999‐2007           (n=55)
                                                                            (n=48)




Reactor Characteristics
      Mean Design Capacity (in MWe)                                         921.9            959.7             .38
      Mean Reactor Age as of December 1998                                   18.8             18.4             .74

      Number of Reactors Operated by the Same Reactor                        2.7               2.8             .86
      Operator as of December 1998
      Original Construction Cost Per Kilowatt Capacity                     $2,397            $2,298            .81
      (in Year 2010 dollars)


Reactor Type
      Percentage Pressurized Water Reactor                                  54%               78%              .01
      Percentage Boiling Water Reactor                                      46%               22%              .01


Reactor Manufacturer
      Percentage Westinghouse                                               42%               51%              .35
      Percentage General Electric                                           46%               22%              .01
      Percentage Combustion Engineering                                      8%               18%              .15
      Percentage Babcock and Wilcox                                          4%               9%               .33


Reactor Location
      Percentage Northeast Census Region                                    50%               0%               .00
      Percentage Midwest Census Region                                      38%               18%              .03
      Percentage South Census Region                                        13%               67%              .00
      Percentage West Census Region                                          0%               15%              .01



Notes: The sample includes all 103 nuclear power reactors operating in the United States as of January 1, 2000. Year the
reactor began commercial operation, reactor type, reactor manufacturer, and reactor location come from the NRC
Information Digest 2010‐2011 (NUREG‐1350, Volume 22), published August 2010. Original construction cost per kilowatt
was calculated by the authors using data from FERC, Form 1 for 1996. Column (3) reports p‐values from tests that the
means are equal in the two subsamples.




                                                          50
                                                         TABLE 3
                              The Effect of Divestiture on Nuclear Operating Efficiency


                                                         (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)


1[           ]it                                        6.5**         10.4**         10.2**          10.2**          9.7**
                                                        (1.2)          (2.1)          (2.0)           (2.0)          (2.0)


Month‐of‐Sample Fixed Effects (480 months)               Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes
Reactor Fixed Effects (103 reactors)                     No            Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes
Reactor Age (cubic)                                      No            No              Yes             Yes           Yes
Observations Weighted By Reactor Capacity                No             No             No              Yes            No
Dataset Collapsed To Plant Level                         No             No             No              No            Yes


Number of Cross Sectional Units                         103            103             103             103            65
Number of Observations                                 36,667        36,667          36,667          36,667        23,796
R2                                                       .18            .22            .22             .22            .26
Notes: This table reports coefficient estimates and standard errors corresponding to an indicator variable for reactors that
have been divested from five separate regressions. In all regressions the dependent variable is net generation as a percent
of design capacity. The sample includes monthly observations 1970‐2009 for all 103 nuclear power reactors operating in
the United States as of January 1, 2000. Standard errors are clustered at the plant level. Single and double asterisks denote
statistical significance at the 5% and 1% level.




                                                              51
                                                         TABLE 4
              The Effect of Divestiture By Reactor Design, Manufacturer, Vintage, and Type of Sale


                                                        (1)                  (2)                 (3)                (4)
                                                    By Reactor           By Reactor          By Reactor
                                                                                                              By Type of Sale
                                                      Design            Manufacturer          Vintage


Pressurized Water Reactors (n=22)                      9.5**
                                                       (2.5)


Boiling Water Reactors (n=26)                          10.8**
                                                       (2.7)

Westinghouse (n=20)                                                         10.0**
                                                                            (2.9)


General Electric (n=22)                                                     10.8**
                                                                            (2.7)

Combustion Engineering (n=4)                                                 5.9
                                                                            (3.4)


Babcock and Wilcox (n=2)                                                    12.5**
                                                                            (1.9)

Completed Before 1975 (n=17)                                                                    10.3**
                                                                                                 (2.7)

Completed 1975 ‐ 1985 (n=13)                                                                    13.7**
                                                                                                 (3.6)


Completed After 1985 (n=18)                                                                     7.2**
                                                                                                 (2.6)

External Sales (n=19)                                                                                              11.5**
                                                                                                                    (2.8)

Internal Sales (n=29)                                                                                              9.4**
                                                                                                                    (2.3)

Month‐of‐Sample Fixed Effects (480 months)              Yes                  Yes                 Yes                Yes
Reactor Fixed Effects (103 reactors)                    Yes                  Yes                 Yes                Yes
Reactor Age (cubic)                                     Yes                  Yes                 Yes                Yes


Number of Observations                                36,667               36,667              36,667             36,667

R2                                                      .22                  .22                 .22                 .22
Notes: This table reports coefficient estimates and standard errors from four separate regressions. In all regressions the
dependent variable is net generation as a percent of design capacity. Coefficients are reported from interaction terms
between the variables indicated in the row headings and an indicator variable for reactors that have been divested. The
sample includes monthly observations 1970‐2009 for all 103 nuclear power reactors operating in the United States as of
January 1, 2000. Standard errors are clustered at the plant level. Single and double asterisks denote statistical significance
at the 5% and 1% level. In none of the four regressions is it possible to reject the null hypothesis that the estimated
coefficients are equal. The p‐values from the tests of equal coefficients are .68, .12,.31, and .51, respectively.




                                                               52
                                                                   TABLE 5
                           The Effect of Divestiture and Consolidation on Nuclear Operating Efficiency


                                                           (1)               (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
                                                         Reactor‐         Reactor‐      Reactor‐      Reactor‐      Reactor‐       Plant‐
                                                          Level            Level         Level         Level         Level         Level


                                                          10.2**           7.8**          8.4**         8.7**       Excluding       6.5**
1[           ]it
                                                                                                                     Divested
                                                           (2.0)           (2.3)          (1.9)         (2.1)       Reactors        (2.1)


Number of Reactors/Plants Operated by the                    ‐‐              .48            ‐‐            ‐‐          .87*          .98*
Same Operator                                                              (.28)                                      (.34)         (.38)


Number of Same‐Type Reactors (PWR/BWR)                       ‐‐              ‐‐            .64            ‐‐            ‐‐            ‐‐
Operated by the Same Operator                                                             (.44)


Number of Same‐Manufacturer Reactors                         ‐‐              ‐‐             ‐‐           .61            ‐‐            ‐‐
Operated by the Same Operator                                                                           (.43)



Month‐of‐Sample Fixed Effects (480 months)                 Yes               Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Reactor/Plant Fixed Effects (103 reactors)                 Yes               Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Reactor/Plant Age (cubic)                                  Yes               Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes


Mean of Consolidation Variable                               ‐               3.3           2.1           1.7           2.9           1.5
Number of Observations                                   36,667           36,667         36,667        36,667        19,446        23,796
R2                                                          .22              .22           .22           .22           .21           .27
Notes: This table reports coefficient estimates and standard errors corresponding to an indicator variable for reactors that have been
divested from four separate regressions. In all regressions the dependent variable is net generation as a percent of design capacity. In
columns (1)‐(4) and column (6) the sample includes monthly observations 1970‐2009 for all nuclear power reactors operating in the
United States as of January 1, 2000. Column (5) excludes all reactors that were ever divested, leaving 55 of the 103 total reactors. Standard
errors are clustered at the plant level. Single and double asterisks denote statistical significance at the 5% and 1% level.




                                                                     53
                                                                                                TABLE 6
                                                       Considering Possible Concerns About Selection Bias, Long Outages, and Closures


                                                              Selection Bias                                                           Long Outages 1996‐1998                               Closures


                              (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)            (6)                (7)           (8)              (9)               (10)                (11)
                           Excluding     Excluding      Excluding        Divest      Excluding      Propensity         Excluding     Excluding        Excluding         Including           Including
                           Michigan      California     Iowa and          Date          the           Score              Years       12+ Month         Reactors         Indicator          Five Closed
                                                        Wisconsin      1/1/2001      Northeast      Weighting            1996‐        Outages          With 12+         Variables           Reactors
                                                                        For All       Census                             1998        1996‐1998          Month          for All 12+             with
                                                                       Reactors       Region                                                           Outages            Month              Imputed
                                                                                                                                                      1996‐1998          Outages,          Post‐Close
                                                                                                                                                                       During and          Operations
                                                                                                                                                                          After


1                             9.7**        10.4**         10.3**          7.9**        10.0**          11.0**             8.8**          9.1**           8.2**            7.4**               8.6**
                              (2.0)         (2.1)          (2.1)          (2.4)         (2.6)          (3.1)              (2.0)          (2.1)            (1.9)           (1.5)               (1.7)


Month‐of‐Sample
                              Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes                Yes           Yes              Yes              Yes                 Yes
Fixed Effects
Reactor Fixed Effects         Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes                Yes           Yes              Yes              Yes                 Yes
Reactor Age (cubic)           Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes                Yes           Yes              Yes              Yes                 Yes


Number of Reactors             99            99             99            103             79              71              103            103               93              103                 108
Number of
                            35,459         35,155         34,905         36,667        27,825          25,484            32,963         36,452          33,177           36,667              38,705
Observations
R2                             .23           .22            .23            .22           .21            .22                .24            .22             .23              .34                 .22
Notes: This table reports coefficient estimates and standard errors corresponding to an indicator variable for reactors that have been divested from eleven separate regressions. In all regressions the
dependent variable is net generation as a percent of design capacity. The sample includes monthly observations 1970‐2009 for all nuclear power reactors operating in the United States as of January 1,
2000 excluding reactors or reactor‐month observations as indicated in the column headings. Column (10) includes an indicator variable for any outage that lasted for 12 or more months, plus separate
indicator variables for the three 12‐month periods after the long outage. Column (11) includes observations from the five reactors in divesting states closed between 1995 and 1997 with imputed values
after their close date. Standard errors are clustered at the plant level. Single and double asterisks denote statistical significance at the 5% and 1% level.




                                                                                                  54
                                                       TABLE 7
                         Understanding the Mechanisms behind Post‐Divestiture Gains


                                                                        (1)                (2)               (3)


                                                A. Maximum Generating Capacity

Maximum Generation Over Last 12 Operating Months                       2.5**               1.6               1.7
[Sample Mean: 100.4]                                                   (0.9)              (1.5)             (1.4)


Maximum Licensed Thermal Capacity (MWt)                                 1.9                2.0               1.9
[Sample Mean: 102.0]                                                   (1.1)              (1.1)             (1.1)


                                            B1. Operating Days and Shutdowns

1[Operating]it x 100                                                   3.9**               3.5               3.8*
[Sample Mean: 91.0]                                                    (0.7)              (2.0)             (1.9)


1[Scram]it x 100                                                        ‐.01              ‐.06               ‐.06
[Sample Mean: 0.2]                                                     (.02)              (.04)             (.04)


                                           B2. Length Versus Number of Outages

Number of Outages per Year                                              ‐.17              ‐.13               ‐.13
[Sample Mean: 1.7]                                                     (.11)              (.16)             (.16)


Mean Outage Length in Days                                             ‐6.4**             ‐6.2               ‐6.9
[Sample Mean: 19.1]                                                    (1.3)              (5.4)             (5.3)


                                            C. Capacity Factor when Operating

Capacity Factor in Percent Excluding Zeros                              ‐0.3               0.5               0.4
[Sample Mean: 97.7]                                                    (0.3)              (0.3)             (0.3)


Time Effects (4,017 days / 11 years)                                    Yes                Yes               Yes
Reactor Fixed Effects (103 reactors)                                    No                 Yes               Yes
Reactor Age (cubic)                                                     No                 No                Yes
Notes: This table reports coefficient estimates and standard errors corresponding to an indicator variable for reactors
that have been divested from 24 separate regressions. The row headings list the dependent variable used in each
regression. The sample in all regressions includes the 103 nuclear power reactors operating in the United States as of
January 1, 2000. The regressions described in the first two rows are estimated using monthly data. All other regressions
are estimated using the daily data from the NRC. Both measures of maximum generating capacity are expressed as a
percent of the original design capacity. Standard errors are clustered at the plant level. Single and double asterisks
denote statistical significance at the 5% and 1% level.




                                                          55
                                          APPENDIX TABLE 1
                             U.S. Nuclear Reactors Divestitures (1999‐2007)


                       Design
  Reactor Name        Capacity    State   Sales Date                 Seller                      Buyer

Pilgrim               655         MA      7/1999         Boston Edison Co               Entergy
Clinton               950         IL      12/1999        Illinois Power Co              Amergen (Exelon)
Three Mile Island 1   819         PA      12/1999        GPU Nuclear Corp               Amergen (Exelon)
Calvert Cliffs 1      845         MD      7/2000         Baltimore Gas & Electric       Constellation
Calvert Cliffs 2      845         MD      7/2000         Baltimore Gas & Electric       Constellation
Susquehanna 1         1065        PA      7/2000         Penn Power and Light           PPL Corp
Susquehanna 2         1052        PA      7/2000         Penn Power and Light           PPL Corp
Hope Creek 1          1067        NJ      8/2000         Public Service E&G             PSEG Power
Oyster Creek          650         NJ      8/2000         GPU Nuclear Corp               Amergen (Exelon)
Salem 1               1090        NJ      8/2000         Public Service E&G             PSEG Power
Salem 2               1115        NJ      8/2000         Public Service E&G             PSEG Power
Fitzpatrick           821         NY      11/2000        Power Authority of New York    Entergy
Indian Point 3        965         NY      11/2000        Power Authority of New York    Entergy
Braidwood 1           1120        IL      1/2001         Commonwealth Edison            Exelon
Braidwood 2           1120        IL      1/2001         Commonwealth Edison            Exelon
Byron 1               1120        IL      1/2001         Commonwealth Edison            Exelon
Byron 2               1120        IL      1/2001         Commonwealth Edison            Exelon
Dresden 2             794         IL      1/2001         Commonwealth Edison            Exelon
Dresden 3             794         IL      1/2001         Commonwealth Edison            Exelon
La Salle 1            1078        IL      1/2001         Commonwealth Edison            Exelon
La Salle 2            1078        IL      1/2001         Commonwealth Edison            Exelon
Limerick 1            1065        PA      1/2001         Philadelphia Electric Co       Exelon
Limerick 2            1065        PA      1/2001         Philadelphia Electric Co       Exelon
Peach Bottom 2        1065        PA      1/2001         Philadelphia Electric Co       Exelon
Peach Bottom 3        1065        PA      1/2001         Philadelphia Electric Co       Exelon
Quad Cities 1         789         IL      1/2001         Commonwealth Edison            Exelon
Quad Cities 2         789         IL      1/2001         Commonwealth Edison            Exelon
Millstone 2           870         CT      3/2001         Northeast Nuclear              Dominion
Millstone 3           1156        CT      3/2001         Northeast Nuclear              Dominion
Indian Point 2        873         NY      9/2001         Consolidated Edison Co of NY   Entergy
Nine Mile Point 1     620         NY      11/2001        Niagara Mohawk Power           Constellation
Nine Mile Point 2     1080        NY      11/2001        Niagara Mohawk Power           Constellation




                                                    56
                                       APPENDIX TABLE 1 (continued)
                             U.S. Nuclear Reactors Divestitures 1999‐2007


                       Design
  Reactor Name        Capacity     State     Sales Date                 Seller                    Buyer

Comanche Peak 1      1150         TX       1/2002           Texas Utilities Electric Co    TXU Generation
Comanche Peak 2      1150         TX       1/2002           Texas Utilities Electric Co    TXU Generation
Vermont Yankee       514          VT       7/2002           Vermont Yankee Nuclear         Entergy
                                                            Power Corporation
Seabrook 1           1198         NH       11/2002          North Atlantic Energy          FPL Group
                                                            Services Corporation
South Texas 1        1250         TX       1/2003           Reliant                        CenterPoint
South Texas 2        1250         TX       1/2003           Reliant                        CenterPoint
Ginna                470          NY       6/2004           Rochester Gas & Electric       Constellation
Kewaunee             535          WI       7/2005           Wisconsin Public Service       Dominion
Beaver Valley 1      835          PA       12/2005          Pennsylvania Power             FirstEnergy
                                                            Company
Beaver Valley 2      852          PA       12/2005          Pennsylvania Power             FirstEnergy
                                                            Company
Davis‐Besse          906          OH       12/2005          Toledo Edison Co               FirstEnergy
Perry 1              1205         OH       12/2005          Cleveland Electric             FirstEnergy
Duane Arnold         538          IA       1/2006           Interstate Power And Light     FPL Group
Palisades            805          MI       4/2007           Consumers Energy Co            Entergy
Point Beach 1        497          WI       10/2007          Wisconsin Electric Power       FPL Group
Point Beach 2        497          WI       10/2007          Wisconsin Electric Power       FPL Group


Notes: Divestiture dates come from U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, Power
Plant Report. We identify divestitures using the first month in which a reactor operator changes its status from
utility to non‐utility. These dates were cross‐checked against U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information
Administration, Electric Power Monthly, ``Electric Utility Plants That Have Been Sold and Reclassified,” March
Issues 2000‐2003 and against SEC filings from the companies involved.




                                                      57
