                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     SHARING SOME THOUGHTS ON
                   WEITZMANtS THE SHARE ECONOMY




                          Russell Cooper




                      Working Paper No. 1734




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 1985




This paper draws on a series of conversations, held during the
Cowles Coffee Hour, With my collegues at Yale University as Well as
the spirited discussion during a conference held at Yale on Martin
Weitzman's The Share Economy. I am particularly grateful to Bill
Nordhaus and Andrew John for their comments and suggestions on
earlier versions of this tale. The paper Was Written While I was
participating in the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer
Institute. I thank participants in that seminar series for their
helpful questions and comments. The research reported here is part
of the NBER'S research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                              NBER Working Paper #1734
                                                              October 1985




              Sharing   SorrE Thoughts on Weitzrnn' s The   Share EconorrW




                                       ABSTNCT




      This   paper explores the positive and normative aspects of

share contracts. In particular, the paper explores the properties

of a share system as advanced by Martin Weitzman in The Share Economy.

The model employed highlights a "macroeconomic externality" created

in a multi—sector economy with imperfect competition. The introduction

of share contracts is shown to influence the comparative static properties

of the model economy and in some cases to lead to Pareto superior out-

comes *




                                                             Russell   Cooper
                                                             Departrrent of Ecxnomics
                                                             College of Business
                                                                rninistration
                                                             University of Iowa
                                                             Iowa City, Iowa 52242
                                                                              I




               Sharing Some Thoughts on Weitzman's The Share Economy


 I. Motivation

        In a series of recent publications, Weitzman (1983, 198'4a) has strongly

advocated the construction of a system of share contracts to mediate

 transactions in the labor market. Under such a system, workers' compensation

would fall with increases in employment. These contracts, Weitzman argues,

would provide the correct incentives at the micro—level, so that workers and

firms would act to reduce macroeconomic fluctuations. Weitzman [19814aJ says

that,

             "The lasting solution to stagflation requires going inside
        the workings of a modern capitalist economy and correcting the
        underlying structural flaw directly at the level of the individual
        firm by changing the nature of labor renumeration. An alternative
        payment system where it is considered perfectly normal for a
        warkers pay to be tied to an index of the firm's performance, say
        a share cf its revenue or profits, puts in place exactly the right
        incentives automatically to resist unemployment and inflation."

     The response to this challenging proposal has been mixed. At one

extreme, The New York Times, in an editorial entitled, "Best Idea Since

Keynes," extolled a number of virtues associated with Weitzman's proposal.

The Times warned that "ideas that promise so much usually succumb to general

skepticism," and noted that "the idea needs testing for analytic errors and

practical   examination. .

     Always willing to provide general skepticism, most academic economists

have been less enthusiastic about the proposed reform. The reason for this

somewhat cool reception is not all that difficult to understand. Although

Weitzman's proposal is a creative one, his ideas have not been formulated in a

complete model.1 Without such a representation of' these deas, it. is

difficult to undertake serious debate about the virtues and vices of' a share

economy.




                                                               j6m2coo/9/25/85
                                                                              2



     The present paper is an attempt in this direction.   I will analyze an

explicit model economy for the purposes of comparing and contrasting the

positive and normative properties of the two compensations schemes highlighted

in Weitzman's work: a fixed wage system and a share system. The basic

structure of the modeiwill reflect my interpretation of the fundamental

aspects of a share system. The paper is not an attempt to formalize every

element of Weitzman's argument. This interpretation of Weitzrnan's argument is

set forth in the next section of this paper.

     The formal model is presented in Section III and its business cycle and

welfare properties ace displayed in Section IV. The structure of the model

reflects the importance of a "macroeconomic externality" stemming from

imperfect competition in a multi—sector economy. A share system is shown to

change the comparative static properties of the model and, in some cases, to

moderate fluctuations in output and employment in he face of adverse shocks

to the system. Section V contains some critical comments on the exercise

performed in this paper and some ideas for future 'esearch in this area.


II. Overview and Interpretation of the Share System

     This section is devoted to an intuitive discussion and interpretation of

Weitzman's argument in favor of a share economy. These remarks reflect my

interpretation of these issues and hence may differ from other analyses.

     Weitzman contrasts the behavior of a rnacroeconomy under two modes of

transacting labor services: a wage system and a share system. In a wage

system, a worker's real wage rate is set, ex—.ante, by competitive forces but,

ex-post, is inflexible and hence independent of random disturbances affecting

the economy. A share contract, in its simplest form, is characterized by two

parameters: a constant transfer term () and a share coefficient Cx). The

contract also specifies some index of firm activity such as profits per


                                                             j6m2coo/9/25/85
                                                                             3



worker, revenues per worker, etc., to which compensation is linked. This
index is assumed to be a decreasing function of the level of activity at the

firm so that compensation per worker falls (assuming X>O) as the firm

expands. Under either of these compensation systems, firms are given the

latitude of choosing employment, ex post.

     In a world of certainty, both of these compensation schemes can be shown

to support the same labor allocation (see Proposition 1, Weitzman (1983)).

However, there is a critical difference between the two systems. In a wage

system, the labor market equilibriates at zero excess demand. In a share

system, however, firms offering share contracts will have an incentive to

increase their workforce further (at the equilibrium allocation) to take

advantage of reductions in average wages associated witn higher employment

levels. Firms are prevented from expanding in this way by the existence of

competing offers by wage firms. Hence, as Weitzman puts it, share firms are

in a state of excess demand for labor in the certainty equilibrium of t;he

share economy (Section III elaborates on this point).

     Weitzman then proceeds to investigate the comparative static properties

of these two economies. Wage firms tend to respond to demand fluctuations by

varying employment levels. This response in quantities, through the circular

flow of income, tends to create a multiplier effect that exacerbates the

effects of the initial shock on real variables.

    Weitzman (198a, p. 6) contends that,

          "The current wage system of compensating labor is a perilous
     anachronism that needs to be replaced. For when a contractionary
     impulse hits, not only is the initial response of a wage economy
     to throw people out of work, but a wage system can deepen a
     recession, multiplying its adverse consequences until the economy
     is trapped in a vicious cycle of persistent involuntary
     underutilization of the major factors of' production. This public
     cost of the wage system - its "macroeconomic externality" of'
     misbegotten unemployment spawning further unemployment — is a



                                                            j6m2coo/9/25/85
                                                                             '4




      pollutionhike consequence that private agents have little
      incentive to consider."

     The share economy operates quite differently in the face of fluctuations

in demand. Since share firms are in a state of excess demand for labor, they

are willing to employ those workers laid off by wage firms. This reduces

fluctuations in employment and will eliminate the smaller shocks altogether.

Weitzman {19814a] argues that,

      "A share system looks very much like a !'labour shortage"
      economy. Firms cruise around like vacuum cleaners on wheels,
      searching in nooks and crannies for extra workers to suck in at
      existing compensation parameter values. Such an economy is
      inherently recession resistant."

     The upshot of this comparison is that a share economy is better able to

absorb shocks without causing unemployment in labor markets. This, Weitzrnan

argues, means that a share system socially dominates a wage system. Weitzmari

acknowledges that the wage system privately dominates the share system for

workers and firms so that a tax and transfer system will be necessary to

induce those agents to trade labor services through socially superior share

contracts.

     A number of questions come to mind about this line of reasoning:

       i) Why   is   the wage system socially suboptimal?;

      ii) What is the source of this "macroeconomic externality" described

above?; and,

     iii) Under what conditions and by what criteria will a share economy

dominate the wage system?

     With regard to the first question, it is important that the wage system

be privately optimal. If not, then the wage system is trivially socially

suboptinial. Thus, it is critical to use a model which predicts that the wage

system will arise and, for which, the share system is feasible.

Unfortunately, the microeconomic rationale for the wage system, as Weitzrnan


                                                             j   6m2coo/9125185
                                                                                      5




points out, has long eluded economists. For the most part, this analysis will

also take the wage system as institutionally given and evaluate a share system

as a viable alternative. The possible problems with this approach are

discussed in Section IV.

     Leaving this issue aside, it is also critical to Weitzman's argument that

the "macroeconomic externality" he alludes to be explicated in the model.

Presumably, this is not unlike the "macroeconomic externality" that has been

responsible for underemployment equilibria and that economists do not firmly

grasp either. Without understanding this externality, it is impossible to

evaluate proposals to internalize it. The model of this "macroeconomic

externality" is presented in the next section and folloc.is Cooper—John (1985).

The approach stresses the importance of strategic complementarity in

generating underemployment equilibria and multiplier effects.

     With regard to the last question, the share economy differs from the wage

economy in a number of ways, including the magnitude of fluctuations in wages,

prices, employment and profits. One way to compare the systems is to

calculate the expected utilities of the individuals in the alternative

economies. This paper follows Weitzman and views the shocks as surprises in a

certain world, The systems are compared by looking at the magnitudes of

employment, output and utility fluctuations. We comment on the

appropriateness of this approach later.

     This paper is best viewed as an attempt to model WeitzmanFs argument and

to specify an explicit economy with a multiplier process, that exacerbates

shocks and creates large movements in unemployment rates under a wage

system. We then show that a share system changes the response of the economy

to shocks in a way that supports Weitzman's statements. Thus, the framework

focuses explicitly on the second question raised above. The comparison of the



                                                                j 6m2 coo / 9 /   25 / 85
                                                                           6



two systems and the comparative statics analysis follows Weitzman's outline

fairly closely.


III. The Basic Model

     The modelling approach taken here to compare wage and share systems draws

on a series of recent papers by Hart (1982), Weitzman (1982), Heller (19814),

Roberts (19814), and Cooper—John (1985). These models, in one way or another,

stress the importance of imperfect competition in understanding certain key

Keynesian features including multiple equilibria, inefficient allocations and

multiplier effects. Crucial to these model economies is the circular flow of

income created by specifying particular patterns of production and consumption

in a multi—sector economy. In particular, producing agents are viewed as

specialists in their production activity and generalists in consumption.

These two ingredients—-imperfect competition and a circular flow of income—-

lead to situations in which quantities fluctuate widely relative to prices and

in which multiplier effects tend to propagate shocks at the micro-level. We

specify a model of this type below to capture the "macro externality" implicit

in Weitzman's discussion. We can then investigate its properties as we vary

the exogenously given compensation system.

     Consider an economy with 2 sectors indexed by i   1,2 producing distinct

commodities. In each sector, there are F firms indexed by f     1,2,...,F. The

number of firms in each sector is fixed exogenously. There are also 2N

identical workers who can work in either of the two sectors. Assume there is

a total of three commodities in the economy: the two produced goods and one

non-produced commodity. The non-produced commodity could be viewed as a proxy

for money but, given the static nature of the model, such an interpretation

could be misleading. The non-produced good will serve as numeraire.




                                                              j6m2coo/9/25/85
                                                                                    7



        Each firm is endowed with rn units of the non-produced good and has, at

its disposal, a linear technology converting labor into output on a one—for—

one basis. Letting the subscript "fi" denote firm f of sector i, profits for

this firm (uf1) are given by


              ilfi =   (p — w)qf          (p. —


Here p1 and w are the sector output price and wage respectively, q1 is the

firm's output and           is the level of employment.

        The firm (equivalently its owner) spends its total income of            ÷ m on

two commodities: the non-produced good (m) and the produced good from the

other sector (c_1). The firm's preferences are given by U (cm1)

where 0 < a < 1 and U C.)         is   strictly increasing and concave. Firm's demands

for c_1 and    m   are given



                       — (rr1     + rn), m = (1 —
                                                    a)(TI1
                                                             +   rn).




Here,   as stated above, the subscript in c—i and p_ refers to the sector in

which the firm is a consumer. This structure of' production and consumption

highlights the circular flow of income and expenditures. The introduction of

the non—produced good creates a leakage from this stream and avoids the

prediction of a continuum of equilibria as in Cooper-John (1985).

        Workers are endowed with a unit of leisure time that they supply

inelastically to the firm. An employed worker in sector i receives

compensation w and consumes some of the non-produced good and some of the good

produced in the other sector. This worker's preferences are represented by

V(c3m8) where V(S) is strictly increasing and concave with 0 < p < 1. The

demand functions are given by


              c =      --— w, m        (1 —   )w.

                                                                        j6m2coo/9/25/85
                                                                                  8



An unemployed worker receives zero compensation and has utility of V(O) =         0.
     With this structure of preferences, endowments, and technology, one can

consider a wide variety of market structures. Randomness in endowments and

preferences can be introduced as well to investigate the comparative statics

properties of the decentralized economy. The emphasis here is on the

implications of alternative schemes for trading labor services on the form of

fluctuations stemming from shocks.

    Given the symmetry in the problem, it is easy to compute the competitive

equilibrium for this economy:


                 *       *       F
                                                     q*
                                     tim
            *        =       =             and   =        =   N/F.
                p2

In this equilibrium, wages and prices are equal across sectors and we have

full employment. Fluctuations in firms' endowments in one or both sectors

create fluctuations in prices and in the distribution of workers across

sectors.2 The economy remains at full employment.

    This competitive system has neither of the key ingredients in Weitzman's

formulation: wage rigidities and some form of imperfect competition. We next

consider the consequences of imperfect competition under three alternative

compensation systems: flexible wages, fixed wages, and share contracts.

a) The Wage System

    To begin, we outline the imperfectly competitive equilibrium for an

arbitrarily chosen wage, w. The 2F firms play a non-cooperative game using

quantities of output (equivalently employment) as strategy variables. We then

discuss the determination of w in this imperfectly competitive system and

begin our study of the comparative static properties of alternative

compensation schemes.




                                                                     j6rn2coo/9/25185
                                                                                     9



        We focus on the decisions of firm f in sector i and use the symmetry of

the agents to describe the symmetric Nash equilibrium. This firm chooses its

output   level, q1, to maximize rIg.              subject      to

                               R.
                                -1
              p.                                                               (1)
               1
                        qf•+     E


Here p is the prevailing price in sector i where R_1 denotes the total amount

of nunieraire to be spent by sector -i agents on sector i output. From the

preference structure described earlier,


              R. F{arn. 4                         — w(cz   —
                                     q1(czp   .




where        is the level of output for each firm in sector -i. Mote that the

Cobb-Douglas preferences imply that the share of income being spent on sector

—i is independent of the price prevailing in that sector. This greatly

simplifies    the      analysis (see Hart (1982) as well on the role of this

structure).

     The solution to the firm's optimization problem yields


              (p. - w) +
                               qf.i
                                 qf
                                          0.                                   (2)


In a symmetric Nash equilibrium, we find that


              q1 :1                                                            (3)
                  wF
                   1
where n a FF_            Substituting this into (1) yields an equation for the sector

i price, i.e.,


                         / .                                                   ()



                                                                    J6m2coo/9/25/85
                                                                                                TO



Because of the strong assumptions on preferences, prices here have the

property that they are independent of the output levels in either of the

sectors.

     Substituting (LI)        into    (3) yields a useful relationship between the level

of activity per firm in sector i (q) for a given level of activity per firm

in the other sector (q_),


                   A1 +       yq.                                                       (5)


                                                                                           —1
This "reaction curve" for sector i has a positive intercept of A                                and

a slope of y     (a -   n(a    -     B)).   With a,   n, B all between zero and one we
know that 0 < y < 1.

     This curve is graphed in Figure 1. Again, invoking symmetry, there is an

analogue to (5) giving q_ as a function of q1. This is shown in figure 1 as

well. The symmetric r'Jash equilibrium (q*) is then given by t;he intersection

of these curves,


                    A
                              with     A                                                (6)
                   1-1    ,




So, given w, it is straightforward to determine the equilibrium for this

economy.

     If w = w0     Nrna), the equilibrium will be one of full employment. This

would be the case if there was an auctioneer controlling the real wage to

ensure that the labor market cleared. If w > w0, we have an underemployment

equilibrium. For n < 1 (i.e., F <                 w0 < wM. To keep the imperfect

competition equilibrium at full employment requires a lower real wage as an

inducement for the firms to increase output.

    With this structure in mind, we can begin our analysis of the comparative

statics properties of this economy. The previously cited comment by Weitzmn



                                                                         j 6m2 coo   / 9 / 25 / 85
                                   ii




                         q21 +
    g1



                                             + Yq2




w




                         *              q7
         Am1
          1    cm       q=   A
            ________         1—i
               w


         Figure     1
                                                                                     12




on the "vicious cycle of persistent involuntary underutilization of the major

factors of production" stands out in this model. As Figure 1 illustrates, the

positively-sloped reaction curves of the identical firms generate a multiplier.

effect from shifts in these curves due to exogeneous changes!t

       Suppose, as Weitzman suggests, that the economy is characterized by a

wage system where we start with w = wC (as in the perfectly competitive,

flexible wage case). We comment, in the next section, on possible sources for

this rigidity. Taking w wC as given, how does the imperfectly competitive

economy respond to shocks?

       Suppose, for example, there is a decrease in the endowment of sector 2

firms, m2. Starting at the full employment, symmetric Nash equilibrium, the

changes in the equilibrium levels of output are:

                    Ti                     11

             dq1
                    —         dq,      —
              —I—- W     2   'dm2
                                           W
                                                2
                    1—y                1—y
             dm2


The   numerator in the dq1 / drn2 expression is         the change in autonomous

expenditures (A2) on sector 1 due to a reduction in m2. The denominator,

        lies between zero and one and reflects the multiplier interaction

between the two sectors. Output in sector 2 is reacting to sector 1 output

reductions so that dq2 / drn2 =                 / dm2. This process can be seen directly
                                    ydq1
from Figure 1 by considerating a shift in the q1 "reaction curve."

      Hence employment fluctuations tend to feed on each other so that an

initial shock to the system can create fairly large employment fluctuations.

From the assumed rigidity of wages, unemployed workers wish to be working but

the imperfectly competitive firms have no incentive to hire them given the

downward sloping demand curves they face.




                                                                        j6m2coo/9/25/85
                                                                                13



         The magnitude of this multiplier effect depends, ultimately,

 on y.    As c and      increases, more of an extra dollar of income (for either the

 firm or worker) is "returned" to the system so that leakages are reduced and

 the multiplier effect is increased. As the number of firms increases, r tends

 to 1. This influences the magnitude of the multiplier if there is a

difference in consumption patterns between firms and workers. As F +
  -1     and y   - B.   Later, we shall see how the existence of share contracts can

produce results that resemble these implications of F ÷

       If wages were flexible, then w could be adjusted to equilibrate the labor
market given the Labor demand functions reported by the firms. In this case,

the interaction between sectors would take the form of price rather than

quantity movements as was the case in the competitive model. Thus the fixed

wage assumption is critical since it leads to price inflexibilities and large

output/employment fluctuations. This illustrates a point made by Hart (1982)

that the underemployment and multiplier results in these models depend more on

the presence of some imperfections in the labor market. than on imperfectly

competitive firms. Given the presence of fixed real wage contracts,

Weitzman's point about large movements in real quantities is substantiated in

the model.

b) The Share System

     We now consider a system with share contracts as an alternative to the

wage system. Suppose that pF of the firms in sector 1 offer workers share

contracts while all the other firms in sector 1 and all the sector 2 firms

continue to trade with fixed wage contracts. This structure allows us to

evaluate the importance of the proportion of share firms on the magnitude of'

fluctuations in sectors 1 and 2 as we vary p between zero and one.




                                                                 j6m2coo/9/25/85
                                                                             14




     Weitzman's argument is that the presence of share firms will reduce

employment fluctuations in sector 1 since these firms are always on the hunt

for unemployed workers. Because of' the "macroeconomic externality" across

sectors of' the economy, stabilization of output and employment in sector 1 may

help stabilize sector 2 as well. To see this, we begin with a statement of

equilibrium in an economy with share firms.

     As mentioned in Section II, a share contract stipulates that wages depend

inversely on some measures of firm activity. For simplicity, we take revenues

per worker as that index which, given the firm's technology, is simply the

price of output. Letting w5(p1) be the wage paid to a worker at a share firm

when the price is p1,


                    w +         ,   0 < x < 1.                        (8)
           wS(p1)         xp1

The share contract is characterized by a constant payment of w and a share

coefficient A. The contracting process with share firms will determine

(w,X), just as w is determined for the wage firms. Share contracts, though,

do allow movements in the wage rate in response to price changes.

     To characterize the equilibrium, we have to consider the behavior of

three classes of firms: share firms in sector 1, wage firms in sector 1. wage

firms in sector 2. A share firm takes the decisions of' all other firms as

given and solves



          max(p1(1—x)-w)q
           q1

where p1 is the price which clears the market for sector I output. Note too

that (w,x) are taken as given by the share firm. The experiment we are

conducting is to investigate the effects on fluctuations in the economy of

alternative (exogenously determined) contracts.



                                                             j6m2coo/9/25/85
                                                                                        15




        The solution to the share firm's optimization problem is


                              +                  0                               (9)
                                  q(1—x)—---1
                                           q1
This first-order condition looks similar to (2) though the inclusion of

A > 0 is critical. Using (1), (9) can be rewritten as:

                                                     S
                R(1—X)                            q
                                     (1—
                                                  +
                                                                   )w            (10)
              F(pq+ (1—p)q)                              (1—p)q)

This equation implicitly defines the optimal quantities of the share firms as

a function of the wage firm's output and the amount of spending by the other

sector R2.5

        The reaction curves by the wage firms is given by

                                                      w
                         R
                          2
                                      (1 —                          =            (ii)
             F(pq1 + (i—p)q.1)               F(pq1 +      (1—)q1)

This equation comes directly from (2). These two equations combined with (1)

for i      1 completely describe quantities and the price in sector 1. The

behavior of the sector 2 firms is given by (3) and (14) with i = 2.

     To finish the statement of an equilibrium, we need to describe the

behavior of workers in terms of their choice of employer. In parti.cular,

something needs to be said about workers' evaluation of consumption risks

associated with being employed by the different types of firms. ft this

stage, Weitzman argues that the shocks to the system are completely

unpredictable and constitute uncertainty as opposed to risk. Hence agents in

this economy completely ignore these shocks and evaluate the compensation

schemes offered by alternative firms as if they lived in a world of'

certainty.6 So, to describe the equilibrium we need to determine the level



                                                                        j6m2coo/9/25/85
                                                                                      16




of compensation which clears the labor market given agents' beliefs that they

face no risks.

     Take, as a benchmark, the full-employment equilibrium with

w   wC and p1 and p =             Call the corresponding output level q** which is

determined from (6) with w c Furthermore, assume that (w,X) satisfy


           wS(p**)      w +   xp**            wc                               (12)


Hence, workers are indifferent between being employed by share or wage firms

at the full employment allocation.

     The full employment allocation will be an equilibrium for all

combinations of (w,X) satisfying (12). This is Proposition I in Weitzman

(1983).

     To see this, suppose that q q2                q** and p1   p2 p. This will be
an equilibrium if share firms choose to set q q** as well. Inserting (12)

into (9) and evaluating this at q q** yields

                  —                     ap1
           (p —      w) +   q**(1..x)                                          (13)
                                        aq1

Since, by construction, q** solves (2) for p p, (13) cannot equal zero if

A > 0. Share firms wish, in fact, to expand output beyond q** since they

share the loss of a lower price with their workers. However, if one of them

did, p1 would fall below p and w5(p1) would fall below w. Share firms would

then be unable to attract any workers.

     This point is shown in Figure 2. Given w, wage firms select q* as their

desired level of output and employment. A share contract satisfying (12) is

depicted as well. The desired level of output and employment by. a share firm

is given by q > q**. Share firms are limited to producing only q** by




                                                                     j 6m2coo/9 /25/85
                                                    17




caiensation
per worker    wS(p1(q))




       C-
      w=w




                                      iso--profit




                      **         —S
                     q




                      Figure 2
                                                                               18




(12). (Note that the iso-profits curves are drawn for given levels of output

by all other firms.)

    Hence q** is an equilibrium in which share firms find that (12) acts as a

binding constraint on their output/employment choice. In this equilibrium,

share firms are in a state of excess demand for workers.

    With this full-employment equilibrium as a benchmark, we can repeat our

earlier experiment and consider the response of this economy to a reduction in

                   the wage firms will reduce their employment and output.
m2. Intuitively,
Share firms will hire the unemployed workers to take advantage of the

reduction in compensation from an increase in output. Due to (assumed)

mobility costs, the workers at the share firms will not be able to find

employment at the wage firms. For small enough reductions in rn2, there will

be no unemployment in sector 1 though prices will fall. This price reduction

will influence the demand curve facing sector 2. Hence, the externalities

associated with contractions in one sector leading to contractions in the

other sector are not avoided in the share economy. A share system changes the

nature of these spillovers but does not eliminate them. Nonetheless, a share

system will be more stable under certain parameter restrictions. Thinking       of'


Figure 1, the share system can lead to a flatter reaction curve in sector 1

and hence a reduction in the multiplier effects described earlier.

     To formalize this intuition, we need to characterize the Nash equilibrium

after the realization of a low       Once we assume immobile labor, ex post,

share firms will be able to hire any available labor without fear of losing

their current work force. These workers will not leave because they will be

unable to locate employment elsewhere. Let q(q,R2) solve (9) with

equality. This is the level of output share firms wish to produce given

(q,R2). The actual level of share firms output    is   given by



                                                                  j6rn2coo/9/25/85
                                                                                       19




                                                                   F
                                                               1
                                     mm                                         (1k)
             q (q', R2) =                  ((q,2)         pF

This expression is the short—run reaction curve for share firms. The first

term on the right side is the desired level of output for these firms. The

second term is the number of workers available in sector 1 per share firm

after the wage firms have determined their employment level. At the full

employment equilibrium (our benchmark) the second term is less than the

first. This will continue to be the case for small enough reductions

in rn2 below rn.   Hence, the share firms employ all of the workers in the sector

not employed by the wage firms. We assume that, ex post, workers in sector 2

are not able to migrate to sector 1. So, together, (11) and (114) describe the

distribution of workers between share and wage firms for given levels of R2.

     For small enough fluctuations in m2, the reaction of sector 1 will he

solely in terms of prices since, by (114), share firms ensure that q** is the

average level of' output in the sector. Sector 1 price, p1, is determined from

                       R2
            P1 Fq                                                               (15)


The behavior in sector 2 is characterized by (3) and (14) and this determines

112. Differentiating the conditions for equilibrium with respect to in2, we can

derive that (the superscripts indicates that these conditions hold for the

share system):


                         fl_à11S                                               (16)
                        wF


                                                                               (17)
            AR          F4q**p

              5    =
                            1   (W           S
                                          A q2 +
                        —i                         Am2)
                                                                                (18)




                                                                       j6m2coo/9/25/85
                                                                               20



     Equation (16) is the quantity response function in sector 2 to a change
in expenditures on that sector. Eqution (17) relates the change in

expenditures to the change in the sector 1 price. The variable

    a - pX(ci—) and lies between zero and one. Finally, (18) describes a

change in the sector 1 price due to the exogenous change in sector 2

endowments and the endogenous change in sector 2 output. Recall that

X   a —   i(ct-). Since   p2
                                 win and pq ÷ (1—p)q   q, this completes the

description of the comparative statics effects of a reduction in rn2.

     Substituting (18) into (17) and (17) into (16) yields:



                  =
                      a/w      and                                      (19)

            Am2



             1i       _____                                             (20)


Equations (19) and (20) are the counterparts to (7) for the share economy. In

comparing (19) and (20) with (7), we note that fluctuations in the share

system take the form of both price and quantity movements. The share sector

responds to shocks through relative price changes and these produce movements

in sector 2's output and employment level. To stress an important point,

share contracts do not eliminate spillover effects across sectors of the

economy. Instead, they alter the form of these interactions. With these

comparative static results in mind, we now turn to a welfare evaluation of the

share system.


IV. Welfare Properties of the Share System

     A full welfare evaluation of the share system should start with a

complete statement of the primitives for our economic model. One could


                                                               j6m2coo/9/25i85
                                                                              21




ideally proceed to a comparison of the decentralized allocation with the set

of Pareto optimal allocations,

     Our evaluation of the share system falls short of this methodology in a

number of important respects. First, our comparison is between •the wage and

share systems. We have not argued that the wage system is a privately optimal

contracting arrangement for this economy. Nor will we assert that a share

system can support a Pareto optimal allocation. Instead, the argument for

this comparison has been that the wage system is both close to what we observe

and possibly responsible for magnifying shocks to the economy. Consequently,

it is useful to see how thai; system compares with alternatives such as the

share system.

     This approach is potentially dangerous in that the ultimate argument to

support the wage system (assuming it is empirically relEvant) may impose

constraints which make the share system more costly to implement. Without a

theory predict;ing the wage system, it is impossible to gauge the importance of

this concern. We nonetheless proceed with this comparison and discuss some

approaches to understanding the wage system in the conclusion.

     A second issue concerns the treatment of uncer'taint;y and risk sharing in

the model. In specifying preference, both workers and firms were allowed to

be risk averse. The actual economic behavior described so far has avoided any

discussion of risk sharing issues. This is consistent with Weitzman's view

that the randomness affecting the macroeconomy is totally and completely

unpredictable so that agents behave as if they lived in a world of

certainty. Consequently (12) is the appropriate equilibrium condition. If we

had addressed the issues of risk sharing directly, then (12) would be replaced

by an expected utility equality for workers. Part of the cost of share

contracts could be their inferior allocation of risk relative to the wage



                                                              j6m2coo/9/25/85
                                                                                              22




system.8 Again, in keeping with Weitzman, we ignore these (potentially

important) issues for now and assume that both U() and V() are linear.

     Without completely characterizing the planning problem and without a

complete treatment of uncertainty, it is still possible to investigate some of

the welfare properties of the two systems. Our approach will be to look at

changes in utility levels for firms and workers due to reductions in                     across

the two systems.

     To begin, we consider the effects of changing from a wage system to a

share system in sector I on the magnitude of fluctuations in sector 2. As

noted earlier, in selecting compensation schemes and employment rules, agents

will not take into accoint the effects of their contracting structures on the

rest of the economy. Hence it is important to see whether there are any

external benefits to sector 2 agents from having share contracts in sector 1.

     Letting superscripts denote the system (s for share, w for wage), we can

compare the equilibrium changes in sector 2 output and employment across the

two systems from:
                        w
            A2 2
               -
                   Aq        Aq
                                  S
                                               ___   —

                                               —12 1—y
                                                                                     (21)
                   Am2       Am2

Equation   (21) implies that y >               is necessary and sufficient for output in

sector 2 to be more stable in a share economy than in a wage system. From the

definitions of y and 4,, y > 4, means that


            (ct—) < pX(a—)                                                             (22)



Proposition 1:          If    > , share contracts help stabilize sector 2 output as
long as pX > r. If a                  8, share contracts are destabilizing.
Proof: Direct from (21) and (22).




                                                                              j6m2coo/9/25/85
                                                                              23



     The point of the share contracts, it seems, is to exact a redistribution

of income from workers to firms in economic downturns. If c > ,    firms    tend

to "recycle" more income than workers so that the leakage effect in downturns,

is reduced under the share system. So one interpretation of this is that

share contracts act as an automatic stabilizer.

     The workers in sector 1 also appear to be better off under a share system

in the sense that their employment is stabilized. This is true even if the

conditions for Proposition 1 don't hold. Hence, if we focus exclusively on

fluctuations in employment and output, the share system is welfare improving

for workers in sector 1.

     This concentration on quantity fluctuations, however, misses some of the

costs of the share system. From the viewpoint of a worker at a share firm,

the price fluctuations induced by the share system implies that, wages fall in

downturns. It is not obvious that workers prefer the employment security of

share contracts to the wage security and employment risk of the wage system.

To understand this tradeoff between employment compensation and price risk

better, we need to evaluate the utility changes of the agents in question.

     Looking first at workers, we can consider the changes in utility levels

from changes in rn2 across the two systems for three types of' workers: sector

1 workers at wage firms, sector 1 workers at share firms, and sector 2

workers. A sector 1 share worker is always worse off in low rn2 states than a

sector 1 worker at a wage firm since the latter have a chance of a job at

w while the former always face reductions in compensation when rn2 falls.

Hence, if we can show that share workers in a share system and sector 2

workers do better under a share system, then we can conclude that all workers

do better in a share system.




                                                             j6m2coo/9/25/85
                                                                                2k



     a. Sector 1 Workers

     The change in the utility of a sector 1 worker in a wage system due to a

change in m2 is given by:


             ——
              AVW


              Am2 2
                               —
                           [a+—-—]
                                   Aq'

                                   Am
                                                                            (23)



where — is      the equilibrium change in sector 2 output from decreases in
      Am2
in a wage system (see (7)) and t         t3 (1_)1. Equation (23) utilizes the
assumption that each worker faces an equal chance of being laid off under a

wage system.9
     The change in the utility of a sector 1 worker for a share firm in a

share system is given by

              AV3             —    AqS
             _E(ci+X —)                                                     (2k)
              Am2 Np
        S
where _E is given by (19). Denote by A the difference between (23) and (2k).
      Am2
     Comparing (23) and (2Z1), workers under either system benefit if the

equilibrium output responses to a reduction in in2 are small. For the
                                          w —
calculation    in (23), low levels of Aq2/Am2 help stabilize sector 1

employment. From (18), we see that changes in p1 due to Am2 are smaller

if AqIAm2     is   smaller. Share workers thus gain from stabilizing Aq/Arn2

since price reductions lower compensation if X > 0. For a given level

of Aq/Am2, share workers prefer lower values of' X. If Xn and p=l, then from

(21), we know that (23) and (2k) are equal and A        0.


     We can think of policy-makers having control over two variables

p and A, with w adjusting so that (12) holds. Given the importance of' pA as a

product in      and hence in (19) and (22), consider         pA and A as the policy

variables. The horizontal line in Figure 3      at   n ensures that


                                                                   j6m2coo/9/25/85
                                    25




                     I'
                     A=O

1




                               AO
Ti




                                     x
                11         1



     Figure 3
                                                                                               26



           Aq/Arn2, or AO from (21). Note too that since q                  < 1,    < X, we are

restricted to combinations of A and              on or below the 145° line. The line

labeled AO contains the combination of (x,) such that (23) and (214) are

equal. This curve goes through the point (n,n) as shown in Figure 3. From

(23) and (214), it can be shown that the A curve has a slope exceeding one in

the neighborhood of (n,n). This is depicted in Figure 3 as well. Above

the A = 0 curve, we find that AV'/Ani2 > 1"2 so that the share system

provides better protection for sector one workers against adverse                      shocks.

      b. Sector 2 workers

      For sector two workers,


            2pF2
            Am2 pN Am2
                                                                                        (25)




                       pF           -
and               =
                                         1i1   __::i                                    (26)
              2       p1        2       p1        2


where AV is the change in sector 2 workers' utility under compensation scheme

i. The important difference between (25) and (26) is that sector 2 workers

benefit from sector 1 price reductions in a share system when rn2 falls

(i.e. Ap1/Arn2>O). Hence, even if a                   or   pX   (so   Aq/Arn2   Aq/Arn2 from
(21)), sector 2 workers still prefer a share system in sector 1.

      The gains or losses for sector 2 workers from a share system can be seen

from Figure 3 as well. Along the line A=O, we know that (25) exceeds (26),

since Ap1/Arn2> 0. So, AV/Arn2 > AV/Arn2 for combinations of (X,E) slightly

below the line (by continuity).

      Looking at Figure 3, any combination of (x,) in the shaded region (i.e.

close to (,n) with          < x) will determine a share contract in which workers in

both sectors are better off than in the wage system. Since we are below the



                                                                            j6m2 coo / 9/25 / 85
                                                                                     27



=O line, fluctuations in sector 2 output are actually larger in the share

system than in the wage system (if cz         > ). Sector   2 workers are compensated

for this by reductions in sector 1 output prices when rn2 is low. Sector 1

workers have their employment stabilized and their compensation

destabilized. Above the             0 line, A is low enough, relative to

, that    sector 1 workers are better off with slightly destabilized

compensation. Workers, then, are in agreement about the merits of' stabilizing

the system through share contracts, i.e., both groups of workers benefit from

large values of .      Sector   1 workers, of course, prefer that this be

accomplished by making all firms share firms (i.e. p1) rather than through

large A. Given this, we let p=l for the remainder of the analysis since our

ultimate goal is to show there exists a share system preferable to the wage

system.

     c. Sector 1 Firms

     With regard to firms, we first look at those in sector 1. Under a wage

system,
                                    —   qW
                   !   (l—)(a   +         2)                                  (27)
            2
where Y c (1_ct)l_Z. In a share system,we use (18) to calculate that


            AtJS                        AqS
               ...i     (1-X)(c   +      _2                                   (28)
            Am2 p
So, like their workers, sector 1 firms benefit from stabilizing fluctuations

in sector 2 output. These firms, however, prefer that A be large so that they

do not have to absorb profit reductions in bad states.

     Define A as the difference between (27) and (28). The combinations of

(x,) such that A=0 are shown in Figure 14•         note that this curve goes through



                                                                      j6m2coo/9!25/85
                28




               450




n




                     x
        11




    Figure 4
                                                                                       29



the point (n,n) as well. In contrast to , A             0 is negatively sloped which

reflects firms' preference for higher x, given .             Comparing A   0 to A =    0,
we see that there are no combinations of (x,) with              < X such that all sector

1 agents are better off with share contracts. At the point (n,n) both sector

1 workers and firms are indifferent between the two systems.

      d. Sector 2 Firms

      Finally, the utility changes for sector 2 firms due to reductions in

are given by:


                — -.           (1     (1-) ___
                                            —

            Am2

              S                                  S
and        —= _____ (1
            AU2
            A          I
                                    + '(1—
                                             A        f2
                                                         —
                                             ___ — (ii ÷m) —1   —).
                                                           2 p1 A
                                                                                (30)
            "2         'ri-'                 urn2               urn2

As was the case for sector 2 workers, these firms gain from stabilizing their

output and from reductions in p1 when m2 is low. For (x,ç) sufficiently close

to (fl,T1), (29) will exceed (30).

      These calculations make quite clear that all agents in the economy

benefit from the stabilization of output in both sectors (assuming that

Proposition 1 holds) associated with a share system. The potential losers

from the share system are sector 1 workers who bear the burden of compensation

reductions in bad states. Is it possible to devise a share contract such that

the share system dominates the wage system?

Proposition 2: Agents' utility losses when rn2 falls are less under a share

system with p=l and X=ri       than under a wage system.
Proof: With p=l and X=, E=i as well. Hence, from (21), A=0 (regardless of

the sign of a—s). At x= and pl, all sector 1 agents suffer identical

utility losses, when rn2 is low, in the two systems. At X=n and p=l, sector 2

agents are better off with the share system since A0 and Ap1/Am2 > 0.


                                                                       j6m2coo/9/25/85
                                                                               30



     In thinking about this proposition, note that at A=n and pl,
fluctuations in sector 2 output are identical under the two systems. The

gains from the share system come from the stabilized employment of sector 1

agents and hence the enhanced consumption of sector 2 agents.

     The proposition tells us about the welfare properties of the two systems

when rn2 is lower than rn.    If m2 is unexpectedly high then the two systems

will generate the same outcome since, at the benchmark allocation described by

(6) with w wC and        =      rn, we are at full-employment. Hence by

setting p=l and X=n, the share system generates an allocation which

stochastically dominates (first—order) the allocation supported by the wage

system. So t;hat, even if we allowed agents to be risk averse, the share

system would be better than the wage system.


V. Concluding Comments

     The main   point of this exercise has been to establish a framework for

evaluating Weitzman's proposal for the imposition of a share system. The

model has sought to highlight the multiplier effects in quantity responses

under a wage system. Following the arguments in Cooper—John (1985), these

multiplier effects were driven by strategic complementarities across sectors

of the economy. From this perspective, the value of share contracts is their

potential for altering the form and magnitude of these intersectoral

linkages. In this model, share contracts in one sector have positive external

benefits for other sectors.

     One of the most. discomforting features of' this exercise is the lack of a

firm theoretical or empirical basis for the wage system. As a consequence, a

share contract might appear to be simply a "back-door" way of reintroducing

the wage—price flexibility that has been assumed away at the start.

     To address this criticism, one needs to develop a theory which predicts


                                                                j6m2coo/9/25/85
                                                                                 31




the wage system as a privately optimal contracting structure, perhaps for

insurance reasons. In such a setting, there would be a private cost to wage

flexibility from insurance losses. Nonetheless, as this analysis points out,.

there may be a social benefit associated with more wage flexibility which is

not internalized by the contractants. In fact, one can interpret the w term

of'   a   share contract as an insurance term and the A term as an "employment

incentive" term. The best share contract balances private insurance needs

with the social costs of large employment fluctuations and. hence sets a higher

value of A than is privately optimal.

          Unfortunately, contracting theories which predict fixed wages as an

optimal insurance arrangement also predict full severance pay and a separately

negotiated employment rule. These are not features of the wage system

explored in this paper. Whether or not models with private information (or

alternative models) can rationalize the wage system remains an open and

intriguing question.




                                                                  j6m2coo/9/25/85
                                                                           32



                                      FOOTMOTES


     1After writing the first draft of this paper, I received Weitzman [1984b]
which provides more details on the share system without the stress, given
here, to flows across sectors of the economy.

     2AS indicated by the equilibrium conditions, prices may fluctuate a lot
in the face of endowment shocks due to the structure of demands. The point of
focusing on imperfect competition and wage/price inflexibility is to generate
more quantity fluctuations.

     3This is not a proper reaction curve in that it incorporates the
conditions for a Nash equilibrium in sector i given       Still, it indicates
the reaction of sector i,. in equilibrium, to changes in output of the other
sector. We use the term reaction curve loosely.

     4Hence the economy will exhibit behavior similar to the strategic
complementarities investigated in Cooper—John (1985). For this model, there
is a unique Nash equilibrium. The importance of the strategic
complementarities becomes clear in the comparative static properties of the
model.

     5We are assuming here that all wage firms and all share firms produce the
same levels of output:   q' and q respectively.
     6This treatment of uncertainty is discussed in the next section.

     7Whether or not this is an appropriate view of' business cycle
fluctuations is arguable.

     8One common argument for fixed wage contracts is risk sharing.

   FqT probability that an arbitrary sector 1 worker is employed is given
by —--, where q1 is the average employment level.

     101t is, of couse, critical that p be large relative to the size of
              N—(1—p)q1 F
Am2 so that                 is the minimum in (1).
                  pF
     11Because of the imperfect competition in this model, the contracting
structure seems a bit richer than in the contract models with price-taking
behavior. One can view firms as contracting with both customers and workers
with informational asymmetries possibly existing in each of these contracts.
I am currently working on the implications of these models for prices, wages,
output, and employment.




                                                             j6rn2coo/9/25/85
                                                                            33



                                  REFERENCES


Cooper, R, and A. John. "Coordinating Coordination Failures in Keynesian
     Models," Cowles FOundation Discussin Paper #7145R Yale University, 1985.

Hart, 0. "A Model of Imperfect. Competition with Keynesian Features,"
     Quarterly Journal of' Economics, 97 (1982): 109—38.

Heller, W. "Coordination Failure with Complete Markets in a Simple Model of
     Effective Demand," Department of Economics, University of California,
     mimeo, 1984,

New York Times (editorial) "Best Idea Since Keynes," March 28, 1985.

Roberts, J. "General Equilibrium Analysis of Imperfect Competition: In
     Illustrative Example," Stanford University, mimeo, 1981.

Weitzrnan, M. "Increasing Returns and the Foundations of Unemployment Theory,"
     Economic Journal, 92 (1982): 787_8014,

__________—.  'Some Macroeconomic Implications of Alternative Compensation
    Systems," Economic Journal, 93 (1983): 763-783.

________      The Share Economy, Harvard University Press: Cambridge,
    Massachusetts, (1984a).

______         "The Simple Macroeconomics of Profit Sharing," MIT WorkLng
    Paper #357, (1984h).




                                                             j6m2coo/9/25/85
