                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   ABS INFLOWS TO THE UNITED STATES AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS

                                            Carol Bertaut
                                      Laurie Pounder DeMarco
                                         Steven B. Kamin
                                          Ralph W. Tryon

                                        Working Paper 17350
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17350


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




This paper was prepared for the NBER-Sloan Project on the Global Financial Crisis. The authors
are economists in the International Finance Division of the Federal Reserve Board. The views in this
paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
or of any other person associated with the Federal Reserve System. We would like to thank Charles
Engel, Kristin Forbes, Jeffrey Frankel, Michael Leahy, Andreas Lehnert, Frank Warnock, and conference
participants at the Federal Reserve, Bank of Canada, and NBER for helpful comments. James Coonan
and Corinne Land provided superb research assistance.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Carol Bertaut, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, Steven B. Kamin, and Ralph W. Tryon. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
ABS Inflows to the United States and the Global Financial Crisis
Carol Bertaut, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, Steven B. Kamin, and Ralph W. Tryon
NBER Working Paper No. 17350
August 2011
JEL No. F3,G1

                                              ABSTRACT

The “global saving glut” (GSG) hypothesis argues that the surge in capital inflows from emerging
market economies to the United States led to significant declines in long-term interest rates in the United
States and other industrial economies. In turn, these lower interest rates, when combined with both
innovations and deficiencies of the U.S. credit market, are believed to have contributed to the U.S.
housing bubble and to the buildup in financial vulnerabilities that led to the financial crisis. Because
the GSG countries for the most part restricted their U.S. purchases to Treasuries and Agency debt,
their provision of savings to ultimately risky subprime mortgage borrowers was necessarily indirect,
pushing down yields on safe assets and increasing the appetite for alternative investments on the part
of other investors. We present a more complete picture of how capital flows contributed to the crisis,
drawing attention to the sizable inflows from European investors into U.S. private-label asset-backed
securities (ABS), including mortgage-backed securities and other structured investment products.
By adding to domestic demand for private-label ABS, substantial foreign acquisitions of these securities
contributed to the decline in their spreads over Treasury yields. Through a combination of empirical
estimation and model simulation, we verify that both GSG inflows into Treasuries and Agencies, as
well as European acquisitions of ABS, played a role in contributing to downward pressures on U.S.
interest rates.


Carol Bertaut                                        Steven B. Kamin
Board of Governors                                   Board of Governors
20th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW              20th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20551                                 Washington, DC 20551
bertautc@frb.gov                                     steven.kamin@frb.gov

Laurie Pounder DeMarco                               Ralph W. Tryon
Board of Governors                                   Board of Governors
20th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW              20th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20551                                 Washington, DC 20551
laurie.p.demarco@frb.gov                             ralph.tryon@frb.gov
1. Introduction

It is widely accepted that international capital flows played an important role in the emergence of

the U.S. housing bubble and the global financial crisis that followed the bursting of that bubble.

In this view, an excess of saving over investment in many emerging market economies,

popularly referred to as the “global saving glut” (Bernanke, 2005, 2007), led to a surge in capital

inflows to the United States that increased available credit and lowered interest rates. In

combination with a number of additional factors—the increase in securitization, excessive

reliance on credit ratings, increases in leverage, failures to manage liquidity and risk, and

inadequacies of supervision and regulation—the expansion of financing associated with the

capital inflows contributed to the U.S. housing bubble and to the buildup in financial

vulnerabilities more generally that led to the crisis.

       However, as noted in a companion paper (Bernanke et al., 2011), the global saving glut

(GSG) story is an incomplete description of the developments in international capital markets

that contributed to the crisis. The emerging market economies at the center of the global saving

glut—China, other Asian developing economies, and the oil exporters—for the most part

restricted their U.S. purchases to Treasuries, Agency debt, and other low-risk investments. Their

provision of savings to what ultimately proved to be risky borrowers—such as those with

subprime mortgages—was indirect, as the massive capital inflows pushed down yields on

Treasuries and Agencies, thus increasing the appetite among private investors for alternative

assets and lowering yields on them as well. In fact, as we will discuss below, yields on

mortgages and mortgage-backed securities fell even more than those on Treasuries.

       In considering the factors contributing to the global financial crisis, it is therefore

important to address a second feature of international capital flows that has received less



                                                   1
attention—direct foreign purchases of asset-backed securities (ABS) and other structured

products issued in the United States. To establish terminology, throughout this paper, “ABS”

refers to mortgage-backed and other asset-backed securities that are “private-label,” meaning

they are not guaranteed by the GSEs. All securities issued or guaranteed by the GSEs are

collectively referred to as Agency securities. By adding to the demand for private-label ABS,

foreign acquisitions of these securities – which were especially prominent among European

investors –likely contributed to the decline in their spreads over Treasury yields and to the

increase in their supply, thus directly increasing the flow of resources to subprime and other

risky borrowers. At the same time, foreign purchases of U.S. ABS ensured that when the bubble

finally burst, the financial crisis would not be confined to the United States, but would spread

throughout the world.

       In our paper, we analyze data on international capital flows and portfolio positions in

order to describe the evolution, magnitude, and financing of foreign acquisitions of U.S. ABS

and structured instruments. We also explore the reasons why foreigners, especially Europeans,

purchased so many ABS and similar securities. We compare these acquisitions to those of U.S.

Treasuries and Agencies by the “global saving glut” countries in order to examine the relative

importance of these flows in creating vulnerabilities leading to the crisis. In particular, we

present both regression estimates and simulations of a stylized portfolio balance model to gauge

the contribution to the downward pressure on U.S. interest rates from purchases of U.S.

Treasuries and Agencies by the global saving glut countries, on the one hand, and from foreign

(especially European) acquisitions of U.S. ABS, on the other. However, we note that purchases

of Treasuries and Agencies by the global saving glut countries and purchases of ABS by

Europeans were hardly independent: By taking U.S. government debt off the market and



                                                 2
lowering its yields, the acquisitions of the global saving glut countries encouraged European

purchases of ABS. This research has ready implications for policy analysis: the better we can

identify the underlying roots of the global financial crisis, the better we can identify trends that

anticipate future crises and design measures to counteract them.

       Our research builds on a number of papers linking the emergence of the global financial

crisis to international imbalances. This research has followed two distinct strands. The first of

these is the story sketched out above, in which current account surpluses in the emerging market

economies increased the global supply of capital, reduced interest rates in the United States and

other advanced economies, and thus encouraged the emergence of the bubble in subprime

housing mortgages. Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2009), Jagannathan, Kapoor, and

Schaumburg (2009), Obstfeld and Rogoff (2009), and Rajan (2010), among others, all discuss

variants of this argument. Members of the official sector, such as Bernanke (2009) and Bini

Smaghi (2008) have also highlighted this line of causation.

       The second strand of research into international capital flows and the crisis has focused

on the extent to which exposure to U.S. dollar assets and dollar liabilities—and particularly to

U.S. ABS and other structured instruments—made foreign economies more vulnerable to

financial disruptions once the crisis began. Acharya and Schnabl (2010) assesses whether

issuance of asset-banked commercial paper was associated with subsequent financial distress,

while Kamin and Pounder (2010) examine whether holdings of U.S. ABS or financing in dollars

led to greater declines in bank asset values in different economies during the crisis. Rose and

Spiegel (2009) and Ehrman, Fratzscher, and Mehle (2009) examine how exposure to U.S. assets

and liabilities may have influenced broader economic developments during the crisis. Baba,




                                                  3
McCauley, and Ramaswamy (2009) and McGuire and von Peter (2009) both analyze the funding

patterns of non-U.S. banks that led to a severe shortage of dollar liquidity once the crisis began.

       However, only a few observers have considered whether the substantial acquisitions of

U.S. ABS by foreigners, primarily in Europe, might not only have rendered foreigners more

vulnerable to a bursting of the subprime housing bubble, but might also have contributed to the

emergence of that bubble. Brender and Pisani (2010) describe how European investors

complemented the acquisition of safe U.S. assets by emerging market economies through their

participation in international “risk-taking chains” which supplied funds for riskier investments in

the United States. Caballero (2009) argues that the driving force behind the U.S. housing and

financial bubble was not current account imbalances but the rise in global demand for safe assets

beyond levels that could be met through creation of genuinely safe securities. Similarly, Johnson

(2009) and Borio and Disyatat (2011) argue that gross capital inflows, especially from Europe,

may have been more important in explaining U.S. financial developments in the leadup to the

crisis than the net inflows from emerging markets associated with current account imbalances.

       But this previous research does not provide a thorough-going comparison of the

dimensions and effects of the international capital flows associated with the “global saving glut”

economies, on the one hand, and those associated with the acquisition of U.S. ABS by the

advanced economies, on the other. Our research, together with the related work featured in

Bernanke et al. (2011), fills gaps in the evolving literature on the global financial crisis in several

respects: by drawing on the full range of available data to build a composite picture of the pattern

of global capital flows in the lead-up to the crisis; by explaining why foreigners (especially

Europeans) purchased so much ABS and contrasting their motives with those of the global

saving glut countries; and by assessing the extent to which foreign acquisitions of U.S. ABS and



                                                  4
other structured investment products may have added to the factors—specifically, lower interest

rates—propelling the emergence of the housing bubble.1 However, we do not address the effect

of lower interest rates on the U.S. housing market, a critical issue that unfortunately is beyond

the scope of this paper.

        The first section of the paper establishes that foreign purchases of U.S. ABS were

quantitatively important in the financing of U.S. investment, particularly in housing, and

compares those purchases with the size of capital inflows from the GSG countries. Section II

describes how the different economies used different means to finance their acquisitions of U.S.

assets. Section III addresses the different motivations for the acquisition of U.S. assets by the

GSG countries and the advanced foreign economies, especially Europe. The fourth section

provides some econometric evidence on the impact of foreign demand for U.S. securities on U.S.

interest rates, while Section V presents implications from simulations using a stylized portfolio

balance model. Section VI concludes.

I.      Quantitative importance of foreign purchases of U.S. ABS

        To analyze the pattern of international capital flows, we combine data from several

sources. The Treasury International Capital (TIC) System provides detailed data on the

composition of U.S. capital flows and the U.S. external position by country and instrument. To

these data we add details from other countries’ published external positions, BIS data on

international banking positions, and the IMF’s Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey (CPIS),

which provides geographic breakdowns of many countries’ external securities claims. Finally,

the detail available in the TIC data allows us to estimate the composition of other countries’


1
  Bernanke et.al. (2011) also compares capital inflows into Treasuries and Agencies from the global saving glut
countries with inflows into ABS from other countries, primarily in Europe. Whereas Bernanke et al. (2011)
explores the demand for safe assets by the different foreign investors, this paper focuses more on gauging the
relative impact on U.S. interest rates of the different types of capital inflows.

                                                         5
claims and liabilities that are not otherwise available. Such estimates help fill out the picture of

international capital flows and positions, providing the basis for addressing the role of ABS and

other structured products in global imbalances. (See Appendix B for additional details.)

        Figure 1 summarizes the evolution of U.S. external liabilities, while Figure 2 compares

the flow of foreign capital into U.S. Treasuries and Agencies with that into U.S. corporate bonds.

The increase in liabilities that financed the U.S. current account deficit in the years leading up to

the crisis was very broad-based (Figure 1). While the stock of U.S. Treasuries and Agencies

held by foreigners exceeded foreign holdings of corporate bonds, by 2007 the latter (including

ABS) were nearly as large. Moreover, in the years leading up to the crisis, foreign flows into

corporate debt were at least as large as those into Treasuries and Agencies (Figure 2). Nearly

half of these inflows into corporate bonds involved the purchase of ABS. In addition, much of

the non-ABS corporate debt securities purchased by foreigners were in the form of financial

debt, floating rate notes, and various structured products, rather than relatively safe conventional

nonfinancial corporate bonds. 2

        Another way to gauge the importance of foreign asset holdings is to consider their share

of the total outstanding stocks of these assets, shown in Table 1. On the eve of the financial

crisis in mid-2007, while foreign holdings of U.S. Treasuries and Agencies were a large share of

the amount outstanding—31 percent—foreign holdings of ABS were not all that far behind. At

24 percent, they represented a substantial share of the market, certainly enough to have had a

material impact on pricing.

        However, the geographic distribution of the inflows into these respective securities was

quite different. Figure 3 shows the cumulated flows into the same securities as Figure 2, but


2
  Albertus, Bertaut, and Curcuru “Has the Crisis Changed Foreign Positions in U.S. Securities?” Federal Reserve
staff working paper 2010.

                                                        6
differentiates these inflows by region of origin. Inflows from Emerging Asia and the Middle

East were almost entirely in the form of U.S. Treasuries and Agencies, and investors from these

countries account for about 60 percent of the inflows into these securities from 2003 up to June

2007. In contrast, inflows from Europe were largely in the form of corporate debt securities;

they accounted for about two-thirds of the total foreign purchases of corporate debt and a little

over half of the total foreign purchases of ABS. Most of the remaining capital inflows into

corporate debt and ABS came from Caribbean financial centers.3 The stark differences in the

geography of the inflows suggest that ABS played a very different role in the evolution of capital

inflows than that described by the global saving glut story.



II.      How did foreign economies finance their acquisitions of U.S. assets?

         One of the most important differences between the foreign (mainly European)

acquisitions of U.S. asset-backed securities (ABS) and the purchases of Treasuries and Agencies

by the emerging market economies was how these acquisitions were financed. Figure 4 focuses

on the three groups of economies most associated with the global saving glut (GSG)—China,

other developing Asian economies, and the OPEC countries—and compares their current

account surpluses over the period 2003 to 2007 with their acquisition of U.S. securities and their

deposits into European banks.4 Although the data are incomplete, it is apparent that these

economies’ acquisitions of foreign assets were financed primarily by their own current account

surpluses. It is also apparent that these surpluses financed not only purchases of U.S. assets, but


3
  These financial center inflows in turn reflect in large part investments of special purpose vehicles, including those
established by European investment banks.
4
  Comprehensive data on overseas asset purchases by these countries not available. Therefore, we have attempted to
capture these purchases by combining data on GSG-country acquisitions of U.S. assets, based on U.S. balance-of-
payments, Treasury International Capital (TIC), and Bank for International Settlements (BIS) banking data, with
GSG net bank flows to Europe, based on BIS banking data. Unfortunately, data on foreign purchases of non-U.S.
securities, which likely represent the largest gap in our coverage, are not available for most GSG countries.

                                                          7
investments in other economies, such as Europe, as well. Data on the allocation of OPEC assets,

unfortunately, is especially incomplete, but it is likely that much of their overseas investments

went into purchases of European assets and U.S. assets held by third-party custodians and thus

not picked up in the TIC data.

         By comparison, Europe, which accounted for most of the foreign purchases of U.S. ABS

during the period, was running a small current account deficit in aggregate. Accordingly, as

shown in Figure 5, the expansion of its claims was financed by a comparable expansion in its

liabilities.

         The fact that Europe was issuing external liabilities and acquiring external assets in

roughly equal quantities does not mean, however, that the net effect of these transactions on U.S.

and global financial markets was a “wash.” Figure 6 depicts the evolution of Europe’s

international balance sheet from 2003 to 2007, showing how its acquisition of external claims

was financed by issuance of external liabilities. The composition of these flows of claims and

liabilities were broadly similar, but the rise in claims included significant amounts of ABS and

other complex financial instruments, whereas the rise in liabilities was tilted toward traditional

securities and bank deposits.

         Specifically, and focusing first on securities, Figure 6 shows that much of Europe’s

issuance of externally held securities was in the form of equity and sovereign debt, whereas

much of its acquisition of external securities was in the form of asset-backed securities and other

debt securities issued by foreign financial corporations, most of which ultimately were issued in

the United States.5 Turning to transactions among banks and other primarily financial


5
  Sovereign debt refers to debt issued by governments. While capital inflows to purchase European sovereign debt
helped finance the acquisition of external assets by Europe as a whole, there is no presumption that these inflows
financed external asset accumulation by European governments themselves. No sovereign debt appears on the asset

                                                        8
institutions, Europe was a net lender abroad to nonbank corporations (“net loans to nonbanks and

other”), but was a net recipient of international interbank flows and other deposits from abroad

(“net interbank and deposits”) during this period.6 As became apparent after the financial crisis

broke, many European financial institutions were funding their purchases of U.S. assets with

short-term dollar-denominated liabilities like commercial paper or bank deposits, much of which

attracted U.S. investors (McGuire and von Peter, 2009, Acharya and Schnabl, 2010).7

        Thus, even though Europe was not running current account surpluses, its financial firms

and investors engaged in a process of intermediation which augmented the supply of financing

for ABS and related instruments, especially in the United States. As Acharya and Schnabl

(2010) note, investment flows from current account deficit countries as well as surplus countries

left their imprint on U.S. financial markets.

         Of course, some of the investment flows from external deficit countries to the United

States were, in essence, recycled flows from external surplus countries to those deficit countries.

Figure 7 decomposes Europe’s international transactions in debt securities during the 2003-2007

period by the geographical destination of Europe’s outward investment (on the claims side) and

the source of the inflows (on the liabilities side). Outward investment flowed largely to the


side of the balance sheet shown in Figure 6 because the change in Europe’s holdings of foreign sovereign debt over
the period was negligible.
6
  Because the gross two-way flows between Europe and the rest of the world are so large for the “Net loans to
nonbanks and other” and “Net interbank and deposits” categories, we show only their net flows in Figure 6. “Net
loans to nonbanks and other” primarily contains long-term bank loans to nonbank corporations, intercompany loans
between nonbank corporations, and certain transactions by brokers. “Net interbank and deposits,” in addition to
interbank flows and deposits from nonbank residents abroad, also includes estimates of net repurchase agreements
transacted by nonbank corporations, such as brokers. These two categories are derived from and completely cover
the “Other Investment” category of the Financial Accounts of the balance of payments of the euro area and the
United Kingdom. But in order to present these categories on the basis shown in Figure 6, we also used data from the
BIS, individual European countries’ Financial Accounts, and the U.S. Financial Account.
7
  It should be noted that not all of the dollar funding of U.S. ABS by Europeans is captured by these data. In many
cases, U.S. subsidiaries of European institutions, including their off-balance-sheet vehicles, both received dollar-
funding and purchased ABS in the United States or the Caribbean; accordingly, these transactions did not give rise
to the cross-border financial flows with Europe shown in Figure 6. This is particularly true of dollar funding
through commercial paper vehicles.

                                                         9
United States and offshore centers, whereas most of the expansion in Europe’s liabilities is

accounted for by increased holdings of its bonds in the international reserves of other countries

as well as a large residual category, comprising mainly EMEs and offshore centers. Most likely,

both the international reserves and the EME residual category are largely accounted for by

liabilities to the global saving glut economies.

        Hence, the global saving glut countries not only provided financing to the United States

directly through purchases of U.S. assets, but also indirectly through purchases of European

assets that in turn financed purchases of U.S. assets. Moreover, European liabilities to the saving

glut countries were primarily in the form of safe assets such as government bonds and bank

deposits, whereas many European claims on the United States were in the form of ABS and other

structured credit instruments that later proved
                                                              by
                                                                   Stylized   flows
                                                                          riskiness of asset
quite risky. Accordingly, Europeans had

considerable exposure to the subsequent crisis                           U.S.
(as illustrated by the diagram of the “triangular
                                                           Risky                       Safe
trade” in financial assets). Ironically, in this            &
                                                           Safe      Risky
regard Europe was acting as an international                          &
                                                                     Safe
hedge fund, a role that previously had been
                                                                          Safe
attributed to the United States.                         Europe                        Asia/Oil
        To be sure, most U.S. ABS was rated

AAA, and investors both in the United States and abroad believed they were acquiring very safe

assets (Bernanke et al., 2011). But even so, these investors were happy to accept some additional

yield in exchange for investments that were not as gold-plated as U.S. Treasuries, and they




                                                    10
intended to exploit the difference between the cost of short-term deposits and commercial paper,

on the one hand, and the return on U.S. ABS and other corporate debt, on the other.

III.    Motivations for investment flows into the United States

        What motivated the different types of investors we have discussed above to purchase

U.S. assets? This question is interesting in its own right, and also has a bearing on whether

capital inflows contributed to the U.S. housing boom and subsequent bust. To the extent that

these capital inflows were largely exogenous to financial developments within the United

States—that is, the capital was pushed into the country—this strengthens the case that such flows

lowered U.S. interest rates and contributed to the boom and bust cycle. Conversely, if capital

flows were an endogenous reaction to U.S. developments—that is, they were pulled into the

United States by the prospect of high returns—this weakens the case for an independent effect of

foreign inflows.

        Certainly, most observers would characterize the capital inflows from the GSG countries

as being relatively predetermined with respect to U.S. financial market developments in general

and the sub-prime bubble in particular. There is no consensus regarding the causes of the current

account surpluses generated by these countries; candidate explanations include high saving rates,

intentional currency undervaluation, precautionary reserve accumulation, rising commodity

prices, and the desire to acquire the high-quality financial assets created in advanced economies. 8

But there is general agreement that, whatever the sources of these surpluses, the GSG countries

have been investing them in assets regarded as very safe and liquid, with little regard to their rate

of return. Because U.S. Treasuries and Agencies represent the global benchmark for safe, liquid,

assets, acquisitions of these instruments have comprised a large share of the GSG countries’


8
  See, among others, Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber (2003), Gruber and Kamin (2007, 2009), Ju and Wei
(2006), Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rios-Rull (2007), and Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2008).

                                                     11
asset purchases (Blanchard, Giavazzi, and Sa, 2005; Clarida, 2005; Cooper, 2005; Hubbard,

2005). Thus, taking the current account surpluses run by the GSG countries as given, the capital

generated by those surpluses appears to have been pushed toward the United States rather than

pulled by it.

        The factors underlying the sizeable inflows of capital from Europe and other industrial

economies are more varied and complex. Some of the most prominent of these are the

following:

Rising wealth Figure 8 shows that the dollar value of gross European financial wealth

(excluding the volatile equity component) rose sharply during the years prior to the financial

crisis, and more rapidly than that of the United States. The $13.6 trillion rise in European

holdings of debt securities from the end of 2002 to the middle of 2007 meant that, even if the

share of U.S. assets in those assets had remained constant at its end-2002 level of 6 percent,

Europe would have had to acquire an additional $800 billion in U.S. assets.

        To be sure, some of the rise in the dollar value of European wealth reflected valuation

effects from the fall in the dollar rather than accumulation of additional wealth per se; as shown

in Figure 9, when measured as a ratio of GDP, European wealth grew more slowly than it did in

absolute dollar terms. But valuation changes can affect portfolio decisions just as readily as asset

accumulation. Put another way, the fall in the dollar reduced the share of U.S. assets in

European portfolios, so it was natural for them to purchase more of these assets to restore

balance to their portfolios.




                                                12
Falling home bias9 Europeans were not acquiring U.S. assets solely to maintain the shares of

these assets in their portfolios, however. They were also boosting the shares in their portfolio of

external assets in general, and U.S. assets in particular, thereby bringing these shares closer to

the levels consistent with global market capitalizations. The X-axis of Figure 10 plots the

evolution of Europeans’ relative portfolio weight in all externally-issued bonds: A value of 1

indicates that the share of the external bonds in Europe’s portfolio was equal to the share of the

external bonds’ value in the total global value of bonds outstanding (i.e., no home bias); a value

of zero indicates that none of the foreign bonds were being held (complete home bias).10 The y-

axis computes Europeans’ relative portfolio weight in U.S.-issued bonds: Again, a value of 1

indicates that the share of U.S. bonds in European portfolios was equal to their share in global

market capitalization, while a value of zero indicated no U.S. bonds were being held. The figure

indicates that in 2002, Europe started with considerable home bias in its holdings of all external

bonds (a portolio weight of only about .19), and even more home bias against holdings of U.S.

bonds (a portfolio weight of .14). However, by 2007, Europe had reduced its home bias against

both externally-issued bonds in general and U.S. bonds in particular, boosting the shares of both

in its portfolio. Thus, even if the dollar value of Europe’s total securities holdings (both

domestic- and externally- issued) had remained constant between 2002 and 2007, the reduction

in bias against U.S. holdings would have, by itself, accounted for $150 billion in acquisitions of

U.S. debt securities.

Role of ABS It is difficult to determine how much of Europe’s overseas acquisitions during the

2003-2007 period were motivated by the desire to reduce home bias (i.e., internationally


9
  Home bias refers to the extent to which a country’s holdings of external assets as a share of its total portfolio fall
short of the standard CAPM benchmark: the share of total external market capitalization in global market
capitalization.
10
   For a more detailed description of this measure, see Bertaut and Kole (2004).

                                                           13
diversify) in general and how much they were motivated by the demand for specific types of

instruments, such as ABS. Purchases of ABS and other structured products stand out as a

significant component of the buildup in Europe’s cross-border positions, not only vis-à-vis the

United States, as noted earlier, but against all foreign (to Europe) counterparties. Figure 11

shows Europe’s holdings of long-term debt securities. Using TIC data, we can identify

European-held U.S. ABS and additionally estimate ABS issued in other countries, especially

offshore centers. Moreover, the bar segments labeled “U.S. corporate bonds other than ABS”

and “offshore bonds, other than ABS” may in fact contain some ABS, as well as other structured

products and financial-sector debt. All told, though it is difficult to distinguish with certainty

among the different types of instruments held, it is evident that ABS and other structured debt

instruments played an important role in the expansion of external assets in the United Kingdom

and the euro area.

       The role of ABS and other structured debt in financial globalization is illustrated more

starkly in Figure 12. This figure identifies the part of the reduction in “home bias” for a number

of advanced economies between 2003 and 2007 that is attributable to increased acquisitions of

ABS and other structured products. In the figure, reductions in home bias are expressed as

positive values—the red portions of the bars represent the reduction in home bias associated with

expanded holdings of ABS, while the blue portions represent reductions in home bias associated

with acquisitions of other debt securities. For most of the economies examined, ABS accounted

for a substantial part of the change in portfolios associated with a reduction in home bias during

the period.

       One of the reasons why ABS accounted for so much of the expansion of Europe’s cross-

border assets, of course, is that most of the ABS was being issued outside of Europe, so



                                                 14
European investors had perforce to engage in cross-border transactions to acquire it. Figure 13

shows that from 2002 to 2007, the United States accounted for nearly 80 percent of the global

issuance of ABS, whereas Europe accounted for only 15 percent.

         But what accounts for the Europeans’ interest in U.S. ABS? To begin with, the

investment strategies of European financial institutions were not all that different than those of

similar institutions in the United States and other parts of the world. Figure 14 describes the

evolution of the composition of U.S. holdings by U.S. and foreign residents. Between 2003 and

2007, the share of ABS in the portfolios of both European residents (the third set of panels) and

U.S. residents (the fourth set) expanded significantly as the shares allocated to Treasuries and

agencies declined.11 Although the share of European holdings allocated to ABS grew by more

than did the ABS share of U.S. residents’ holdings, this in large part appears to reflect the

Europeans’ greater taste for fixed income securities than for equities; focusing on their fixed-

income portfolios alone, the share of ABS rose by broadly similar margins for Europeans and

U.S. residents. Research by Arteta et al. (2010) also suggests that Europeans did not have a

higher intrinsic demand for ABS. Arteta et al. show that large, global banks were especially

likely to sponsor the vehicles that purchased ABS financed with commercial paper, and most of

those banks were headquartered in Europe; in a regression explaining bank sponsorship of ABS

vehicles, a dummy variable for U.S. banks is not statistically significant.

         Therefore, the factors that explain European interest in ABS were likely similar to those

motivating investors in the United States and elsewhere. Most obviously, ABS was

overwhelmingly rated AAA, and so appeared very safe while offering slightly higher returns

than Treasuries and Agencies (Bernanke et al., 2011). But some observers argue that the demand


11
  Clearly, the global saving glut countries had little interest in these instruments: The share of ABS in their holdings
of U.S. assets remained below 2.5 percent by the end of the period.

                                                          15
for ABS reflected not just a failure to understand the risks, as manifested in misleadingly high

ratings, but also agency problems and flawed risk-management systems within the

intermediation system (Kashap, Rajan, and Stein, 2008; Arteta et al., 2010): Financial industry

participants were well-compensated for acquiring assets earning high returns during good times,

but were not penalized for creating exposure to adverse tail risks during bad times. By the same

token, industry participants faced few disincentives to acquiring substantial short-term liabilities

during periods of high liquidity, even though this made them vulnerable to runs during periods of

market stress. And perhaps banks’ risk-return tradeoff was distorted by implicit or explicit

government guarantees. For example, debt issued by the German Landesbanks prior to 2005

carried explicit state guarantees through 2015 and Arteta et al. (2010) find that Landesbanks

were more likely than other banks to sponsor credit arbitrage vehicles, all else equal.

       Finally, some observers have argued that the regulatory capital charges levied on banks

that set up off-balance-sheet conduits to invest in U.S. ABS were inadequate, which also served

to encourage investments in these assets (Acharya and Schnabl, 2010). Banks incurred little or

no capital charges for the liquidity guarantees provided to conduits. These guarantees

backstopped a highly profitable scheme, ensuring high ratings on the conduits’ ABCP issuance,

and allowing the sponsoring bank to pocket the difference in yields between these short-term

ABCP liabilities and the conduits’ long-term ABS assets. Acharya and Schnabl (2010) argue

that these regulatory incentives applied to banks in both the United States and Europe.

Role of Interest Rates A recurrent issue in discussions of the U.S. subprime housing boom is the

role played by U.S. monetary policy. It is beyond the scope of this paper to address the

contribution of the very low federal funds rate in the 2002-2004 period to the U.S. housing




                                                 16
boom, sub-prime lending, or the securitization process in general. 12 However, it bears asking

whether the evolution of U.S. policy rates influenced the large European acquisitions of U.S.

assets, especially ABS. As shown in the top panel of Figure 15, policy interest rates in the

United States, the United Kingdom, and the euro area all dipped in response to the mild

economic recession early in the decade, but U.S. rates clearly fell the most. According to

standard international economic theory, this differential should have triggered capital flows from

the United States toward Europe. But this theory ignores the fact that most banking activity

avoids exchange rate exposure and seeks to maintain a “matched book” between the currency

denomination of assets and liabilities. The remaining panels of Figure 15 present data on what

may have been a more relevant consideration, the differential between the yield on highly rated

corporate bonds and short-term funding costs, as proxied by the countries’ respective policy

interest rates. By this measure, the profitability of corporate bonds funded by short-term debt

was highest in the United States during the 2002-2004 period, and along with other factors

described above likely played a role—just how large is difficult to say—in encouraging

European financial institutions to simultaneously take on long-term U.S. corporate assets

(including ABS) financed by short-term dollar liabilities.

        By the 2005-2006 period, however, increases in the federal funds rate had sharply

depressed the profitability of U.S. ABS, both in absolute terms and relative to similar measures

for the United Kingdom and the euro area. Even so, creation of subprime loans peaked during

this period (Figure 17), as did European purchases of corporate bonds, including ABS (Figure 2).



12
  For discussions of the role of U.S. interest rates in the runup to the crisis, see, among others, Taylor (2008),
Dokko et.al. (2009), Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko (2010), and Sa, Towbin, and Wieladek (2011). For analysis of
subprime lending and securitization, see, among others, Coval, Jurek, and Stafford (2008), Gerardi, Lehnert,
Sherlund, and Willen (2008), Mayer, Pence, and Sherlund (2009), Acharya and Schnabl (2010), Demyanyk and Van
Hemert (2009), Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein (2008), and Ashcraft, Goldsmith-Pinkham, and Vickery (2010).


                                                       17
Why did Europeans continue to acquire these assets, even after their ex ante return, net of

carrying costs, had diminished so greatly?13 The answers are probably the same as those

explaining why U.S. and other investors more generally continued to buy ABS: Strong housing

price appreciation had substantially held down delinquencies on subprime mortgages, allowing

ABS to develop a track record of dependability and an illusion of safety (Gerardi, Lehnert,

Sherlund, and Willen, 2008; Demyanyk and van Hemert, 2009). Analysts deeply discounted the

possibility of a decline in housing prices, and thus assumed subprime mortgages would continue

to be serviced (Gerardi, Lehnert, Sherlund, and Willen, 2008). Low yields and low spreads on

other assets reduced the incentives for investors to shift their portfolios toward other investments.

And, more generally, a culture of risk-taking had evolved among banks that centered importantly

around securitization, and the credit boom developed a momentum of its own in this context

(Diamond and Rajan, 2008; Demanyanyk and van Hemert, 2009).

Summing up

        Putting the pieces together, growing European demand for U.S. assets (fed by rising

wealth, increasing international diversification, a new global bank business model, and

regulatory incentives) combined with rising supply of U.S. ABS (fed in part by the sub-prime

housing boom and financial industry incentives) to produce sizeable European acquisitions of

these instruments. To return to the question posed at the beginning of the section, in explaining

the European capital flows into the United States, both push and pull factors appear to have been

at work.

IV.      Impact of capital inflows on U.S. interest rates—data and reduced-form estimates


13
  Not only did the differential between promised returns and funding costs narrow, but evidence suggests that
mortgage underwriting standards slipped and assets with the same credit rating became riskier during this period
(Demyanyk and van Hemert, 2009; Ashcraft, Goldsmith-Pinkham, and Vickery, 2010; Mayer, Pence, and Sherlund,
2009).

                                                      18
        How might purchases of Treasuries and Agencies by the global saving glut (GSG)

countries and purchases of asset-backed securities (ABS) by Europeans and others have affected

financial conditions in the United States? In particular, how might they have affected yields on

asset-backed securities which, in turn, would have affected the costs of mortgage borrowing by

households and thus influenced the evolution of the housing bubble? To address this question,

we adopt two distinct but related strategies: First, in this section, following on Warnock and

Warnock (2009), we estimate reduced-form models that link U.S. interest rates to, among other

factors, foreign capital inflows. Second, in Section V below, we develop and simulate a highly

stylized portfolio balance model in order to illustrate how different types of capital inflows might

have affected yields on different types of U.S. assets. Before describing this work, however, we

first review the salient trends in U.S. interest rates in the years before the financial crisis.

IV.1 Trends in U.S. interest rates

    The top left panel of Figure 16 illustrates the signal development of this period, the low level

of long-term Treasury security yields, which remained relatively contained even as the federal

funds rate was raised from 1 percent to an eventual level of 5¼ percent. Greenspan (2005)

famously referred to this development as a "conundrum," and various studies showed that bond

yields, both in the United States and abroad, fell below levels that were consistent with standard

macro fundamentals such as inflation, growth in gross domestic product, and fiscal balances

(Rudebusch, Swanson, and Wu, 2006; Gruber and Kamin, 2009). Explanations for the weakness

in Treasury yields during this period include declines in risk premiums (perhaps, at least initially,

associated with the "great moderation") and enhanced demands for long-term assets by pension

funds and other institutional investors. In addition, observers have come to attribute at least part




                                                   19
of the weakness of Treasury yields to the subject of this paper, the heavy purchases of securities

by foreigners.

     As is evident in the remaining panels of Figure 16, during this period interest rates on

Agency (Fannie Mae) MBS , AAA corporate bonds, and conforming (Agency-guaranteed) 30-

year fixed mortgages also fell significantly. While part of the weakness in these rates obviously

was due to the low Treasury yields, these rates declined even more than Treasury yields, so that

the spread of these different yields over Treasuries also edged down over the period,

notwithstanding a sharp step-up in the pace of issuance of these assts.14 Accordingly, these

declines in yields may have reflected more than just spillovers from falling Treasury yields—

they may also have reflected increases in demand for the non-Treasury securities themselves.

     These developments were also evident in the markets most relevant to the U.S. subprime

housing boom. The top left panel of Figure 17 displays rates on subprime mortgages (shown

here as the origination rates on subprime ARMs), which declined roughly 250 basis points from

2000 through 2006; the spread between subprime ARMs and conforming (Agency-guaranteed)

ARMs moved down as well. This decline in subprime spreads is quite remarkable, given the

explosion in the number of subprime loans issued over this period: subprime originations grew

nearly 20-fold, far faster than issuance of Treasuries. The bottom panels show similar

developments for Alt-A ARMs; here, there is a more pronounced decline in the spread over

conforming ARMs, even in the face of a substantial increase in Alt-A issuance.

IV.2 Reduced-form estimates of the effect of capital inflows on U.S. interest rates

        To gauge the impact of capital inflows on U.S. interest rates, we start by building on the

work of Warnock and Warnock (2009) and examining the effect of foreign official purchases of


14
   For example, the outstanding stock of MBS and unsecuritized mortgages rose from $6.4 trillion at the end of 2002
to $11.1 trillion in 2007.

                                                        20
U.S. Treasuries on Treasury yields. Most of these purchases came from countries associated

with the global saving glut, so they could reasonably be described as exogenous to the Treasury

yields themselves—China and other Asian countries were intervening to buy dollars in foreign

exchange markets and channeling the proceeds into U.S. Treasuries and Agencies in a fairly

stable allocation. To estimate the effect of these purchases, we use a variant of the single

equation OLS specification in Beltran, Kretchmer, Marquez, Thomas (2011), which reformulates

the Warnock and Warnock model as an AR(1) after extensive testing of alternative

specifications:15




       : 10-year U.S. Treasury yield, nominal

     : expected GDP growth (blue chip)

        : expected inflation rate (10-year ahead Michigan survey)

      : risk premium (36-month standard deviation of changes in Treasury yields)

       : federal funds rate

     : foreign official holdings of U.S. Treasuries and Agencies

     : total outstanding marketable U.S. Treasuries and Agencies




15
   Our specification differs from that employed by Warnock and Warnock (2009) in a number of ways. First, it
introduces a lagged dependent variable, which is highly significant and required to help control serial correlation of
the error term. Second, it uses the stock of foreign official holdings as the dependent variable rather than the flow of
purchases employed by Warnock and Warnock (2009); this conforms more closely with the view embodied in
portfolio balance models that it is the stock rather than the flow of asset supplies and demands that best explains
asset prices. One concern with using a stock formulation of foreign holdings is that they trend upward over time and
their estimated negative impact on interest rates is spuriously reflecting a downward trend in interest rates for other
reasons. However, inclusion of a time trend in the regressions shown in Table 2 (not shown) does not reduce the
estimated effect of the foreign holdings variable.

                                                          21
       The equation is estimated using quarterly data for the period 1990 through the first half of

2007. The first column of Table 2 presents the estimation results. The foreign official share of

Treasuries and Agencies significantly decreases Treasury yields, just as in Warnock and

Warnock (2009). The long-run effect of a one percentage point rise in this share is to depress

Treasury yields by 7 basis points. Evaluated using the level of outstanding Treasuries and

agencies in June 2007, this implies that $100 billion in foreign official inflows depresses

Treasury yields by 11 basis points. The table below compares this estimated effect of Treasury

purchases with that derived from other studies, including some also focusing on the effect of

foreign capital inflows on yields (Warnock and Warnock, 2009, Beltran et al., 2011, and

Rudebusch, Swanson, and Wu, 2006) and others focusing on the effects of the Federal Reserve’s

recent asset purchase programs (Gagnon et al., 2010, D’Amico and King, 2010, and Hamilton

and Wu, 2010). The estimated effects in these studies are quite dispersed, and our own estimates

seem to fall squarely within their range.


                              Study                           Impact of $100 billion in U.S.
                                                              Treasury/Agency purchases on
                                                              Treasury yields (basis points)
        Bertaut et al. (2011): Reduced form regression                     -11
        Bertaut et al. (2011): Portfolio balance model                     -15
        (section V, below)
        Warnock and Warnock (2009)                                      -15 to -32
        Beltran et al. (2011)                                              -49
        Rudebusch, Swanson and Wu (2006)                           no significant effect
        Gagnon et al.(2010)                                                 -6
        D’Amico and King (2011)                                            -10
        Hamilton and Wu (2010)                                              -4

       Taking our own estimates and applying them to the roughly $1 trillion in Treasury and

Agency acquisitions by the GSG countries during the 2003-2007 period, this suggests that those

inflows lowered U.S. Treasury yields by 110 basis points. But to what extent did these declines


                                                22
spill over into other interest rates such as those on housing mortgages? Unfortunately, foreign

holdings of ABS are only available beginning in 2002; this implies only 20 quarterly

observations of our key independent variable, too few to generate reliable estimation results.

Moreover, the markets for subprime loans and for private label MBS did not achieve substantial

depth and liquidity until the 2000s.

        However, we can gain some sense of the likely spillovers of foreign purchases of U.S.

Treasuries and Agencies into other markets by estimating the effect of these purchases on the

yields shown in Figure 16: corporate AAA, Fannie Mae guaranteed MBS, and 30-year fixed-rate

conforming mortgages. The results of these estimations are also shown in Table 2. They

confirm that foreign official purchases of Treasuries and Agencies had significant spillovers to

other markets, significantly depressing yields on Fannie Mae MBS, AAA corporate bonds, and

fixed-rate mortgages. Moreover, the size of these effects appears similar to, and usually larger

than, the effects on U.S. Treasury yields themselves, suggesting a great deal of substitutability

between Treasuries and other bonds.16

        All told, these results suggest that inflows from the GSG countries depressed other

private yields by well upwards of 100 basis points by 2007. However, they do not shed light on

the size of the additional impact on yields of direct purchases of ABS and other corporate debt

securities by Europe and other non-GSG countries. This impact is more difficult to estimate, as,

unlike foreign official inflows, European purchases of U.S. corporate securities are likely to be

endogenous with respect to the yields on those assets. For this reason, we instead examine

illustrative simulations of a stylized portfolio balance model in Section V below.




16
  Warnock and Warnock (2009) look at the effect of all foreign purchases (both private and official) of Treasuries
and Agencies on the yields on corporate bonds and mortgage interest rates, and get similar results.

                                                        23
         However, to shed at least some light on this issue before describing those simulations, the

last column of Table 2 presents a regression of AAA corporate yields on foreign acquisitions of

corporate bonds. The coefficient on this variable is significant, and implies that the 7.5

percentage point rise in the foreign share of U.S. corporate bonds outstanding between 2002 and

June 2007 depressed AAA corporate yields by 95 basis points. Moreover, the coefficient is

likely biased upwards (less negative) by the endogeneity problem, as feedback from shocks to

corporate bond yields should lead to increases in the same direction of foreign purchases of these

bonds.

V.       A calibrated portfolio balance model of asset demands and supplies

         To complement the econometric results discussed above and to develop more intuition

into the ways in which foreign capital flows may have affected U.S. interest rates, this section

considers a stylized portfolio balance framework with three assets: (1) bank deposits; (2) U.S.

Treasuries and Agencies (which, for convenience, we will refer to as “Treasuries”); and (3) U.S.

corporate debt, including the focus of our interest, asset-backed securities (ABS).17 These assets

are demanded by residents of three different economies: the United States, Europe, and the

global saving glut countries (referred to, again for convenience, as “China”). All assets are

freely exchanged between investor countries at fixed exchange rates (admittedly a more plausible

assumption for China than for the United States and Europe).

         We assume asset supplies are exogenous, so that reductions in interest rates caused by

capital inflows do not elicit additional issuance of securities. This assumption is unavoidable,


17
   We model the broader category of corporate debt rather than its narrower ABS sub-component for a number of
reasons. First, most ABS received AAA credit ratings and, before the crisis, were perceived to be comparable in
quality to other highly-rated corporate securities. Second, as noted earlier, much of the non-ABS corporate debt
held by European investors was in the form of financial debt, floating rate notes, and structured products that were
similar in many respects to ABS. Finally, as noted in section IV, we do not have sufficiently long time series on
either holdings of ABS or their yields to permit reliable estimation of a demand equation for ABS, whereas we do
have such data for corporate debt more generally.

                                                         24
because tenuous as are our estimates of the parameters of asset demands (see below), even less

information is available on the parameters of asset supply. As a consequence, our analysis

focuses on comparing the notional downward pressures on U.S. interest rates posed by different

types of capital inflows; the actual downward pressures may have been somewhat less, as they

would have been moderated by increased securities issuance in response to the lower interest

rates.

V.1 Basic Framework

         Let, b stand for bank deposits, t for Treasury securities, and c for U.S. corporate debt,

including ABS. In this framework, demand for each asset A in each country as a share of wealth

W takes the form:




                                                                      !




Demand for each asset thus consists of an intercept term, and then is positively related to its own

interest rate and negatively to the interest rates on other assets. Our model will solve for the

various changes in interest rates that result from different configurations of investor preferences.

         The assumptions regarding the demand curve parameters used in our analysis are listed in

the table below. Details of their derivation are described in Appendix A. In short, these

parameters were derived from IV estimations of the demand system described in equation (2)

above, applied to U.S. and European financial data over the period 1980 to 2007. However, for a

number of reasons, these parameters (and the model incorporating them) should be regarded as

illustrative rather than a precise representation of actual asset demands. First, asset demand


                                                  25
systems are notoriously difficult to estimate, and we had few previous results to draw upon.

Second, one of the reasons for the sparseness of previous results is the lack of suitable

instruments to distinguish shocks to asset demands from those to asset supplies; we used lagged

values of the variables in the model as instruments, but it is unclear how effective this approach

really is. Third, in reality investor portfolios are comprised of other assets besides deposits,

Treasuries, and U.S. corporate debt, and this also compromises the accuracy of the parameters of

interest. The results discussed in this section use our “baseline” simulation coefficients; in Table

3, we also show the sensitivity of the results to somewhat higher and lower elasticities calibrated

from the estimated standard errors of the portfolio balance model.

       With these caveats in mind, a number of features of the parameters we use are worth

highlighting. First, for China, we assume, consistent with much anecdotal evidence and

observed behavior, that their asset demands are invariant with respect to interest rates, so their

parameters are all set equal to zero. Second, we assume identical demand sensitivities for the

United States and Europe, both for convenience and because the composition of their U.S. asset

holdings, shown in Figure 14, is indeed fairly similar.

       The parameters shown below represent the change in the share of a given asset in

investors’ wealth, expressed in decimal form, resulting from a 1 percentage point rise in a given

interest rate, all else equal. For example, a 1 percentage point rise in Treasury yields (say, from

4 percent to 5 percent), all else equal, would induce a rise in the ratio of Treasuries holdings to

total wealth of .36 (say, from .30 to .66) and a corresponding fall in the ratio of corporate debt to

wealth of .54 (say, from .64 to .10). These appear to be huge swings in asset shares for

comparatively modest changes in interest rates. However, as indicated in Figure 16, interest

rates on Treasuries and corporate debt tend to move up and down together. Therefore, it would



                                                 26
be unusual for Treasury yields to move 1 percentage point without some accompanying

movement in corporate yields, which would moderate the response of portfolio shares.

       Finally, the parameters suggest very little substitutability between either Treasuries or

corporate debt, on the one hand, and deposits, on the other. By implication, the parameters

suggest more substitutability between Treasuries and corporate debt, consistent with the results

of the reduced-form equations described in Section IV.2


                  Portfolio Balance Model Coefficient Settings: Sensitivity of Asset
                            Demands to Interest Rates on Different Assets

                                                             Corporate
                                           Treasuries &    Bonds (including
                                             Agencies           ABS)              Deposits
                                                         Baseline Sensitivities
                                                                  US
             Treasury & Agency demand                 0.37             -0.28             -0.09
             Corporate Demand                        -0.55              0.46              0.10
                                                                Europe
             Treasury & Agency demand                 0.37             -0.28             -0.09
             Corporate Demand                        -0.55              0.46              0.10
                                                                China
             Treasury & Agency demand                    0                 0                 0
             Corporate Demand                            0                 0                 0
                                                                Global
             Treasury & Agency demand                 0.35             -0.27             -0.08
             Corporate Demand                        -0.53              0.44              0.09

       Once the parameters of the model are set, global demand can then be expressed as the

averages of demands for the individual assets in each country, weighted by the shares of each

country’s wealth in global wealth. In equilibrium, the global demand for each asset must equal

the fixed asset supply. We set initial stocks of assets and levels of country wealth to be roughly

comparable to levels of bank deposits held in Europe and the United States, Treasury (and

Agency) securities held by the public, and U.S. corporate debt outstanding in 2003. In our



                                                27
simplified version, corporate debt, including ABS, is held exclusively by the United States and

Europe.

       Because the securities in our model include only those issued by the United States (and

given the home bias in portfolios), the United States has roughly twice the financial wealth of

Europe. Europe holds most of its wealth in deposits; its holdings of $400 billion in corporate

debt and $1 trillion in Treasuries are roughly comparable to the stocks of U.S. corporate debt and

Treasuries and Agencies actually held by Europe in 2003. “China” has wealth of $1,000 billion,

which is roughly the size of the combined foreign exchange reserves of Asian and OPEC

countries in 2003. “China’s” wealth is held in equal amounts of deposits and Treasuries (and

Agencies); the $500 billion assumption for Treasuries is roughly the stock of U.S. Treasuries and

Agencies held collectively by emerging Asia/OPEC in 2003.


                  Initial Asset Stocks and Country Wealth Allocations
                   Total (bill $)      United States         Europe            China
Deposits                      11750                  5425               5825            500
Corporate debt                 5400                  5000                400              0
Treasuries                     8000                  6500               1000            500
Total Wealth                  25150                 16925               7225           1000


       Expressed in portfolio share terms, asset holdings in each country are depicted in the

table below. The b0 coefficients in the asset demand equations depicted in equation (2) are
                                                    "#
calculated residually, as the value that sets the        term, for example, equal to
                                                    $


       .




                                                    28
                                     Initial Portfolio Shares
                                United States      Europe             China
             Deposits                        .32                .81                  .5
             Corporate debt                  .30                .06                  0
             Treasuries                      .38                .14                  .5


       Finally, because the three demand equations are not independent of each other—the asset

demands for each country must sum to its total wealth—the system as specified is under-

determined: there are not enough independent equations to determine all three interest rates.

Accordingly, we assume the interest rate on bank deposits is fixed. This is not implausible, as

this rate likely closely follows the short-term policy rate set by the monetary authority, and does

not vary greatly with movements in longer term rates. Conversely, the interest rates on

Treasuries and ABS are more volatile and less anchored by the policy rate.

V.2 Simulation exercises

       With this framework, we consider the following comparative static exercises. First, to

evaluate the impact of the global saving glut, we analyze the impact on yields of a step-up in

Chinese purchases of Treasuries. Second, as one measure of the effect of capital inflows from

the advanced economies, we perform a simulation in which European investors boost the desired

share of U.S. ABS in their portfolios; this corresponds to the case, described in Section III above,

in which capital flows were pushed into the U.S. financial system. Third, as an alternative

measure of the role of foreign advanced-economy investors in the evolution of U.S. interest

rates, we consider a scenario in which foreign investors’ demand curve for U.S. ABS and other

corporate debt is unchanged, but they purchase more of it as the supply of ABS by U.S. residents




                                                29
increases; this corresponds to the possibility discussed in Section III that capital inflows from

Europe and elsewhere were pulled into the country by the housing boom.

       The implications of these simulations for Treasury and ABS yields are shown in Table 3.

The first set of columns is based on the baseline sensitivities shown above. The remaining two

sets of columns examine the effects on yields when the sensitivity of asset demands to interest

rates are somewhat higher and lower, respectively, than the baseline.

Simulation 1: Greater Chinese Treasuries purchases Inflows from the saving glut countries are

modeled as an exogenous increase in China’s wealth, matched—consistent with the external

surpluses being run against the United States—by an equally-sized rundown of deposits held by

the United States. China’s external investments rise from $1 trillion to $3 trillion, in the

neighborhood of the increase in foreign exchange reserves of the saving glut countries from 2003

through 2006. With China’s portfolio shares remaining constant at ½ for deposits and ½ for

Treasuries (as they are assumed to be invariant with respect to interest rates), the shock leads to

$1 trillion in additional acquisitions of U.S. Treasuries and Agencies, leading the share of these

securities outstanding held by China to rise to 17 percent and the share held by all foreigners to

rise to nearly 30 percent.

       The increased demand from China generates a decline in the equilibrium interest on

Treasuries of 146 basis points. Because Treasuries and ABS are so substitutable in the portfolios

of U.S. and European investors, the ABS yield (equivalently, the yield on corporate debt)

declines by 168 basis points. These estimates of the effects of inflows from the GSG countries

are just a little larger than those derived from the reduced-form regressions described in Section

IV, which implied impacts of 110 basis points and 140 basis points, respectively. That makes

sense, since as noted above, these model-based estimates assume that asset supplies are



                                                 30
unchanged when interest rates decline. In reality, asset supplies might be expected to increase in

response to lower rates, thus attenuating the decline in these rates. The reduced-form estimates

shown in Section IV should reflect those endogenous responses, thus making them a little

smaller than our model-based estimates.

Simulation 2: Greater European demands for U.S. ABS Europe did not run current account

surpluses in aggregate to acquire U.S. ABS, but rather took in safe deposits from other countries

to finance the ABS. We model this activity in Simulation 2a as a reduction in European demand

for deposits (achieved by reducing the b0 coefficient in Europe’s demand curve for deposits)

coupled with an increase in their demand for ABS (achieved by increasing the b0 coefficient in

Europe’s demand curve for U.S. corporate bonds). This boosts the share of total U.S. corporate

debt in European portfolios from 6 percent to 16 percent of European wealth, similar in

magnitude to the actual $475 billion rise in European holdings of U.S. ABS. The higher demand

for ABS leads to a fall in ABS yields of 64 basis points; moreover, because Treasuries and ABS

are substitutable in investor portfolios as noted above, Treasury yields decline by 49 basis points.

       A number of aspects of these results are worth highlighting. First, they suggest that

capital inflows from European countries into U.S. ABS generated material declines in U.S.

interest rates. Second, they show how gross capital flows from Europe to the United States could

have depressed yields on U.S. Treasuries and ABS, even if fully financed by other types of gross

flows running from the United States to Europe. To some extent, of course, this result was

“baked in the cake,” since in our model the deposit interest rate is fixed. But even if the deposit

rate had been endogenous in the model and rose in response to the decline in European demand

for deposits, it would have had little effect on long-term Treasury and ABS yields, since deposits

are not very substitutable with longer term Treasuries or ABS. This low degree of



                                                 31
substitutability is well-confirmed by our estimates of asset demand equations described in

Appendix A.

       Notably, the effect of European acquisitions of ABS on ABS and Treasury yields is much

smaller than the effect of inflows from the global saving glut countries. This in large part

reflects the fact that European acquisitions of U.S. ABS, at $475 billion, were much smaller than

GSG purchases of U.S. Treasuries and Agencies. Simulation 2b looks at the effect of a switch in

European asset demands sufficient to match Europe’s purchases of all types of U.S. corporate

debt, including but not limited to ABS, during the leadup to the financial crisis. Notably, this

generates declines in yields very similar to those in Simulation 1.

Simulation 3: Greater supply of U.S. ABS Third, and finally, we analyze an alternative scenario

in which the U.S. housing boom is driven by factors internal to the U.S. housing and financial

markets themselves rather than by foreign demand for assets. Accordingly, we present a

“supply” shock, modeled as an exogenous increase in the quantity of ABS in the market. We

then ask: even without an exogenous increase in foreign demand for ABS, did the willingness of

European investors to absorb new supply materially reduce the extent to which yields on ABS

would have risen?

       In Simulation 3a, we boost the quantity of ABS by 25 percent (initially distributed on a

pro rata basis to U.S. and European investors, based on their initial holdings), comparable to its

actual rise during the 2003-2007 period. This leads to an increase in the share of U.S. corporate

debt in total wealth at the expense of the shares of both Treasuries and deposits. As expected,

this shock generates a pronounced increase in the ABS yield—by roughly 100 basis points—to

persuade U.S. and European investors to absorb the excess ABS supply. Because of the

substitutability between ABS and Treasuries, Treasury yields also rise, by about 70 basis points.



                                                32
        In Simulation 3b, we couple the rise in the supply of ABS with the assumption that

Europe will absorb none of the increase in its supply. (Specifically, we “zero out” the

parameters representing the sensitivity of Europe’s demand for assets to changes in interest rates,

so its initial holdings of deposits, Treasuries, and ABS remain unchanged.) In this scenario, U.S.

investors must absorb the entirety of the rise in ABS supply, and yields rise further, with a total

increase of 141 basis points for ABS and 97 basis points for Treasuries.

         This experiment highlights two key features of the global capital market in the leadup to

the financial crisis. First, in the face of very large increases in the supply of these assets,

European investors likely played a critical role in keeping yields on ABS and Treasuries from

rising. Second, in the first experiment (Simulation 3a), Europe absorbs about 10 percent of the

increase in the ABS outstanding—thus, even without a shock to Europe’s asset demand curves,

the increase in ABS supply leads to gross capital inflows from Europe to the United States. This

suggests that at least some of the actual capital flows from Europe to the United States were

pulled rather than pushed, but exactly how much is difficult to determine.

VI.     Concluding Remarks

        This paper explores the channels through which foreign demand for U.S. assets may have

contributed to declines in interest rates and the evolution of the U.S. housing bubble. We

distinguish between two prominent sources of foreign demand: demand for Treasuries and

Agencies from China, OPEC, and other emerging market Asian economies (the “global saving

glut,” or GSG, countries), on the one hand, and European demand for U.S. corporate debt,

particularly private-label asset-backed securities (ABS), on the other. From 2003 through mid-

2007, GSG country acquisitions of Treasuries and Agencies totaled roughly $1 trillion, but

European acquisitions of U.S. corporate debt amounted to even more at $1.25 trillion, of which



                                                  33
nearly $500 billion consisted of private-label ABS and some of the remainder was comprised of

other structured investment products similar to ABS.

       The capital flows from the GSG countries and from Europe were financed in very

different ways. Acquisitions of U.S. assets from the saving glut countries represented the

disposition of their sizable current account surpluses. In contrast, Europe had roughly balanced

current accounts, and thus financed its acquisitions through a considerable expansion in external

liabilities. Taken together, the cross border financial flows between the United States, Europe,

and the GSG countries represented a global “triangular trade” in financial assets. Because

Europe was financing what were, at least ex post, risky investments in the United States through,

in part, issuance of safe bank deposits and sovereign debt, it was acting as a hedge fund in the

global securities market, a role previously accorded mainly to the United States.

       We develop a simple, stylized portfolio balance model to compare the effects on Treasury

and ABS yields of capital inflows from the GSG countries and from Europe. While mainly

illustrative, the model’s predictions of the effects of capital flows on bond yields are quite

consistent with both our own reduced-form econometric estimates and those of other analysts.

The model suggests that in the years leading up to the crisis, purchases of U.S. Treasuries and

Agencies by the GSG countries depressed 10-year Treasury yields on the order of 140 basis

points, and the spillovers from this outcome likely lowered ABS yields by some 160 basis points.

The model also indicates that, even though much of Europe’s acquisitions of U.S. ABS were

financed by “reverse” flows of U.S. investments into European liabilities, the effect of this

exchange was to lower ABS yields by about 60 basis points and Treasury yields by 50 basis

points; if we include the effect of European purchases of non-ABS U.S. corporate debt as well,

these declines deepen to -160 basis points and -130 basis points, respectively. The combined



                                                 34
effect of all of these inflows on U.S. interest rates would have been huge, but of course actual

declines in these yields were much smaller, as the supplies of the assets to the market rose

substantially as well.

       Europe’s acquisitions of ABS did not exclusively reflect an exogenous boost to European

demand for these assets that pushed capital into the U.S. financial system. Although that was

likely the case in part, as European wealth expanded rapidly, home bias diminished, and a

number of regulatory and financial factors encouraged Europeans to buy U.S. ABS, at least some

of these acquisitions were probably caused by the expansion of the supply of ABS, which would

have pulled in capital from Europe in response to attractive returns. But even in that latter case,

European investors would have played a significant role by absorbing part of the increased

supply of ABS and thus containing any rise in ABS yields that otherwise would have occurred.

       In conclusion, it is clear that capital inflows from both the global saving glut countries

and the advanced economies, especially Europe, helped depress U.S. interest rates during the

middle of the past decade. A critical question not addressed in this paper is the extent to which

these declines in interest rates exacerbated the housing bubble and other financial vulnerabilities.

This remains a very open issue, and should represent the focus of additional research.




                                                 35
References


Albertus, Jim, Carol Bertaut, and Stephanie Curcuru “Has the Crisis Changed Foreign Positions
in U.S. Securities?” Federal Reserve staff working paper 2010.
Acharya, Viral and Philipp Schnabl (2010), “Do Global Banks Spread Global Imbalances? The
Case of Asset-Backed Commercial Paper During the Financial Crisis of 2007-09,” NBER
Working Paper #16079, June.
Arteta, Carlos, Mark Carey, Ricardo Correa, and Jason Kotter (2010), “Revenge of the
Steamroller: ABCP as a Window on Risk Choices,” unpublished working paper, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of International Finance, July 27.

Ashcraft, Adam, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, and James Vickery (2010), “MBS ratings and the
mortgage credit boom,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Reports 449.
Baba, Naohiko, Robert N. McCauley, and Srichander Ramaswamy (2009), “US Dollar Money
Market Funds and Non-US Banks,” BIS Quarterly Review, March.
Beltran, Daniel, Maxwell Kretchmer, Jaime Marquez, and Charles Thomas (2011), “Foreign
Official Holdings of U.S. Treasuries and U.S. Interest Rates: A Lens on the ‘Savings Glut’,”
Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board, May.
Beltran, Daniel, Laurie Pounder, and Charles Thomas (2008), “Foreign Exposure to Asset-
Backed Securities of U.S. Origin,” International Finance Discussion Paper No. 939, August.

Bernanke, Ben S. (2005), “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit.” The
Sandburg Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, VA, March 10.

Bernanke, Ben S. (2007), “Global Imbalances: Recent Developments and Prospects.” The
Bundesbank Lecture, Berlin, Germany, September 11.

Bernanke, Ben S. (2009), “Financial Reform to Address Systemic Risk,” Speech at Council of
Foreign Relations, Washington, DC, March 10.
Bernanke, Ben S., Carol Bertaut, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, and Steven Kamin (2011),
“International Capital Flows and the Return to Safe Assets in the United States, 2003-2007,”
Banque de France Financial Stability Review, February, pp. 13-26.
Bertaut, C.C. and Linda S. Kole (2004), “What Makes Investors Over or Underweight?
Explaining Investor Appetites for Foreign Equities,” International Finance Discussion Paper No.
819, September.

Bertaut, Carol, William Griever, and Ralph Tryon (2006), “Understanding U.S. Cross-Border
Securities Data,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bulletin,
May.



                                               36
Bini Smaghi, Lorenzo (2008), “The Financial Crisis and Global Imbalances: Two Sides of the
Same Coin,” Speech at the Asia Europe Economic Forum, Beijing, December 9.

Blanchard, Olivier, Francesco Giavazzi, and Filipa Sa (2005). “The U.S. Current Account and
the Dollar, “NBER Working Paper Series 11137. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of
Economic Research, February.


Borio, Claudio and Piti Diyatat (2010), “Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis:
Understanding the Role of International Finance,” Asian Economic Policy Review, 5, pp. 198-
216.

Brender, Anton, and Florence Pisani (2010). Global Imbalances and the Collapse of Globalized
Finance. Brussels: Centre for European Policy Studies.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2008). “An Equilibrium
Model of ‘Global Imbalances’ and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic Review,
vol. 98 (1), pp. 358–93.

Caballero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2009), “Financial Crash,
Commodity Prices, and Global Imbalances,” Working paper, November.


Caballero, Ricardo (2009), “The ‘Other’ Imbalance and the Financial Crisis,” NBER Working
Paper #15636, January.

Clarida, Richard H. (2005). “Japan, China, and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Cato
Journal, vol. 25 (1), pp. 111–14.

Cooper, Richard N. (2005). “Living with Global Imbalances: A Contrarian View,” Peterson
Institute for International Economics Policy Brief PB05-3. Washington: Peterson
Institute for International Economics, November.

Coval, Joshua, Jakub Jurek and Erik Stafford (2009), “The Economics of Structured Finance,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol 23(1), pp.3-25.

D’Amico, Stefania and Thomas B. Kamin (2011), “Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale
Treasury Purchases,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Finance and
Economics Discussion Series, April (revised, original draft September 2010).

Demyanyk, Yuliya and Otto Van Hemert (2009), “Understanding the Subprime Mortgage
Crisis,” The Review of Financial Studies, vol 24(6) June, pp. 1848-1880.

Diamond, Douglas W. and Raghuram G. Rajan (2009), “The Credit Crisis: Conjectures about
Causes and Remedies,” American Economic Review, vol. 99(2), pp.606-610, May.

Dokko, Jane, Brian Doyle, Michael T. Kiley, Jinill Kim, Shane Sherlund, Jae Sim, and Skander
Van den Heuvel (2009). “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble,” Finance and Economics
                                              37
Discussion Series 2009-49. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
December.

Dooley, Michael P., David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber (2003), “An Essay on the Revived
Bretton Woods System,” NBER Working Paper 9971, September.

Ehrmann, Michael, Marcel Fratzscher, and Arnaud Mehle. "What has made the current financial
crisis truly global?" working paper, May 2009.

Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julioe Remarche, and Brian Sack (2010), “Large-Scale Asset
Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff
Report No. 441, March.
Gerardi, Kristopher, Andreas Lehnert, Shane Sherlund, and Paul Willen (2008). “Making Sense
of the Subprime Crises,” in Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2 (Fall). Washington:
Brookings Institution Press, pp. 69–145.
Gleaser, Edward L., Joshua D. Gottlieb, and Joseph Gyourko (2010), “Can Cheap Credit Explain
the Housing Boom?” NBER Working Paper 16230, July.

Greenspan, Alan (2005). “Monetary Policy Report to the Congress,” statement before the
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, February 16.
Gruber, Joseph and Steven B. Kamin (2007), ''Explaining the Global Pattern of Current Account
Imbalances,'' Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 26 (June), pp. 500-522.
Gruber, Joseph and Steven B. Kamin (2009), ''Do Differences in Financial Development Explain
the Global Pattern of Current Account Imbalances?'' Review of International Economics, vol. 17
(September), pp. 667-688.
Hamilton, James D. and Jing (Cynthia) Wu. “The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy
Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment,” working paper, February 2011.
Hubbard, R. Glenn. (2005). “A Paradox of Interest,” Wall Street Journal, June 23.
Jagannathan, Ravi, Mudit Kapoor and Ernst Schaumburg (2009), “Why Are We in a Recession?
The Financial Crisis is the Symptom no the Disease!” Working paper, August.

Johnson, Karen, “Gross or Net International Financial Flows: Understanding the Financial
Crisis,” Council on Foreign Relations Working Paper, July 2009.

Ju, J. and Wei, S-J. (2006), “A solution to two paradoxes of international capital flows,” IMF
Working Paper WP/06/178.

Kamin, Steven B. and Laurie Pounder DeMarco (2010), “How Did a Domestic Housing Slump
Turn into a Global Financial Crisis?” International Finance Discussion Paper No. 994, January.




                                               38
Kashyap, Anil K., Raghuram G. Rajan, and Jeremy C. Stein (2008), “Rethinking Capital
Regulation,” in Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System, Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City, 431-471.

Mayer, Christopher, Karen Pence, and Shane M. Sherlund (2009). “The Rise in Mortgage
Defaults,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 23 (Winter), pp. 27–50.

McGuire, Patrick and Goetz von Peter (2009), “The US Dollar Shortage in Global Banking,” BIS
Quarterly Review, March.
Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull (2007). “Financial
Integration, Financial Deepness, and Global Imbalances,” NBER Working Paper Series
12909. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff (2009), “Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis:
Products of Common Causes,” Paper presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Asia Economic Policy Conference, Santa Barbara, CA October 18-20.
Rajan, Raghuram (2010), Fault Lines, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.

Rose, Andrew and Mark Spiegel (2009): "Cross-Country Causes and Consequences of the 2008
Crisis: International Linkages and American Exposure," NBER Working Paper 15358,
September 2009.
Rudebusch, Glenn D., Eric T. Swanson, and Tao Wu (2006), “The Bond-Yield ‘Conundrum’
from a Macro-Finance Perspective,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper
2006-16, May.
Sa, Filipa, Pascal Towbin, and Tomasz Wieladek (2011), “Low interest rates and housing
booms: the role of capital inflows, monetary policy, and financial innovation,” Bank of England
Working Paper No. 411, February 2011.
Taylor, John B. (2009), “The Financial Crisis and the Policy Responses: An Empirical Analysis
of What Went Wrong,” NBER Working Paper 14631, January.
Warnock, Frank and Veronica Warnock (2009): “International Capital Flows and U.S. Interest
Rates. Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 28, pp. 903-919.




                                              39
Appendix A: Estimation of Portfolio Balance Model

         As noted in the text, the model consists of three demand equations for assets A as a share
of total wealth W, reproduced below. b stands for bank deposits, t for Treasury securities, and c
for corporate debt, including ABS.




                                                        %




One feature of asset demand equations of this type is that an equal increase in all three interest
rates r (leaving differentials between these interest rates unchanged) should leave asset demands
unchanged as well. Accordingly, the various parameters for each country must obey

                                                              &

                                                          &        !

                                                              &

Based on these restrictions, we can re-write the demand equations in A1 in terms of the spread of
Treasury yields over bank deposit interest rates and the spread of corporate debt yields over
deposit rates:




                                                                        '




Jumping ahead to the solution of the model, we note that as written, A3 represents a system of
three equations and two unknowns, the Treasury spread rt - rb and the corporate bond spread rc -
                                                                                   " "        "
rb. However, this system is not over-determined. Because all three asset-shares $# , ( , and )
                                                                                       $       $
must sum to unity, this implies a set of cross-equation restrictions on the parameters, shown in
equations (A4) below. Those restrictions, in turn, imply that the three equations are linearly
dependent, so that only two of the three equations are needed to solve for the two endogenous
spreads. In practice, we use the second two equations, the demand curves for Treasuries and
corporate debt, to solve the model.


                                                40
                                                                     &

                                                                 &        *

                                                                     &

Before solving the model, however, we obtain estimates of the                 coefficients from the following
empirical equations:

                +,-                                                           45 6,-
                                    .           /0     /123          /0                 7
                     ,-                                                            ,-

                                        8
                          /0                    /123        /0                   9 :            ;

                                            <
              /123             /0                           /0                   9 :


      : 10-year U.S. Treasury yield, nominal
 /123 : AAA corporate bond yield, nominal
 /0 : 6-month CD rate, nominal
   : expected GDP growth (blue chip)
       : expected inflation rate (10-year ahead Michigan survey)
9 : : federal budget deficit as a share of GDP
+,- : U.S. M2 money stock
+ : U.S. M2 money stock + euro area M2 money stock + U.K. M4 money stock
8 : Marketable Treasury bonds - U.S. debt held by the Federal Reserve
< : U.S. corporate bonds outstanding
   ,- : +,- + 8 + <
   : + +8 +<
45 6,- : nominal U.S. GDP

A number of aspects of these equations should be highlighted. First, although we do not use the
equation for deposits demand when we solve the model, it is useful to estimate the equation to
assess whether the estimated parameters are consistent with those in the other two equations. As
a proxy for bank deposits, we use the somewhat broader M2 money stock, which includes
currency, another important element in investor portfolios. We also use exclusively U.S.
variables for this equation; given our assumption of identical demand curves in the United States
and Europe, either country (or both) could have been used for estimation.

Second, the second and third equations in our system are inverted so that the endogenous
variables of interest – the spreads of Treasury and corporate yields over CD rates—appear as the
dependent variables. They are likely to be more endogenous than the supply of Treasuries,
which arguably is determined by the path of fiscal deficits, although this argument may not apply
to the supply of U.S. corporate bonds. (Partly to keep the variable as exogenous as possible, we

                                                       41
use the supply of Treasuries alone, rather than the supply of Treasuries and Agencies, as an
explanatory variable.) Note that for these two equations, portfolio shares are specified as asset
supplies divided by the combined wealth of the United States and Europe, since yields on U.S.
Treasuries and corporate debt reflect the demand from both U.S. and European investors.

Third, we have introduced a number of control variables to better identify the effects of the
variables of interest in our system. In the money demand equation, nominal GDP is an obvious
determinant. Similarly, expected inflation and GDP growth, as well as the budget deficit, seem
likely to influence Treasury and corporate bond yields in addition to asset supplies.

The three equations were estimated using two-stage least squares on quarterly data for the period
1980 to 2007. The control variables along with lags of the endogenous variables were used as
instruments. Results of the estimation are shown in Table A1. By and large, the estimates are
quite reasonable. In the Treasury spreads and corporate spreads equations, the coefficients on
the asset shares and the alternative spreads are positive and statistically significant in most cases.
In the money demand equation, the coefficients on the two spread variables are significant but
quite small, suggesting that the demand for money is not very responsive to longer-term yields,
while the coefficient on nominal GDP is positive and significant, as expected.

The table below translates the coefficient estimates into their implied parameter values, along
with re-calculated z-statistics, for the original model shown in equation A1 above. The results
for the Treasuries and corporate bond demands indicate that these two assets are relatively
substitutable in investor portfolios, as their responsiveness to Treasury and corporate bond yields
are broadly similar in magnitude, whereas neither is very substitutable with bank deposits. (The
coefficient of .10 on the CD rate in the corporate bonds equation has a counter-intuitive sign, but
is quite small.) This observation is confirmed by the very small coefficients on all three asset
returns in the deposit demand equation, suggesting that deposit demands are relatively invariant
with respect to rates of return.

 Derivative of asset 6-month CD interest          10-year Treasury         AAA Corporate
demand with respect         rate                       yield                 bond yield
  to rate of return
  Deposit/Wealth             .01                         -.06                      .05
                           (3.38)                      (-4.88)                  (4.95)
 Treasuries/Wealth          -.08                          .36                     -.27
                          (-2.47)                      (2.54)                   (-2.52)
     Corporate               .09                         -.54                      .45
   bonds/Wealth            (1.35)                      (-1.40)                  (1.39)

Another finding highlighted by these results is that the demand for corporate bonds appears more
sensitive to Treasury yields than is the demand for Treasuries with respect to corporate bond
yields. This seems consistent with the results of the reduced-form regressions shown in Table 2,
which indicate that the foreign official purchases of Treasuries and Agencies depress AAA
corporate bond yields even more than they depress yields on Treasuries themselves.




                                                  42
As discussed in the main text, these estimated parameters are used to model the asset demands of
U.S. and European investors. Consistent with past behavior, the demands of the global saving
glut countries are assumed to be invariant with respect to interest rates.




                                              43
Appendix B: Selected Data Sources

1. Sources for total amounts of U.S. securities outstanding

Total amounts of U.S. securities outstanding are taken from the U.S. Flow of Funds accounts
levels (L) tables, available on the Federal Reserve Board website at this link:
http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/z1/default.htm

Total Treasury securities: Table L.2, line 4
Total Agency securities: Table L.3, lines 3 plus 4
Total financial corporate debt: Table L.3, line 5
Total non-financial corporate: Table L.2, lines 4, 6, and 7
Total private-label ABS18: Table L.3, line 19

2. Estimates of foreign holdings and acquisitions of U.S. securities, by country

Estimated holdings of U.S. securities, broken down by investing country, are based on the annual
Treasury International Capital (TIC) surveys of foreign portfolio holdings of U.S. securities.
These comprehensive surveys record holdings of U.S. securities by country of holder as of end-
June for various years. Survey reports are available on the Treasury website at
 http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/tic/Pages/fpis.aspx

To adjust the end-June securities holdings recorded by the surveys to create estimates as of year-
end, we use the Bertaut-Tryon (2007) data, which adjusts for financial center transactions bias
and valuation changes. These estimates, as well as a detailed methodology of their construction,
are available at: http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/ifdp/2007/910/default.htm

Further, by aggregating countries to look at Europe as a whole, we bypass much of the custodial
bias inherent in these data. Custodial bias occurs when financial institutions hold securities in
custodial accounts for end-investors that live in other countries. Bertaut, Griever, and Tryon
(2006) investigate which countries are the major custodial centers for U.S. securities (including
Belgium and Luxembourg), and which countries have undercounts of securities holdings
(including France, Italy, the U.K. and the Channel Islands), —suggesting that their residents’
investments are custodied elsewhere. Since other Europeans are likely the owners of much of
the custodial holdings in Belgium and Luxembourg, looking at Europe as a whole significantly
reduces the bias.

For estimates of cumulated foreign net purchases of U.S. securities in Figures 2, 3, and 4 we also
use the Bertaut-Tryon data base.19 In addition to estimated monthly holdings, this data base
provides estimates of monthly changes in holdings, decomposed into identified adjusted net
flows (flows are adjusted primarily for repayments of ABS), monthly valuation changes, and the

18
  In this appendix, ABS refers broadly to all asset-backed securities including mortgage-backed securities.
19
  We use the Bertaut-Tryon data, which corrects for financial center bias in the estimated net purchases by country,
instead of the as-reported TIC net purchases data available on the Treasury website because the financial center
distortions are particularly important for the countries we consider.


                                                         44
residual “gap” required to reconcile the reported transactions data with the annual survey
holdings. We construct cumulated net purchases by country as the sum of the monthly adjusted
net flows plus the monthly “gap” to generate estimates of net purchases that are corrected for
financial center bias.

We are able to implement the methodology above for purchases of Treasury securities, agency
securities, and total corporate debt. We then decompose further our estimates of net purchases of
corporate debt by country into purchases of ABS, financial corporate debt, and nonfinancial
corporate debt using the relative shares of these types of corporate debt as reported in the
detailed data from the annual surveys.


3. Adjusted foreign official net purchases and holdings of Treasury and agency securities

Although the TIC system collects data separately for foreign official transactions and other
foreign investor transactions in U.S. securities, the published TIC statistics underrepresent actual
foreign official purchases because they only classify as official those transactions that occur
directly between a U.S. counter-party and a foreign official investor. If an official investor
acquires a U.S. security through a foreign intermediary, the initial purchase by the foreign
intermediary would be recorded in the TIC but the subsequent acquisition by the official investor
would not be recorded because it is not a U.S. cross-border transaction. As a result, the annual
surveys of foreign holdings of U.S. securities typically show that foreign official holdings are
substantially higher than would be estimated by cumulating net transactions since the previous
survey and applying valuation changes (see Bertaut, Griever, and Tryon (2006) for further
discussion.)

Because the monthly TIC data are known to understate official transactions, some analysts and
researchers look instead at movements in the weekly custody holdings for official and
international accounts at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) as reported in memo
lines to the Federal Reserve release H.4.1. However, these data are also imperfect and
incomplete for several reasons. First, they account for only those official securities held at
FRBNY, which serves as a custodian for only about three-fourths of all Treasuries held
domestically for foreign official investors. Second, the definition of “official” is slightly
different, as the memo lines include changes in holdings for some international accounts that are
not classified as foreign official in the published TIC statistics. Third, changes in FRBNY’s
holdings of Agency securities for official investors are recorded at original face value, which can
overstate both purchases and sales (or maturities) of seasoned Agency MBS, because the value
of the holdings have not been adjusted to account for repayments of principal. Finally, not all
changes in FRBNY custody holdings reflect foreign official acquisitions or sales. Official
investors will at times move securities between FRBNY and other domestic custodians, and thus
a change in FRBNY holdings may simply reflect a custodian shift.

To adjust monthly net purchases of long-term Treasuries and Agencies, we compare the monthly
changes in the (confidential) information on custody holdings of long-term Treasuries and
agencies for selected official investors at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York with
transactions in these securities as reported in the TIC system for years 2002 forward. When the

                                                45
changes in holdings for these selected accounts are larger than reported in the TIC system and we
do not believe these changes reflect custodial shifts, we augment the TIC official transactions to
account for these larger increases. We also adjust the TIC transactions for estimated principal
repayments on foreign official holdings of Agency MBS.

Following the Bertaut-Tryon methodology, we then decompose the change in total foreign
official holdings of long-term Treasuries and Agencies into the contributions accounted for by
adjusted net flows, valuation changes, and the residual monthly gap. Note that some monthly
gap still remains: our ability to adjust monthly transactions is still incomplete as we cannot
account for unrecorded acquisitions that are placed with other domestic custodians. However,
compared to the original Bertaut-Tryon foreign official series, the recorded “gap” on the survey
date is notably smaller: for June 2006, for example, we reduce the gap for official holdings of
Treasuries from $130 billion to $22 billion, and for long-term agencies from $149 billion to $81
billion. We include a file (ticdata.liabilities.foiadj.csv) of the new underlying monthly estimates
of total foreign official holdings of long-term Treasuries, Agencies, corporate bonds, and
equities, the adjusted monthly net flows in each of these security types, monthly estimated
valuation changes, and the residual monthly gaps, for December 1984 through the most recent
annual survey (June 2010). These adjusted estimates of foreign official holdings form the basis
of our measures of foreign holdings of Treasuries and Agencies in our regression models.


4. European cross-border financial flows shown in Figure 6

We proxy Europe’s cross-border financial flows over this period by summing the flows for the
euro area and the U.K., using their balance of payments (BOP) and international investment
positions (IIP) data. For the euro area, these are available in the Monthly Bulletin table 7.3 and
related dataset: http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/reports.do?node=100000210. For the United Kingdom,
these are available in the annual Pink Book and associated data set:
http://www.statistics.gov.uk/statbase/product.asp?vlnk=1140. These sources provide data on
three types of cross-border investment: direct investment, portfolio investment (equity and debt
securities), and other investment (banking and other transactions). Summing the flows of the
euro area and the U.K. would overstate their combined net flows with the rest of the world
because it would include their flows to each other. To correct this, we subtract the flows
between the two economies, primarily using the geographical breakdowns of their IIPs.20 All
flows and positions are converted to U.S. dollars on a quarterly basis.

Importantly, these sources do not disaggregate flows of debt securities by type, distinctions that
are important to understanding the build-up of risk before the crisis. They also do not separate
“other investment” into categories that are useful for thinking about the crisis, such as interbank
transactions versus transactions with non-banks. Accordingly, we disaggregate these categories
using a variety of other sources; we provide a brief overview below of our methodology. Further
detail on our estimation procedures is available upon request.



20
  We use separate geographical breakdowns for the three broad types of investment; for “other investment,” we are
able to estimate flows separately for bank and non-bank positions.

                                                       46
Disaggregating debt securities
We disaggregate Europe’s external claims and liabilities in the form of debt securities into ABS,
other financial corporate, non-financial corporate, and sovereign debt using different methods for
claims and liabilities because of differences in data availability. For claims, we start with
Europe’s acquisitions of U.S. debt securities of each type, which are available from the Treasury
International Capital (TIC) system. For Europe’s claims on other countries besides the United
States, we draw on the country distribution of euro area and U.K. claims in the form of debt
securities found in the IMF’s Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey (CPIS), and assume that
European investors acquired a similar portfolio of debt securities from each country as U.S.
investors acquired from that country (again using TIC data to estimate the composition of U.S.
acquisitions).

For external liabilities, the U.K. data differentiate between sovereign debt, bank debt and non-
bank debt. We assume that, in addition to bank debt, one-quarter of U.K. non-bank debt is
issued by financial firms and the remainder is by non-financial firms. For the euro area, data on
external liabilities in the form of sovereign debt are available for recent years; we estimate
foreign acquisitions of sovereign debt for the earlier period based on euro area sovereign debt
issuance.21 Corporate debt liabilities of the euro area (excluding ABS) are split into financial and
non-financial categories by assuming investors from all countries acquired a portfolio of
European corporate debt similar to that acquired by U.S. investors (based on TIC data). Finally,
our estimates of foreign holdings of European ABS, combining the euro area and the United
Kingdom, are primarily based on data from the European Securitization Forum (ESF) on gross
issuance of ABS and primary distribution of ABS abroad; as the resulting estimates are
particularly tenuous, the U.S. acquisitions of European ABS (shown in the TIC data) provide a
lower bound.

Disaggregating Banking and Other Transactions
In Figure 6, we present two broad categories of banking and other transactions. The first is “net
interbank transactions and deposits,” which represents the net of external claims and liabilities of
the following three types of transactions: 1) interbank transactions; 2) repurchase agreements
(repos) between or among banks and other financial firms, such as securities dealers; and 3)
deposits by non-bank residents (where deposits abroad by European residents are a claim and
deposits in European banks from non-bank foreigners are a liability). The second category is
“net loans to non-banks and other,” which represents the net of external claims and liabilities of
the following two types of transactions: 1) loans to non-banks (where loans to non-banks
abroad—made either by banks or non-bank firms—are a claim and loans from abroad to
European non-banks are a liability); and 2) miscellaneous other (such as increased currency
liabilities of the ECB to foreigners).

Of the five transaction types identified in the above paragraph, only two, deposits by non-bank
residents and miscellaneous other, are clearly identified in the BOP or IIP data. The amounts for
the other types are estimated using several sources, including primarily: 1) additional
breakdowns that are provided in the euro area and U.K. BOP data; 2) BIS locational data, which

21
  We adjust for the fact that foreign acquisitions of euro area sovereign debt tended to grow faster than sovereign
debt issuance and confirmed our figures with acquisitions of euro-denominated reserve assets in the Currency
Composition of Official Foreign Exchange Reserves (COFER) data.

                                                         47
splits banks’ cross-border positions into those with other banks and those with non-banks; and 3)
aggregate balance sheet data published by the euro area and the U.K. for banks, other financial
firms, and non-financial firms.




                                               48
                                                                Figure 1

                                       Composition of U.S. Hxternal Oiabilities
                                                                                                      Billions of dollars
                                                                                                                            20000
          Corporate Eonds
          Stocks
          Agency Eonds
          Treasuries
          DirectLnvestment                                                                                                 16000
          Bank debt and other



                                                                                                                            12000




                                                                                                                            8000




                                                                                                                            4000




                                                                                                                            0
1990            1992           1994           1996           1998               2000   2002   2004   2006         2008
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce (U.S. International Investment Position).
                                                               Figure 2
                       Foreign inflows into U.S. debt securities in lead-up to the financial crisis
                                                                                                  Billions of dollars
                                                                                                                        1,600
               Corporate ABS
               Other corporate debt securities                                                                          1,400
               Treasuries and agencies
                                                                                                H1*                     1,200

                                                                                                                        1,000

                                                                                                                        800

                                                                                                                        600

                                                                                                                        400

                                                                                                                        200

                                                                                                                        0
                    2003                         2004              2005         2006                  2007
Source: Estimates using Treasury International Capital data.
*Annual rate.
                                                                  Figure 3
                              Cumulated foreign inflows into U.S. debt securities
                                           Jan. 2003 to June 2007                                   Billions of dollars
                                                                                                                          7500
               Corporate ABS
               Other corporate debt securities                                                                            7000
               Treasuries and agencies
                                                                                                                          6500

                                                                                                                          6000

                                                                                                                          5500

                                                                                                                          5000

                                                                                                                          4500

                                                                                                                          4000

                                                                                                                          3500

                                                                                                                          3000

                                                                                                                          2500

                                                                                                                          2000

                                                                                                                          1500

                                                                                                                          1000

                                                                                                                          500

                                                                                                                          0
  Emerging Asia and                     Europe                       Offshore    Total foreign   Change in U.S.
   the Middle East                                                                               debt securities
Source: Estimates using Treasury International Capital data and Flow of Funds.                    outstanding
                                                                  Figure 4
    Current account surpluses and financial acquisitions of certain surplus regions
                                     2003 to 2007
                                                                                                                                Billions of dollars
                                                                                                                                                      1200
               Sum of current account balance, 2003-2007
               Net bank flows to europe                                                                                                               1100
               Net acquisitions of other U.S. assets
               Acquisitions of U.S. Treasuries and agencies                                                                                           1000

                                                                                                                                                      900

                                                                                                                                                      800

                                                                                                                                                      700

                                                                                                                                                      600

                                                                                                                                                      500

                                                                                                                                                      400

                                                                                                                                                      300

                                                                                                                                                      200

                                                                                                                                                      100

                                                                                                                                                      0
                              China                                Other Asia*                                  OPEC
                                                                                                                                                      -100
Sources: Haver Analytics, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Treasury International Capital and Bank for International Settlements.
*Other Asia excludes Japan.
                                                                Figure 5
                                Europe’s gross international claims and liabilities
                                                                                             Billions of dollars
                                                                                                                   50,000
               Gross claims
               Gross liabilities


                                                                                                                   40,000




                                                                                                                   30,000




                                                                                                                   20,000




                                                                                                                   10,000




                                                                                                                   0
                     2003                    2004                    2005   2006      2007
Sources: Haver Analytics, Bank of England and the European Central Bank.
                                                                 Figure 6
                                 Cumulated European cross-border financial flows
                                            Jan. 2003 to June 2007                                        Billions of dollars
                                                                                                                                5500
                                    Claims
                                                                                          Liabilities
                                                                                                         Discrepancy            5000


                                                                Direct investment                                               4500


                                                                                                                                4000


                                                                                                        Net interbank           3500
                                                                                                        and deposits
        Net loans to
      nonbanks & other                                                                                                          3000


       Net derivatives                                                                                  Sovereign debt          2500

                                                               Non-fin. corp. debt
                                                                   securities                                                   2000


                                                                       Equity                                                   1500


                                                                                                                                1000

                                                                 Other financial
                                                              corp. debt securities                                             500

                                                                        ABS
                                                                                                                                0
Source: Estimates based on euro area and U.K. financial accounts and data from the BIS.
                                                                   Figure 7
Geographical breakdown of European cross-border financial flows in debt securities
                                 2003 to 2007
                                                                                                                          Billions of dollars
                                                                                                                                                2500
        US
        Japan
        Offshore centers
        Other industrial
        Reserves (identified in SEFER)
                                                                                                                                                2000
        Residual*




                                                                                                                                                1500




                                                                                                                                                1000




                                                                                                                                                500




                                                                                                                                                0
                                             Change in liabilities                                          Change in claims
*Residual liabilities are to EMEs and Offshore centers; residual claims are mainly on EMEs (especially eastern Europe).
’Europe’ is defined as euro area plus U.K., and excludes cross-holdings.
Source: Estimates using IMF’s Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey and Treasury International Capital.
                                                                    Figure 8
                                                European* and U.S. financial wealth
                                                                                                                 Billions of dollars
                                                                                                                                       80000
              European financial wealth
              U.S. financial Wealth
                                                                                                                                       70000


                                                                                                                                       60000


                                                                                                                                       50000


                                                                                                                                       40000


                                                                                                                                       30000


                                                                                                                                       20000


                                                                                                                                       10000


                                                                                                                                       0
     1999              2000              2001             2002              2003              2004      2005   2006          2007
*Europe is defined as euro area + U.K.
Note: Financial wealth includes currency, deposits, and debt securities held by all domestic sectors.



                                                                     Figure 9
                             European* and U.S. financial wealth as a percent of GDP
                                                                                                                      Percent GDP
                                                                                                                                       500

              European financial wealth                                                                                                450
              U.S. financial wealth

                                                                                                                                       400


                                                                                                                                       350


                                                                                                                                       300


                                                                                                                                       250


                                                                                                                                       200


                                                                                                                                       150


                                                                                                                                       100


                                                                                                                                       50


                                                                                                                                       0
     1999              2000              2001             2002              2003              2004      2005   2006          2007
*Europe is defined as euro area + U.K.
Note: Financial wealth includes currency, deposits, and debt securities held by all domestic sectors.
                                                                        Figure 10
                                     European portfolio weights in U.S. and foreign bonds
       Portfolio weights in U.S. Bonds
0.30


0.28


0.26


0.24


0.22
                                                                                                               2007

0.20                                                                                                 2006          2005

0.18
                                                                                          2004

0.16                                                                        2003

                                                                 2002
0.14
                                                                            2001
0.12


0.10
    0.1            0.12           0.14           0.16           0.18           0.2            0.22           0.24             0.26         0.28          0.3
                                                                                                                          Portfolio weights in foreign bonds
       Source: Estimates using Treasury International Capital and IMF’s Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey.
                                                                 Figure 11
                            European holdings of foreign long-term debt securities
                                                                                                                                 Billions of dollars
                                                                                                                                                       4500
           U.S. and other foreign ABS
           U.S. corporate bonds, other than ABS
                                                                                                                                                       4000
           Offshore bonds, other than ABS
           All other U.S. and other foreign bonds
                                                                                                                                                       3500


                                                                                                                                                       3000


                                                                                                                                                       2500


                                                                                                                                                       2000


                                                                                                                                                       1500


                                                                                                                                                       1000


                                                                                                                                                       500


                                                                                                                                                       0
                  2002                 2003                  2004                 2005                 2006                  2007
Source: Estimates based on IMF’s Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey, euro area & U.K. international investment positions.
                                                                         Figure 12
                         Decrease in home bias arising from ABS cross-border investment
                                             Dec. 2003 to Dec. 2007
0.10                                                                                                                         0.10
                       Change in home bias: ABS
                       Change in home bias: non-ABS

0.08           Positive numbers indicate a decrease in home bias                                                             0.08



0.06                                                                                                                         0.06



0.04                                                                                                                         0.04



0.02                                                                                                                         0.02



0.00                                                                                                                         0.00



-0.02                                                                                                                        -0.02



-0.04                                                                                                                        -0.04
                Euro area                         U.K.                          U.S.                        Japan   Canada

        Source: Estimates using IMF’s Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey and Treasury International Capital.
                                                  Figure 13
                                           ABS and MBS issuance
                                                                              Billions of dollars
                                                                                                    900
               US total
               Euro area total
               Other Europe total                                                                   800
               Other total

                                                                                                    700


                                                                                                    600


                                                                                                    500


                                                                                                    400


                                                                                                    300


                                                                                                    200


                                                                                                    100


                                                                                                    0
     2002           2003            2004   2005       2006    2007   2008   2009          2010
Source: Dealogic.
                             Figure 14: Holdings of U.S. securities outstanding
                                                                   Total outstanding


         Treasury securities                               2003                         2007
         Agency debt
         Non-ABS corporate debt
         ABS
         Equity




                                                           Share ABS: 5.7%              Share ABS: 9.0%




                                                   Held by global saving glut countries


         Treasury securities                               2003                         2007
         Agency debt
         Non-ABS corporate debt
         ABS
         Equity




                                                           Share ABS: 1.5%              Share ABS: 2.4%




                                                                     Held by Europe


         Treasury securities                               2003                         2007
         Agency debt
         Non-ABS corporate debt
         ABS
         Equity




                                                           Share ABS: 4.7%              Share ABS: 14.0%




                                                               Held by U.S. residents


         Treasury securities                               2003                         2007
         Agency debt
         Non-ABS corporate debt
         ABS
         Equity




                                                           Share ABS: 6.1%              Share ABS: 8.9%


Source: Estimates based on Flow of Funds and Treasury International Capital data.
                                                        Figure 15
                                      Policy targets and corporate yields
Monetary policy targets
                                                                                                                  7

                                                                                                                  6

                                                                                                                  5
                                            U.K. bank rate
                                                                                                                  4

                                                                                                                  3

                                                                                                   Euro area      2
                                                                                                    average
                          U.S. target                                                              repo rate
                       federal funds rate                                                                         1

                                                                                                                  0
         2000                           2002                     2004                         2006


United States                                                     Euro area
                                                             9                                                    7

                                                             8
                                                                                         10-year AA               6
                     10-year AA                              7                         corporate yield
                   corporate yield
                                                             6                                                    5

                                                             5
                                                                                                                  4
                                                             4
              Target federal
                funds rate                                   3             Average                                3
                                                                           repo rate
                                                             2
                                                                                                                  2
                                                             1

                                                             0                                                    1
  2000          2002           2004         2006                    2000         2002          2004        2006


United Kingdom                                                    Spread between corporate yield and policy rate
                                                             7                                                    6

           10-year AA                                                          United States                      5
         corporate yield
                                                             6
                                                                                                                  4

                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                Euro area
                                                             5
                                                                                                                  2

                                      Bank rate                                                                   1
                                                             4
                                                                              United Kingdom
                                                                                                                  0

                                                             3                                                    -1
  2000          2002           2004         2006                    2000         2002          2004        2006
                                                                 Figure 16
                                                    Selected long-term rates

Federal funds and 10-year U.S. Treasury rates                             10-year U.S. Treasury and 30-year FNMA
                                                                          MBS yields, and spread
                                                           Percent                                                              Percent
                                                                     9                                                                       9
               10-year Treasury                                                                     30-year FNMA MBS
               Federal funds rate                                                                   10-year Treasury
                                                                     8                                                                       8
                                                                                                    Spread

                                                                     7                                                                       7

                                                                     6                                                                       6

                                                                     5                                                                       5

                                                                     4                                                                       4

                                                                     3                                                                       3

                                                                     2                                                                       2

                                                                     1                                                                       1

                                                                     0                                                                       0

                                                                     -1                                                                      -1
   2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007                                   2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Source: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release H.15.                  Note: MBS yield is FNMA 30-yr current coupon, source: Bloomberg.




10-year U.S. Treasury and AAA corporate                                   10-year U.S. Treasury and 30-year U.S. fixed
yields, and spread                                                        mortgage rates, and spread
                                                           Percent                                                              Percent
                                                                     9                                                                       9
                           AAA corporate                                                            30-year fixed mortgage
                           10-year Treasury                                                         10-year Treasury
                                                                     8                                                                       8
                           Spread                                                                   Spread

                                                                     7                                                                       7

                                                                     6                                                                       6

                                                                     5                                                                       5

                                                                     4                                                                       4

                                                                     3                                                                       3

                                                                     2                                                                       2

                                                                     1                                                                       1

                                                                     0                                                                       0

                                                                     -1                                                                      -1
   2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007                                   2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Source: AAA Corporate: Moody’s.                                           Source: 30-year fixed mortgage: Freddie Mac.
                                                   Figure 17
                                             Selected ARM rates

Rates on subprime and conforming ARMS                       Subprime ARM issuance
                                             Percent                                         Thousands of loans
                                                       12                                                         180


                                                                                                                  160
                                                       10
                                                                                                                  140
                            Subprime ARM

                                                       8                                                          120


                                                                          Subprime ARM                            100
                           ARM indexed to              6
                           1-year Treasury                                                                        80


                                                       4                                                          60


                                                                                                                  40
           Spread                                      2
                                                                                                                  20


                                                       0                                                          0
   2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006                          2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Source: CoreLogic.                                          Source: CoreLogic.




Rates on Alt-A and conforming ARMS                          Alt-A ARM issuance
                                             Percent                                         Thousands of loans
                                                       10                                                         100



                                                       8
                                                                                                                  80
                         Alt-A ARM
                                                       6


                                                                                 Alt-A ARM                        60
                                                       4
       ARM indexed to
       1-year Treasury
                                                       2
                                                                                                                  40


                                                       0

                                                                                                                  20
            Spread                                     -2



                                                       -4                                                         0
   2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006                          2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Source: CoreLogic.                                          Source: CoreLogic.
        Table 1. Foreign Holdings of U.S. Securities as a Share of Outstandings
                                 (as of June 2007, Billions of U.S. dollars)
                                                                                                         Foreign Share
                                                                       Total                                of Total
                                                                               1
                                                                    Outstanding Foreign Held2              (Percent)
                                              3
1.       Treasury and agency securities                                 11,688             3,607               31%
         Corporate & municipal credit securities (non
2.                     4
                                                                        8,616              2,045               24%
         asset-backed)
3.       Corporate ABS + ABCP5                                          4,185               990                24%
4.        Corporate equities and fund shares                            27,768             3,130               11%

Notes
1. Source: Flow of Funds March 6, 2008 Z.1 Statistical Release, tables L.200-L.228 (Federal Reserve Board, 2008). See
   note 5 for ABS and ABCP outstandings.
2. Foreign holdings were obtained from tables 1, 23 and 24 of the "Report on Foreign Portfolio Holdings of U.S.
   Securities," as of June 30, 2007 (Department of the Treasury, 2008) with slight modifications to foreign held corporate
   ABCP from Beltran, Pounder, Thomas (2008).

3. Total includes savings bonds and holdings of the Federal Reserve System.
4. Includes open market paper.
5. Source for ABS is Flow of Funds March 6, 2008, Tables L.218 through L.222. The source for ABCP is Beltran,
   Pounder, Thomas (2008), using Moodys data.
                   Table 2: Effects of Foreign Securities Purchases on U.S. Interest Rates
                                          10‐yr.      30‐yr. Fixed                     AAA        AAA
                                                                    Fannie Mae
               Dependent Variable:       Treasury      Mortgage                     Corporate   Corporate
                                                                     MBS Yield
                                           Yield          Rate                         Yield      Yield
Regressors:
Foreign Official Holdings                ‐2.817        ‐2.851         ‐2.790        ‐3.684
of Treasuries & Agencies*                 (‐2.4)        (‐2.7)        (‐1.87)       (‐2.92)

Foreign Holdings of                                                                               ‐3.981
U.S. Corporate Bonds*                                                                             (‐2.42)

Federal Funds Rate                       0.100          0.145         0.158          0.107        0.076
                                         (2.30)         (3.41)        (2.19)         (2.88)       (2.23)

Expected 10‐yr. Inflation Rate           0.286          0.199         0.215          0.203        0.140
                                         (2.73)         (2.27)        (1.79)         (2.41)       (1.62)

Expected GDP Growth Rate                 0.028          0.110         ‐0.070         0.091        0.106
                                         (0.26)         (1.12)        (‐0.51)        (0.91)       (1.02)

Risk Premium                             1.749          1.401         2.154          0.119        ‐0.141
                                         (1.43)         (1.27)        (1.40)         (0.1)        (‐0.12)

Lagged Dep. Var.                         0.609          0.612         0.540          0.602        0.686
                                         (6.33)         (6.79)        (4.27)         (6.44)       (8.54)

Constant                                 0.705          1.252         1.740          1.853        1.716
                                         (1.08)         (1.83)        (2.02)         (2.3)        (2.01)

Adj. R‐squared                            0.921         0.927          0.878         0.920        0.917
Obs.                                        68            69            65             69           69

(t‐statistics in parentheses)
*measured as a share of total outstanding Treasuries and agencies and U.S. corporate bonds, respectively.
Note: Underlying data is quarterly; sample period 1990q1 ‐ 2007q2.
                                          Table 3: Simulation Results
                                                   Treasury    ABS        Treasury    ABS        Treasury   ABS
                                                     yield     yield        yield     yield        yield    yield

                                                   Baseline Sensitivity Higher Sensitivity       Lower Sensitivity
                                                         Results             results                 Results

Baseline yields                                      + 4.6     + 6.5        + 4.6     + 6.5       + 4.6     + 6.5

                                                                        changes from baseline:


Shock 1: China's wealth +$2 trillion; China's
Treasury & Agency holdings +$1 trillion
                                                     ‐1.46     ‐1.68        ‐2.13     ‐2.37       ‐0.71     ‐0.85
(equivalent to GSG acquisitions of Treasuries &
Agencies 2003‐2007)


Shock 2a: Europe's desired holdings of U.S.
corporate debt +$475 billion
                                                     ‐0.49     ‐0.64        ‐0.77     ‐0.93       ‐0.23     ‐0.35
(equivalent to Europe's acquisitions of U.S. ABS
2003‐2007)


Shock 2b: Europe's desired holdings of U.S.
corporate debt +$1.25 trillion
                                                     ‐1.29     ‐1.68        ‐2.03     ‐2.45       ‐0.60     ‐0.93
(equivalent to Europe's acquisitons of all U.S.
corporate debt 2003‐2007)


Shock 3a: Global supply of ABS +$2.5 trillion
(equivalent to increase in U.S. ABS outstanding,
                                                    + 0.71     + 1.03      + 1.33    + 1.69       + 0.15    + 0.42
20003‐2007; Europe acquires roughly $190
billion)


Shock 3b: Global supply of ABS of +$2.5 trillion
(Europe has no demand sensitivity to yields on
                                                     0.97      1.41         1.94      2.45         0.22      0.61
Treasuries or ABS, and acquires none of the
increase)
                            Table A1: Portfolio Balance Model: 2SLS Estimates

                                              10‐yr. Treas. Yield AAA Corp. Bond Yield   U.S. M2 Money
                    Dependent Variable:
                                               – 6 mo. CD rate      – 6 mo. CD rate           Supply

Regressors:

10‐yr. Treasury Yield                                                    1.210              ‐0.063
                                                                        (25.88)             (‐4.88)

AAA Corp. Bond Yield                                0.768                                    0.051
                                                   (27.67)                                   (4.95)

Treasuries/Wealth                                  2.807
                                                   (2.55)

Corp. Bonds/Wealth                                                      2.222
                                                                        (1.39)

U.S. GDP/U.S. Wealth                                                                         0.221
                                                                                             (2.48)

Expected 10‐yr. Ahead Inflation Rate               ‐0.031               0.070                0.050
                                                   (‐0.61)              (0.62)               (4.92)

Expected 1‐yr. Ahead Inflation Rate                ‐0.160               0.024               ‐0.017
   – Expected 10‐yr. Ahead Inflation Rate          (‐1.09)              (0.12)              (‐1.59)

Federal Budget Deficit/U.S. GDP                     0.126               ‐0.133               0.006
                                                    (6.36)              (‐4.88)              (2.33)

Expected GDP Growth Rate                           ‐0.014               0.039                0.007
                                                   (‐0.27)              (0.59)               (1.92)

Constant                                           ‐1.253               0.427                0.009
                                                   (‐4.87)              (0.71)               (0.23)

Adj. R‐squared                                      0.960                0.946               0.920
Obs.                                                  83                   83                 85

(Z‐statistics in parentheses)
Note: Underlying data is quarterly; sample period 1980q1 to 2007q2.
