                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  LEVERAGE ACROSS FIRMS, BANKS, AND COUNTRIES

                                       Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
                                           Bent Sorensen
                                          Sevcan Yesiltas

                                        Working Paper 17354
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17354


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




The authors thank NBER-MIT SLOAN Project for Global Financial Crisis for support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.¸˛¸

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Bent Sorensen, and Sevcan Yesiltas. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Leverage Across Firms, Banks, and Countries
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Bent Sorensen, and Sevcan Yesiltas
NBER Working Paper No. 17354
August 2011
JEL No. F3

                                              ABSTRACT

We present new stylized facts on bank and firm leverage for 2000-2009 using extensive internationally
comparable micro level data from several countries. The main result is that there was very little buildup
in leverage for the average non-financial firm and commercial bank before the crisis, but the picture
was quite different for large commercial banks in the United States and for investment banks worldwide.
We document the following patterns: a) there was an increase in leverage ratios of investment banks
and financial firms during the early 2000s; b) there was no visible increase for commercial banks and
non-financial firms; c) off balance-sheet items constitute a big fraction of assets, especially for large
commercial banks in the United States; d) the leverage ratio is procyclical for investment banks and
for large commercial banks in the United States; e) banks in emerging markets with tighter bank regulation
and stronger investor protection experienced significantly less deleveraging during the crisis. These
results show that excessive risk taking before the crisis was not easily detectable because the risk involved
the quality rather than the amount of assets.


Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan                                  Sevcan Yesiltas
University of Houston                                 Johns Hopkins University
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
Houston, TX 77204                                     440 Mergenthaler Hall
and NBER                                              3400 N. Charles Street
sebnem.kalemli-ozcan@mail.uh.edu                      Baltimore, MD 21218Johns Hopkins University
                                                      syesilt1@jhu.edu
Bent Sorensen
Department of Economics
University of Houston
204 McElhinney Hall
Houston, TX 77204
bent.sorensen@mail.uh.edu
1        Introduction

The 2007–2009 global crisis started in the financial sector and quickly turned into a global recession
with an unprecedented decline in output, employment, and trade. The lessons from previous
emerging market crises indicate that banks’ and firms’ financing conditions are key mechanisms
turning financial crises into recessions. Higher cost of external financing and declining collateral
values force firms to lower leverage by lowering investment leading to lower output (Kiyotaki and
Moore (1997)). Changes in leverage over the business cycle is, therefore, a potentially important
amplification mechanism propagating the initial adverse shock to the real economy (Bernanke and
Gertler (1995)). Many commentators have argued that the lending boom of the early 2000s, which
fueled the sub-prime crises, caused firms and banks to increase their leverage to unprecedented
levels. When the boom turned into a bust, following the banks’ contraction of credit, a sharp
de-leveraging accompanied the largest global financial meltdown since the Great Depression.

        To this date, no empirical evidence has been brought to bear on the determinants of leverage
before and after the crisis in the framework of an international comparative study, although many
recent theory papers aim at understanding the endogenous leverage process (Farhi and Tirole
(2010); Fostel and Geanakoplos (2008); Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009)).1 This is the task
we undertake in this paper by studying leverage patterns across firms, banks, and countries over
time before and after the 2007–2009 crisis. Our main result is that excessive risk taking before
the crisis was not easily detectable in aggregate data because pre-crisis increases in leverage was
mainly limited to investment banks and brokers/dealers in developed countries. Large banks also
took large risks although this mainly became clear after the crises started. These institutions grew
their balance sheets aggressively by increasing debt and assets during asset booms—this pattern
was prevalent in the United States and to a lesser extent in Europe. Banks in emerging markets
behaved differently possibly due to tighter bank regulation and stronger investor protection. Using
regression analysis, we show that banks in emerging markets had a tendency to grow leverage ratios
less aggressively before the crisis and (with high statistical significance) were able to maintain their
leverage ratios during the crisis.

        The current global crisis underscores the importance of understanding patterns in leverage over
time, across firms and banks, and whether these patterns differ across countries with different
institutional and regulatory structures. In particular, we would like to know what type of banks
    1
        Important early exceptions are the highly influential works of Adrian and Shin (2008, 2009, 2010) and Greenlaw,
Hatzius, Kashyap, and Shin (2008). These papers focus solely on the United States.



                                                            1
and firms were highly leveraged in which countries in the run-up to crisis. We study these patterns
by utilizing the most comprehensive and comparable firm-level and bank-level world-wide dataset,
ORBIS from Bureau van Dijk Electronic Publishing (BvD), 2000–2009. Our data set covers listed,
private, large, and small non-financial firms, financial firms as well as banks. There appears to
be no previous work that investigates the determinants of firm and bank capital structure using
time-varying, comprehensive, and comparable data from many countries. Hence, the novelty of our
study comes from the fact that we are the first to investigate patterns of firm leverage together
with patterns of bank-financing using a global micro-level data set over time.

       Why is this important? Establishing leverage patterns across time and across countries using
country level aggregate data may not give the full picture. Even for a single country there may
be issues since aggregate data masks micro level patterns. For example, Adrian and Shin (2008,
2009, 2010) show that leverage patterns are countercyclical for the U.S. non-financial sector, as
expected, but this is not the case when they focus on particular institutions within the financial
sector, namely broker dealers. A rise in asset prices will mechanically increase the value of equity
(banks’ net worth) as a percentage of assets. Therefore, rising asset prices will lead to a lower
leverage ratio, defined as the ratio of assets to equity. Conversely, in a downturn, asset prices
would fall and the leverage ratio would increase. Adrian and Shin (2008, 2009, 2010) finds that
such a pattern holds for the non-financial sector but not for investment banks, whose leverage
rises during booms and falls during downturns; i.e., the leverage of investment banks is procyclical.
This procyclicality amplifies the business cycle, potentially leading to systemic risk if asset prices
do not properly reflect fundamental values (“bubbles”). Their findings show that these financial
institutions actively manage their balance sheet and leverage during the booms and busts using
collateralized borrowing and lending. He, Khang, and Krishnamurthy (2010) emphasize the shift in
securitized assets within the financial sector by showing that while investment banks were decreasing
their leverage by selling such assets during the deleveraging process of 2008–2009, commercial banks
and government increased their leverage since these latter institutions acquired these assets.

       The works by Adrian and Shin and He, Khang, and Krishnamurthy use mainly aggregate-
sectoral data from the Flow of Funds of the Federal Reserve and can only investigate the difference
between commercial banks and investment banks as an aggregate in the U.S. but not systematically
bank-by-bank and not as banks from different countries.2 It is very likely that these type of
   2
       Adrian and Shin (2008, 2009, 2010) use data from SEC filings for five big investment banks in the U.S.: Lehman
Brothers, Merill Lynch, Morgan Stanley, Bear Sterns, Goldman Sachs, and Citigroup, finding results similar to ours.
He, Khang, and Krishnamurthy (2010) and Greenlaw, Hatzius, Kashyap, and Shin (2008) also use data from the



                                                           2
aggregate patterns are driven by the big banks. We think it is important to know how typical
investment banks and typical commercial banks behave and whether the U.S. patterns are different
from those of other countries. From a regulatory standpoint, the policy prescription will differ
if aggregate patterns are driven by few big players rather than by a large number of small and
mid-size banks.

    We show that leverage is procylical for large commercial banks in the United States and to a
lesser extent in Europe, where we define a “large” bank as a bank that has more then a billion
dollars worth of assets at the beginning of our sample. These banks seem to have increased their
leverage pre-crisis because they have comparative advantage in raising funds in short-term market
(overnight repos and commercial paper) and they skirted capital requirements using off-balance
sheet investment vehicles. They may be somewhat more stable than investment banks due to
their ability to also obtain funds from deposits; nonetheless, excessive risk taking from huge banks,
which are considered safe due to explicit deposit insurance and implicit insurance (“too-big-to-fail”),
raises serious regulatory issues. Our paper’s main contribution is to help us understand patterns
of leverage before the crisis. Our results may have important policy implications especially with
regards to regulatory reform.

    The remainder of the article proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the theoretical and empirical
literature on leverage. Section 3 lays out a simple theoretical framework for ease of interpreting
the empirical results. Section 4 presents our data and discusses relevant issues. Section 5 presents
the empirical patterns and regression results. Section 6 presents robustness analysis. Section 7
concludes.



2     Literature on Leverage

Since the celebrated paper of Modigliani and Miller (1958) there has been an outpouring of theo-
retical work on the underpinnings of the firm’s capital structure but empirical work is only slowly
catching up. Theoretical models pinpoint important departures from the Modigliani-Miller assump-
tion which makes capital structure relevant for the value of firms. However, we still do not know
the empirical relevance of many different theories. Specifically, we lack a good understanding of
the determinants of capital structure of the private and public sector especially outside the United
States because most of the empirical literature focuses on the United States using data from COM-
SEC on five big commercial banks in the United States: Bank of America, JP Morgan Chase, Citibank, Wachovia,
and Wells Fargo and find similar results.


                                                     3
PUSTAT on large listed firms. This literature is mostly cross-sectional and hence cannot speak to
the time-series dynamics in leverage patterns (see Frank and Goyal (2004) for an example).

   The corporate finance literature studying U.S. non-financial listed firms shows that the most
important cross-firm determinants of leverage are size, profitability, and tangibility (collateral). In
a seminal paper, Rajan and Zingales (1995), using data from non-financial listed firms for the year
1991, find that these factors are also important for leverage in the G7 countries and differences in
accounting practices across countries do not affect the leverage patterns for firms. They also find
that European firms have higher levels of leverage on average than U.S. firms. Booth et al. (2001)
study ten developing countries using a data set of large listed firms in a static setting and find that
the factors important for leverage in developed countries (size, profitability, and tangibility) are also
important for developing countries; however, at the same time there are significant country-level
differences in mean levels of leverage. Lemmon, Roberts, and Zender (2006) undertake a dynamic
analysis using data (COMPUSTAT and CRSP) from listed U.S. firms and conclude that more
than 90 percent of the variation in leverage is captured by firm-fixed effects and the determinants
identified by the previous cross-sectional literature—such as size, profitability and collateral—only
account for 10 percent of the variation. This result implies that for listed non-financial firms the
leverage is remarkably stable over time.

   For financial firms and banks, we are only aware of the study by Gropp and Heider (2009)
which applies the insights of the non-financial firm-level literature to banks. In theory, bank
capital is determined by regulatory capital requirements and hence there should not be any cross-
sectional variation in banks leverage ratios (although there can be time variation for a given bank)
which partly explains why the empirical literature on bank leverage is sparse. Gropp and Heider
(2009) show that there is large variation in banks capital ratios and investigate whether capital
requirements are a first-order determinant of banks’ capital structure. They undertake an analysis
similar to that of Rajan and Zingales (1995) but using data that has both cross-bank and temporal
variation from BANKSCOPE as does the present article. They focus on the top 100 large listed
European and U.S. banks between 1991 and 2004. As in the U.S. non-financial firm-level study of
Lemmon, Roberts, and Zender (2006), they find that the importance of determinants such as size,
profitability and tangibility disappears once bank-fixed effects are accounted for. They also find
that minimum capital requirements does not have a role in explaining banks’ capital structure. This
might be because banks optimize their capital structure like firms in a market based system based
on prices and pressures from shareholders and debtors as modeled by Flannery (1994), Flannery
and Sorescu (1996), Myers and Rajan (1998), Diamond and Rajan (2000), Flannery and Rangan


                                                   4
(2008) and Allen et al. (2009). Another important finding from the study of Gropp and Heider
(2009) is that on the margin banks finance their balance sheet growth entirely from non-deposit
liabilities.

    As a result, the main conclusion of the empirical literature on the determinants of non-financial
firms’ and banks’ leverage so far is that patterns are pretty stable over time and determined by
similar cross-bank and cross-firm determinants in different countries, though there exist significant
country differences. The empirical results of Adrian and Shin (2008, 2009) and Greenlaw, Hatzius,
Kashyap, and Shin (2008) regarding the procylical nature of leverage suggest that the largest
banks manage their capital structures based on internal value at risk and not based on regulatory
constraints.

    The recent theoretical literature on endogenous leverage builds upon financial frictions theories.
Financial intermediaries face frictions in raising funds and when these frictions worsen they sell their
assets at fire-sale prices and reduce liquidity provision. These models go back to the influential
work of Shleifer and Vishny (1992). These leverage-constraint models, for example Geanakoplos
and Fostel (2008), Adrian and Shin (2010), and Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), focus on the
amount of debt financing of intermediaries which face a leverage constraint. In such models, the
asset demand (and the demand for risky assets) of the intermediary will be affected and tighter
constraints will lead to deleveraging. The next section details a simple representation of such a
setup.



3     Leverage of Investment Banks: The Adrian-Shin Model

This section outlines the framework of Adrian and Shin (2010) for understanding changes in asset
valuations and leverage. Suppose a household buys a house worth 100 dollars and finances this
investment by taking a mortgage of 90 dollars. The difference between these two sums is household’s
equity, which here equals 10 dollars. In balance sheet diagram form:

                                      Assets           Liabilities

                                      House, 100       Equity, 10

                                                    Mortgage, 90



    Leverage is defined as the inverse of the equity ratio; that is, the ratio of total assets to equity,


                                                   5
hence in this example leverage is 10. Now, what happens to leverage when asset values fluctuate?
If we define A as the market value of assets and E as the market value of equity, leverage is given
by:


                                                         A    A
                                                    L=     =                                                          (1)
                                                         E   A−D
       If the market value of debt stays constant asset price changes increase equity one-to-one and
leverage is inversely related to assets. When the price of a household’s house goes up, net worth
increases, and the households leverage goes down.3 For example, if the price of the house goes up
to 101 dollars, equity goes up by one dollar and leverage falls to 9.18, simply shown as:

                                              Assets             Liabilities

                                              House, 101         Equity, 11

                                                              Mortgage, 90


       Thus the prediction of a standard theory, where leverage is not actively managed, is a negative
relation between balance sheet (asset) growth and leverage growth. Given asset growth, equity
reacts and leverage adjusts.

       Financial intermediaries, such as banks, can behave very differently by engaging in active bal-
ance sheet management. For example, if the intermediary targets a constant leverage it will react to
changes in net worth by adjusting debt. If balance sheets are not marked to market—as is typically
in the case for commercial banks—then leverage is measured as total book assets to book equity and
financial intermediaries can react to an increase in asset prices by increasing their debt in order to
maintain a constant leverage in terms market value. In this case, the relationship between balance
sheet leverage growth and the balance sheet size (asset growth) can be positive. This implies that
leverage can be procylical: high during booms and low during busts.4

       Why might this be the case? Financial intermediaries strive to maintain a constant (maximal)
risk exposure while maximizing earnings through high leverage. A commonly used concept is VaR
(Value at Risk) which is an estimate of a financial institution’s worst case loss.5 Let us denote
   3
       This pattern is borne out in the flow of funds data for the household sector as shown by Adrian and Shin (2010).
   4
       This pattern is borne out in the flow of funds data for the financial sector, specifically broker-dealers, as shown
by Adrian and Shin (2010).
   5
     VaR is usually defined with respect to a confidence level of, say, 99%. Then VaR would be defined such that the
probability that losses on the asset portfolio exceed the value VaR is less than 1%.


                                                             6
Value at Risk per dollar of assets held by a bank by V . If the banks wants to maintain the total
VaR; i.e., V × A to be equal to capital, E, then we have E = V × A and leverage is:


                                                   A   1
                                              L=     =                                              (2)
                                                   E   V

   If this sketch provides a good approximation to the behavior of (investment) banks procylical
leverage is directly related to countercylical VaR. Leverage is high during boom times since during
these times, risks are low. Leverage is low during contractions since risks are high due to increased
volatility of asset prices.

   Let us go back to our previous example but now illustrate the balance sheet of a bank with the
same diagram:

                                     Assets             Liabilities

                                     Securities, 100   Equity, 10

                                                        Debt, 90



   Let us assume this bank actively manages its balance sheet to keep the leverage level constant
at 10. If the price of securities increase by 1% to 101, leverage falls to 9.18 and if the bank targets
a constant leverage of 10, it must increase its debt; i.e.,


                                      A/E = (101 + D)/11 = 10

   Thus, an increase in price of securities of 1 dollar brings an additional debt of 9 dollars. Leverage
is now 10 and the new balance sheet looks like:
                                     Assets             Liabilities

                                     Securities, 110   Equity, 11

                                                        Debt, 99



   This type of active balance sheet management makes the demand for assets procylical and
amplifies the financial cycle. When the demand for assets is high, this puts pressure on their price
which in turn increases prices and induces banks to take on more debt, increasing the size of the


                                                   7
balance sheet. The mechanism works reverse in downturns, through the selling off of assets, possibly
at fire-sale prices.

        This type of behavior goes against the standard theory where assets come first and equity and
debt adjust. Here, equity becomes sticky and assets grow by taking on more debt, and debt goes
down by selling of assets. This way of thinking is different from the traditional interpretation where
adjustment works via equity. According to this VaR model, leverage is explained by risk. Below
we provide evidence that indeed growth of assets and growth of leverage is positively linked for
investment banks and large banks, and that time dynamics in our leverage measures for these banks
in the U.S. follows the VIX volatility index.



4        Data and Descriptive Statistics

4.1        Data

We use a unique data set composed of firm- and bank-level observations from the ORBIS database
provided by Bureau van Dijk Electronic Publishing (BvD), between 2000–2009. This database is
an umbrella product that covers the other well-known databases from the same company such as
AMADEUS (only Europe firms), ZEPHYR (worldwide mergers), BANKSCOPE (worldwide banks)
and OSIRIS (worldwide listed firms). The time coverage of each firm/bank is a subset of the sample
period, leading to an unbalanced panel.6

        The database comes in two modules: Financials, which provides financial information—both
balance-sheet and off-balance sheet items—and Ownership/Corporate tree, which provides informa-
tion on foreign and domestic owners of each firm and all the subsidiaries and many establishments.
In our original data set, we have 60,000 publicly quoted companies worldwide (OSIRIS), 30,000+
banks (BANKSCOPE) worldwide, 29 million European companies from 46 countries (AMADEUS),
18+ million U.S. and Canadian companies, 5+ million South and Central American companies, 6+
million companies in the Far East and Central Asia (mainly in Japan, Korea, China), and 790,000
African and Middle Eastern companies (ORBIS).

        We will only use banks/financial firms and large non-financial firms in this study since the small
non-financial firms have no role in this crisis. In fact, we document that even large non-financial
firms were not important for the crisis and the whole action in pre-crisis leverage patterns comes
from banks and financial firms. Nevertheless, we investigate non-financial firms because Welch
    6
        We use ZEPHYR data to control for all firm mergers and acquisitions that happened during our sample.


                                                          8
(2007) show that only 10 out of the most leveraged 30 firms in S&P 500 typically are financial
firms. Table 1 shows the number of bank-year and firm-year observations used.

       For banks and financial firms we use a benchmark world sample, whereas for non-financial
firms we only focus on Europe and the United States. The reasons for this focus for non-financial
firms is twofold: First, this crisis was mainly about the financial sector. Second, for banks we have
representative universal coverage and we want to compare dynamic patterns in bank leverage before
and after the crisis across developed countries and emerging markets with different regulatory and
institutional structures. However, for non-financial firms we do not have a representative sample and
the coverage across countries varies widely. We focus on “large” firms (defined as firms with more
than 150 employees) from the countries with best quality data and coverage and these countries are
European countries and the United States which have better reporting requirements for accounting
data. In Europe and the United States all large firms (listed or not) have to file with official
registries. Given this requirement our European coverage is very good but the U.S. coverage suffers
from the fact that many firms in the United States do not report assets given that most of them
only provide consolidated statements.7

       We use two types of samples for both banks and firms: permanent and non-permanent. The
non-permanent sample is used in the regression analysis and in the investigation of cross-sectional
patterns. We made sure the non-permanent sample does not suffer from survivorship bias by
assembling our panel data from individual cross-sections using historical, archived releases of the
database. This is important since the BvD erases the banks in BANKSCOPE from all previous
years if the bank does not exist anymore in the current year. They apply a similar practice to firms
in AMADEUS and in ORBIS where they keep a firm for 5 years after it disappears and then erase
it from all years. Hence, the data has to be downloaded disk by disk for every year and not from
the latest disk for all the previous years.

       The permanent sample is used for time series figures. We have to use a permanent sample
here otherwise we would not know if the changes we see in the dynamic leverage patterns are due
to entry and exit of banks and firms. The trade-off is that these permanent samples will suffer
from survivorship bias. Permanent samples are defined as firms and banks being there throughout
the period of 2000–2009 and have non-missing asset data—a similar choice was made by Lemmon,
Roberts, and Zender (2006).
   7
       In addition to this issue, the BvD has a relatively thin coverage for the United States before 2007 even for
consolidated accounts.




                                                          9
   In the context of leverage, our bank data from BANKSCOPE is used by Gropp and Heider
(2009). In the context of the bank competition literature, it is used by Berger, Klapper, and
Turk-Ariss (2008) and Claessens and Laeven (2004). Our firm data is used by many authors in
different contexts. Arellano and Bai (2010) use AMADEUS (European firms only) to study the
relationship between leverage and financial development for one year (2004) but do not analyze
dynamic properties of leverage. Coricelli et al. (2009) use AMADEUS data for 9 CEE countries
in the pre-crisis period of 1996–2005 to study the relation between growth and leverage. ORBIS
data, where we get the U.S. firms, is identical to the well-known Dun and Bradstreet dataset which
is extensively used in the context of the United States. For example, Black and Strahan (2002)
use this data to study entrepreneurial activity in the United States and Acemoglu, Johnson, and
Mitton (2009) and Alfaro and Charlton (2010) use it for the cross-country study of concentration
and vertical integration and vertical and horizontal FDI patterns, respectively. The firm level data
also used in two other studies involving two of the authors of this article, namely, Kalemli-Ozcan,
Sørensen and Volosovych (2010) and Fons-Rosen, Kalemli-Ozcan, Sørensen, Volosovych, Villegas-
Sanchez (2011) who study the relationship between growth, volatility, and financial integration and
productivity spillovers, respectively.

   Our bank and firm data are suitable for international comparisons because the BvD harmo-
nizes the data but also because our dynamic analysis either compares banks over time within a
single country or banks over time within many countries using bank and country-time fixed effects
which control for permanent differences between banks or countries and for global common factors.
For our purpose, it is important to undertake a dynamic analysis, rather than a cross-sectional
analysis which doesn’t allow for fixed effects, because fixed effects will absorb all country- and
time-level differences that are common to all banks and firms in a country such as differences in
accounting practices, balance sheet representation, and domestic regulatory adjustments. For ex-
ample, international financial reporting standards result in higher total asset amounts than U.S.
generally accepted accounting principles because netting conditions are stricter under international
standards.

   In their cross-sectional analysis, Rajan and Zingales (1995) investigate three major differences
in accounting practices to see if these make a difference in their international comparative study of
leverage patterns in G7 countries. One of these differences stem from the fact that some countries
require the reporting of consolidated balance sheets and while other countries do not, though many
firms report consolidated balance sheets together with unconsolidated. Rajan and Zingales (1995)
show that this does not make a difference to their results. In our case, fixed effects will absorb


                                                 10
these difference but nevertheless for non-investment (commercial) banks and non-financial firms
we use only unconsolidated accounts to avoid double counting and improve comparability across
different countries.8 For investment banks, we use consolidated accounts because they only report
these. Adding consolidated statements (holding companies) for commercial banks does not alter
our results.

      Regulatory requirements might also apply differently to different accounts. For example, in the
United States minimum capital requirements apply both to individual banks and to consolidated
banks, whereas in other countries this may be different. Investment banks and their subsidiaries are
not subject to regulatory requirements in the United States and are regulated by the Securities and
Exchange Commission while they other countries often have different regulatory systems. Again,
any non-time varying bank-level changes will be absorbed by our fixed effects.

      Another difference between countries can be due to assets and liabilities being valued at book
value (historical) or at market value (current). As long as different countries follow different prac-
tices but all banks and firms do the same then these differences will be absorbed by our fixed effects.
If different banks and different firms in different countries choose different practices that change
over time then we cannot account for this (if constant over time, bank and firm fixed effects will
control for these difference). Therefore, we stick to book value overall as reported in balance sheets
if we have the choice between the two as in the case of listed firms and banks. For private firms
and banks (which is the big fraction of our data) we have book value only.

      At the country level, we use two sets of variables to proxy institutional regulatory structure.
The first set of variables are from the World Bank’s Doing Business Data Set, such as indices for
the protection of Shareholder Rights and Investor Rights (taking values between 1 and 10 where
a higher value means more protection). We use 2003-2006 values of the variables to capture the
situation before the crisis. The second set of variables are from the Bank Regulation Data Set
of Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2007). This data set comes in two survey waves, an initial one
in 2003 and a later one in 2010. We use the 2003 values of the following variables: Real Estate
Restrictiveness, which is an index that measures the extent to which banks may engage in real estate
investment, development and management. The index takes a value between 1 and 4 where a value
of 1 indicates no restriction and a value of 4 means these activities cannot be conducted. Overall
Restrictiveness is a similarly defined index for real estate insurance and securities activities, where
banks may engage in underwriting, brokering and dealing in securities, insurance and all aspects
  8
      Assets may still be not measured right for each individual bank even we use unconsolidated accounts for each
bank given the global nature of many banks.


                                                        11
of mutual fund industry. This index varies between 3 and 12 since it is the sum of three different
indices and a higher number means more restrictiveness. Required Audit indicates whether or not
there is a compulsory external audit of the bank by a certified auditor. If this takes a value of
1, it means there is a required audit, otherwise the variable takes a value of zero. Supervision
Index indicates the efficiency of supervision and takes a value of 1 if there are multiple independent
supervisors for banks and zero otherwise. Monitoring Index indicates the efficiency of monitoring
and takes a value of 1 if top ten banks in the country are all rated by International Rating Agencies,
if off-balance sheet items are disclosed to public, if banks must disclose risk management procedures
to the public and if subordinated debt is required as part of regulatory capital. This index is zero
otherwise.


4.2       Descriptive Statistics

For most of this article the leverage ratio is measured as the ratio of assets to equity (shareholder
funds). This measure is equivalent to the measure 1−equity/assets as used by Gropp and Heider
(2009).9 We use this measure as our benchmark measure both for non-financial firms and banks.
We also use for robustness the ratio of tier 1 capital (sum of capital and reserves minus intangible
assets) to adjusted assets, ratio of total liabilities to total assets, ratio of total debt to total assets
and ratio of total debt to equity. (Not reported in the present version of the article.) All these
measures give similar results so we focus on the assets to equity ratio as leverage measure.

       The leverage ratio (assets/equity) does not include off-balance sheet exposure. One of the
key characteristic of this crisis is that, in the pre-crisis period banks funded a growing amount of
long-term assets with short-term liabilities through the use of off-balance sheet vehicles, exposing
themselves to credit and liquidity risk by providing credit facilities and guarantees to these vehi-
cles. Many have argued that this was the main amplification mechanism (see Brunnermeier, 2009
and Adrian and Shin, 2009). In addition, banks held structured credit instruments on their own
balance sheet, increasing their maturity mismatch of the balance sheet and their funding liquidity
risk. Therefore, we also investigate patterns in the ratio of off-balance sheet items (guarantees and
committed credit lines) to assets since a loan guarantee involves a future contingent commitment
even it does not show up on the balance sheet. Banks report these data together with balance
sheet as a separate memo line called off-balance sheet items where they report guarantees, com-
   9
       Gropp and Heider use this measure because it includes all debt and non-debt liabilities of banks such as deposits
while other standard measures of leverage are less suitable for banks.




                                                            12
mitted credit lines, and other exposure to securitization. Only very few banks report the last item.
Investment banks do not report any of these items.

    In our regressions, we use explanatory variables that are standard in the corporate finance
literature such as size (proxied by log assets), profitability (proxied by net income/assets), and
tangibility (proxied by total earnings assets/assets). We further investigate the role of foreign
ownership, especially because the previous literature has overlooked potential effects of foreign
ownership on leverage. We divide countries into different groups and compare listed versus non-
listed firms/banks, big versus small firms/banks, and investment banks versus commercial banks.

    As mentioned above, Table 1 shows the number of bank-year and firm-year observations by
country, where for firms we focus only on large firms from European countries and from the United
States to have more comparable samples. Large firms are firms with assets above 28 million USD
and more than 150 employees. We have over 1.5 million observations for these firms. We have over
200,000 bank observations from 60+ countries. Table 2 presents the number of observations by
bank type and account type. Most of our banks report unconsolidated accounts, commercial, and
not listed. Similar picture emerges from firm level data where most of our firms are non-financial.

    Table 3 presents descriptive statistics, averages across bank and time. The leverage ratio can
be as high as 46 with a mean of 12 and the maximum amount of off-balance sheet items is 65
percent of assets with a mean of 10 percent. Table 3 also shows descriptive statistics by type of
bank. Investment banks have slightly higher leverage, on average. “Sponsor” banks and large
commercial banks have the highest leverage on average, around 22 and 17 respectively. “Sponsor
banks” refer to banks which have created off-balance sheet investment vehicles. These are mostly
large commercial banks. The names of the sponsor banks are from Acharya, Schnabl and Suarez
(2010). There are 70 conduit sponsor banks in their data set and we have located 62 of these in our
data. 31 of these banks are European, 23 are American, 4 are Australian, 3 are Japanese, and 1
bank is Canadian. Only 3 out of 62 are investment banks. Non-sponsor banks statistics are similar
to the statistics of all banks.



5     Empirical Patterns

5.1   Aggregate Picture

In order to interpret our results for leverage, we start by plotting the development of bank assets
and equity since 2000. In the Flow of Funds compiled by the U.S. Federal Reserve System, assets

                                                13
of commercial banks, savings institutions, and credit unions increase from about 6 trillions dollars
to over 12 trillion dollars in 2008 followed by a decline of several hundred billion since 2008—see
Panel A. Investment banks (“brokers and dealers” in the Flow of Funds) saw a tremendous growth in
assets from 2000 to 2008 followed by a steep reversal of over half a trillion dollars. Investment banks
held large amounts of assets tied to sub-prime loans. These travails of the U.S. investment banking
sector and the culmination in the default of Lehman Brothers, has been extensively documented
in many places (see for example Duffie (2010) and Krishnamurthy (2001) and other papers in the
Journal of Economic Perspective’s symposium on the financial crisis in the Winter 2010 issue).

      Panel B of Figure 1 displays U.S. aggregated assets from the our bank-level data. “Aggregated,”
when results are based on bank by bank data, simply means the sum of assets (or equity) over all
the banks in the sample. Compared to the Flow of Funds data, our aggregated data overstates
assets because banks’ claims on each other are not netted out and may display slightly lower
growth as our data are deflated by the Consumer Price Index while the Flow of Funds data are
nominal. Nonetheless, the patterns in our aggregated data are similar to the patterns in the Flow
of Funds data for both investment banks and non-investment banks. Using our data, we are able to
break down the patterns for large banks, large banks excluding investment banks and small banks.
Panel C shows aggregated assets of European banks from our data.10 Assets grew marginally from
2000 till 2004 followed by a sharp acceleration to more than 20 trillion dollars in 2008 followed by
an astounding drop of about 3 trillion dollars from 2008 to 2009.

      Figure 2 displays U.S. Flow of Funds equity and aggregated equity from our micro data in
Panels A and B, respectively. U.S. investment bank equity grew sharply from 2004 to 2006 followed
by a sharp drop in 2008 (the exact timing being slightly different between the quarterly Flow of
Funds data and the annual aggregated data and a sharper decline in aggregated data given the
log scale). For large banks (excluding investment banks) there has been a steady increase. For
European banks aggregated equity, see Figure 2 Panel C, increased rapidly from about 600 billion
dollars in 2004 to about 800 billion in 2007 followed by a slight drop in 2008 and a steep recovery
in 2009.

      Figure 3 compares aggregate U.S. leverage, calculated as assets over equity, from the Flow of
Funds to aggregated leverage (aggregated assets divided by aggregated equity) compiled from our
micro data. The U.S. patterns from the Flow of Funds accounts in Panel A are very similar to those
of the aggregated data in Panel B which display aggregated assets divided by aggregated equity.
 10
      European sample includes all European countries. Results with banks only from the EU are similar.




                                                        14
In 2004, SEC deregulated the minimum capital requirements for investment banks, freeing leverage
ratios from regulatory constraints. A run-up in leverage of investment banks (“brokers and dealers”
in the Flow of Funds) from 2004 to 2008 is evident in both panels although the Flow of Funds data,
being quarterly, exhibits sharper peaks and valleys. The collapse in leverage of investment banks
after 2008 is also clearly evident in both panels. This is (mechanically) explained by the sharp
decline in assets combined with equity rebounding in 2009. Leverage ratio of commercial banks
was quite stable from 2000 until 2008 when a steep decline occurred. This is explained by the small
decline in assets and the steeper increase in equity seen in the previous figures. In the light of the
VaR model we discussed above, it is not surprising that the pattern in leverage is similar to the
pattern in the VIX risk measure, as shown in Appendix Figure.

       Figure 4 “zooms in” on non-investment banks whose lines seemed flat due to the scale of
Figure 3 and compares to European data. The Flow of Funds leverage ratio for non-investment
banks can now be seen clearly to be quite stable between 12 and 14 until the middle of 2008
when the leverage ratio started dropping till near 9 in late 2009. A similar pattern is revealed in
Panel B using aggregated data and it appears that this decline in leverage was concentrated in
the group of large banks.11 Large banks grew faster from 2004 to 2008 but because small banks
kept growing after 2008 the difference in assets and hence the leverage ratio is now smaller. For
Europe, aggregated leverage was quite stable apart from a slight decline after the 2001 dot-com
crises until a steep run-up from 2006 to 2008 followed by a sharp fall-back in 2009—clearly caused
by the decline in assets observed in Figure 1. In Europe we do not observe a separate category of
investment banks since banking is universal.

       The sub-prime crisis first came to the surface on July 31, 2007 with the default of two Bear
Stearn hedge funds followed by BNP Paribas halting withdrawals from three investment funds.
A large number of banks had created off-balance sheet conduits which mainly invested in asset-
backed securities in order to reduce capital requirements. However, most conduits were still fully or
partially guaranteed by their sponsoring banks which also provided committed lines of credit (see,
Acharya, Schnabl and Suarez (2010) for more details on this). We have measures of guarantees
and committed credit lines and we display the aggregated amounts relative to assets for all banks
and separately for large banks in Figure 5. Investment banks do not report these items. The total
amount of guarantees and credit lines were almost as large as total assets from 2000 till 2007—more
precisely 85 percent—for large banks and lower at 70 percent for all banks. From 2007 till 2009
  11
       These figures include investment banks for large and all banks to be able to compare the magnitudes to European
banks.



                                                           15
there was a sharp reversal with the aggregate amount dropping to less than 50 percent of assets
when banks were getting out these commitments in the wake of the interbank lending freeze. Large
banks and smaller banks witnessed a narrowing gap. Panel B shows similar patterns for Europe
in terms of timing, though less pronounced in scale; guarantees and committed credit lines are
only as high as 20 percent of assets. This might be also due the differences in regulation where
banks in Spain do not issue guarantees to off-balance sheet entities. The reason for this is the fact
that before the crisis only one country, Spain, had imposed similar capital charges for assets on- or
off-balance sheet and therefore Spanish banks did not sponsor conduits.

      This article does not focus on guarantees and credit lines but it is obvious that banks carry
a large amount of risk that is not visible from conventional leverage ratios. Ex post, major U.S.
banks were subject to increasing risk from guaranteeing enormous pools of assets of declining
quality; however, the pattern of Figure 5 does not indicate increased risk taking before 2007—
only the collapse after the start of the crises reveals the risk taken. We will return to this theme
again during our regression analysis but it is already clear that outside of investment banks neither
leverage nor guarantees and committed credit lines relative to assets (or equity) signalled excessive
risk taking over time in the run-up to the crisis. It appears that the increasing risk exposure of
commercial banks in 2004–2007 were hidden in the deteriorating quality of the asset pool.


5.2      Median Leverage: Typical Bank and Firm

Aggregated (and Flow of Funds) patterns may be driven by a few megabanks, such as Bank of
America, Citibank, and JP Morgan. Our micro data allows us to examine leverage of typical
banks. We plot median leverage for banks over time in Figure 6. Panel A is visually dominated
by investment banks which have pro-cyclical leverage ratios between 14 and 20. These medians
are higher than those of commercial banks but much lower than the aggregate leverage ratios of
investment banks—clearly, high leverage of investment banks is concentrated within the largest
ones.

      Panel B drops investment banks to better study the leverage ratio of the typical U.S. commercial
bank. For the typical large bank, leverage has been steadily decreasing from around 12 to around
10.5 with temporary increases in 2004–2005 and 2008, while the median (overall) bank has had a
stable leverage ratio between 10 and 10.5 from 2000 to 2009.12 Panel C shows that the median
European bank decreased leverage steadily from around 17.5 to 15 over our sample. The higher
 12
      Bank leverage is much higher than typical firm leverage, displayed below, as found by Gropp and Heider (2009).



                                                         16
leverage in Europe may be due to various institutional features as studied by Rajan and Zingales
(1995) who found higher leverage for European than for U.S. firms. In this paper, the focus is
on temporal patterns in leverage and we notice that typical (median) banks have falling leverage
ratios in both Europe and the United States with both countries displaying a temporary increase
in 2008.

   Figure 7 shows median levels of guarantees and committed credit lines to assets for large and for
all banks. The median is much smaller than the aggregate ratio for large banks and much smaller
again for all banks. This holds for both the United States and Europe implying that issuing of
guarantees and committed credit lines was concentrated within the group of the largest banks. The
patterns so far suggests that large banks were substantially more exposed to systemic risk than
smaller banks.


5.3   Bank Leverage: Procylical or Countercyclical?

An increase in asset values will mechanically increase the value of both the numerator and denom-
inator of the leverage ratio but the increase in equity will be proportionally larger and the leverage
ratio will mechanically fall. Such a pattern is observed for households as pointed out by Adrian
and Shin (2008, 2009). However, a firm or a bank may be able to use the increased equity as basis
for further lending which will increase assets (and liabilities) relative to equity with the outcome
that asset appreciation and leverage is no longer inversely related. Adrian and Shin (2008, 2009)
demonstrate that non-financial corporations’ asset growth and leverage is virtually uncorrelated
using aggregate data from the U.S. Flow of Funds accounts.

   A non-financial firm may face decreasing marginal profitability of investments; however, banks
will often be able to invest in large liquid markets, such as mortgage-backed securities with non-
decreasing marginal returns, while lending at a constant low rate through repurchase arrangements,
commercial paper, or implicitly through cash management for hedge funds. If banks have target
leverage ratios the net result will be that leverage does not increase with asset values but rather
aggregate leverage and asset growth will be positively correlated over time. Adrian and Shin (2008,
2009) show this procylicality for U.S. investment banks 1963–2006. They show that for commercial
banks the patterns is acylical, though Greenlaw, Hatzius, Kashyap, and Shin (2008) found a similar
procylical pattern for 5 big commercial banks in the United States.

   Figure 8 examines potential pro-cyclicality for U.S. investment banks, large commercial banks,
and small commercial banks in Panels A, B, and C, respectively. The figure complements Adrian


                                                 17
and Shin (2008, 2009) and Greenlaw, Hatzius, Kashyap, and Shin (2008), plotting average growth
of leverage against average growth of assets for the sample of all (investment, large, small) banks
in our dataset. In these figures, all banks have equal weight and the interpretation is that the
figures show whether banks typically display the Adrian-Shin pattern.13 Because all banks have
equal weights the patterns are not strongly affected by a few giant banks.

       Panel A focusses on U.S. investment banks and the “Adrian-Shin pattern” is easily visible over
the full sample period. Year 2008 is an outlier with large declines in assets and leverage but it
pretty much lies on the line that one can easily fit using ordinary myopic eyeballs.14 For large U.S.
(non-investment) banks in Panel B, a similar pattern is visible, maybe with an even steeper slope
although the observations for 2008 and 2009, which are above the other points, probably should
be interpreted with caution: many observers, see for example, Greenlaw, Hatzius, Kashyap, and
Shin (2008), interpret the increase in bank lending in 2008 as “forced lending” where borrowers—in
particular—were drawing on pre-committed credit lines placed in the off-balance sheet vehicles.
Certainly, the steep decline in assets, committed credit lines and guarantees that started in 2008
and accelerated in 2009 is consistent with banks needing time to unwind their obligations. Panel C
shows a clear absence of pro-cyclical leverage for smaller banks.

       For European banks, in Figure 9, we observe a slight tendency for leverage to be pro-cyclical for
large banks, although with a much smaller slope than found for large U.S. banks. Smaller European
banks display a surprisingly stable level of asset growth and no hint of pro-cyclical leverage is visible
for this group of banks.


5.4       Non-Financial Firms

Mean values of leverage for large non-financial firms over time are plotted in Figure 10. Mean firm
leverage for listed U.S. firms is very stable at around 2.3-2.4 while the leverage ratio is slightly larger
for non-listed firms but still much lower than what we found for banks. This pattern is consistent
with firms hoarding cash in 2009 (for example, Almeida, Campello, and Weisbach 2004 discuss how
constrained firms may be more likely to conserve cash in a recession drawing on their bank lines
of credit). For Europe, we see slightly higher leverage ratios, which may be due to differences in
  13
       This is different from saying that the typical bank (usually interpreted as the median) displays the pattern. In
the time series graphs, we plotted medians against time but it is not as meaningful to plot median leverage growth
against median asset growth because the medians will belong to different banks.
  14
     Note that in Adrian-Shin figures the 2008 point is on the top of the graph since they only use first quarter of
2008 where the crisis was still in its infancy. Our annual data reflects end of year accounts.



                                                           18
accounting rules, but the temporal patterns are similar to those of the United States with very
little variation over time except that we find a weak but steady decline in leverage for all (mainly
non-listed) firms. The great recession does not register at all for European non-financial firms.

       Figure 11 examines potential pro-cyclicality of the leverage of non-financial firms. The U.S. data
in Panel A show no inkling of pro-cyclicality and very little systematic growth. Leverage increased
in 2008, likely due to loss of equity, but decreased as rapidly in 2009. European non-financial firms
keep a constant amount of leverage over the sample, apart from the 2008 outlier which is similar
to the United States.


5.5       Regression Analysis

From the previous section, it appears that leverage at the bank and firm level did not signal an
impending recession. In the first version of this paper we performed regressions for non-financial
firm leverage and confirmed the standard determinants of leverage, as identified in the corporate
finance literature (reviewed above), but because nothing new came to the surface we turn to bank-
level regressions in Table 4.

       We estimate the relation

                   Leverageit = µi + α ∗ sizeit + γ ∗ profitit + δ ∗ collatit + Σt βt Dt ∗ Xc(i) ,

where the left-hand side is firm level leverage, µi is a firm level dummy (“fixed effect”), Dt is
a set of time dummies (with 2000 left out to avoid collinearity), and Xc(i) is one of the institu-
tional/regulatory variables (we try several) for country c in which bank i is located.15 We control for
size (log assets), profitability, and collateral because these were found by Gropp and Heider (2009)
to be predictors of bank leverage and excluding these variables might result in left-out variable
bias.

       The interpretation of the results out of this specification will be as follows: because the bank-
level dummy captures any constant bank-level (and therefore also country-level) variables the inter-
pretation of the other regressors is that they capture the change in leverage relative to bank-level
averages while they are uninformative about permanent differences between banks (and countries).
The objects of interest is the βt coefficients which show whether countries with particular regulatory
environments experience different temporal patterns in leverage.
  15
       In the regression, we use the alternative equivalent leverage measure 1-equity/assets. The sign and significance of
the estimated coefficients are similar to what we would find with assest/equity but the measure used here is between
0 and 1 which allows for easier interpretation of the coefficients.


                                                             19
       The results of Table 4 are interesting. In columns (1)-(3), we run the exact regressions in
Gropp and Heider (2009) and confirm their findings that size has a positive impact on leverage
(with t-values around 40!), collateral have a positive significant impact (t-values around 10), while
profitability has a negative impact (with t-values around 10).16 These are the variables typically
found to be significant with similar signs for non-financial firms and Gropp and Heider found that
banks are not different.17 Column (2) focuses on the banks that are large and listed on stock
exchange (similar sample as Gropp and Heider) and column (3) uses lagged values, as it is typical
in the literature, and obtains a weaker fit. Lagged assets may not be relevant during the crisis
due to rapid changes in asset values and hence in the rest of the columns we use current values of
controls—-assets and leverage are obviously determined simultaneously, but the focus here is on
comparison across countries.

       The temporal patterns are revealing: In columns (4) to (10) the time-dummy interaction terms
are in general not significant for 2001 to 2007 (meaning these years are similar to 2000) except for
the “required audit variable” and “monitoring variable” for which 2000 (left-out) leverage is higher
than 2001–2007 (in the countries where these variables are higher, meaning stricter regulation).
More interesting is the highly significant very robust pattern that more restrictive regulation is
associated with a relatively higher leverage in 2008. We interpret this in the light of of the time
series patterns observed in the figures. Banks with high leverage and, in particular, highly risky
assets displayed strongly declining leverage in 2008 when assets were written down. As discussed
previously, standard leverage measures did not flag that the assets on many banks’ balance sheets
were questionable, this only became apparent in assets value losses in 2008—the moment of truth! If
a restrictive regulatory environment helped banks stay on the straight and narrow path in terms of
asset quality, this should therefore also be visible only in 2008 and so it is. The positive coefficient
associated with strict regulation imply that countries with strict regulation suffered lower asset
losses which we interpret to mean that banks in those countries on average held higher quality assets
and/or avoided risk exposure through guarantees to off-balance sheet entities with questionable
assets. The coefficient to, say, overall restrictiveness of 0.003 implies that a change of 10 in overall
restrictiveness (moving from least to most restrictive) leads to a change in the leverage ratio of
0.03. If the initial leverage ratio was 0.9 and the new leverage ratio is 0.93 that implies a change
in assets over equity from 9 to 13.3 (=0.93/0.07)—a rather substantial increase in leverage. The
implications is that leverage (or more precisely the underlying problems in asset quality) and,
  16
       We experimented with different definitions of these variables and other controls, but the results are very robust.
  17
       Gropp and Heider find that their results are not robust to inclusion of bank-fixed effects but we find very high
significance even if such fixed effects are included here. This might be due to our bigger sample.


                                                            20
therefore, the vulnerability of the real economy is significantly impacted by regulatory constraint.

    Table 5 considers the relation of assets and equity separately to the restrictiveness variable.
We see that assets and equity increased more (or, in 2008, declined less) in the tighter regulation
countries relative to other countries. These results are consistent with the result in Table 4 that
tighter regulation countries deleveraged less, a result we interpret as these countries’ banks holding
less risky assets.

    Figure 12 illustrates the results of Table 4 and Table 5 visually by plotting the growth of
aggregate leverage from 2007–2008 against overall restrictiveness of regulation in 2003. While
this does not exactly correspond to the regressions (since other variables are not controlled for)
it illustrates the positive slope is driven by emerging markets such as Mexico, Brazil, and Turkey,
which had stricter regulation and less declines in assets and leverage relative to developed countries
(the bottom corner of the figure) such as the U.K. and Ireland in 2008. The United States, Germany
and France are outliers.



6     Robustness and Other Issues

6.1    Other Determinants of Leverage: Banks and Firms

We have performed extensive robustness analysis, where we do not report all for space considera-
tions. We have data on the ownership structure of the banks. Calculating “foreign ownership” of
the banks as ln(1 + F O) where FO represents percent voting stakes owned by foreigners, we obtain
similar results. Foreign ownership itself enters negative and significantly. We have also used risk
weighted assets based on Basel II requirements instead of total assets obtaining similar results.

    What about the role of cash holdings? Figures 13 and 14 display median and aggregate cash
holdings of European and U.S. banks. For Europe, the picture is one of steadily increasing cash
holdings, roughly mirroring the increase in assets. For the United States, the picture is similar
before the crisis although cash holdings increased a little slower than aggregate assets. However;
overall, these data would not have signalled an increase in risk taking before the crisis. The U.S. data
displays a highly pronounced spike in 2009. This reflects the breakdown of interbank lending during
the crisis when banks did not lend to other banks which might be in danger of failure. The banks,
therefore, held the assets on their books, wherefore the spike in cash, and the Federal Reserve lent
directly to banks needing short-term financing. In order to limit any potential inflationary impact
of the large reserves the Federal Reserve, for the first time in its history, began paying interest on

                                                  21
reserves in October 2008. In effect, the Federal Reserve acts as an intermediary between banks
with excess funds and banks wishing to lend. This mechanism is explained in detail in Keister and
McAndrews (2009).

   We have also performed firm level regressions for non-financial firms. The standard determinants
of leverage such as size, collateral and profitability all have the expected signs but there was no
visible increase or decrease in leverage of the non-financial firms before and/or after the crisis
as we have shown before graphically. We have checked whether this can be explained by firms
cash holdings but those holdings also do not show an significant time variation. These results are
available upon request.


6.2   The Role of Conduits

Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2010) show that commercial banks set up conduits to securitize
assets—specifically Asset Backed Commercial Paper (ABCP)—without transferring risk to outside
investors. These conduits were designed to avoid capital charges and commercial banks facing more
stringent capital requirements were more likely to set up conduits with guarantees implying that
risk was not transferred outside of the banking system.

   Conduits are independent shell companies sponsored by large financial institutions. Acharya,
Schnabl, and Suarez (2010) use a hand-collected dataset on the universe of conduits from January
2001 to December 2008 and their sponsors. They show that almost all conduits have credit guaran-
tees by large financial institutions. We do not have their conduit data nor we do have some of these
conduits in our data but we do have the sponsors. The data on guarantees and committed credit
lines we have shown before include the credit guarantees to conduits because these are explicit
commitments of the sponsor banks. Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2010) report that investors in
conduits only lost 1.7 percent of their investments in ABCP since the guarantees were called and
the assets were liquidated and/or absorbed by the sponsoring bank. Figure 5 is consistent with
this fact. Thus, it is clear that the deleveraging process is closely linked to these conduits and their
sponsor banks.

   Did banks with conduits have different leverage? Very few of the conduit sponsor banks are
investment banks (3 out of 62 sponsors in our data) and almost all the sponsor banks are large
commercial banks. We do not have the actual conduits in our dataset but, in order to investigate
if sponsor banks had different leverage on their balance sheets, we plot Figures 1–7 dropping all
conduit sponsor banks from our permanent sample. All these figures are identical to our previous


                                                  22
figures and hence not reported to save space. They are available upon request.


6.3   The Role of Mergers and Government

During the crisis, a lot of mergers took place such as Bank of America’s takeover of Merrill Lynch
as of January 2009, JP Morgan’s takeover of Bear Stearns in 2008. We do not control for these
which took place mid to end of 2008/beginning of 2009. It is most likely the case that the merger
will not cause an immediate increase in the assets of the commercial bank. But over time as the
securities held by the acquired banks are transferred, we should see a slow rise in the assets of the
commercial bank. Thus, this is an important issue if we want to trace changes in leverage and
assets throughout the end of 2010 since Bank of America’s and JP Morgan’s assets might increase
as a result of the acquisitions. The same issue might also effect the acquired banks but He, Khang,
and Krishnamurthy (2010) notes that they do not observe any change in Merrill Lynch’s asset
holdings in the first quarter of 2009. Other investment banks were not acquired but ceased to be
investment banks and converted into bank holding companies, in particular Goldman Sachs and
Morgan Stanley. As noted by He, Khang, and Krishnamurthy (2010) even after being converted
into holding company status, the commercial banking operations represent a very small fraction of
the business of these investment banks.

   He, Khang, and Krishnamurthy (2010) argue that there has been a shift in the distribution of
risky assets during 2008-2009, where the assets sold by the investment banks are bought out by
commercial banks and the government. They use aggregate flow of funds data and their results are
likely driven by big banks, which they also confirm by using data on the largest banks from SEC
filings and call reports.

   The government played a very active role in recapitalizing banks. He, Khang, and Krishna-
murthy (2010) suggest that the preferred stock owned by the government must be subtracted from
equity in calculating “true leverage.” They find, using FDIC-data, that such a correction raises
the leverage of the top 19 commercial banks in the United States from 10.0 to 14.4 in the first
quarter of 2009. There is also the the issue of recording the assets at book value. He, Khang,
and Krishnamurthy (2010) argue that “true leverage” may have been as high as 30 if assets were
marked to market. While He, Khang, and Krishnamurthy (2010) were able to roughly impute the
fall in the value of banks’ asset during the peak of the crises for the commercial banking sector as a
whole and for some major banks, it is not an easy task to do systematically bank-by-bank over our
sample and hence we do not perform such an exercise. We also do not perform an adjustment on


                                                 23
the government owned stock since we argue that if the purpose of measuring leverage is to gauge the
riskiness of banks, surely government owned preferred equity helps buffer the risk. We report asset
and equity holdings and leverage of big investment and commercial banks from the United States
and Europe in Table 6. Our numbers match He, Khang, and Krishnamurthy (2010) for investment
banks. For commercial banks, we have a slight increase in 2008 but not as high as found by He,
Khang, and Krishnamurthy (2010) since we do not adjust for government owned equity.

    One final difference is that He, Khang, and Krishnamurthy (2010) focus on subsidiaries and,
most likely unconsolidated statements, since they drop holding companies. (One has to use either
consolidated or the non-consolidated statements in order to avoid double counting.) In our em-
pirical analysis we also use unconsolidated accounts for non-investment (commercial) banks and
for investment banks we use consolidated accounts throughout because these banks only report
consolidated statements. For the purpose of Table 6, we use consolidated statements and holding
companies for both commercial and investment banks in order to make a meaningful comparison
between the two groups.



7    Conclusion

Traditional leverage ratios and off-balance sheet exposure relative to assets did not signal increas-
ing risk taking by banks before the financial crises, with the exception of investment banks who
aggressively increased leverage. On the whole, increasing risk before the crisis was associated with
risky pools of assets although only few realized this at the time. When the crisis broke in 2008,
the banks with large exposure to sub-prime assets suffered large declines in assets. Larger banks
were the most exposed and it appears that the larger the banks the more risky on average. There
was little relation between leverage and restrictiveness of regulation across countries before 2008
but the countries with stricter bank regulation and stronger protection of investor and shareholder
rights were less affected by the crises implying that regulation may well have benefits even if these
benefits are invisible until the economy faces a major stress event.




                                                 24
                                        References



Acharya, V., and Schnabl, P. (2009), “How Banks Played the Leverage Game,” Chapter 2 in
    Acharya, Viral V. and Matthew Richardson (editors).

Acharya, V., Schanbl, P., and Suarez, G. (2010), “Securitization without Risk Transfer,” NBER
    WP 15730.

Acemoglu, D., Johnson S. and Mitton T. (2009), “Determinants of Vertical Integration: Financial
    Development and Contracting Costs,” Journal of Finance 63, 1251–1290.

Adrian, T., and Shin H. (2009), “Money, Liquidity, and Monetary Policy,” American Economic
    Review 99, 600-605.

Adrian, T., and Shin H. (2008), “Financial intermediary leverage and value at-risk,” Federal
    Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, 338.

Adrian, T., and Shin H. (2010), “Liquidity and Leverage,” Journal of Financial Intermediation
    19, 3, 418–437.

Alfaro L. and Charlton A. (2007), “Intra-Industry Foreign Direct Investment,” NBER WP No.
    13447.

Allen F., Carletti E., Marquez R. (2009), “Credit Market Competition and Capital Regulation,”
    Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Almeida, H., Campello, M., and Weisbach, M. (2004), “The Cash flow sensitivity of cash,” Journal
    of Finance 59, 1777–1804.

Arellano C., Bai Y. (2010), “Financial Markets and Fluctuations in Uncertainty,” Federal Reserve
    Bank of Minneapolis Research Department Staff Report.

Barth, J., Caprio G. and Levine R. (2007), “Bank Regulation and Supervision (updated dataset),”
    WB working paper series no. 2588.

Berger A., Klapper Leora F. and Turk-Ariss R. (2008), “Bank Competition and Financial Stabil-
    ity,” World Bank Working Paper No. 4696.



                                                25
Bernanke, B.S. and Gertler, M. (1995), “ Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of Monetary
    Policy Transmission,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, 27–48.

Black S. and Strahan E. (2002), “Entrepreneurship and Bank Credit Availability,” Journal of
    Finance 57, 2807–2833.

Booth L., Aivazian V., Demirgüç-Kunt A. and Maksimovic V. (2001), “Capital Structures in
    Developing Countries,” Journal of Finance 56, 87–130.

Brunnermeier, M. (2009), “Deciphering the 2007/8 Liquidity and Credit Crunch,” Journal of
    Economic Perspectives 23, 77-100.

Brinnermeier, M. and Pedersen, L. (2009), “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity,” Review of
    Financial Studies 22, 6, 2201–2238.

Claessens S. and Laeven L. (2004), “What Drives Bank Competition? Some International Evi-
    dence,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 36, 563–583.

Coricelli, F., Driffield, N., Pal, S., and Roland, I. (2009), “Excess leverage and productivity growth
    in emerging economies: Is there a threshold effect?” CEPR WP No. 7617.

Diamond, D. and Rajan, R. (2000), “A Theory of Bank Capital,” Journal of Finance 55, 2431–
    2465.

Duffie, Darrell (2010) “The Failure Mechanics of Dealer Banks,” Journal of Economic Perspectives
    24, 51–72.

Farhi E. and Tirole J. (2010), “Bubbly Liquidity,” NBER WP No. 16750.

Flannery, M. (1994), “Debt maturity and the deadweight cost of leverage: Optimally financing
    banking firms,” American Economic Review 84, 320–331.

Flannery M. and Sorescu M. (1996), “Evidence of Bank Market Discipline in Subordinated Deben-
    ture Yields: 1983–1991,” Journal of Finance 51, 1347–1377.

Flannery M., Rangan K. (2008) “What caused the bank capital build-up of the 1990s?” Review
    of Finance 12, 391–429.

Fons-Rosen, C., Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Sørensen, B., Villegas-Sanchez, C., Volosovych, V. (2011)
    “Productivity versus Competition Effects of Foreign Investment Within and Across Coun-
    tries,” University of Houston, Working Paper.

                                                 26
Fostel A. and Geanakoplos J. (2008), “Leverage Cycles and the Anxious Economy,” American
    Economic Review 98, 1211–1244.

Frank, M. and Goyal, V. (2004), “Capital structure decisions: Which factors are reliably impor-
    tant?” Financial Management, forthcoming.

Greenlaw D., Hatzius J., Kashyap A., Shin H. (2008) “Leveraged Losses: Lessons from the Mort-
    gage Market Meltdown,” U.S. Monetary Policy Forum Report No. 2.

Gropp R. and Heider F. (2009), “The Determinants of Bank Capital Structure,” European Central
    Bank WP, No. 1096.

He, Z. and Khang, I., and Krishnamurthy, A. (2010) “Balance Sheet Adjustment during the 2008
    Crisis” IMF Economic Review 58, 1, 118–156.

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Sørensen, Bent E., Vadym Volosovych, Vadym, (2010) “Deep Financial
    Integration and Volatility,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 7784.

Keister, T., and McAndrews, J. (2009), “Why Are Banks Holding So Many Excess Reserves?”
    Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Reports no. 380.

Kiyotaki, N., and Moore J. (1997), “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy 105, 211–248.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind (2010) “How Debt Markets Have Malfunctioned in the Crisis,” Journal of
    Economic Perspectives 24, 3-28.

Lemmon, M.L., M.R. Roberts, and Zender J.F. (2008), “Back to the beginning: Persistence and
    the Cross-Section of Corporate Capital Structure,” Journal of Finance 63, 1575–1608.

Myers, S. and Rajan, R. (1998), “The paradox of liquidity,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113,
    733–771.

Modigliani F., Miller M. (1958) “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the Theory of
    Investment,” American Economic Review 48, 261–297.

Rajan R., Zingales L. (1995), “What do we know about capital structure? Some evidence from
    international data,” Journal of Finance 50, 1421–1460.

Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R. W. (1992) “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market Equi-
    librium Approach,” Journal of Finance 47, 4, 1343–1366.


                                             27
Welch I. (2007), “Common Flaws in Empirical Capital Structure Research,” unpublished working
    paper, Brown University.




                                            28
A     Data Appendix

A.1     Sample Construction

The micro-level data that we utilize in this paper provides not only the financial information on
both balance-sheet and off-balance sheet items, but also the information on foreign and domestic
owners of each firm/bank.

    For banks, we have 3 sets of samples that give those information. They are created for U.S.
banks, European banks and all banks, respectively. Each sample has two sets of sub-samples;
permanent and non-permanent. The non-permanent samples are used in regression analysis and in
the investigation of cross-sectional patterns. The permanent samples are used for time-series plots.

    For firms, we have 2 sets of samples that contain very large and large industrial (both financial
and nonfinancial) firms operating in U.S. and European countries. Similar to bank-level data, each
sample has two sets of sub-samples, permanent and non-permanent.


A.2     Sample Selection Criteria

As we mentioned above, we have different samples for banks and firms. The structure of those
samples differs in some aspects. Thus, different sample selection criteria are applied in each sample.
The details on the structure of samples and the corresponding sample selection criteria are given
in the below.


A.2.1       Bank Selection Criteria

The time period covered in bank-level samples that we downloaded via BANKSCOPE database is
1990-2010. However we exclude the first 6 years and the last year because of poor coverage. We
apply the following sample selection criteria to obtain the samples that we use in our regression
analysis:

    • We drop central banks.

    • We drop banks with faulty records such as inconsistent information on any generic variables
      such as date of establishment/type of company/template etc.

    • We drop bank-year observations with negative values of assets/capital/reserves or deposits.


                                                 29
The final samples we obtained for U.S. and European banks have 13,964 banks with 194,802 ob-
servations and 14680 banks with 202,357 observations between 1996-2009, respectively.

   In addition to above criteria, we first drop the banks that do not report Total Assets continuously
between 2000-2009 and inactive banks to obtain the final samples that we use for creating time-
series plots in this paper. The sample of European banks has 1123 banks with 11,230 observations
while the sample of U.S. banks has 7334 banks with 73,340 observations—both for the period
2000-2009.

   The time period covered in the world sample that contain the banks from all countries in the
world is 1985-2009. However, we exclude the years before 1996 because of poor coverage. We apply
the following sample selection criteria to this sample that we use in our regression analysis:

   • We drop countries with less than 20 banks.

   • We drop central banks.

   • We drop banks with faulty records such as inconsistent information on any generic variables
      such as date of establishment/type of company/template etc.

   • We drop bank-year observations with negative values of assets/capital/reserves or deposits.

The final sample has 32,158 banks with 229,610 observations between 1996-2009.

   In addition to above criteria, we drop the banks that do not report Total Assets continuously
between 2000-2008 to obtain the permanent sample. We exclude 2009 from that permanent sample
because of poor coverage. Thus, very final sample has 9437 banks with 85,383 observations.


A.2.2    Firm Selection Criteria

The time period covered in firm-level samples that we downloaded via ORBIS and AMADEUS
databases is 1996-2010, however we exclude the last year because of poor coverage. At the very
first stage, we apply the following selection criteria and the resulting sample for U.S. firms consists
of 236,734 firms with 585,632 observations and that for European firms have 343,819 firms with
2,273,360 observations.

   • We drop firms with faulty records, which have inconsistent information on any generic vari-
      ables such as date of establishment/type of company/template etc.


                                                  30
   • We drop firm-year observations with negative values of all types of assets/capital/reserves
      and deposits.

The following sample selection criteria are applied to obtain the final samples that we use in our
regression analysis:


   • We drop firms if any of total assets, current liabilities and non-current liabilities is missing in
      all years between 1996-2009.

   • We drop firms if any of total assets, employment, sales, operating revenue, current liabilities
      and non-current liabilities is negative.

   • We drop firms whose total number of employees is lower than 10.

   • We drop firms if Total Assets are less than 100,000 in PPP dollars.

   • We drop firms if Sales are less than 1000 in PPP dollars.

   • We drop firms if Operating Revenue are less than 1000 in PPP dollars.

   • We drop firm-year observations at 0.1 and 0.99 percent of the tails of ratios employment/sales,sales/total
      assets, operating revenue/total assets and shareholders funds/total assets

   • In the data that covers European firms, we drop countries having firms less than 100 at least
      6 years between 1996-2009.

   • We drop firm-year observations at 0.1 and 0.99 percent tails of all leverage measures we
      defined above.

   • We drop firm-year observations at 0.1 and 0.99 percent tails for collateral variable defined as
      total fixed assets/total assets.

   • We drop firm-year observations at 0.1 and 0.99 percent tails for all profitability measures
      defined above.


The resulting samples consist of 54,108 firms with 152,124 observations and 234,380 firms with
1,495,671 observations for U.S. firm-level sample and European firm-level sample, respectively.

   Lastly, to obtain the samples that we use for creating time-series plots, we restrict the samples
to the firms that report Total Assets continuously in the period starting by 2000. Thus, the sample

                                                  31
that contains European firms has 30,167 firms with 271,503 observations between 2000-2008. We
exclude 2009 because of the poor coverage. And the sample that contains U.S. firms has 3053 firms
with 18318 observations between 2004-2009. We exclude the years between 2000-2003 because of
poor coverage.


A.3     Variable Definitions

The structure of the financial statements is not the same for banks and firms. Not only the coverage,
but also the definition of the some variables differ, thus the construction of the variables of our
main interest needs a careful and detailed work. The details are given in the below sections.


A.3.1    Bank-Level Variables

The variables we use to calculate bank-level measures are total assets, shareholders’ funds, total
debt, total liabilities, off balance-sheet items, net income, earning assets and adjusted assets.

   Total Assets: Total book value of intangible, tangible and other fixed assets.

   Shareholder’s Funds: Book value of equity (issued share capital plus other shareholders fund)

   Total Liabilities: Total book value of current and non-current liabilities.

   Total Debt: Total book value of short term and long term debt.

   Off-Balance Sheet Items: In financial statement of banks, the off-balance sheet volumes depend
on three summary lines of acceptances, documentary credits and guarantees.

   Guarantees : Total amount guaranteed by the bank.

      Acceptances: reported off-balance-sheet: Total amounts the bank “accepts” to pay, usually
under international trade finance arrangements where reported off balance sheet. These are usually
reported on balance sheet (as a liability, often matched by a corresponding asset for a claim by the
bank on the recipient of goods) under U.S. GAAP and IFRS.

   Committed credit lines: Total committed and undrawn lines of credit extended by the bank.

   Since the number of banks reporting acceptances is very limited, we used committed credit lines
and guarantees to calculate total book value of off-balance sheet items.

   Net income: Book value of profit/loss before deduction of Minority interests if any (Profit
after taxation+ extraordinary and other profit). Following Heider and Gropp (2009), we used this



                                                  32
variable to proxy profitability of banks (ratio of total assets).

   Earning Assets: Total book value of stock, bonds, CD and income from rental property, again
following Gropp and Heider (2009), we used this variable to proxy collateral of banks (ratio of total
assets).

   Adjusted Assets: Book value of total assets excluding goodwill and intangibles.


A.3.2      Firm-Level Variables

The variables we use to calculate firm-level measures are total assets, shareholders’ funds, total
debt, total liabilities, EBITDA, PLBT.

   Total Assets: Total book value of intangible, tangible and other fixed assets.

   Shareholder’s Funds: Book value of equity (issued share capital plus other shareholders fund)

   Total Liabilities: Total book value of current (all current liabilities of the company such as
Loans+ Creditors+ Other current liabilities) and non-current liabilities (all long term liabilities of
the company such as Long term financial debt+other long term liabilities and provisions)

   Total Debt: Total book value of short term and long term debt.

   EBITDA: Total book value of Earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization

   PLBT : Profit (Loss) before tax: Operating profit+ financial profit.


A.4     Country-Level Data

In the analysis in which we utilize world bank data, we also use some country-level broad institu-
tion measures. They come from the ICRG, Doing Business databases and Bank Regulatory and
Supervisory data.

   This first dataset provides a quantitative measure for the protection of property rights. The
measures on “Corruption” and “Law and Order” between 1996-2004 are selected for our purpose.
The second one provides a quantitative measure of regulations for starting a business, dealing with
construction permits, employing workers, registering property, getting credit, protecting investors,
paying taxes, trading across borders, enforcing contracts and closing a business. The variables
that we use are “Starting Business”, “Getting Credit”, “Protecting Investors” and “Enforcing
Contracts”. They provide the related information between 2004-2009. The last one provides infor-
mation on bank regulations and supervisory practices for 107 countries. The database constitutes

                                                  33
of aggregate indexes that depend on responses to individual questions of the survey designed and
implemented by Barth, Caprio, and Levine and funded by World Bank                    18 .   We use 2003 indices for
the variables regarding “Bank Activity Regulation”, “Mixing Banking / Commerce Regulation”,
“Competition Regulation”, “Capital Regulation”, “Official Supervisory Action”, “Official Supervi-
sory Experience and Structure”, “Private Monitoring”, “Deposit Insurance Scheme” and “Market
Structure”.




  18
       For the details on the survey questions and data collection process, see Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2007). The
data is also available at the following website: www.worldbank.org/research/interest/intrstweb.htm.


                                                          34
        Table 1: Firms and Banks Across Countries, 2000–2009: Observations by Country
                          Country                Bank-Year          Firm-Year
                                                              (Europe and U.S. Only)

                          ARGENTINA                  1404
                          AUSTRALIA                 1384
                          AUSTRIA                   2996               5225
                          AZERBAIJAN                 180
                          BANGLADESH                  412
                          BELGIUM                    1420              67385
                          BOSNIA                     249
                          BRAZIL                     2248
                          BULGARIA                   333               11585
                          CANADA                      963
                          CHILE                      547
                          CHINA                       993
                          COLOMBIA                   507
                          COSTA RICA                  861
                          CROATIA                    509               11277
                          CZECH REPUBLIC             449               37078
                          DENMARK                   1812               23231
                          EGYPT                      478
                          EL SALVADOR                 272
                          ESTONIA                    160                5847
                          FINLAND                    350               32318
                          FRANCE                    6809              182857
                          GEORGIA                    125
                          GERMANY                   22981             104191
                          GHANA                       337
                          GREECE                     472
                          HONG KONG                  1647
                          HUNGARY                    553               21703
                          ICELAND                    262                2163
                          INDIA                      1318
                          INDONESIA                  846
                          IRELAND                    914               13141
                          ISRAEL                      332
                          ITALY                      9891             163632
                          JAPAN                     10079
                          KENYA                       671
                          KOREA REP. OF              810
                          LATVIA                     365               6399
                          LITHUANIA                  198               6564
                          LUXEMBOURG                 1617              2592
                          MALAYSIA                   1514
                          MEXICO                      770
                          NETHERLANDS               1345               29182
                          NEW ZEALAND                280
                          NORWAY                     1474              30479
                          PARAGUAY                    230
                          PERU                        395
                          PHILIPPINES                 718
                          POLAND                     695               72030
                          PORTUGAL                    765              34732
                          ROMANIA                    366               16891
                          RUSSIA                     5889             154729
                          SERBIA                     345               19796
                          SINGAPORE                  816
                          SLOVAKIA                    290              7989
                          SLOVENIA                   337               4239
                          SOUTH AFRICA               980
                          SPAIN                      3069             133102
                          SWEDEN                    1343              81489
                          SWITZERLAND                6104              4646
                          TAIWAN                    1237
                          THAILAND                   661
                          TURKEY                      946
                          UKRAINE                     555              16099
                          UNITED KINGDOM             6533             183959
                          URUGUAY                    464
                          USA                      112116             139026
                          VENEZUELA                  619

                          TOTAL                    229610             1675576

Notes: Banks are defined broadly to include financial firms such as credit card companies, private equity firms, hedge
funds, broker-dealers, specialized credit institutions, etc. Firms are large non-financial firms from Europe and the
U.S.

                                                         35
           Table 2: Firms and Banks Across Countries, 2000–2009: Observations by Type


                                  BANKS

                                                    World    Europe     U.S.

                                  All               30056     14680    13964

                                  Investment         975       402      138
                                  Commercial        29081     14278    13826

                                  Consolidated      6826      2612      3246
                                  Unconsolidated    23201     10978    10606

                                  Listed             3351      1164     1074
                                  Unlisted          26705     13516    12890




                                  FIRMS

                                                             Europe     U.S.

                                  All                        227295    53666

                                  Financial                   1466     6632
                                  Non-Financial              225829    47034

                                  Consolidated               42451     16486
                                  Unconsolidated             184844    37180

                                  Listed                     10476     8875
                                  Unlisted                   216819    44791




Notes: Consolidated and unconsolidated refers to the number of banks/firms with consolidated and unconsolidated
statements, respectively. Listed indicates the number of banks/firms that are listed on a stock exchange. Financial
firms are firms with Primary NACE Rev. 1.1 sector code i.e. J - Financial intermediation




                                                        36
                                 Table 3: Descriptive Statistics: 2000–2009


                                      Panel A: All Banks
                                                                    N     Mean      Min        Max

                                         Leverage Ratio       180518     12.399    1.267     46.343
                             Total Assets (billion USD)       180611      5.117    0.011    102.159
                          Adjusted Assets (billion USD)       141674      3.919    0.011     83.943
                                   Equity (billion USD)       180562      0.345    0.002      6.386
                                      Off Balance Sheet        79573      0.007        0     11.577
                                 (ratio of Total Assets)

                             Panel B: Investment Banks
                                                                    N     Mean      Min        Max

                                         Leverage Ratio          4101    13.566    1.267     46.343
                             Total Assets (billion USD)          4103    13.269    0.011    102.159
                          Adjusted Assets (billion USD)          1890    15.104    0.011     83.943
                                   Equity (billion USD)          4103     0.807    0.002      6.386
                                      Off Balance Sheet            34     0.247        0      3.651
                                 (ratio of Total Assets)

                  Panel C: Large Non-Investment Banks
                                                                    N     Mean      Min        Max

                                         Leverage Ratio         33704    17.379    1.267     46.343
                             Total Assets (billion USD)         33713    17.584    0.011    102.159
                          Adjusted Assets (billion USD)         20837    16.009    0.011     83.943
                                   Equity (billion USD)         33707     1.151    0.002      6.386
                                      Off Balance Sheet          1601      0.09        0     11.577
                                 (ratio of Total Assets)

                                 Panel D: Sponsor Banks
                                                                    N     Mean      Min        Max

                                         Leverage Ratio           406    22.712    1.267     46.343
                             Total Assets (billion USD)           406    80.119    0.114    102.159
                          Adjusted Assets (billion USD)           368    69.499    0.113     83.943
                                   Equity (billion USD)           406      4.95    0.002      6.386
                                      Off Balance Sheet            11     0.124        0      0.936
                                 (ratio of Total Assets)

                           Panel E: Non- Sponsor Banks
                                                                    N     Mean      Min        Max

                                         Leverage Ratio       180112     12.375    1.267     46.343
                             Total Assets (billion USD)       180205      4.948    0.011    102.159
                          Adjusted Assets (billion USD)       141306      3.749    0.011     83.943
                                   Equity (billion USD)       180156      0.335    0.002      6.386
                                      Off Balance Sheet        79562      0.006        0     11.577
                                 (ratio of Total Assets)



Notes: Data is windsorized at 2 percent level. Bank statistics are based on broader world sample. In Panel A, the
statistics are given for all banks. In Panel B, statistics of conduit sponsor banks are displayed. The names of the
sponsor banks are from Acharya and Schnabl (2009). There are 70 conduit sponsor banks in their data set, where
we have 62 of these on our data. 31 of these banks are European, 23 are U.S., 4 are Australian, 3 are Japanese and 1
bank is Canadian. In Panel C, the same statistics are given for the sample in which sponsor banks are excluded from
the world bank sample of Panel A. Leverage Ratio is defined as the ratio of total assets to equity. Totals Assets are
composed of tangible and intangible assets. Adjusted assets excludes good will and intangibles. Equity is measured
as shareholder funds. Off Balance Sheet items are sum 37
                                                      of guarantees and committed credit lines. We define large
bank as a bank that has more then a billion dollars worth of assets at the beginning of our sample.All non-ratio items
are in real dollars.
                                                               Table 4: Bank Leverage: 2000–2009, World Sample


      Dependent Variable:                                                                                                 Bank Leverage


                                                   (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)             (7)              (8)                (9)                    (10)

      Bank Sample                                  All          Listed           All             All             All              All             All              All                All                     All

      Regulatory/Institutional (R/I)              NA              NA             NA           Investor      Shareholder       Required       Supervision      Monitoring        Real Estate             Overall
      Framework                                                                                Rights         Rights           Audit           Index            Index          Restrictiveness       Restrictiveness

      Log Size                                0.079***        0.075***       0.030***        0.076***        0.076***          0.075***       0.076***          0.074***          0.076***                 0.075***
                                               (0.002)         (0.008)        (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)        (0.002)           (0.002)           (0.002)                  (0.002)
      Collateral                              0.127***        0.475***       0.060***        0.124***        0.123***          0.130***       0.131***          0.177***          0.130***                 0.132***
                                               (0.012)         (0.086)        (0.012)         (0.012)         (0.012)           (0.012)        (0.012)           (0.014)           (0.012)                  (0.012)
      Profitability                           –0.446***       –0.082***      –0.313***       –0.413***       –0.415***        –0.387***       –0.388***        –0.291***          –0.391***                –0.392***
                                               (0.039)         (0.028)        (0.042)         (0.040)         (0.040)           (0.042)        (0.041)           (0.047)           (0.042)                  (0.040)
      2001× R/I Framework                                                                      0.001           0.001          –0.006***         0.001            –0.001           0.001***                  0.001**
                                                                                              (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.002)        (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.000)                  (0.000)
      2002× R/I Framework                                                                     –0.001          –0.001          –0.011***         0.001           –0.001*             0.001                    0.001
                                                                                              (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.002)        (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)                  (0.001)
      2003× R/I Framework                                                                     –0.001          –0.001          –0.011***        –0.001          –0.002***           –0.001                    0.001
                                                                                              (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.002)        (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)                  (0.001)
      2004× R/I Framework                                                                     –0.001          –0.001          –0.007***        –0.002          –0.002***           –0.001                    –0.001
                                                                                              (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.003)        (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)                  (0.001)
      2005× R/I Framework                                                                     –0.001          –0.001            –0.003         –0.001            –0.001            –0.001                     0.001
                                                                                              (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.003)        (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)                  (0.001)
      2006× R/I Framework                                                                     –0.001          –0.001             0.004         –0.001            –0.001            –0.001                    0.001
                                                                                              (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.004)        (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)                  (0.001)
      2007× R/I Framework                                                                      0.001           0.001             0.002          0.003             0.001             0.001                    0.001




38
                                                                                              (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.002)        (0.002)           (0.001)           (0.001)                  (0.001)
      2008× R/I Framework                                                                    0.004***        0.003***          0.021***       0.009***         0.006***           0.004***                 0.003***
                                                                                              (0.001)         (0.000)           (0.006)        (0.002)           (0.001)           (0.001)                  (0.001)

      Bank dummies                                Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes                    Yes
      Year dummies                                Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes                    Yes
      Country×Year dummies                        Yes             Yes            Yes            No               No              No               No               No                 No                     No

      R2                                         0.26            0.22           0.10           0.25             0.25            0.25             0.25             0.25               0.25                    0.25
      N                                         176116          19746          176116         176116           176116          176116           176116           176116             176116                  176116

     Notes: The table shows the results of a regression of bank leverage on bank size, profitability, collateral. Profitability calculated as Net Income Flow over Total Assets.
     Collateral calculated as Total Earnings Assets over Total Assets. Log Size is Logarithm of Total Assets in PPP Dollar units. Leverage is measured as 1 minus Equity
     over Total Assets. Standard errors are clustered at bank level and in parenthesis. All specifications include a full set of bank dummies. Column (1)-(3) include a full
     set of country and time dummies. Column (2) limits the sample to listed firms. Column (3) lags the controls Log Size, Collateral and Profitability one year. Column
     (4)-(10) include a country level variable that captures the regulatory and institutional framework (exact variable name is given in each column’s heading), where this
     variable is interacted with time dummies. Note that these interacted effects controls for a full set of time dummies. 2000 is the omitted year.
     Investor Rights is an index that shows the strength of investor rights protection. Higher number means higher protection. Shareholder Rights is a similarly defined index for shareholder rights

     protection. These variables come from World Bank Doing Business Data Set (2010). Real Estate Restrictiveness is an index that measures the extent to which banks may engage in real estate

     investment, development and management. The index takes a value between 1 and 4 where a value of 1 indicates no restriction and a value of 4 means these activities cannot be conducted.

     Overall Restrictiveness is a similarly defined index for real estate, insurance and securities activities, where banks may engage in underwriting, brokering and dealing in securities, insurance

     and all aspects of mutual fund industry. Again a higher number means more restrictiveness and this index varies between 1 and 12 since it is the sum of each component. Required Audit

     indicates whether or not there is a compulsory external audit by a certified auditor. If this takes a value of 1, it means there is a required audit, otherwise the variable takes a value of zero.

     Supervision Index indicates the efficiency of supervision and takes a value of 1 if there are multiple independent supervisors for banks and zero otherwise. Monitoring Index indicates the

     efficiency of monitoring and takes a value of 1 if top ten banks in the country are all rated by International Rating Agencies, if off-balance sheet items are disclosed to public, if banks must

     disclose risk management procedures to the public and if subordinated debt is required as part of regulatory capital. This index is zero otherwise. These variables are from Barth-Caprio-Levine

     (2010), Bank Regulation and Supervision Data Set. See table 1 for the countries in the World Sample.
      Table 5: Bank Leverage: 2000–2009, World Sample


Dependent Variable:                   Log Assets     Log Equity


                                         (1)              (2)

Regulatory/Institutional (R/I)       Overall           Overall
Framework                         Restrictiveness   Restrictiveness

2001× R/I Framework                    0.027***        0.013***
                                        (0.002)         (0.002)
2002× R/I Framework                    0.035***        0.017***
                                        (0.003)         (0.003)
2003× R/I Framework                    0.042***        0.017***
                                        (0.003)         (0.003)
2004× R/I Framework                    0.042***        0.014***
                                        (0.003)         (0.003)
2005× R/I Framework                    0.042***        0.014***
                                        (0.004)         (0.004)
2006× R/I Framework                    0.042***        0.014***
                                        (0.004)         (0.004)
2007× R/I Framework                    0.040***        0.014***
                                        (0.004)         (0.004)
2008× R/I Framework                    0.031***        0.019***
                                        (0.005)         (0.005)

Bank dummies                             Yes             Yes
Year dummies                             Yes             Yes
Country×Year dummies                     No              No

R2                                      0.17             0.15
                                       176116           176116




                                 39
                               Table 6: Big Banks Leverage (in billion dollars)



                                              (2007)                            (2008)


                                     Assets   Equity   Leverage       Assets    Equity    Leverage


                 Bank of America       1616    138.3          11.7    1648.9     160.6        10.3
                    Bearn Stearns     372.4     11.1          33.5     N.A.      N.A.         N.A.
                        Citigroup    2060.5      112          18.4    1758.2     130.6        13.5
                   Goldman Sachs     1054.7     47.2          22.4     802.3      59.9        13.4
                       JP Morgan     1471.4    116.9          12.6    1972.8     152.4        12.9
                 Lehman Brothers      650.9     21.2          30.7     N.A.      N.A.         N.A.
                    Merrill Lynch     960.8     30.1          31.9     605.5      18.1        33.4
                  Morgan Stanley      984.7     29.5          33.4     597.6      46.1          13
                      Wells Fargo       542     45.1            12    1187.9      92.8        12.8

                     BNP Paribas       71.4      4.8          14.9     N.A.       N.A.        N.A.
                          Barclays   2073.8     54.1          38.3    3335.7        77        43.3
                    Deutsche Bank    2315.9     47.3            49     N.A.       N.A.        N.A.
                      Fortis Bank     331.3     27.3          12.1     N.A.       N.A.        N.A.
                             RBS     3211.1    154.5          20.8    3051.3      76.8        39.7
                             UBS        1.5      0.2           6.4     N.A.       N.A.        N.A.




Notes: Data is windsorized at 2 percent level. Leverage Ratio is defined as the ratio of total assets to equity. Total
Assets are composed of tangible and intangible assets. Equity is measured as shareholder funds. All non-ratio items
are in real billion dollars.




                                                         40
                                                                                               Figure 1: Financial Sector Assets

Panel A: Flow of Funds Macro Data, Aggregate: U.S.




                                                                                              14
                                                                                                          Commerical Banks, Savings
                                                                                              12          Institutions, Credit Unions
                                                                                                          Brokers Dealers




                                                               Totall Assets (trillion USD)
                                                                                              10


                                                                                              8


                                                                                              6


                                                                                              4


                                                                                              2


                                                                                              0




 Panel B: Bankscope Micro Data, Aggregated: U.S.

                                                                                                                    Aggregate Assets, U.S. Banks
  Aggregate Assets (log scale, trillion USD)
                                       10 12 14 1618
                                       8
                                       6
                                       4
                                       2

                                                        2000



                                                                                                   2001



                                                                                                             2002



                                                                                                                             2003



                                                                                                                                        2004



                                                                                                                                               2005



                                                                                                                                                       2006



                                                                                                                                                                2007



                                                                                                                                                                        2008



                                                                                                                                                                               2009




                                                                                                                                           YEAR

                                                                                                             All Banks                                    Investment Banks
                                                                                                             Large Banks (no Inv.)



Panel C: Bankscope Micro Data, Aggregated: Europe

                                                                                                                Aggregate Assets, Europe Banks
                                       17 18 19 20 21
  Aggregate Assets (log scale, trillion USD)
                                       16
                                       15
                                       14
                                       13
                                       12
                                       11

                                                        2000



                                                                                                   2001



                                                                                                             2002



                                                                                                                             2003



                                                                                                                                        2004



                                                                                                                                               2005



                                                                                                                                                       2006



                                                                                                                                                                2007



                                                                                                                                                                        2008



                                                                                                                                                                               2009




                                                                                                                                           YEAR

                                                                                                                              All Banks               Large Banks




                                                                                                                                        41
                                                                                              Figure 2: Financial Sector Equity

Panel A: Flow of Funds Macro Data, Aggregate: U.S.




                                                1.2
                                                                                              Brokers Dealers
                                                                  1
                                                                                              Commercial Banks, Savings Institutions,


  Totall Equity (trillion USD)
                                                                                              Credit Unions
                                                0.8


                                                0.6


                                                04
                                                0.4


                                                0.2


                                                                  0




 Panel B: Bankscope Micro Data, Aggregated: U.S.

                                                                                                                       Aggregate Equity, U.S. Banks
                                                                 0
                            Aggregate Equity (log scale, trillion USD)
                                                                 .4
                                                                 .2              1.8
                                                                 .6 .8 1 1.21.41.6

                                                                                       2000



                                                                                                 2001



                                                                                                                2002



                                                                                                                          2003



                                                                                                                                    2004



                                                                                                                                             2005



                                                                                                                                                     2006



                                                                                                                                                              2007



                                                                                                                                                                      2008



                                                                                                                                                                             2009




                                                                                                                                        YEAR

                                                                                                                All Banks                               Investment Banks
                                                                                                                Large Banks (no Inv.)



Panel C: Bankscope Micro Data, Aggregated: Europe

                                                                                                                  Aggregate Equity, Europe Banks
                            Aggregate EQUITY (log scale, trillion USD)
                                                                 .85 .9 .95
                                                                 .8
                                                                 .75
                                                                 .7
                                                                 .65
                                                                 .6
                                                                 .55
                                                                 .5

                                                                                       2000



                                                                                                 2001



                                                                                                                2002



                                                                                                                          2003



                                                                                                                                    2004



                                                                                                                                             2005



                                                                                                                                                     2006



                                                                                                                                                              2007



                                                                                                                                                                      2008



                                                                                                                                                                             2009




                                                                                                                                        YEAR

                                                                                                                           All Banks                Large Banks




                                                                                                                                        42
                                          Figure 3: Financial Sector Leverage Ratio




                              80
                                          Commercial Banks, Saving Institutions, Credit Unions
                              70
                                          Brokers Dealers

                              60


                              50


                              40


                              30


                              20


                              10


                              0




                                   Panel B: Bankscope Micro Data, Aggregated: U.S.


                                           Aggregate Leverage Ratio, U.S. Banks
         50       40
Leverage Ratio (A/E)
20       30
         10
                       2000



                                   2001



                                               2002



                                                              2003



                                                                            2004



                                                                                           2005



                                                                                                   2006



                                                                                                            2007



                                                                                                                     2008



                                                                                                                            2009




                                                                                YEAR

                                               All Banks        43                                Large Banks (no Inv.)
                                               Investment Banks
Figure 4: Financial Sector Leverage Ratio (Excluding Investment Banks)




          16


          14


          12


          10


           8


           6


           4


           2


           0




          Panel B: Bankscope Micro Data, Aggregated: U.S.

                                                       Aggregate Leverage Ratio, U.S. Banks
                         13
                 Leverage Ratio (A/E)
               10      119       12
                                        2000



                                               2001



                                                         2002



                                                                   2003



                                                                            2004



                                                                                   2005



                                                                                             2006



                                                                                                      2007



                                                                                                               2008



                                                                                                                      2009




                                                                                YEAR

                                                                All Banks              Large Banks (no Inv.)



         Panel C: Bankscope Micro Data, Aggregated: Europe

                                                      Aggregate Leverage Ratio, Europe Banks
                         28        26
                Leverage Ratio (A/E)
               22       24
                         20
                                        2000



                                               2001



                                                         2002



                                                                   2003



                                                                            2004



                                                                                   2005



                                                                                             2006



                                                                                                      2007



                                                                                                               2008



                                                                                                                      2009




                                                                            44
                                                                                YEAR

                                                                    All Banks              Large Banks
     Figure 5: Financial Sector Off Balance Sheet Items Ratio: Aggregated

                 Panel A: Bankscope Micro Data, Aggregated: U.S.


                 Aggregate Guarantees/Credit Lines, U.S. Banks
  .9
  .8
GG+C/A
  .6
  .5.7
         2000



                 2001



                        2002



                               2003



                                       2004



                                               2005



                                                       2006



                                                               2007



                                                                      2008



                                                                             2009
                                            YEAR

                                All Banks             Large Banks


                Panel B: Bankscope Micro Data, Aggregated: Europe


                Aggregate Guarantees/Credit Lines, Europe Banks
  .22
  .2
GG+C/A
.18
  .16
         2000



                 2001



                        2002



                               2003



                                       2004



                                               2005



                                                       2006



                                                               2007



                                                                      2008



                                                                             2009




                                            YEAR

                                All Banks             Large Banks




                                        45
       Figure 6: Financial Sector Leverage Ratio: Typical Bank

            Panel A: Bankscope Micro Data, Median: U.S.

                                                      Median Leverage Ratio, U.S. Banks




                      20         18
             Leverage Ratio (A/E)
           12     14  10 16
                                       2000



                                              2001



                                                      2002



                                                                2003



                                                                         2004



                                                                                2005



                                                                                          2006



                                                                                                   2007



                                                                                                            2008



                                                                                                                   2009
                                                                             YEAR

                                                      All Banks                         Large Banks (no Inv.)
                                                      Investment Banks



Panel B: Bankscope Micro Data, Median (excl. investment banks): U.S.

                                                      Median Leverage Ratio, U.S. Banks
                      12       11.5
             Leverage Ratio (A/E)
           10.5      11
                      10
                                       2000



                                              2001



                                                      2002



                                                                2003



                                                                         2004



                                                                                2005



                                                                                          2006



                                                                                                   2007



                                                                                                            2008



                                                                                                                   2009




                                                                             YEAR

                                                             All Banks              Large Banks (no Inv.)



          Panel C: Bankscope Micro Data, Median: Europe

                                                     Median Leverage Ratio, Europe Banks
                      20          19
             Leverage Ratio (A/E)
           16     17  15  18
                                       2000



                                              2001



                                                      2002



                                                                2003



                                                                         2004



                                                                                2005



                                                                                          2006



                                                                                                   2007



                                                                                                            2008



                                                                                                                   2009




                                                                             YEAR

                                                                 All Banks              Large Banks




                                                                         46
   Figure 7: Financial Sector Off Balance Sheet Items Ratio: Typical Bank

                   Panel A: Bankscope Micro Data, Median: U.S.


                   Median Guarantees/Credit Lines, U.S. Banks
  .25
  .2
GG+C/A
  .15
  .1
  .05
         2000



                2001



                        2002



                               2003



                                       2004



                                               2005



                                                       2006



                                                               2007



                                                                      2008



                                                                             2009
                                            YEAR

                                All Banks             Large Banks


                Panel B: Bankscope Micro Data, Median: Europe


                Median Guarantees/Credit Lines, Europe Banks
  .075
  .07
GG+C/A
 .065
  .06
  .055
         2000



                2001



                        2002



                               2003



                                       2004



                                               2005



                                                       2006



                                                               2007



                                                                      2008



                                                                             2009




                                            YEAR

                                All Banks             Large Banks




                                        47
     Figure 8: Financial Sector Procylical Leverage Ratio: U.S.

  Panel A: Bankscope Micro Data, Mean: U.S. Investment Banks

                                                                              US: Investment Banks




                           .3                .25
            Mean Growth of Bank Leverage (A/E)
                                 .15   .2
                                                                                                                                                  2006
                                                                                                                                                2003
                                                                                                                      2007

                            .1
                                                                                                                        2004
                     .05



                                                                                                  2001      2000
                                                                              2002               2005
          −.05 0




                                                                                                               2009
                                                       2008

                                                                         0                     .1                                 .2
                                                                              Mean Growth of Bank Assets


Panel B: Bankscope Micro Data, Mean: U.S. Large Banks (exc. inv.)

                                                                                US: Large Banks
                           .3




                                                                                                                                         2008
                                          .25
          Mean Growth of Bank Leverage (A/E)




                                                                                                                      2009
                                    .2




                                                                                                                                   2007
                            .15




                                                                                                                                  2004
                                                                                                                                            2006
                      .1




                                                                                                                       2005
                                                                                                                        2002
                                                                                                            2003
          0    .05




                                                                                       2001          2000
                           −.05




                                                   0            .05               .1            .15                          .2                  .25
                                                                              Mean Growth of Bank Assets


     Panel C: Bankscope Micro Data, Mean: U.S. Small Banks

                                                                                US: Small Banks
                           .1
          Mean Growth of Bank Leverage (A/E)
                                 .05




                                                              2008

                                                                       2009          2001

                                                                   2004
                                                                 2005
                                                                     2003
                                                                              2000
                  0




                                                                2007            2002
                                                                2006
                           −.05




                                                   0            .05               .1            .15                          .2                  .25
                                                                              Mean Growth of Bank Assets




                                                                                            48
                                          Figure 9: Financial Sector Procylical Leverage Ratio: Europe

                                          Panel A: Bankscope Micro Data, Mean: Europe Large Banks


                                                                    EUROPE: Large Banks
               .3               .25
Mean Growth of Bank Leverage (A/E)
     .05    .1    .15     .2




                                                                                              2005
                                                             2008                              2007
                                                                         2003 2004 2000
                                                       20022001
0




                                                                    2009
               −.05




                                      0              .05                     .1            .15        .2   .25
                                                                         Mean Growth of Bank Assets

                                          Panel B: Bankscope Micro Data, Mean: Europe Small Banks


                                                                    EUROPE: Small Banks
               .1
Mean Growth of Bank Leverage (A/E)
                       .05




                                                           2008              2001
                                                                     2003
                                                                    2002
                                                                                           2009
                                                                       2007
                                                                         2005
                                                                  2004
        0




                                                                           2006
                                                                  2000
               −.05




                                      0              .05                 .1            .15            .2   .25
                                                                     Mean Growth of Bank Assets




                                                                                    49
                                          Figure 10: Non-Financial Sector Leverage Ratio

                                                Panel A: ORBIS Micro Data, Mean: U.S.


                                                        US Mean Leverage Ratio
 2.25 2.3 2.35 2.4 2.45 2.5
      Leverage Ratio (A/E)

                              2004



                                     2004.5



                                                 2005



                                                               2005.5



                                                                           2006



                                                                                       2006.5



                                                                                                2007



                                                                                                           2007.5



                                                                                                                           2008



                                                                                                                                     2008.5



                                                                                                                                              2009
                                                                                   YEAR

                                              All Non−Financial Firms                                  Listed Non−Financial Fir


                                        Panel B: AMADEUS Micro Data, Mean: Europe


                                                          Europe Mean Leverage Ratio
           5
Leverage Ratio (A/E)
 3         24
                              2000




                                         2001




                                                        2002




                                                                        2003




                                                                                       2004




                                                                                                   2005




                                                                                                                    2006




                                                                                                                                  2007




                                                                                                                                              2008




                                                                                   YEAR

                                              All Non−Financial Firms                                  Listed Non−Financial Firms




                                                                                  50
                                    Figure 11: Non Financial Sector Procylical Leverage Ratio

                                                  Panel A: ORBIS Micro Data, Mean: U.S.


                                                           US Non−Financial Companies
             .1
Mean Growth of Leverage (A/E)




                                    2008
                    .05




                                                                                             2007


                                                                                                    2005
     0




                                                                                                     2006




                                                    2009

                                           0                  .05               .1                   .15    .2
                                                                    Mean Growth of Assets

                                               Panel B: AMADEUS Micro Data, Mean: Europe


                                                   EUROPE Non−Financial Companies
             .1




                                                    2008
Mean Growth of Leverage (A/E)
            .05




                                                                               2006
                                      2001                                            2007
                                     2002                    2004       2005
                                      2003
             0




                                0                      .05                  .1                      .15     .2
                                                                    Mean Growth of Assets




                                                                          51
                                                                Figure 12: Regulation and Leverage Ratio




                                                                    GERMANY                                           SLOVAKIA
    Change in Leverage Ratio (A/E), 2007−−2008
                                            4




                                                                                                   SWEDEN
                                                     FRANCE                                        MEXICO
                                                                                   POLAND
                                                                    NETHERLANDS
                                                                                                   DENMARK
                              2




                                                                    PHILIPPINES                                       SLOVENIA
                                                                                   SINGAPORE
                                                                    SPAIN          VENEZUELA       BRAZIL
                                                                    PERU
                                                                    CANADA
                                                                    AUSTRIA
                                                                    UKRAINE
                                                                    NORWAY         TURKEY
                                                                    SWITZERLAND                                       USA
                0




                                                     UNITED KINGDOM


                                                                    IRELAND
                      −2




                                                 4              5                 6                7              8              9
                                                                      Overall Bank Activity Restrictiveness, 2003

                                                                         levchg                  Fitted values


Notes: Growth in Aggregate Leverage Ratio is relative to other countries and other years. Overall Restrictiveness is
an index for real estate, insurance and securities activities. The index takes a high value if banks are restricted from
engaging in underwriting, brokering and dealing in securities, insurance and all aspects of the mutual fund industry.
The index varies between 3 and 12.




                                                                                    52
                                                       Figure 13: Cash Holdings of U.S. Banks

                                         Panel A: ORBIS Micro Data, Aggregate Cash Holdings, U.S. Banks


                                                       Aggregate Cash Holdings, U.S. Banks
                                 .9
Aggregate Cash Holdings (trillion USD)
                                 .8
                                 .7
                                 .6
                                 .5
                                 .4
                                 .3
                                 .2

                                         2000



                                                2001



                                                         2002



                                                                2003



                                                                        2004



                                                                                2005



                                                                                        2006



                                                                                                2007



                                                                                                       2008



                                                                                                              2009
                                                                             YEAR

                                                                 All Banks             Large Banks


                                           Panel B: ORBIS Micro Data, Median U.S. Bank Cash Holdings


                                                        Median Cash Holdings, U.S. Banks
                                 .16
Median Cash Holdings (billion USD)
                                 .14
                                 .12
                                 .1
                                 .08
                                 .06
                                 .04
                                 .02
                                 0

                                         2000



                                                2001



                                                         2002



                                                                2003



                                                                        2004



                                                                                2005



                                                                                        2006



                                                                                                2007



                                                                                                       2008



                                                                                                              2009




                                                                             YEAR

                                                                 All Banks             Large Banks




                                                                         53
                                                                   Figure 14: Cash Holdings of Europe Banks

                                                    Panel A: ORBIS Micro Data, Aggregate Cash Holdings, Europe Banks



Aggregate Cash Holdings (log scale, trillion USD)                  Aggregate Cash Holdings, Europe Banks
                                           .4
                                           .35
                                           .3
                                           .25
                                           .2
                                           .15

                                                     2000



                                                            2001



                                                                      2002



                                                                             2003



                                                                                     2004



                                                                                             2005



                                                                                                     2006



                                                                                                             2007



                                                                                                                    2008



                                                                                                                           2009
                                           .1




                                                                                          YEAR

                                                                              All Banks             Large Banks


                                                    Panel B: ORBIS Micro Data, Median European Bank Cash Holdings


                                                                    Median Cash Holdings, Europe Banks
Median Cash Holdings (log scale, billion USD)
                                           .06
                                           .05
                                           .04
                                           .03
                                           .02

                                                     2000



                                                            2001



                                                                      2002



                                                                             2003



                                                                                     2004



                                                                                             2005



                                                                                                     2006



                                                                                                             2007



                                                                                                                    2008



                                                                                                                           2009




                                                                                          YEAR

                                                                              All Banks             Large Banks




                                                                                      54
Appendix Figure: Financial Sector Leverage and VIX




                80
                       Commercial Banks, Saving Institutions, Credit Unions
                70
                       Brokers Dealers

                60


                50


                40


                30


                20


                10


                 0




                                                           55
