NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON THE INTERNATIONAL TRANSMISSION OF SHOCKS:
MICRO-EVIDENCE FROM MUTUAL FUND PORTFOLIOS
Claudio Raddatz
Sergio L. Schmukler
Working Paper 17358
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17358

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2011

This paper was prepared for the NBER conference on the global financial crisis, with funding gratefully
acknowledged from the Sloan Foundation. We thank Charles Engel, Kristin Forbes, Jeff Frankel, Jeremy
Stein, and participants at the MIT-NBER conference for very useful comments. We are grateful to
Tomas Williams for truly outstanding research assistance and for computing most of the estimates
for this paper. Francisco Ceballos, Ana Gazmuri, Laura Malatini, and Lucas Núñez also did an excellent
job as research assistants, helping us at different stages of the paper. We are indebted to the EPFR
Global for giving us unique data and support that made this paper possible. We thank the NBER and
the World Bank for research support. The views expressed here do not necessarily represent those
of the World Bank or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Authors are with the World Bank,
Development Research Group.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Claudio Raddatz and Sergio L. Schmukler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

On the International Transmission of Shocks: Micro-Evidence from Mutual Fund Portfolios
Claudio Raddatz and Sergio L. Schmukler
NBER Working Paper No. 17358
August 2011
JEL No. F3,F32,F36,G01,G1,G11,G15,G2,G23
ABSTRACT
This paper uses micro-level data on mutual funds from different financial centers investing in equity
and bonds to study how investors and managers behave and transmit shocks across countries. The
paper finds that the volatility of mutual fund investments is driven quantitatively by both the underlying
investors and fund managers through (i) injections/redemptions into each fund and (ii) managerial
changes in country weights and cash. Both investors and managers respond to country returns and
crises and adjust their investments substantially, for example, generating large reallocations during
the global crisis. Their behavior tends to be pro-cyclical, reducing their exposure to countries during
bad times and increasing it when conditions improve. Managers actively change country weights over
time, although there is significant short-run pass-through from returns to these weights. Consequently,
capital flows from mutual funds do not seem to have a stabilizing role and expose countries in their
portfolios to foreign shocks.

Claudio Raddatz
Research Economist
World Bank, MSN3-301
1818 H Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20433
craddatz@bcentral.cl
Sergio L. Schmukler
The World Bank
MSN MC3-301
1818 H Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20433
Sschmukler@worldbank.org

1. Introduction
The global financial crisis of 2008-2009 reignited the interest in the behavior of financial
intermediaries in both propelling risk taking and propagating shocks across markets and
countries. In fact, several papers argue that financial intermediaries were at the core of
the global financial crisis, as well as in some of the previous crises in emerging
economies. In particular, the literature stresses that market participants tend to take
too much risk during good times, and run and retrench when shocks hit the financial
system.1 Countries and companies facing short-term or foreign currency debt, or simply
depending on volatile foreign financing, are then susceptible to shocks and can become
financially constrained as liquidity in the financial system dries up.
In a world where most savings are intermediated, two types of market
participants become essential to understand the behavior of financial institutions when
investing domestically and globally: (i) the underlying investors delegating their assets
to financial intermediaries and (ii) the managers allocating those assets. In the case of
investments abroad, investors tend to channel the bulk of their assets through financial
intermediaries dedicated to investing across countries, pouring funds into those
institutions when they wish to diversify globally and withdrawing their funds when they
favor local assets. Managers, in turn, need to deal with these shocks from investors and
other shocks by deciding how much cash to accumulate and in which countries to

1

See Allen and Gale (2000, 2007), Chang and Velasco (2001), Cifuentes et al. (2005), Diamond and Rajan

(2005), Rajan (2005), Calomiris (2008), Broner et al. (2010, 2011), Forbes and Warnock (2010), MilesiFerretti and Tille (2010), and Gourinchas and Obstfeld (2011), among many others.

1

invest. The shocks managers face can be large. For example, during the 1998 Russian
crisis and the 2008-2009 global crisis, financial institutions faced severe liquidity
shortages and withdrawals from the underlying investors, leading to the collapse of
Long-Term Management Company (LTCM), Bear Stearns, and Lehman Brothers, and
pushing the entire world financial system to the brink of a meltdown.
The link between the underlying investors and fund managers, partly driven by
limited information and principal-agent problems, is important because it can
profoundly affect portfolio allocations by financial institutions. This link exists because
managers are monitored by investors (and their own supervisors) and respond to the
incentives that the monitoring imposes on them. The relation between managers and
investors is perhaps more obvious in the case of demandable debt that affects banks and
bond mutual funds (among others), where short-term rollover decisions by investors are
strategic complements and condition managers that are involved in maturity
transformation.2 Bank runs are a good example of this since the incentives to run are
correlated among depositors, given that their demandable claims (whose value is fixed in
nominal terms) are returned on a first-come, first-served basis (Diamond and Dybvig,
1983). The maturity mismatch and the possibility of a run constitute a source of
fragility as liquidity may suddenly vanish (Brunnermeier, 2009; Shin, 2009; Raddatz,
2010; and Gorton and Metrick, 2011). Vulnerability can be exacerbated under the

2

More specifically, when one investor withdraws financing, banks and bond mutual funds are more likely

to run into trouble. Thus, other things equal, other investors have more incentives to withdraw financing
as well. In this sense, the decisions by investors are strategic complements (Bulow et al., 1985).

2

presence of leverage, where margin calls can also trigger collapses.3 But fragility can
exist even in the case of demandable equity (characteristic of mutual funds), where the
value of the claims move in tandem with the value of the assets so the rush to get out
first is attenuated. For instance, if investors have asymmetric information and flows to
mutual funds are related to past returns, sudden collapses in returns can generate fire
sales by investors (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997), which accentuate the collapse in returns
resulting in further liquidations. This serial correlation of returns resulting from funds
selling assets at distressed prices provides incentives for investors to sell their claims as
soon as possible (before prices continue declining) and may result in run-like behavior.
The fact that investors can pull out their demandable (debt or equity) claims can
generate incentives for managers to avoid long-run arbitrage opportunities, herd, and
deviate from the optimal portfolios for the underlying investors (Scharfstein and Stein,
1990 and Stein, 2005, 2009). In the case of mutual funds, open-end structures allow
investors to monitor managers on a short-term basis and discipline them if they behave
badly, but this short-run monitoring can impose limits to arbitrage, as managers are
constrained to take long-run positions. For example, managers might not buy assets at
fire-sale prices during crises, which are likely to pay off in the long run, since they can
suffer short-term withdrawals from the underlying investors. Agency problems might
thus lead to short-term structures, vulnerability, fire sales by investors and managers,
and contagion effects.

3

See, for example, Calvo (2002), Kodres and Pritsker (2002), Mendoza and Smith (2006), and Mendoza

(2010).

3

While the literature argues that the supply side of funds and, in particular, the
actions of managers and investors are important in the transmission of shocks, detailed
and direct evidence on how financial intermediaries behave in their international
investments is rather limited. Some papers analyze the case of bank flows, whereas
others study mutual fund flows across countries.4 Although very informative about the
behavior of institutional investors, these studies tend to focus on aggregate investment
flows into different countries (using bank flows, foreign direct investment, and portfolio
flows). Therefore, they mostly miss important micro aspects of the inner-workings of
financial institutions, like how fund managers and the underlying investors behave,
which seem essential to understand how financial intermediaries invest and react to
shocks. These reactions seem to be at the core of the transmission of crises. Three
exceptions that stand out and are good complements to this paper are Kaminsky et al.
(2004), Hau and Rey (2008), and Jotikasthira et al. (2009).5

4

See, for example, Borensztein and Gelos (2003), Martinez Peria et al. (2005), Broner et al. (2006), Hau

and Rey (2006), Cetorelli and Goldberg (2011), and Fratzscher (2011).
5

Kaminsky et al. (2004) study momentum trading by investors and managers of Latin American equity

funds during the Asian crisis. Hau and Rey (2008) use data on equity funds to study whether foreign
exchange and equity risk measures trigger rebalancing behavior at the fund and stock level. Jotikasthira
et al. (2009) analyze how the movements in outside investor flows force significant changes in the fund
portfolio allocations to emerging markets that drive emerging market equity returns, correlations among
emerging markets, and the betas of emerging markets on developed markets. A much larger literature
studies other aspects of the behavior of mutual funds, at the domestic or international level. See, for
example, Grinblatt et al. (1995), Wermers (1999), and Gompers and Metrick (2001) for the U.S. domestic
funds, and Kang and Stulz (1997), Dahlquist and Robertsson (2001), Kim and Wei (2002), Chan et al.
(2005), Gelos and Wei (2005), and Didier et al. (2010) for the international ones.

4

In this paper, we use a micro-level dataset on international mutual funds to shed
new light on how investors and managers react to shocks and might help transmit them
across countries. International mutual funds are particularly useful as they enable us to
separately analyze: (i) injections/redemptions, driven by the underlying investors; (ii)
fund portfolios or country weights, which are at the sole discretion of managers; and (iii)
their interactions (how investors monitor managers).6 The main data consist of portfolio
weights and assets invested in each country around the world for 1,076 equity and bond
mutual funds on a monthly basis during 15 years, January 1996 and November 2010.
The data cover portfolio allocations to 124 developed and emerging markets and cash,
plus fund returns, which allow us to obtain injections and redemptions into each fund.
With the assembled dataset, we study the contribution of the underlying
investors and managers to the transmission of shocks and crises, with special attention
to the global financial crisis. We explore several related questions of interest. How
volatile is the mutual fund investment across countries? Do mutual funds help transmit
crises, as the literature has argued for financial intermediaries? What was their specific
behavior during the global crisis? More generally, what is the role of investors and
managers? How volatile are injections? To what extent do weights remain constant over
time? To the extent that weights change, how much are they the cause of valuation
effects versus actual buying/selling in different countries or regions? How long does it
take for weights to adjust to shocks? How are cash positions used? Are there differences

6

Henceforth, we often use the term “injections” to refer to injections/redemptions, with the

understanding that redemptions correspond to negative injections.

5

between bond and equity funds? Lastly, how much of the volatility of capital flows is
driven by the behavior of the underlying investors and how much by the behavior of
mutual fund managers? Are capital flows and retrenchments largely driven by flows into
and out of investment funds that lead them to liquidate positions across countries to
maintain portfolio weights, or by active changes in these country weights by fund
managers?
The main results of the paper can be summarized as follows. Mutual fund assets
fluctuate substantially and pro-cyclically over time. Both the underlying investors and
managers are behind these movements, retrenching from countries in bad times and
investing more in good times. In the case of the underlying investors, wealth effects
(driven by shocks at home) seem to have a direct impact on how much they invest in
other countries. When shocks are correlated across countries, like during the global
crisis, they do not act as deep-pocket international investors buying assets abroad at
fire-sale prices. The investor behavior exerts pressure on managers, who need to react to
this pressure as well as to shocks to returns (or valuation effects). In the short run,
managers allow shocks to returns to pass-through to country weights, with the latter
changing substantially over time. Over the long run, weights deviate from the passthrough effects. While during normal times managers do not allow the pass-through to
be complete (in relative terms they reallocate a small fraction to countries that are
doing badly), they behave pro-cyclically during crises, moving away from countries
experiencing turmoil. This pro-cyclicality is observed particularly in equity funds.

6

Managers of bond funds hold a larger cash cushion, which allows them to better absorb
shocks. The behavior of managers and investors has a direct effect on capital flows to
countries around the world. In sum, neither managers nor investors seem to be
exploiting potential long-term arbitrage opportunities by being contrarian, especially
during crises, and exerting a stabilizing role. Instead, they seem to amplify crises and
transmit shocks across countries. The global crisis was a notable example of this type of
behavior.
Our findings are relevant to different strands of the theoretical literature in both
international finance and finance. First, the results in this paper suggest that the
demandability of assets plays an important role in the reactions of investors, and is a
factor that cannot be neglected in future models of crises. We show that investors run
even from equity claims, not just from debt claims. This could be explained, for
example, by autocorrelation in returns or wealth effects coming from the investors’
home country. Moreover, a run by certain investors might trigger runs by other
investors, perhaps because of asymmetric information or because flows are related to
past returns.
Second, the findings in this paper also contribute and provide evidence to the
theoretical literature that discusses whether the open-end and closed-end structure of
mutual funds matter. Our results from open-end funds indicate that when shocks are
correlated across countries, like during the global crisis, managers do not act as deeppocket international investors buying assets abroad at fire-sale prices. The behavior of

7

investors exerts pressure on managers. The evidence is, thus, consistent with the
theoretical literature that argues that in open-end structures neither managers nor
investors act counter-cyclically, trying to benefit from potential long-term arbitrage
opportunities, and thus performing a stabilizing role. Instead, they seem to amplify
crises and transmit shocks across countries, which is also consistent with the large
contagion literature.7
Third, the findings also relate to the literature that discusses how different types
of shocks trigger crises. There is an extensive literature on the origins and propagation
of financial crises, and a growing literature on the global financial crisis that tries to
understand why a relatively small shock in the U.S. subprime sector resulted in a global
recession and the near collapse of many financial institutions and markets. Several
papers in this literature conclude that financial institutions play an important channel
of the transmission of shocks across countries, producing large fluctuations in capital
flows.8 In this paper, we show micro-evidence that suggests that shocks to the supply
side of funds seem important in the transmission and amplification of shocks. With the
data we use, we are able to measure different effects inside financial intermediaries,
which other papers that focus on capital flows (aggregate or by type) cannot do, despite
the increasing interest in financial intermediaries in the transmission of crises. In
particular, we measure the shocks faced by managers investing internationally and the

7

See, for example, Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000), Claessens and Forbes (2001), Boyer et al. (2006), and

Mendoza and Quadrini (2010).
8

See, for example, Shiller (2008), Eichengreen et al. (2009), Hellwig (2009), and Mishkin (2011).

8

way they respond to those shocks. Namely, we disentangle the actions of investors
injecting and withdrawing capital from open-ended funds, possibly as a way to discipline
managers, and the behavior of managers actively allocating country portfolios and
reacting to shocks from investors and returns. Our results support the claims that
shocks to financial institutions and their inner-workings are important to understand
crises.
Fourth, there is an increasing interest in studying how portfolios are managed
when investing around the world and how shocks impact them. Important among shocks
are valuation effects.9 One advantage of working with mutual fund data is that we can
work with actual portfolios. This is helpful because, while there is much discussion on
portfolio reallocations, there is limited information on how portfolios are allocated and
managed. There are no data on the portfolios of households and little data on those of
other institutions like banks and hedge funds. Moreover, unlike country portfolios, the
data we use are not inferred from capital flow data. In our case, we link movements in
asset allocations to capital flows by an important group of foreign portfolio investors,
international mutual funds. Moreover, we analyze in detail what role valuation effects
play in changes in portfolio compositions.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the data
and provides some basic statistics of the mutual fund investments across countries.
Section 3 discusses the shocks to managers and studies the variation in fund allocations

9

See, for example, Broner et al. (2006), Gourinchas and Rey (2007a), Hau and Rey (2008), Krugman

(2008), Devereux and Yetman (2010), and Gourinchas et al. (2010).

9

(the manager’s decisions). Section 4 analyzes how managers and investors react to
crises. Section 5 studies how the variations in the investor and manager responses affect
capital flows to different countries. Section 6 concludes.

2. Data and Summary Statistics
In this paper, we use a micro-level dataset consisting of an unbalanced panel of 1,140
international equity mutual funds and 121 international bond funds, containing the
monthly country portfolios of these funds over the period December 1995 to November
2010 for equity funds and July 2002 to November 2010 for bond funds. The dataset
comes from EPFR Global and includes active and dead cross-regional and regional
equity and bond funds registered in various domiciles globally. These funds invest in
over 124 developed and developing economies around the world. For each fund and
month, the dataset contains the total net asset (TNA) value of the fund denominated in
U.S. dollars, the percentage of the fund assets allocated to each country (which we refer
as country weights or weights), and the percentage held in cash. The dataset has actively
and passively managed funds with different investment scopes: global, emerging markets
and different regional funds (Table 1). The data also contain information on the fund
domicile, the family (investment or asset management company), and main currency
denomination.10 We generally use the term “fund type” to refer to any of these
dimensions of fund characteristics, clarifying the precise dimension when necessary.

10

Our sample covers mainly open-end mutual funds. While EPFR Global data contain some closed-end

funds, their importance is relatively small. Moreover, many of the closed-end funds they cover allow for

10

To perform the empirical analysis, we cleaned the original data in standard ways,
reducing the sample in about 15% and the total of funds to 1,076 starting in 1996.11 The
final dataset on country allocations contains 7,429,000 observations of the investments
of the included mutual funds across countries and time. There are substantially more
data (cross sectional and time series) and variety of funds for equity funds than for
bond funds. For this reason, we place somewhat more weight on the results using equity
funds.12
We complement the analysis by collecting additional data from other sources
aimed mainly at computing inflows and outflows to funds and countries. To calculate
monthly injections into each fund, we collect data on fund prices (Net Asset Values,
NAVs) from Bloomberg and Datastream that we match to the corresponding funds from
EPFR Global by name and family. We are able to match about 90% of the funds in our
cleaned sample, ending up with 896 and 106 equity and bond funds, respectively, with

monthly or quarterly subscriptions and redemptions, and are therefore not truly closed. There is also flow
activity due to share buybacks or distributions being taken in cash.
11

We conducted two basic cleanings. First, we removed fund-time periods where the data was reported at

a frequency other than monthly. This excludes some funds that report quarterly data during part of the
sample period. Second, we excluded funds that report data for less than 12 months in the entire sample
(unless they are present until the end of the sample period).
12

Equity mutual funds cover the period January 1996 to November 2010 and contain nine types of funds

(of global and regional nature). There are a total of 965 mutual funds with 6,867,500 usable observations.
Instead, bond mutual funds cover the period July 2002 to November 2010, encompass two types of funds
(global and global emerging markets), and include a total of 111 mutual funds. The total number of
observations (country weights and cash) for bond funds is 561,500.

11

return data.13 The analyses in the paper that require fund return information are
restricted to this subset of funds.
Since we do not know the detailed portfolio of each fund within a country, we use
country-level indexes to compute returns and assume throughout the paper that all
funds investing in a country experience the same return to their investments in that
country, disregarding country-return heterogeneity across funds.14 To this end we collect
monthly, dividend-adjusted price indexes in U.S. dollars for stock markets (MSCI
Standard Index, S&P Broad Market Index, and local sources for a total of 86 countries)
and bond markets (JP Morgan sovereign bond index for 78 countries).15 Analyses that
require country-return information are restricted to those countries and time-periods for
which we could gather these data.
Table 1 shows the characteristics of the cleaned mutual fund sample (without
constraining by return price availability). Panel A reports sample characteristics by
13

Information on ISIN is not available for the EPFR Global mutual funds, so we had to match the return

data with the EPFR Global data according to the mutual fund name and family, using an algorithm that
compares the (Levenshtein) distance across names (which takes into account the minimum number of
insertions, deletions, or substitutions necessary to change one string into the other). We then manually
screen out incorrect matches and complete the matching process. This procedure yields 896 matches for
equity funds and 106 matches for bond funds (over 90% of the sample). The total number of observations
of fund prices is 255,510.
14

We believe this is a reasonable approximation given the documented synchronicity of returns across

assets within countries, especially in developing countries (Morck et al., 2000). Furthermore, we find a
strong correlation between the return of a fund computed directly from its NAV and the return computed
from the portfolio of country investments and country-level returns, which gives additional validity to our
approximation.
15

The time coverage is January 1999-November 2010 for stock market indexes and July 2002-November

2010 for bond market indexes. The total number of observations of stock and bond market indexes across
countries and over time is 23,272.

12

equity/bond funds. There are 965 equity funds (85% of the entire original sample) from
January 1996 to November 2010, with a median number of 47 observations per fund.
The total number of bond funds is 111 (92% of the entire original sample), covering the
period July 2002 to November 2010, with a median number of 34 observations per fund.
Panel B reports the number of funds and observations by different partitions. Of the
total sample, 95% is actively managed and the rest is passively managed. Also, almost
65% of the funds have their investment scope in Asia (excluding Japan), global markets,
global emerging markets, or Europe. Finally, Table 1 documents the number of funds
and observations by domicile. The funds are primarily domiciled in developed market
jurisdictions, in fact, 80% of the funds are domiciled (in order of importance by the
number of funds) in Luxembourg, the U.S., the U.K., and Ireland. Appendix Table 1
classifies funds by mutual fund family. Average total net assets (first computed within
funds, and then across all funds) is around 620 million U.S. dollars for both equity and
bond funds. Appendix 1 provides more description of the data and some investment
patterns.
Figure 1 shows the evolution of total net assets (TNAs) in equity and bond funds
by region. Panel A plots total assets for equity funds between January 1996 and
December 2000 and between June 2001 and November 2010.16 Panel B displays total
assets for bond funds between July 2002 and November 2010. The figure shows not only
16

The division between both time frames in equity funds is an important one due to the relevance of

global equity funds. EPFR Global starts reporting information for global equity funds in June 2001. The
introduction of this type of funds adds nearly 90,000 million U.S. dollars to the total assets in all equity
funds.

13

the large increase in total assets over time, but also the sharp declines around crises,
particularly around the Asian and Russian crises and the global financial crisis. A
similar pattern is observed for bond funds. The figure also shows that, as a group, bond
funds are much smaller than equity funds (100 versus 599 billion U.S. dollars in
November 2010), even though the mean fund is of a similar size.
It is interesting to observe not only the variation in TNAs but also that of
country weights, for which we focus on the period around the global financial crisis.
Figures 2 and 3 show the weights for equity and bond funds, respectively, with global
funds at the top and global emerging funds at the bottom. The figures illustrate the
evolution of weights for some of the main regions of investment within emerging and
developed countries. In particular, they show the weights in: (i) emerging economies
(emerging Asia, emerging Europe, and Latin America), developed Europe, and North
America for global funds and (ii) emerging Asia, emerging Europe, and Latin America
for global emerging funds. The figures also mark some of the main events around the
global crisis: the nationalization of Northern Rock, the collapses of Bear Stearns and
Lehman Brothers, and the AIG near-collapse.
Figures 2 and 3 show several noteworthy features of the data. First, weights
fluctuate substantially over time. Second, there are significant reallocations across
regions especially at times of stress. For example, the figures for equity funds show that,
even though the epicenter of the crisis was in the U.S., managers started liquidating
their exposure to emerging economies after the collapse of Bears Stearns while they

14

increased their exposure to North America. This is consistent with a relatively smaller
collapse in some asset prices in the U.S. than, for instance, in emerging Asia. Only in
early 2009 managers started reversing that trend. Among global emerging funds,
managers sold their positions in emerging Europe and Latin America and moved to
emerging Asia. For example, between June 2008 and July 2009 the mutual fund
exposure in Asia increased from 45% to 55%, while it decreased from 14% to 9% in
emerging Europe (after having dropped to 7%) and from 24% to 21% in Latin America.
Among bond funds, the large substitution took place between developed Europe and
North America in global funds, when managers reduced their exposure to Europe from
51% in March 2008 to 31% in November 2008 and increased their share in North
America from 7% to 19% during the same period. Global emerging funds sold their
positions in emerging Europe and bought assets in emerging Asia after August 2008.
Figure 4 shows a similar plot but for cash positions, which increased for equity
funds in the buildup to the crisis and started declining sometime after the collapse of
Lehman Brothers. Bond funds show more variation in their cash positions before the
crisis, with global bond funds reducing their holdings and global emerging bond funds
increasing them. Nonetheless, bond funds quickly reduced their cash positions after the
collapse of Lehman.

15

3. Shocks to Managers and Portfolio Reallocations
Mutual fund managers decide on the allocation of the funds they manage, but the size of
these funds depends on the returns of their previous investments and the injection
(redemptions) of flows into (out of) the fund. While the return of a fund depends on its
past investments, the exact realization of the return is stochastic and can be considered
as a shock to the fund manager. Similarly, while the performance of a fund may affect
its injections and redemptions, ex-post these inflows and outflows are at the discretion
of the underlying investors and largely outside the control of managers.
Mutual fund assets fluctuate importantly. The median growth rate of assets
across equity funds fluctuates between -30% and 20%, with a time average of 0.35% and
a standard deviation of 7.44% (Figure 5). Fluctuations in the median growth rate of
assets are somewhat smaller among bond funds, moving between -20% and 10% (time
average and standard deviation of 1.09% and 3.70%, respectively). Table 2 shows
interesting variation in the growth rate of assets of funds specialized in different
regions/segments. Among equity funds, those specialized in the group called emerging
Europe, Middle East, and Africa and in that called emerging Europe experience the
highest growth in assets and the highest variability of this growth. On the contrary,
funds specialized in Europe experience the lowest growth rate of assets. Similarly,
among bond funds the highest growth rates (and highest standard deviations) occur for
global emerging funds. Thus, at the TNA level, the data show a shift in favor of
developing countries during the period of analysis. The evolution of the median growth

16

of assets of mutual funds is characterized by lengthy periods of expansion followed by
shorter periods of sharp contractions that roughly coincide with periods of international
financial turmoil. For instance, equity fund assets experienced large declines in 19971998, 2001, and 2008. Because of sample restrictions, among bond funds we only observe
the drop in assets in 2008.
Fund assets may grow because of higher returns of their investments or because
of injections to the fund by the underlying investors. In fact, the growth rate of fund ’s
total assets,

, can be trivially written as
,

where
the fund

is the (net) return to fund

(1)
/

at time , and

is the injection to

expressed as a fraction of the fund’s initial assets

. While injections

are not directly observable, we can estimate them. To do so, we compute individual
fund returns on a given month and obtain injections from the difference between the
change in total net assets and individual returns. More formally,
,
where

is the gross rate of returns to fund

(2)

at time , computed as

⁄

, with

being the fund price or NAV, adjusted by dividend payments.17

17

A fund’s net asset value (NAV) corresponds to the total net assets (

shares (

divided by the number of

). Thus, the ratio of NAV in two consecutive periods correspond to the ratio of the total asset

values times the inverse ratio of total shares

⁄

/

. The flows into the

fund can also be expressed as the increase (decrease) in shares times the value of the share
⁄

. Replacing this in Equation (2), we obtain that the gross returns correspond to

the ratio of net asset values. The only caveat to our calculation is that total net assets discount the value
of a fund’s liabilities, such as the fees paid to the managers. However, if these fees are proportional to the

17

The evolution of the returns and injections for the median fund is shown in
Figure 5, Panels B and C, while summary statistics are reported in Table 2. For the
median equity and bond funds, both returns and injections experience significant
fluctuations. Fluctuations in fund returns are much more volatile than those in
injections for equity funds (standard deviations of 6.23% and 2.05%, respectively), while
for bond funds the volatility of these components is similar (standard deviations of
2.53% and 2.05%, respectively). This is consistent with equity returns being more
volatile than those of fixed income securities (Schwert, 1989; Andersen et al., 2007).
Both components also exhibit a similar time pattern, which also coincides with that of
the growth rate of assets, suggesting that the components do not cancel each other.
Both returns and injections expand during good times and experience severe
contractions during periods of financial turmoil. Across types of funds by target region,
the most salient pattern is the large growth in injections to funds specialized in BRICs.
The relative variability of returns and injections for equity and bond funds can
also be used to explain the variance of the growth rates of assets within funds. Among
equity funds, the variances of returns and injections explain roughly the same fraction of
the variability of the growth rate of assets (Table 2, Panel A). On average, the
variances of returns and injections explain, respectively, 47% and 53% of fund asset

assets under management they would only bias the levels of the variables but cancel out when computing
the returns and flows relative to initial assets.

18

growth variability.18 Among bond funds, however, the volatility of injections is behind
most of the overall variability in asset growth, explaining 89% of it. These results show
that price fluctuations are important drivers of the variation of the gross asset positions
of investors, especially in equity, which is consistent with valuation effects having
potentially important consequences for movements in net foreign asset positions too
(Gourinchas and Rey, 2007b).
The variance decompositions reported above consider the whole period with
available data. However, it is possible that the contributions of returns and injections
vary between tranquil and crisis periods. This is indeed the case. Table 3 shows that
return variability plays a much more important role during crisis times. For instance,
during the global crisis the contribution of return variability to overall variance of
equity funds is 67%, compared to a 37% contribution in the four years leading to the
beginning of the crisis. Table 3, Panel B also shows that among bond funds, the
contribution of return variability increases from 12% prior to the crisis to 19% during
the crisis. These broad patterns tend to be relatively stable across fund types and crises.
The previous results show that, at the fund level, both returns and injections
contribute to the variability of asset growth. They also show that returns and injections
vary over time in a manner that is consistent with the international business cycle. As

18

Following Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (2005), we have equally imputed the covariance term to each

component (returns and injections). That is, the share of the variance of the growth of assets explained by
returns equals the ratio of the variance of returns plus the covariance between returns and injections to
the variance of the growth of assets. The contemporaneous covariance between returns and injections is
small and negative.

19

said above, both returns and injections show sharp drops during times of financial
turmoil, and lengthy expansions during tranquil times. It is, therefore, possible that the
ability of returns and injections to explain variations in assets comes mainly from all
these series sharing a common time component, but this is not the case, especially for
injections. While a common time component can explain 59% and 20% of the variability
of fund returns (for equity and bond funds, respectively), the same component explains
only 5% and 9% of the variability of injections.19
A fund manager’s main decision is how to allocate his available funds across the
different assets in which he may invest, in particular across the countries where the fund
specializes. This decision may be driven by long-run structural factors behind the fund’s
strategic asset allocation (expected returns, covariance of assets across countries,
benchmarks being followed, and so forth), but it may also depend on short-run
variations in these or other factors. Faced with shocks to the return of their investments
or to injections by the underlying investors, fund managers may or may not decide to
reallocate their investments within and across countries. This is important because
weights that are relatively stable imply that only fluctuations in fund assets (either
because of returns or injections) will impact capital flows. On the other hand, country
weights that experience non-trivial fluctuations over time indicate that manager
decisions, on how to let weights adjust to relative price changes or how to buy and sell
assets differentially in different countries, play a role in international capital flows.

19

These figures correspond to the overall

of an ordinary least squares regression between each of these

variables and a set of month fixed effects.

20

Appendix 2 shows that country weights indeed fluctuate significantly across funds and
over time. Next, we study in more detail the behavior of injections and weights.

4. Behavior of Investors and Managers
The evidence above shows that both the underlying investors and managers change
their positions over time, but tells us little about the ultimate determinants of mutual
fund investments across countries. For instance, it does not show us how investors and
managers respond to crises and shocks. These responses are crucial to understand if this
type of financial intermediaries may contribute to or dampen the transmission of crises
across countries. To advance in our understanding of their behavior, we model how
injections and weights vary over time using some parsimonious models that, nonetheless,
capture basic and important properties of the data.
Underlying investors may link their injections into a fund to attributes that vary
at the fund level and over time. Therefore, to study the behavior of injections we regress
them on variables measuring the occurrence of crises (both at the countries of destiny of
a fund and the global level), returns of the fund, and returns of its country of origin.
This allows us to test, for example, if investors inject more resources into a fund when it
is performing well, as previously shown for U.S. mutual funds by Chevalier and Ellison
(1997), among others. It also permits us to estimate how investors react to changes in
the conditions experienced by the countries in which funds invest, measured by crisis at
the country of destiny. Furthermore, investors are also affected by shocks such as global

21

crises and changes in the conditions at their country of origin, which can lead to change
their investments in the type of international mutual funds we analyze. During good
times, investors may feel richer and desire to invest more internationally and diversify
risk, and vice versa. But it could also be the case that investors prefer to invest more
internationally when conditions in their home countries worsen, since international
markets might provide better prospects in relative terms. Ex-ante, these effects are not
obvious. Investors may react to different types of shocks pro-cyclically, countercyclically, or not react at all.
We sequentially regress the injections to a fund on a weighted country crisis
dummy, a dummy variable taking the value one during periods of global turmoil, lagged
fund returns, and the returns of the fund’s country of origin.20,21 This is akin to an
augmented version of the specification estimated by Sirri and Tufano (1998) for U.S.

20

In the regressions, we normalize the injections to a fund (given by Equation (2)) by the average assets

instead of the initial assets to isolate fluctuations in injections from fluctuations in initial assets. Results
using injections normalized by initial assets (available upon request) are qualitatively and quantitatively
similar to those reported here, but estimators are less precise because of the additional volatility of the
denominator in the expression.
21

The weighted country crisis dummy is constructed using yearly country crisis data, weighted by the

fund’s country portfolio weights at the beginning of the year. The crisis variable comes from Broner et al.
(2010) and dates a crisis the years when a country suffers at least a banking, debt, or currency crisis,
according to indicators widely used in the literature. The periods of global turmoil are: July 1997December 1997 (the Asian crisis), August 1998-December 1998 (the Russian crisis), March 2001-December
2001 (the dotcom bust, September 11, and the Enron scandal), and September 2008-June 2009 (the global
financial crisis). Fund returns are computed from fund-price data. Returns of the fund’s country of origin
are measured using a broad equity price index from the country where the fund is located. Funds that are
domiciled in Luxembourg are matched with country returns from Belgium since there are no available
indexes for bonds and equity from Luxembourg.

22

mutual funds.22 In addition, the regressions include, alternatively, fixed effects at the
fund, time, and country of origin-time levels. Standard errors are clustered at the
country of origin-time level to control for correlation in injections to funds located in the
same country.23
The results reported in Table 4 show that injections to both equity and bond
funds fall when the countries of destiny are affected by crises (Column (1)) and in
periods of global crises (Column (2)). On the contrary, injections increase in response to
the lagged returns of the fund (Column (3)), which are presumably observable by the
underlying investors, and in response to increases in the contemporaneous returns in the
country of origin of the fund (Column (4)), which capture local conditions. Interestingly,
among both equity and bond funds, the coefficient on lagged fund returns is lower than
that for country of origin returns. One can interpret this difference as suggesting that
wealth effects are stronger than substitution effects (across funds). A decline in local
conditions does not itself lead investors to increase their investments in international
funds to take advantage of equity return differentials or “carry-trade” effects (in cases
when these declines are associated with low interest rates). Nonetheless, controlling for
the conditions in the country of origin, more money flows into (or less money gets out
of) the better performing funds.

22

Sirri and Tufano (1998) include a longer set of lags of injections and fund returns in their specification.

We also estimated a version including up to three lags of both variables obtaining similar results.
23

Clustering estimations by time yields very similar results to using clusters by country of origin-time.

23

The regression in Column (5) includes all the previous variables simultaneously
and shows similar coefficients than those obtained in the single-variable regressions,
except for the impact of country crisis on equity funds. This indicates that while in
some cases the country-crisis variable is capturing the variation coming from periods of
global turmoil, the potential correlation between global crises and returns at the fund
and country level is not behind the significant results obtained in the previous columns.
Quantitatively, a global crisis reduces injections to equity funds by about 1
percentage point. This is much larger than the average monthly injection of about 0.1
percentage points, and 20% of the interquartile range of variation of injections over
average assets (5 percentage points). Similarly, a 10% decline in fund returns also
reduces injections by 1 percentage point. Since crises and fund returns are negatively
correlated, the joint impact of crises is larger. Finally, a 10% decline in the returns of
the country of origin (domicile) of the fund reduces injections by 2 percentage points.
The quantitative importance of these variables for bond funds is higher. For instance, a
global crisis reduces injections to bond funds by 3 percentage points. Although the
average injection over average assets for these funds is also higher (1.3% instead of 0.1%
for equity funds) the interquartile range of variation is similar than in equity funds
(5%). Thus, because of greater coefficients, injections to bond funds react more strongly
to returns and crises in the target countries and the country of origin.
The regressions in Columns (6) and (7) add time and country of origin-time fixed
effects to the regression in Column (5), respectively. In both cases, and among equity

24

and bond funds, the impact of country crisis declines and becomes statistically
insignificant (the global crisis variable is dropped from the regression in both cases
because it varies only with time). This confirms that the identification of the coefficient
in Column (1) comes mainly from a common, time-varying component, and not from
the idiosyncratic incidence of crises in individual countries. Lagged fund returns and
country returns remain statistically significant, except when including country of origintime fixed effects for bond funds, where the coefficient for these returns retains the
magnitude but becomes marginally significant (with a p-value of 0.11).
The results above show that the underlying investors respond to local and
international conditions when deciding whether to inject or withdraw money from
mutual funds. Fund managers must then choose how to allocate or liquidate positions in
response to these injections/redemptions and the realized returns of their investments. It
is this response (or lack thereof) that ultimately determines the net inflows/outflows to
the countries where each fund invests.
To empirically study the behavior of fund managers, we start with the following
identity that relates the country portfolio weights of a fund in two subsequent periods
(3)

,
where

is the portfolio weight of fund

in country

gross returns of the investments of the fund in country
respectively. Finally,

at time ,

are the

and across its whole portfolio,

is the net flow of money from fund

to country

expressed as a fraction of the fund’s initial assets in the country
25

and

at time ,

, and

is the

injection/redemption of funds into (out of) fund

by its underlying investors, expressed
.24

as a fraction of the initial assets of the fund

The expression in Equation (3) simply states that the weight of a country in a
fund portfolio at the end of time

depends on the country’s initial portfolio weight, the

return of the fund’s investment in the country, the return of the whole fund portfolio,
the fund’s new net inflows into and out of the country, and the fund’s
injections/redemptions. Intuitively, in absence of any type of flows (by the fund across
countries or to the fund), the portfolio weight of a country would increase (decrease)
only if the country assets have a higher (lower) return than those of other countries in
the fund portfolio. Henceforth, we will refer to the counterfactual country portfolio
weight in absence of any new flows or injections,

/

as the buy-and-hold weight.

The presence of injections adds another layer of variation in relative weights because
they would require the fund to allocate new money across countries or to liquidate
positions that may result in changes in portfolio weights. Furthermore, the flows to
different countries do not need to be linked to injections; even in the absence of the
latter, managers might decide to change country weights by reallocating positions across
countries. While Equation (3) is an identity, it does not imply any specific behavior for
country portfolio weights at time

because funds have the liberty, in principle, to

relocate funds across countries as they see fit (through variations in

) to achieve a

given portfolio composition.

24

As explained in Section 2, for data availability reasons we assume that the returns of all funds i

investing in country j are identical; namely,

across funds.

26

The discussion above shows that Equation (3) is a useful starting point to
analyze the behavior of portfolio weights. Log-linearizing that equation around a state
with gross returns equal to one and zero injections, one obtains the following expression
,
where

is the log of

, lowercase

(4)

represents the corresponding net returns

associated with the gross returns described above, and

and

are the main

components of a second order approximation error.25 This expression clearly shows that
in the absence of relative flows
returns

there is complete pass-through from relative

into weights (to a first order log approximation).

We allow the relative flows (which are at the complete discretion of fund
managers) to depend on lagged weights, relative returns, and the incidence of crises as
follows,
δ

η

γ

.

is a dummy variable that takes the value one if country
,

is a country of destiny-fund fixed effect, and

(5)

experiences a crisis at time

is an error term. , , and

are

parameters that capture the sensitivity of relative flows to lagged weights, relative
returns, and crises, and the rest of the notation is the same as above. The inclusion of
relative returns as determinants of relative flows is standard in the literature (e.g. Hau
and Rey, 2008). We augment this dependence of flows on country performance by

25

We separate the two components because the

term that contains expressions on

and

may

become especially important when these variables significantly deviate from the approximation point. It
may be, therefore, useful to control for them in a non-parametric manner.

27

including the crisis indicator. Finally, the presence of lagged weights captures the
possibility that flows respond to deviations of those weights from some desired target
level.
Replacing Equation (5) back in Equation (4), we obtain the following empirical
specification for the evolution of fund portfolio weights,
,
where

1

,

1

(6)

, and the rest of the notation is the same as above. This is

an estimable equation that allows us to study the determinants of a fund’s country
portfolio allocations and, replacing the estimated parameters back in Equation (5), the
determinants of its relative flows.26,27
Table 5 reports estimates of Equation (6) for equity funds (Panel A) and bond
funds (Panel B). The regression includes country weights in the target region of a fund
(i.e., in countries within the main scope of investment), and excludes cash weights,
which are analyzed separately. The first five columns report the main parameters of
26

Note that the model described by Equation (6) corresponds to a dynamic panel and that omitting the

fund-country fixed effect, or cleaning it by taking differences will result in inconsistent parameters,
especially for the lagged weights (Arellano and Bond, 1991). Estimating the fixed effects using the least
squares dummy variable estimator is still asymptotically biased, but the bias is of the order of 1/T, where
T is the time-series length of the typical fund. Since T is relatively large (50 observations for the median
fund), this bias is small. Including and estimating the fixed effects is important.
27

Although it is possible that the process for log weights has a unit root and that standard t-stats cannot

be reliably used, standard panel unit root tests (Im-Pesharan) reject the hypothesis of a unit root in log
weights. Second, as we report below, we also estimate specifications where the dependent variable is the
difference between log current weights and the buy-and-hold benchmark. These differences should be
stationary under both the null of a unit root and the alternative. Finally, as we describe next, we estimate
the specification at lower frequencies (semi-annual and annual) that make much more likely for weights to
differ from past weights.

28

Equation (6) including different combinations of fixed effects that capture the different
sources of variation of the data. The results in Column (1) include no fixed effects, while
the results in Column (2) include fund and time fixed effects that decompose

on its

two dimensions. The results in Column (2) show that the coefficients are very similar to
those without fixed effects and that these sources of variation do not have much
explanatory power.28 In the two columns, the coefficient on both lagged weights and
relative returns are significantly positive, meaning that weights are serially correlated
and positively correlated with relative returns.
The conclusions from the first two columns of Table 5 are not robust to the
inclusion of other sets of fixed effects capturing shocks of higher dimensions. Columns
(3), (4), and (5) include, alternatively and jointly, fund-time fixed effects and country of
destiny-fund fixed effects. The results in Column (3), which include fund-time fixed
effects, exhibit a significant increase in the coefficient for relative returns. They indicate
that the low coefficient on relative returns documented in the initial columns is largely
due to fund-level, time-varying shocks, such as those to injections and fund returns that
are part of the approximation error in Equation (4).29 When including the country of

28

Results controlling for shocks to the fund at the country of origin level (unreported) are also similar to

those obtained without fixed effects and to those obtained with fund and time fixed effects, indicating
that shocks at the level of country of origin do not play an important role in the dispersion of portfolio
allocations.
29

For instance, in the nonlinear version of the identity (Equation (3)) the impact of fund returns on

weights depends, among other things, on its injections. If these injections are large, weights would be
mainly driven by these injections and respond relatively less to returns. Furthermore, from an
econometric standpoint, these fixed effects also control for time variation in the within-fund (across-

29

destiny-fund fixed effects (Column (4)), the coefficient on lagged weight declines
significantly relative to the other columns. This is consistent with the existence of some
stable “target” component of weights per country for each fund.
Including only the two sets of fixed effects that have some impact on the
coefficients (country of destiny-fund and fund-time fixed effects), the regressions in
Column (5) show that at the monthly level there is an important, albeit incomplete,
degree of pass-through of relative returns to weights. Managers do not undo to an
important extent the short-term impact of relative returns on their positions, and let
them erode as a result of low returns. Using Equation (5) to uncover the behavior of
relative flows, we find that they are weakly negatively related to relative returns at a
monthly frequency.30
The regression in Column (6) further investigates the pro-cyclicality of fund
allocations by including a country-crisis dummy, as in Equation (6), to test if funds
react especially to crises periods. The results show that funds decrease their exposure to
countries that experience crises. A crisis results in a 2% decline in the weights assigned
to the affected country, on top of the decline implied by the relative returns. The strong
negative relation between portfolio weights and country crises implies that fund flows
also respond negatively to them. Thus, while relative flows are neutral or mildly
countries) dispersion of weights (captured in the average log weight), and identifies the importance of
relative returns using only within-fund, across-countries variation in returns and allocations.
30

For the readers interested directly in the parameters of the flow Equation (5), Appendix Table 8 reports

the same regressions shown in Table 5 but using relative flows (the difference between log weights, log
lagged weights, and net relative returns) as dependent variable. The conclusions from this exercise remain
the same.

30

contrarian during normal times, as shown in Column (6), they are strongly pro-cyclical
during crises.
It is important, however, to be cautious about interpreting the contrarian
behavior of relative flows during normal times as implying that funds wish to increase
their exposure to underperforming countries. To reach that conclusion, one requires a
model of the relation between relative flows and desired weights. Appendix 3 presents a
simple but very flexible partial adjustment model of this relation, and shows that under
reasonable assumptions, the results reported above are consistent with desired weights
that are positively related to relative returns. The intuition for this apparent
contradiction is that in the model relative flows depend on the difference between the
fund’s desired and initial (buy-and-hold) weights. If desired weights are higher (lower)
than buy-and-hold weights, money flows into (out of) a country. Since a decline in
relative returns has a direct one-to-one pass-through impact on the buy-and-hold
portfolio weights, if desired weights decline less than one-to-one with relative returns,
relative flows would tend to move in a contrarian manner (even when desired weights
decline with a fall in returns).
The last two columns of Table 5 repeat the specification in Column (6) using
data aggregated at different frequencies. The results show that the importance of passthrough declines at lower frequencies, as funds have more time to adjust their positions
after changes in relative prices. The same is valid for the response of flows which are
more negatively related to relative returns as the frequency of data is reduced.

31

Nonetheless, the negative relation between weights, flows, and crises is present at all
frequencies.
The results for bond funds (Table 5, Panel B) are broadly similar to those for
equity funds, but while the coefficients move in the same manner when various fixed
effects are added, the pass-through of returns on weights is much smaller than among
equity funds, implying that the underlying relative flows respond to returns in a
contrarian fashion.31 Quantitatively, a decline of 10 percentage points in a country’s
relative returns reduces its weight on about 6%. The response of weights and flows to
crises is negative but statistically insignificant. Bond funds seem to behave in a more
contrarian way than equity funds. This behavior may result from a lack of ability to
quickly liquidate bonds of countries suffering strong reversals, because of the lower
liquidity of some bond markets. Thus, in the short run bond funds may be forced to
liquidate positions in countries that do relatively better in order to meet redemptions,
but as they can slowly accommodate their positions they react pro-cyclically to return
differentials. Another possible explanation is that the unobserved benchmarks followed
by bond funds do not react as fast as those of equity funds to relative country returns.
Finally, as we show below, these findings may also be explained by higher precautionary
holdings of cash by bond funds than by equity funds.
We conducted a series of robustness checks on the results of the basic
specifications reported in Table 5 without finding significant changes in our results.

31

Note that this does not necessarily imply a contrarian response of total country flows because relative

flows are measured relative to the injections to the fund, which we know react negatively to bad news.

32

Among these checks we estimated the model using only funds with at least three years
of data, we added more lags of log weights and relative returns (up to three), we
considered countries both inside and outside the relevant region, and we estimated the
model separately for global equity funds and regional equity funds. In all cases, the
qualitative and quantitative results (available upon request) are similar to those
reported in Table 5.
The log transformation used above and the regressions reported in Table 5
discard the information contained in the zero weight countries. It is not obvious if these
zeroes should be included or not because some cases may correspond to countries that
are out of the scope of investment of a fund for reasons we do not observe (prospectus
or underlying unobserved benchmark). To check the concern that the zeroes may
contain useful information while minimizing the probability of zeroes that are related to
the scope of the fund, we re-estimate the regressions in levels including only the zeroes
corresponding to countries that are in the region or market segment declared as part of
the scope of the fund. To maintain consistency with the equation in logs, we include as
explanatory variables the level of the buy-and-hold weight and the country’s relative
returns expressed as the ratio of the gross returns of the country and the portfolio. The
results, shown in Table 6, are qualitatively consistent with those obtained with the
specification in levels, despite significantly increasing the number of observations (from
460,000 to 740,000): weights decline when relative returns fall and when a crisis hits a
country. Quantitatively, the implied results are larger than in the log specifications. In

33

equity funds, a 10% decline in relative returns would reduce weights by 1 percentage
point, in addition to the pure pass-through effect. This is about 20% of the average
weight (5%). The impact of a crisis is also larger: it results in a 10 percentage point
decline in weights.
Both equity and bond funds maintain a fraction of their assets in cash. This cash
may be used as a buffer to park money before and after buying and selling assets, meet
redemptions, and strategically take advantage of sudden investment opportunities. The
regressions in Table 7 characterize the behavior of the cash weights in logs. In
unreported results, we also ran the same regression for cash in levels, obtaining similar
results. The specifications are analogous to those reported above, with gross cash
returns assumed to equal one so that relative returns correspond to minus fund net
returns. Since cash weights vary only in the fund-time dimension, we limit the set of
fixed effects included.
The results in Table 7 show that a decline in equity fund returns results in an
increase in cash. In other words, equity funds accumulate extra cash in bad times and
reduce these positions in good times. Quantitatively, a 10% decline in the return of the
fund results in a 7% increase in cash. The results also show a significantly lower passthrough on cash weights, with coefficients on log lagged cash weights much smaller than
one. The results in Column (3), which include time fixed effects, show that most of the
positive relation between cash weights and cash relative returns results from variations
in global conditions. After controlling for those fixed effects, the coefficient on relative

34

returns, while still positive, becomes smaller than that of lagged weights and not
significant. The regression in Column (4), without time fixed effects, shows that the
variables capturing the prevalence of country and global crises are associated with both
an increase in cash and a decline in the coefficients for relative returns, confirming that,
to an important extent, the relevance of relative returns comes from global conditions.
A fund experiencing a crisis in one of its target countries increases cash by 10% of the
share of that country in its portfolio, and a fund experiencing a global crisis increases
cash by 16%. Columns (5) and (6), focusing on the results at different frequencies, show
again a smaller and vanishing degree of pass-through, indicating that at lower
frequencies cash weights tend to converge to a target level that is not driven by price
fluctuations. However, even at this level of aggregation country and global crises can
explain some of the variation in cash weights.
Interestingly, the response of cash weights to returns is much different in bond
funds. Among these funds, cash moves in opposite direction to returns, even though
pass-through would suggest a positive response. Bond funds seem to accumulate cash
when fund returns are high (low relative returns). Why is this effect dominant only for
bond funds? This result may be due to the stronger response of injections to returns
among bond funds (Table 4): a high return results in injections that are temporarily
parked in cash. Similarly, a bad fund return may require a decline in cash while the
fund meets redemptions. Another explanation is that, since bond funds hold more cash
on average, they are better able to respond to injections/redemptions through variations

35

in cash without having to liquidate assets or relocate money across countries. This is
only a proximate explanation because, of course, the level of cash held by bond funds is
an endogenous choice. Nonetheless, one can rationalize both the level and cyclical
fluctuations in cash if the bond markets where international funds invest are less liquid
than the corresponding equity markets, so that funds cannot quickly adjust positions to
meet redemptions without taking large losses through fire-sale prices, which may lead
them to hoard more cash. These results can also explain the weaker response of country
weights to relative returns among bond funds in the short run: a decline in country
returns prompts bond funds to liquidate cash to meet redemptions, dampening the
impact of this decline on the country weights. Results in levels including the zero cash
weights are qualitatively similar to those in logs (unreported).

5. Gross and Net Country Flows: The Role of Investors and Managers
We next quantify the relative importance of the underlying investors and managers in
explaining the gross and net capital flows by mutual funds to different countries. “Gross
flows” are the growth rate of total assets invested by mutual funds in a country
(including returns of past investments). “Net flows” are inflows/outflows of money
(gross flows minus the return in each country).32

32

Note that this is a specific definition of gross and net flows that fits well with the discussion on this

paper, but the literature has employed the terms with many other ways. For our computations, we use
the growth rates of assets between two consecutive periods in a country using only the funds that have
investments in that country in both periods. That is, we do not include entry-exit in the calculations. The

36

The assets held by mutual funds in country

trivially correspond to the sum of

the assets held in that country by each one of the funds that invest in it,

∑

.

Taking log differences we obtain the following decomposition for the growth rate of total
assets in a country (gross flows)
∑

where

∑

,

(7)

denotes the growth rate of total mutual fund assets in country
⁄

is the share of total country

growth of the weight of country

assets represented by fund ,

in the portfolio of fund

is the growth in total assets of fund

between

and

at time ,
is the
1 and, and

within the same interval.

Equation (7) states that gross flows of money from mutual funds to a country
may increase because funds increase the weight of that country in their portfolios, or
because the total assets of the funds investing in the country are increasing. The
economic interpretation of these two components as capturing the contribution of fund
managers versus that of the underlying investors require to take a stance on the scope of
activities within the realm of decision of each of these two sets of market participants.
Assuming that changes in weights are the managers’ choice and the growth rate of fund
assets is exogenously determined, one may interpret the first component as
corresponding to the managers’ decision and the second component to that of the
underlying investors. This is one of the decompositions we estimate below.

reason is that we do not know whether entry-exit in our sample corresponds to real entry-exit or
variations in data coverage.

37

The other main decomposition we use works with net flows to a country (growth
in total assets net of returns,

) by isolating the contribution of the growth in weights

net of returns (relative flows) and injections to net flows, in the following manner,

.

(8)

A nice feature of the decomposition in Equation (8) is that both terms have a
very clear economic interpretation. The first term is the change in weights net of
relative returns, which corresponds to relative flows of managers to a country, and the
second corresponds to injections/redemptions into the fund. The flows of fund money to
country

increase either because the fund manager is investing relatively more money

into the country or because the fund has injections by the underlying investors that are
proportionally allocated to all countries. For additional information including two other
decompositions see Appendix 4.
The results of the decompositions in Equations (7) and (8) are reported in two
separate panels of Table 8 and offer a good picture of the role of managers and investors
in explaining gross and net flows of capital to countries. Each panel reports two sets of
results: the average contribution of each of the two components to the level and
variance of each type of flow.
To illustrate what Table 8 reports, take the example of gross flows in Panel A.
The calculation for the left side of the panel (the “shares”) is as follows: for each
country and time we compute the share of each component (growth in weights and

38

growth in fund assets) in the growth in the country’s gross assets. We then compute for
each country the average over time of each of these components, and finally take their
average across all countries in each of the groupings in the rows.33 The right side of each
panel (“variance decomposition”) reports a standard variance decomposition exercise,
where we assess the share of the total variance of gross flows that can be attributed to
each component. Again, we first conduct the variance decomposition at the country
level and then average across countries to reach the reported estimates. Since the two
terms are not orthogonal, we follow Klenow and Rodriguez-Claire (2005) and impute the
covariance term equally to each component (see Section 3).
Table 8, Panel A shows that both components of Equation (7) have roughly a
similar impact on the level and fluctuations in gross assets (around a 40%-60% split
depending on the decomposition). That is, the growth of weights and the growth of fund
assets are not very different in explaining the gross flows into countries, although the
contribution of the former is largely due to fluctuations in relative returns that are
correlated with the movement in gross flows. After controlling for this effect, managers
explain 30% of the variation (Appendix 4). In sum, Panel A shows that variations in
fund assets, resulting at least partly from the behavior of the underlying investors,
explain an important share of the level and variability of gross flows. If one considers
changes in weights due to variations in returns part of manager’s choices, managers

33

We use both a geographical grouping (Asia, Eastern Europe, and Latin America) and another one

(developed, emerging, and non-emerging developing countries) taken from MSCI. Non-emerging
developing countries are the ones considered frontier markets by MSCI.

39

explain about 60% of the variance of gross flows. If not, they still explain a nontrivial,
but smaller share.
Table 8, Panel B shows the decomposition of net flows corresponding to Equation
(8). The results are clearly different from those for gross flows. In this case, the first
component, associated with manager’s behavior, explains a larger share of the level and
variance of these flows. Net flows are more closely linked to managerial discretion than
gross flows since they abstract from the effect of returns on the growth of asset holdings.
For all countries, the growth rate of adjusted weights explains 88% of the level of net
flows and 85% of their variance. Namely, the term associated with total injections
explains 12% and 15% of the level and variance of net flows, respectively. The pattern is
very similar across groups of countries.
In summary, Table 8 shows that both managers and the underlying investors
play a significant role in explaining the level and fluctuations of international gross and
net flows but the relative importance of each of them varies with the type of flow. For
gross flows, managers explain a share of the level and variance of flows of around 50%,
when not adjusting for returns and depending on the specific decomposition and region.
For net flows, however, the bulk of the level and variance of flows (between 77% and
88%) can be explained by manager’s behavior. Managerial discretion, measured as
deviations of country allocations from buy-and-hold allocations, is very important in
explaining the flows of new money to countries.

40

Table 9 shows the same decompositions as in Table 8 for all countries but for
different groups of funds. In each case, the gross and net flows to a country correspond
only to the flows coming from that subset of funds. The table also shows decompositions
at different frequencies: semi-annual and annual instead of monthly. Not surprisingly,
the growth of total weights, capturing manager’s behavior, explains always a much
larger fraction of the level and volatility of gross flows for active funds than for passive
funds. For instance, Table 9, Panel A shows that the growth of weights accounts for
49% and 58% of the level and variance of gross flows for active funds, versus 22% and
32% for passive funds, respectively. Panel B shows that the difference between active
and passive funds in the contribution of manager’s behavior to net flows is even larger:
87% of the level and variance for active funds, and 15% of the level and 31% of the
variance for passive funds, respectively. Namely, the gross and net flows of capital from
passive funds to countries respond mainly to the behavior of the underlying investors.
Regarding the difference between bond and equity funds, manager’s behavior seems to
play a slightly larger role among bond funds, for both gross and net flows. Regarding
the differences between monthly, semi-annual, and annual frequencies, Table 9 shows a
clear pattern. For both levels and variances of gross and net flows, the role of manager’s
behavior declines with the increase in the length of the period of analysis. Although as
seen in Section 4, the ability of managers to change country weights with respect to a
buy-and-hold benchmark increases with time, it is also the case that the underlying

41

investors can react further to fund performance, country conditions, or other shocks. At
lower frequencies, the investor side seems to become relatively more important.
In addition to providing a quantitative assessment of the relative importance of
manager’s and underlying investor’s choices for mutual fund capital flows to target
countries, the decompositions above, together with our previous estimations, allow us to
obtain some back-of-the-envelope calculations of the impact of various shocks on capital
flows. Let us start with Equation (7) for gross flows. From Table 4 we know that a 10%
decline in (lagged) fund returns reduces injections by about 1 percentage point. Thus, if
all funds investing in a country experience such a decline in returns, gross flows will
decline in 1 percentage point through its impact on the total assets of these funds (the
second term in Equation (7)). This is close to the median gross flows across countries
(about 2%) and indicates that there may be important contagion effects through the
injections of the underlying investors. Similarly, a 10% decline in the returns of the
country where the funds are located will reduce injections to these funds by 2
percentage points. If funds located in the country experiencing the decline are important
for a target country, the decline in gross flows will be significant. From Table 6 we also
find that a decline in the relative return of a country has almost a one-to-one impact on
the growth of weights at a monthly frequency. Keeping fund returns constant, a 10%
decline in relative returns results in a 10% decline in the weight of that country in
mutual fund portfolios and may induce a similar decline in gross flows. A country crisis

42

also has an important effect, reducing the growth of weights by almost 2%, with a
corresponding decline in gross flows.
A similar set of calculations can be conducted to estimate the impact of various
shocks on net (mutual fund) capital flows to a country using Equation (8). Changes in
fund injections have the same direct impact on net flows than in gross flows, so a 10%
decline in last period returns may reduce net inflows by 1 percentage point, or a 10%
decline in the returns in the country of origin of the funds may contract inflows by 2
percentage points. Relative returns also matter. As discussed above, Table 5 shows that
a 10% decline in relative returns results in a 0.5 percentage point increase in relative
flows, which is considerable relative to the (unweighted) average growth of net flows in
the sample (minus 1.5%). However, if this relative return decline is accompanied by a
low fund performance or by low returns in the country of origin of funds that induce
large redemptions, the consequences for net capital flows may still be severe (3 to 4
percentage point decline).

6. Conclusions
This paper has shown that mutual funds help transmit crises across countries and that
their behavior is driven by both the underlying investors and managers. The global
crisis was no exception, when there were large reallocations across countries and regions.
In particular, the paper has shown that investors react to shocks by pulling out of funds
that invest in countries undergoing crises and during global crisis times. In addition,

43

investors put more capital into funds that have shown to do relatively well and when
conditions in their country of origin improve. This pro-cyclical reaction of investors is
matched with a similar behavior by fund managers, who face not only shocks from
investors injecting and redeeming capital but also from valuation changes in the
countries in which they invest. Managers react to these shocks by allowing weights to
adjust almost pari passu with returns and partly by moving allocations out of countries
experiencing crises. This adjustment of managers takes place over time, with the passthrough from returns to weights diminishing at lower frequencies. During crises,
managers of equity funds also tend to accumulate more cash. All these patterns are
consistent with how investors and managers behaved during the global crises, when
there was retrenchment from emerging economies and Europe and a reallocation
towards the U.S.
The findings in this paper have important implications for the theoretical
literature and policy discussions. They suggest that, in a world where investors
discipline managers through injections and redemptions and there are large shocks,
managers of open-ended funds might have difficulties taking advantage of long-term
arbitrage opportunities and reacting counter-cyclically, for example by buying assets
internationally at fire-sale prices. Therefore, the evidence is not consistent with
international deep-pocket investors (mutual funds in this case) playing a stabilizing role.
To the contrary, these investors appear fickle.

44

Regarding the difference between debt and equity, the paper shows that the
results are not unique to demandable debt, where the need to get out first is more
imperative. The pro-cyclicality occurs even in equity funds, for which prices adjust
instantaneously, suggesting that limited information by investors, and/or other factors,
need to be playing an important role. While in equity funds cash is used pro-cyclically,
being accumulated during crises, in bond funds cash is used more as a buffer, reducing
the impact of redemptions on manager reallocations. This could suggest that managers
have more difficulty buying and selling assets in markets that might be more illiquid,
and thus use more cash to withstand the shocks they face. The results also suggest that,
when there is a shock in a country where funds invest, equity funds tend to amplify the
shock by acting pro-cyclically, while bond funds might help transmit shocks across
countries by acting in relative terms counter-cyclically in that country, generating
contagion effects. However, when the shock hits the country of origin where funds are
domiciled, both bond and equity funds reduce their investments abroad, implying that
wealth effects might be significant. These wealth effects tend to dominate the
substitution effects across countries and constitute a mechanism of cross-country crisis
transmission.
The evidence also shows that weights are not constant over time. In fact, they
fluctuate substantially with shocks. In other words, it is not the case that investors
drive all the action and managers act as passive agents, allocating the injections they
receive into countries according to some approximate fixed weights. While changes in

45

weights might partly reflect monthly changes in the benchmark indexes (changing with
returns), the findings also suggest that adjustment costs might play a role in manager
behavior. Valuation changes pass-through to portfolios weights almost entirely in the
short run; only over time they get adjusted and somewhat reverse to pre-shock levels.
These adjustment costs could take place because it is difficult for managers to adjust
immediately to the shocks they receive and react to them in the short run by buying or
selling assets in certain countries (perhaps liquid ones), before adjusting the portfolio
elsewhere. These effects are more pronounced during crisis times, since in relative terms
during normal times managers reallocate their portfolio towards countries that get
negative shocks. For example, equity fund flows are slightly counter-cyclical during
normal times and pro-cyclical during crises. These differences are consistent with
adjustment costs being larger during crises and shed light on the heterogeneity of
behavior of equity funds over time. The evidence could also indicate to some extent that
the managers’ target or desired weights themselves change over time and fluctuate with
returns.
The findings in this paper have important implications for the policy discussion
as well. In particular, some of the proposals after the global crisis suggest a shift from
banks to a mutual fund model to avoid runs and contagion effects. This paper shows
that this shift will not necessarily solve the problem that banks entail and that runs and
contagion are possible even in equity funds. The findings also suggest that idiosyncratic
risk and market discipline play only a limited role during crises and, thus, regulation

46

based on those pillars (such as Basel II) would not entirely isolate the financial system
from crises. Furthermore, to the extent that open-ended structures constrain long-term
arbitrage, there could be socially excessive open-ending and it might be desirable to
have more closed-end funds. However, open-ended funds provide more room for
investors to monitor managers and avoid moral hazard problems, implying a difficult
trade-off between monitoring and long-term investments (Stein, 2005). Another area for
possible policy action is the potential for mutual funds to become a source of instability
in domestic markets, pushing prices away from fundamental values. Recent work
suggests that this might be the case (Jotikasthira et al., 2009). Finally, the findings in
this paper imply that shocks to the supply side of funds are hard to dismiss. The actions
by different players within institutions interact and get magnified, plus foreign investors
(in this case mutual funds) play no stabilizing role by buying at fire-sale prices. This has
important policy lessons in terms of liquidity provision and moral hazard. To the extent
that shocks come from the supply side of funds, providing liquidity at times of crisis
might help stabilize markets and countries. If instead crises were country specific with
investors expecting unreasonable rates of returns, providing financing at times of crisis
might fuel moral hazard.

47

References
Allen, F., Gale, D., 2000. Optimal Currency Crises. Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public
Policy 53, 177-230.
Allen, F., Gale, D., 2007. Systemic Risk and Regulation, in: Carey, M., Stulz, R., (Eds.),
The Risks of Financial Institutions. NBER, Edition 1, Part 3, Chapter 7, 341-376.
Arellano, M., Bond, S., 1991. Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte Carlo
Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations. Review of Economic
Studies 58 (2), 277-297.
Andersen, T., Bollersley, T., Diebold, F., Vega, C., 2007. Real-time Price Discovery in
Global Stock Bonds and Foreign Exchange Markets. Journal of International
Economics 73 (2), 257-277.
Borensztein, E., Gelos, G., 2003. A Panic-Prone Pack? The Behavior of Emerging
Market Mutual Funds. IMF Staff Papers 50 (1), 43-63.
Boyer, B., Kumagai, T., Yuan, K., 2006. How Do Crises Spread? Evidence from
Accessible and Inaccessible Stock Indices. Journal of Finance 61 (2), 957-1003.
Broner, F., Gelos, G., Reinhart, C., 2006. When in Peril, Retrench: Testing the
Portfolio Channel of Contagion. Journal of International Economics 69 (1), 203230.
Broner, F., Didier, T., Erce, A., Schmukler, S., 2010. Gross Capital Flows: Dynamics
and Crises. Banco de España Working Paper 1039.
Broner, F., Lorenzoni, G., Schmukler, S., 2011. Why Do Emerging Economies Borrow
Short Term? Journal of the European Economic Association, forthcoming.
Brunnermeier, M., 2009. Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-2008.
Journal of Economic Perspectives 23 (1), 77-100.
Bulow, J., Geanakoplos, J., Klemperer, P., 1985. Multilateral Oligopoly: Strategic
Substitutes and Strategic Complements. Journal of Political Economy 93, 488-511.
Calomiris, C., 2008. The Subprime Turmoil, What’s Old, What’s New, and What’s
Next. Journal of Structured Finance 15 (1), 6-52.
Calvo, G., 2002. Contagion in Emerging Markets: When Wall Street is a Carrier.
Proceedings from the International Economic Association Congress, Vol. 3, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.
48

Cetorelli, N., Goldberg, L., 2011. Global Banks and International Shock Transmission:
Evidence from the Crisis. IMF Economic Review 59 (1), 41-76.
Chan, K., Covrig, V., Ng, L., 2005. What Determines the Domestic Bias and Foreign
Bias? Evidence from Mutual Fund Equity Allocations Worldwide. Journal of
Finance 60 (3), 1495-1534.
Chang, R., Velasco, A., 2001. A Model of Financial Crises in Emerging Markets. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (2), 489-517.
Chevalier, J., and Ellison, G., 1997. Risk Taking by Mutual Funds as a Response to
Incentives. Journal of Political Economy 105 (6), 1167-1200.
Cifuentes, R., Ferrucci, G., Shin, H., 2005. Liquidity Risk and Contagion. Journal of the
European Economic Association 3 (2-3), 556-566.
Claessens, S., Forbes K., 2001. International Financial Contagion. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Boston.
Dahlquist, M., Robertsson, G., 2001. Direct Foreign Ownership, Institutional Investors
and Firm Characteristics. Journal of Financial Economics 59 (3), 413-440.
Devereux, M., Yetman, J., 2010. Leverage Constraints and the International
Transmission of Shocks. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 42 (1), 71-105.
Diamond, D., Dybvig, P., 1983. Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity. Journal
of Political Economy 91 (3), 401-419.
Diamond, D., Rajan, R., 2005. Liquidity Shortages and Banking Crises. Journal of
Finance 60 (2), 615-647.
Didier, T., Rigobon, R., Schmukler, S., 2010. Unexploited Gains from International
Diversification: Patterns of Portfolio Holdings around the World. NBER Working
Paper 16629.
Eichengreen, B., Mody, A., Nedeljkovic, M., Sarno, L., 2009. How the Subprime Crisis
Went Global: Evidence from Bank Credit Default Swap Spreads. NBER Working
Paper 14904.
Forbes, K., Warnock, F., 2010. Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight, and
Retrenchment. MIT and University of Virginia. Mimeo.
Fratzscher, M., 2011. The Role of Capital Flows and Investment Fund Contagion in the
Global Crisis, European Central Bank. Mimeo.

49

Gelos, R., Wei, S., 2005. Transparency and International Portfolio Holdings. Journal of
Finance 60 (6), 2987-3020.
Gompers, P., Metrick, A., 2001. Institutional Investors and Equity Prices. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 116 (1), 229-259.
Gorton, G., Metrick, A., 2011. Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo. Journal of
Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Gourinchas, P., Rey, H., 2007a. From World Banker to World Venture Capitalist: U.S.
External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege, in: Clarida, H., (Ed.), G7
Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, Edition 1, Chapter 1,
11-66. NBER.
Gourinchas, P., Rey, H., 2007b. International Financial Adjustment. Journal of Political
Economy 115 (4), 665-703.
Gourinchas, P., Govillot, N., Rey, H., 2010. Exorbitant Privilege and Exorbitant Duty.
IMES Discussion Paper 10-E-20. Bank of Japan.
Gourinchas, P., Obstfeld, M., 2011. Stories of the 20th Century for the 21st. American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.
Grinblatt, M., Titman, S., Wermers, R., 1995. Momentum Investment Strategies,
Portfolio Performance and Herding: A Study of Mutual Fund Behavior. American
Economic Review 85 (5), 1088-1105.
Hau, H., Rey, H., 2006. Exchange Rates, Equity Prices, and Capital Flows. Review of
Financial Studies 19 (1), 273-317.
Hau, H., Rey, H., 2008. Global Portfolio Rebalancing under the Microscope. NBER
Working Paper 14165.
Hellwig, M., 2009. Systemic Risk in the Financial Sector: An Analysis of the SubprimeMortgage Financial Crisis. De Economist 157 (2), 129-207.
Jotikasthira, C., Lundblad, C., Ramadorai, T., 2009. Asset Fire Sales and Purchases
and the International Transmission of Financial Shocks. CEPR Discussion Paper
7595.
Kaminsky, G., Reinhart, C., 2000. On Contagion, Crisis and Confusion. Journal of
International Economics 51 (1), 145-168.

50

Kaminsky, G., Lyons, R., Schmukler, S., 2004. Managers, Investors, and Crises: Mutual
Fund Strategies in Emerging Markets. Journal of International Economics 64 (1),
113-134.
Kang, J., Stulz, R., 1997. Why is there a Home Bias? An Analysis of Foreign Portfolio
Equity Ownership in Japan. Journal of International Economics 64 (1), 113-134.
Kim, W., Wei, S., 2002. Foreign Portfolio Investors Before and During a Crisis. Journal
of International Economics 56 (1), 77-96.
Klenow, P., Rodriguez-Clare, A., 2005. Externalities and Growth, in: Aghion, P.,
Durlauf, S., (Eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth, Edition 1, Volume 1, Chapter
11, 817-861.
Kodres, L., Pritsker, M., 2002. A Rational Expectations Model of Financial Contagion,
Journal of Finance 57 (2), 769-799.
Krugman, P., 2008. The International Finance Multiplier. Princeton University. Mimeo.
Martinez Peria, M., Powell, A., Vladkova-Hollar, I., 2005. Banking on Foreigners: The
Behavior of International Bank Claims on Latin America, 1985-2000. IMF Staff
Papers 52 (3), 430-461.
Mendoza E., 2010. Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage. American Economic
Review 100, 1941-1966.
Mendoza, E., Quadrini, V., 2010. Financial Globalization, Financial Crises, and
Contagion. Journal of Monetary Economics 57 (1), 24-39.
Mendoza, E., Smith, K., 2006. Quantitative Implications of a Debt-Deflation Theory of
Sudden Stops and Asset Prices. Journal of International Economics 70 (1), 82-114.
Milesi-Ferretti, G., Tille, C., 2010. The Great Retrenchment: International Capital
Flows during the Global Financial Crisis. IHEID Working Paper 18-2010.
Graduate Institute of International Studies.
Mishkin, F. S., 2011. Over the Cliff: From the Subprime to the Global Financial Crisis.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, forthcoming.
Morck, R., Yeung, B., Wu, W., 2000. The Information Content of Stock Markets: Why
Do Emerging Markets Have Synchronous Stock Price Movements? Journal of
Financial Economics, 59 (1-2), 215-260.

51

Raddatz, C., 2010. When the Rivers Run Dry: Liquidity and the Role of Wholesale
Funds in the Transmission of the U.S. Subprime Crisis. Policy Research Working
Paper 5039. The World Bank.
Rajan, R., 2005. Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier? Proceedings, 313369. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Scharfstein, D., Stein, J., 1990. Herd Behavior and Investment. American Economic
Review 80 (3), 465-479.
Schwert, G., 1989. Why Does Stock Market Volatility Change over Time? Journal of
Finance 44 (5), 1115-1153.
Shiller, R., 2008. The Subprime Solution: How Today's Global Financial Crisis
Happened, and What to Do About It. Princeton University Press. Princeton, NJ.
Shin, H., 2009. Reflections on Modern Bank Runs. A Case Study on Northern Rock.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23 (1), 101-119.
Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1997. The Limits of Arbitrage, Journal of Finance, 52 (1), 3555.
Sirri, E., Tufano, P., 1998. Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows. Journal of Finance,
53 (5), 1589-1622.
Stein, J., 2005. Why Are Most Funds Open-End? Competition and the Limits to
Arbitrage. Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (1), 247-272.
Stein, J., 2009. Presidential Address: Sophisticated Investors and Market Efficiency.
Journal of Finance 64, 1517-1548.
Wermers, R., 1999. Mutual Fund Herding and the Impact on Stock Prices. Journal of
Finance 54 (2), 581-622.

52

Figure 1
Evolution of Total Assets in Mutual Funds
Panel A presents the total amount of assets in equity funds. The upper figure presents the period January 1996
to December 2000, and the lower figure presents the period June 2001 to November 2010. Panel B presents the
total amount of assets in bond funds for the whole period, July 2002 to November 2010.

A. Equity Funds

90,000

Millions of USD

80,000
70,000
60,000
50,000
40,000
30,000
20,000
10,000
Jul. 00

Jan. 00

Jul. 99

Jan. 99

Jul. 98

Jan. 98

Jul. 97

Jan. 97

Jul. 96

Jan. 96

0

800,000

Millions of USD

700,000
600,000
500,000
400,000
300,000
200,000
100,000
Jun. 10

Jun. 09

Jun. 08

Jun. 07

Jun. 06

Jun. 05

Jun. 04

Jun. 03

Jun. 02

Jun. 01

0

B. Bond Funds

100,000
90,000
70,000
60,000
50,000
40,000
30,000
20,000
10,000

53

Jul. 10

Jul. 09

Jul. 08

Jul. 07

Jul. 06

Jul. 05

Jul. 04

Jul. 03

0
Jul. 02

Millions of USD

80,000

Figure 2
Portfolio Weights during the Global Financial Crisis: Equity Funds
This figure presents the evolution of the average portfolio weights invested in different regions by equity funds during the global financial crisis of 2008-2009. Only countries with stock market price index data are
considered to compute the weights. Regions are aggregated according to the EPFR Global classification. Only funds that have complete coverage for the period under study (Jan. 2007 - Dec. 2009) are considered. The grey
bars indicate times of stock market turmoil or the fall of financial institutions. In chronological order, they represent: the nationalization of Northern Rock (Sep. 2007), the Bear Stearns collapse (Mar. 2008), the Lehman
Brothers collapse (Sep. 2008), and the AIG near-collapse (Mar. 2009).
Global Equity Funds

Jan.09

May.09

Sep.09

Jan.09

May.09

Sep.09

Sep.08

May.08

Sep.07

May.07

Jan.07

Sep.09

May.09

Jan.08

North America

23%
22%
21%
20%
19%
18%
17%
16%
15%
Jan.09

Sep.08

May.08

Sep.07

May.07

Jan.07

Sep.09

May.09

AIG
Jan.09

Sep.08

Lehman
Brothers
May.08

Bear
Stearns

Jan.08

Sep.07

May.07

Jan.07

Northern
Rock

Emerging Countries

15%
14%
13%
12%
11%
10%
9%
8%
7%

Jan.08

Developed Europe

50%
49%
48%
47%
46%
45%
44%
43%
42%

Global Emerging Equity Funds
Emerging Europe

Latin America

25%
24%
23%
22%
21%
20%
19%

54

Sep.08

May.08

Jan.08

Sep.07

May.07

Jan.07

Sep.09

May.09

Jan.09

Sep.08

May.08

Jan.08

Sep.07

May.07

18%
Jan.07

Sep.09

May.09

15%
14%
13%
12%
11%
10%
9%
8%
7%
Jan.09

Sep.08

May.08

Sep.07

May.07

Jan.07

Jan.08

Emerging Asia

56%
54%
52%
50%
48%
46%
44%
42%
40%

Figure 3
Portfolio Weights during the Global Financial Crisis: Bond Funds
This figure presents the evolution of the average portfolio weights invested in different regions by bond funds during the global financial crisis of 2008-2009. Only countries with bond market price index data are
considered to compute the weights. Regions are aggregated according to the EPFR Global classification. Only funds that have complete coverage for the period under study (Jan. 2007 - Dec. 2009) are considered. The grey
bars indicate times of stock market turmoil or the fall of financial institutions. In chronological order, they represent: the nationalization of Northern Rock (Sep. 2007), the Bear Stearns collapse (Mar. 2008), the Lehman
Brothers collapse (Sep. 2008), and the AIG near-collapse (Mar. 2009).
Global Bond Funds

Jan.09

May.09

Sep.09

Jan.09

May.09

Sep.09

Sep.08

May.08

Sep.09

May.09

Jan.09

Sep.08

May.08

Jan.08

Sep.07

May.07

Jan.07

Sep.09

AIG

0%

Sep.07

0%

Lehman
Brothers

Jan.07

5%

0%

Bear
Stearns

May.09

10%

5%

Northern
Rock

Jan.09

10%

Sep.08

15%

20%

May.08

15%

Jan.08

20%

30%

Sep.07

25%

20%

May.07

25%

40%

Jan.07

50%

10%

North America

30%

Jan.08

Emerging Countries

30%

May.07

Developed Europe

60%

Global Emerging Bond Funds

Sep.08

May.08

Sep.07

May.07

Sep.09

May.09

Jan.09

Sep.08

May.08

Jan.08

Sep.07

35%
May.07

40%

20%
Jan.07

22%

10%
Sep.09

12%

May.09

45%

Jan.09

24%

Sep.08

14%

May.08

50%

Jan.08

16%

Sep.07

55%

26%

May.07

28%

Jan.07

18%

55

Latin America

60%

Jan.08

Emerging Europe

30%

Jan.07

Emerging Asia

20%

Figure 4
Cash Weights during the Global Financial Crisis
This figure presents the evolution of the average mutual fund portfolio cash weights during the global financial crisis of 2008-2009. Regions are aggregated
according to the EPFR Global classification. Only funds that have complete coverage for the period under study (Jan. 2007 - Dec. 2009) are considered. The
grey bars indicate times of stock market turmoil or the fall of financial institutions. In chronological order, they represent: the nationalization of Northern
Rock (Sep. 2007), the Bear Stearns collapse (Mar. 2008), the Lehman Brothers collapse (Sep. 2008), and the AIG near-collapse (Mar. 2009).
Global Funds

Sep.09

May.09

Jan.07

Sep.09

May.09
M

Jan.09

Sep.08

May.08
M

Jan.08

Sep.07

May.07
M

Jan.07

May.09

AIG

0%

Jan.09

Lehman
Brothers

Jan.09

Bear
Stearns

Sep.08

Northern
Rock

1%

Jan.08

3%

Sep.07

4%

May.07

5%

2%

Global Bond

20%
18%
16%
14%
12%
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%

May.08

Global Equity

6%

Global Emerging Funds
Global Emerging Equity

6%

Global Emerging Bond

8%
6%

5%

4%

4%

2%

3%

56

Sep.09

Sep.08

May.08

Jan.08

Sep.07

Jan.07

Sep.09

May.09

Jan.09

Sep.08

May.08

Jan.08

-6%
Sep.07

-4%

0%
May.07

1%
Jan.07

-2%

May.07

0%

2%

Figure 5
Median Growth Rate of Assets, Returns, and Injections
Panels A, B, and C present, respectively, the median growth rate of total assets, the median fund rate of return, and the median injection over initial assets
for equity and bond funds. All variables are first calculated within funds, and then the median is obtained at each point in time considering only continuing
funds. Shaded areas indicate times of global turmoil.
A. Growth Rate of Total Assets
Equity Funds

20%

20%

Bond Funds

10%

10%
0%

0%

-10%

-10%

Russian
Crisis

Asian
Crisis

-20%

2001 Crisis

Global Financial
Crisis

-20%

-30%

2007

2008

2009

2010

2007

2008

2009

2010

2007

2008

2009

2010

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

-30%

B. Fund Returns
Equity Funds

20%

20%

Bond Funds

2006

2005

2002

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

-30%
2002

-30%
2001

-20%

2000

-20%
1999

-10%

1998

-10%

1997

0%

1996

0%

2004

10%

2003

10%

C. Injections/Initial Assets
Equity Funds

20%

20%

Bond Funds

10%

10%

57

2006

2005

2004

2002

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

-30%
1999

-30%
1998

-20%

1997

-20%
1996

-10%

-10%

2003

0%

0%

Table 1
Mutual Fund Summary Statistics
This table presents summary statistics on equity and bond mutual funds from the EPFR Global database. Panel A presents statistics across the
whole sample. Column (1) presents the number of funds in each category. Column (2) presents the number of monthly observations among all
funds within each category. Columns (3) and (4) present the first and last date, respectively, for which there are data available in each category.
Column (5) presents the median number of monthly reports within funds. Panel B presents the number of funds and observations by different
partitions. Funds are divided by strategy, target region, and according to the country in which the fund is based. The strategy classification
between active and passive is based on their stated investment behavior.

Number of
Funds
Equity Funds
Bond Funds

(1)
965
111

A. Whole Sample
Number of
First Available Date
Observations
(Fund-Month)
(2)
(3)
Jan. 96
54,940
Jul. 02
4,492

Last Available Date
(4)
Nov. 10
Nov. 10

B. Number of Funds and Observations by Different Attributes
Number of
Number of
Number of
Observations
Funds
Funds
(Fund-Month)
(1)
(2)
(1)
By Strategy
Active Funds

1,025

58,383

Passive Funds

By Target Region
Equity Funds
Asia Ex-Japan
BRIC
Emerg. Europe, Middle East, and Africa
Emerging Europe
Europe
Global

201
18
38
91
143
155

13,365
610
1,253
6,580
4,824
6,826

Equity Funds
Global Emerging
Latin America
Pacific
Bond Funds
Global
Global Emerging

By Domicile
Australia
Austria
Bahamas
Bahrain
Belgium
Bermuda
British Virgin Islands
Canada
Cayman
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Guernsey

5
5
3
4
5
2
8
32
15
22
9
22
22
15

167
533
56
119
295
212
502
1,897
881
1,063
321
1,328
634
1,138

Hong Kong
Ireland
Isle of Man
Japan
Jersey
Luxembourg
Mauritius
Netherlands Antilles
Netherlands
Singapore
Sweden
Switzerland
U.K.
U.S.

58

Median Number of
Observations per
Fund (Months)
(5)
47
34
Number of
Observations
(Fund-Month)
(2)

51

1,049

187
91
41

12,972
6,068
2,442

30
81

1,096
3,396

2
104
1
7
6
400
1
2
4
3
1
19
137
220

38
5,571
35
250
377
21,528
26
78
239
198
30
1,298
9,313
11,305

Table 2
Growth Rate of Assets, Returns, and Injections: Summary Statistics
This table presents descriptive statistics of the growth rate of total assets, rates of return, and injections over initial assets for mutual funds, and
the variance decomposition of the growth rate of assets. Panel A presents the mean, standard deviation, and variance decomposition for equity
funds, and Panel B for bond funds. Columns (1) - (3) present the mean growth rate of assets, returns, and injections over initial assets. The
reported values are obtained by calculating first the mean within funds and then obtaining the mean across funds. Column (4) is obtained by
calculating the standard deviation within funds and then the mean across funds for each fund type. Columns (5) and (6) are obtained by
calculating the variance within funds for the fund returns and injections over initial assets, and calculating their contribution to the variance of
the growth rate of assets. Since the two terms are not orthogonal, the covariance term is imputed equally to each component.

A. Equity Funds
Mean

Target Region
All Equity Funds
Asia Ex-Japan
BRIC
Emerg. Europe, Middle East, and Africa
Emerging Europe
Europe
Global
Global Emerging
Latin America
Pacific

Growth Rate
of Assets
(1)
2.20%
2.44%
4.72%
1.56%
2.81%
0.65%
1.59%
2.85%
4.05%
1.05%

Returns
(2)
1.01%
1.15%
1.33%
-0.28%
1.30%
0.57%
0.71%
1.32%
1.61%
1.08%

Injections/
Initial Assets
(3)
1.15%
1.24%
3.40%
1.86%
1.35%
0.11%
0.88%
1.46%
2.32%
-0.09%

Growth Rate of Assets
Variance Decomposition
Standard Deviation
Injections/
Returns
Initial Assets
(4)
(5)
(6)
10.34%
47.24%
52.76%
10.25%
41.12%
58.88%
13.82%
54.82%
45.18%
14.57%
33.26%
66.74%
12.69%
48.22%
51.78%
9.61%
38.39%
61.61%
6.96%
54.69%
45.31%
9.67%
49.57%
50.43%
13.11%
48.34%
51.66%
7.98%
45.56%
54.44%

B. Bond Funds
Mean

Target Region
All Bond Funds
Global
Global Emerging

Growth Rate
of Assets
(1)
3.94%
0.61%
1.31%

Returns
(2)
0.69%
0.31%
0.43%

Injections/
Initial Assets
(3)
3.19%
0.60%
0.92%

59

Growth Rate of Assets
Variance Decomposition
Standard Deviation
Injections/
Returns
Initial Assets
(4)
(5)
(6)
8.66%
11.37%
88.63%
7.39%
9.31%
90.69%
10.54%
9.74%
90.26%

Table 3
Variance Decomposition of the Growth Rate of Assets around the Global Financial Crisis
This figure reports the variance decomposition of the growth rate of assets around the global financial crisis of 2008-2009. Panel A and B report this decomposition for
equity funds and bond funds, respectively. Injections are obtained at the fund level as the difference between the total net assets (TNAs) and lagged TNAs multiplied by
returns. Columns (1)-(6) are obtained by computing the variance within funds and then across funds for the respective target region. Since the two terms are not
orthogonal, the covariance term is imputed equally to each component.

Period

A. Variance Decomposition of the Growth Rate of Assets for Equity Funds
Before the Global Crisis
During the Global Crisis
(Jan. 2003-Feb. 2007)
Narrow Window (Mar. 2008-Dec. 2009)
Returns

Target Region
All Equity Funds
Asia Ex-Japan
BRIC
Emerg. Europe, Middle East, and Africa
Emerging Europe
Europe
Global
Global Emerging
Latin America
Pacific

Period

(1)
36.74%
35.97%
41.53%
17.47%
40.07%
19.98%
37.06%
33.54%
32.60%
37.38%

All Bond Funds
Global
Global Emerging

Returns
(3)
67.01%
71.11%
72.15%
60.51%
69.37%
51.33%
65.40%
70.15%
71.20%
65.15%

Injections/
Initial Assets
(4)
32.99%
28.89%
27.85%
39.49%
30.63%
48.67%
34.60%
29.85%
28.80%
34.85%

B. Variance Decomposition of the Growth Rate of Assets for Bond Funds
Before the Global Crisis
During the Global Crisis
(Jan. 2003-Feb. 2007)
Narrow Window (Mar. 2008-Dec. 2009)
Returns

Target Region

Injections/
Initial Assets
(2)
63.26%
64.03%
58.47%
82.53%
59.93%
80.02%
62.94%
66.46%
67.40%
62.62%

(1)
12.36%
5.18%
12.90%

Injections/
Initial Assets
(2)
87.64%
94.82%
87.10%

Returns
(3)
18.78%
2.66%
26.23%

60

Injections/
Initial Assets
(4)
81.22%
97.34%
73.77%

During the Global Crisis
Wide Window (Mar. 2007-Oct. 2010)
Returns
(5)
57.65%
57.41%
61.45%
52.81%
63.54%
44.36%
60.44%
64.71%
58.96%
58.90%

Injections/
Initial Assets
(6)
42.35%
42.59%
38.55%
47.19%
36.46%
55.64%
39.56%
35.29%
41.04%
41.10%

During the Global Crisis
Wide Window (Mar. 2007-Oct. 2010)
Returns
(5)
11.82%
4.45%
20.59%

Injections/
Initial Assets
(6)
88.18%
95.55%
79.41%

Table 4
Behavior of Injections
This table presents the results of ordinary least squares regressions at a monthly frequency of mutual fund injections over average assets on
different variables. Panel A presents the results for equity funds and Panel B for bond funds. The "country crisis" variable is a dummy that
indicates if a country has a banking, debt, or currency crisis during a given year. The dummy is weighted by the relative contribution of the country
in the portfolio of a fund. The "global crisis" variable is a dummy variable that indicates periods of worldwide crisis (Jul. 1997-Dec. 1997, Aug. 1998Dec. 1998, Mar. 2001-Dec. 2001, and Sept. 2008-Jun. 2009). "Country of origin returns" are the returns from indexes in the country where the fund is
based. Injections/average assets, "lagged fund returns," and "country of origin returns" are all expressed as decimals. Fund fixed effects are
included in every case and, alternatively, fixed effects at the time and country of origin-time levels are included. Standard errors are clustered by
country of origin-time. Standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

A. Equity Funds
Injections/Average Assets
Variables
Country Crisis

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.048 ***
(0.014)

Global Crisis

-0.018 ***

(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.003

-0.009

-0.013

(0.012)

(0.010)

(0.011)

-0.008 **

(0.001)

(0.004)

Lagged Fund Returns

0.161 ***

0.119 ***

(0.024)

(0.023)

Country of Origin Returns

0.261 ***

0.222 ***

(0.024)

(0.023)

0.171 ***
(0.033)

0.178 ***
(0.039)

0.135 ***
(0.028)

Fund Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Time Fixed Effects

No

No

No

No

No

Yes

No

Country of Origin-Time Fixed Effects

No

No

No

No

No

No

Yes

41,232

41,232

40,492

39,479

38,764

38,764

40,492

0.035

0.036

0.047

0.050

0.065

0.114

0.174

(6)

(7)

Number of Observations
R-squared

Yes

B. Bond Funds
Injections/Average Assets
Variables
Country Crisis

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.081 ***

-0.070 ***

(0.021)
Global Crisis

(0.018)
-0.038 ***

-0.018

-0.031

(0.016)

(0.023)

-0.028 ***

(0.006)

(0.008)

Lagged Fund Returns

0.229 **

0.205 **

(0.111)
Country of Origin Returns

(0.102)
0.464 ***

Fund Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

(0.148)
Yes

Time Fixed Effects

No

No

No

No

Country of Origin-Time Fixed Effects

(5)

0.468 ***

0.126 *
(0.070)

0.107
(0.067)

0.337 ***

(0.127)
Yes

(0.121)
Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

Yes

Number of Observations

3,520

3,520

3,445

3,261

3,196

3,196

3,445

R-squared

0.061

0.065

0.073

0.068

0.092

0.156

0.266

61

Table 5
Behavior of Log Country Weights
This table presents the results of ordinary least squares regressions of the log country weights on different variables. Panel A presents the results for equity funds
and Panel B for bond funds. The "country crisis" variable is a dummy that indicates if a country has a banking, debt, or currency crisis during a given year. The
"relative returns" variable is the difference between country net returns and fund net returns, expressed as decimals. Estimations are performed at different
frequencies and include different combinations of fixed effects. Only countries in the target region are considered for each type of fund. Errors are clustered by
country of origin-time. Standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

A. Equity Funds

Variables
Log Lagged Weights

(1)

(2)

0.986 ***

0.982 ***

(0.001)
Relative Returns

0.622 ***
(0.051)

(0.001)
0.647 ***
(0.057)

Log Country Weights
(4)
(5)

(3)

Monthly
0.983 ***
0.899 ***
(0.001)
(0.002)
0.993 ***
(0.013)

0.598 ***
(0.049)

0.901 ***
(0.002)
0.959 ***
(0.013)

Country Crisis

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.901 ***

Semi Annual
0.568 ***

Annual
0.307 ***

(0.002)
0.956 ***
(0.013)
-0.020 ***

(0.012)
0.857 ***
(0.032)
-0.069 ***

(0.026)
0.567 ***
(0.035)
-0.118 ***

(0.003)

(0.017)

(0.026)
No

Fund Fixed Effects

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

Time Fixed Effects

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

No

Fund-Time Fixed Effects

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Country of Destiny-Fund Fixed Effects
Number of Observations
R-squared

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

458,458

458,458

458,458

458,458

458,458

458,458

62,949

26,018

0.965

0.965

0.969

0.967

0.971

0.971

0.908

0.890

B. Bond Funds
(1)
Variables
Log Lagged Weights

0.974 ***
(0.002)

Relative Returns

0.237 ***
(0.091)

(2)
0.969 ***
(0.003)
0.238 ***
(0.091)

Log Country Weights
(4)
(5)

(3)

Monthly
0.970 ***
0.868 ***
(0.003)
(0.008)
0.638 ***
(0.079)

0.219 ***
(0.084)

0.866 ***
(0.009)
0.608 ***
(0.073)

Country Crisis

(6)
0.866 ***
(0.009)
0.611 ***
(0.073)

(7)

(8)

Semi Annual

Annual

0.448 ***
(0.037)
0.296 ***
(0.101)

0.102 *
(0.059)
0.310 ***
(0.100)

-0.016

-0.017

-0.026

(0.011)

(0.050)
No

(0.084)
No

Fund Fixed Effects

No

Yes

No

No

No

Time Fixed Effects

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

No

Fund-Time Fixed Effects

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Country of Destiny-Fund Fixed Effects
Number of Observations
R-squared

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

39,183

39,183

39,183

39,183

39,183

39,183

5,035

1,959

0.941

0.941

0.946

0.946

0.951

0.951

0.871

0.880

62

Table 6
Behavior of Country Weights
This table presents the results of ordinary least squares regressions of the country weights on different variables. Panel A presents the results for equity funds and Panel B
for bond funds. The "buy-and-hold weight" variable is the lagged weight multiplied by the ratio of gross country return to gross fund return. The "relative returns"
variable is the difference between country net returns and fund net returns, expressed as decimals. Estimations are performed at the different frequencies and include
different combinations of fixed effects. Only countries in the target region are considered for each type of fund. Errors are clustered by country of origin-time. Standard
errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
A. Equity Funds
(1)
Variables
Buy-and-Hold Weight (in %)

0.987 ***
(0.003)

Relative Returns

-1.782 ***
(0.192)

(2)
0.984 ***
(0.003)
-1.619 ***
(0.206)

Country Weights (in %)
(4)
(5)

(3)

Monthly
0.988 ***
0.893 ***
(0.002)

(0.016)

0.045

-1.512 ***

(0.044)

(0.138)

0.913 ***
(0.010)
0.181 ***
(0.045)

Country Crisis

(6)
0.913 ***
(0.010)
0.173 ***
(0.044)
-0.093 ***
(0.021)

(7)
Semi-Annual
0.648 ***
(0.109)
0.864 ***
(0.109)
-0.371 ***
(0.086)

(8)
Annual
0.461 ***
(0.050)
1.011 ***
(0.140)
-0.602 ***
(0.105)

Fund Fixed Effects

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

No

Date Fixed Effects

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

No

Fund-Date Fixed Effects

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Country of Destiny-Fund Fixed Effects

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

741,776

741,776

741,776

741,776

741,776

741,776

105,222

44,146

0.982

0.982

0.985

0.984

0.986

0.986

0.951

0.935

Number of Observations
R-squared

B. Bond Funds
(1)
Variables
Buy-and-Hold Weight (in %)

Country Weights (in %)
(4)
(5)

(3)

(6)

Monthly
0.971 ***
(0.004)

Relative Returns

(2)

-1.563 ***
(0.184)

0.970 ***
(0.004)
-1.540 ***
(0.187)

0.971 ***
(0.004)

0.859 ***
(0.012)

-1.053 ***
(0.273)

-1.359 ***
(0.168)

0.861 ***
(0.013)
-0.917 ***
(0.234)

Country Crisis

0.861 ***
(0.013)
-0.914 ***
(0.234)
-0.102 *
(0.060)

(7)

(8)

Semi-Annual

Annual

0.440 ***
(0.070)
-0.120
(0.283)

0.035
(0.146)
0.905 *
(0.529)

-0.340

-0.575

(0.369)

(0.649)

Fund Fixed Effects

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

No

Date Fixed Effects

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

No

Fund-Date Fixed Effects

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Country of Destiny-Fund Fixed Effects

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

93,819

93,819

93,819

93,819

93,819

93,819

13,116

5,508

0.961

0.961

0.962

0.964

0.965

0.965

0.891

0.871

Number of Observations
R-squared

63

Table 7
Behavior of Log Cash Weights
This table presents the results of ordinary least squares regressions of the log cash weights on different variables. Panel A presents the results
for equity funds and Panel B for bond funds. The "relative returns" variable is the difference between country net returns and fund net
returns. The "country crisis" variable is a dummy that indicates if a country has a banking, debt, or currency crisis during a given year. The
dummy is weighted by the relative contribution of the country in the portfolio of a fund. The "global crisis" variable is a dummy that
indicates periods of worldwide crisis (Jul. 1997-Dec. 1997, Aug. 1998-Dec. 1998, Mar. 2001-Dec. 2001, and Sept. 2008-Jun. 2009). "Country of
origin returns" are the returns from the indexes of the country where the fund is based. Both "relative returns" and "country of origin returns"
are expressed as decimals. Estimations are performed at different frequencies and include different combinations of fixed effects. Errors are
clustered by country of origin-time. Standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level, respectively.
A. Equity Funds
Log Cash Weights
(1)
Variables
Log Lagged Weights
Relative Returns

(2)

(3)

0.587 ***
(0.006)
0.729 ***
(0.083)

0.389 ***
(0.008)
0.700 ***
(0.102)

0.360 ***
(0.008)
0.169 *
(0.088)

Country Crisis
Global Crisis
Country of Origin Returns
Fund Fixed Effects
Time Fixed Effects
Number of Observations
R-squared

(4)

Monthly

No
No
33,681
0.347

Yes
No
33,681
0.433

Yes
Yes
33,681
0.452

0.377
(0.009)
0.494
(0.099)
0.096
(0.051)
0.158
(0.018)
-0.168
(0.116)
Yes
No
32,416
0.434

***
***
*
***

(5)

(6)

Semi-Annual

Annual

0.112
(0.024)
0.188
(0.071)
0.116
(0.158)
0.116
(0.049)
-0.437
(0.097)
Yes
No
4,226
0.435

***
***

**
***

-0.083
(0.050)
-0.181
(0.138)
0.498 *
(0.284)
0.111
(0.101)
-0.034
(0.119)
Yes
No
1,515
0.523

B. Bond Funds
(1)
Variables
Log Lagged Weights
Relative Returns

Log Cash Weights
(3)
(4)

(2)
Monthly

0.654 ***
(0.022)
-0.459 *
(0.264)

0.449 ***
(0.029)
-0.422
(0.303)

0.446 ***
(0.029)
-0.682
(0.456)

Country Crisis
Global Crisis
Country of Origin Returns
Fund Fixed Effects
Time Fixed Effects
Number of Observations
R-squared

No
No
2,857
0.437

Yes
No
2,857
0.510

Yes
Yes
2,857
0.532

64

0.433 ***
(0.030)
-0.381
(0.298)
-0.537 ***
(0.172)
-0.028
(0.047)
0.261
(0.520)
Yes
No
2,745
0.507

(5)
Semi-Annual
0.119
(0.078)
0.166
(0.257)
-1.175 *
(0.670)
-0.039
(0.138)
0.991
(0.949)
Yes
No
333
0.528

(6)
Annual
-0.380
(0.176)
0.510
(0.295)
-1.923
(1.057)
0.371
(0.186)
-0.362
(0.930)
Yes
No
117
0.660

**
*
*
*

Table 8
Decomposition of Gross and Net Flows by Regions
This table presents the decomposition of gross and net flows into the growth rate of country weights and the growth rate of total mutual
fund assets or injections for different regions. Panel A presents the decomposition for gross flows without adjusting weights for returns,
while Panel B presents the decomposition for net flows adjusting for returns. Shares are calculated as the median share of individual
components for each country, averaged across time, and then averaged across all countries in each region. The variance decomposition is
obtained by taking the variance of each individual component at the country level, and then averaging it across countries. Both gross and
net flows are computed as the sum of the two terms in the decompositions. Since the two terms are not orthogonal, the covariance term is
imputed equally to each component. Outliers are filtered by the share of the component associated with weights in each decomposition.
Only observations within the 10th and 90th percentile of the share of this component are considered.

A. Gross Flows without Adjusting Weights for Returns
Shares
(% of Gross Flows)
Target Region
All Countries
Asia
Developed Countries
Non-emerging Developing Countries
Eastern Europe
Emerging Countries
Latin America

Variance Decomposition
(% of Variance of Gross Flows)

Growth Rate of
Weights

Growth Rate of Fund
Assets

Growth Rate of
Weights

Growth Rate of Fund
Assets

46.5%
40.5%
37.5%
64.3%
47.7%
36.1%
44.2%

53.5%
59.5%
62.5%
35.7%
52.3%
63.9%
55.8%

59.0%
55.9%
46.8%
78.8%
65.5%
49.8%
56.3%

41.0%
44.1%
53.2%
21.2%
34.5%
50.2%
43.7%

B. Net Flows Adjusting Weights for Returns
Shares
(% of Net Flows)

Target Region
All Countries
Asia
Developed Countries
Non-emerging Developing Countries
Eastern Europe
Emerging Countries
Latin America

Variance Decomposition
(% of Variance of Net Flows)

Return-Adjusted
Growth Rate of
Weights

Injections

Return-Adjusted
Growth Rate of
Weights

Injections

88.4%
91.6%
93.9%
89.9%
85.0%
79.9%
74.8%

11.6%
8.4%
6.1%
10.1%
15.0%
20.1%
25.2%

84.8%
84.6%
87.2%
91.3%
86.3%
74.2%
75.3%

15.2%
15.4%
12.8%
8.7%
13.7%
25.8%
24.7%

65

Table 9
Decomposition of Gross and Net Flows by Type and Frequency
This table presents the decomposition of gross and net flows into the growth rate of country weights and the growth rate of
mutual fund assets or injections for different breakdowns. Panel A presents the decomposition for gross flows without
adjusting weights for returns, while Panel B presents the decomposition for net flows adjusting for returns. Shares are
calculated as the median share of individual components for each country, averaged across time, and then averaged across all
countries in each region. The variance decomposition is obtained by taking the variance of each individual component at the
country level, and then averaging it across countries. Both gross and net flows are computed as the sum of the two terms in the
decompositions. Since the two terms are not orthogonal, the covariance term is imputed equally to each component. Outliers
are filtered by the share of the component associated with weights in each decomposition. Only observations within the 10th
and 90th percentile of the share of this component are considered.
A. Gross Flows without Adjusting Weights for Returns
Shares
(% of Gross Flows)
Type
Active
Passive
Equity
Bond
Frequency
Monthly
Semi-Annual
Annual

Variance Decomposition
(% of Variance of Gross Flows)

Growth Rate of
Weights
49.3%
21.7%
47.5%
66.6%

Growth Rate of Fund
Assets
50.7%
78.3%
52.5%
33.4%

Growth Rate of
Weights
57.9%
32.0%
54.6%
82.2%

Growth Rate of Fund
Assets
42.1%
68.0%
45.4%
17.8%

46.5%
33.7%
26.2%

53.5%
66.3%
73.8%

59.0%
40.7%
35.2%

41.0%
59.3%
64.8%

B. Net Flows Adjusting Weights for Returns
Shares
(% of Net Flows)

Type
Active
Passive
Equity
Bond
Frequency
Monthly
Semi-Annual
Annual

Return-Adjusted
Growth Rate of
Weights
87.4%
15.0%
85.9%
73.8%
88.4%
83.3%
80.6%

Variance Decomposition
(% of Variance of Net Flows)

12.6%
85.0%
14.1%
26.2%

Return-Adjusted
Growth Rate of
Weights
86.8%
30.9%
85.6%
89.0%

11.6%
16.7%
19.4%

84.8%
78.9%
73.0%

Injections

66

Injections
13.2%
69.1%
14.4%
11.0%
15.2%
21.1%
27.0%

Appendix 1: Where Do Mutual Funds Invest?
Mutual funds specialize along several dimensions. The most important are geographical
regions, market segments (e.g. emerging and developed), and types of assets (equity and
bonds). The specialization of funds largely determines the broad patterns of their asset
allocation, as shown in Appendix Table 2. The table displays the mean portfolio weight
invested in a geographical/market segment region by different types of equity and bond
funds, along the number of funds included in each category. The regional classification
corresponds to that used by EPFR Global (Appendix Table 3). The mean portfolio
weights reported in the table correspond to the average across funds of the mean
regional weight of all funds within a category.
Not surprisingly, funds invest mainly in the region/market segment they target.
For instance, “Asia ex-Japan” equity funds invest 96% of their portfolio in developed
and emerging Asia. Similarly, Latin America equity funds invest 97% of their portfolio
in Latin America. Nonetheless, most fund types invest around 5% of their assets outside
their target region/segment and in cash. Cash holdings are a small but non-trivial part
of fund portfolios. The holding of liquid assets may be due to the need to meet
redemptions or to keep injections until they are properly allocated. Some funds might
also hold liquidity to be able to invest quickly if opportunities arise (cash-in-themarket). Perhaps consistently with this latter possibility, active equity and bond funds
hold much more cash than their passive counterparts. Active equity (bond) funds hold

67

3.4% (5.7%) of assets in cash on average, while passive equity (bond) funds hold only
0.5% (2%).
Funds specialized in multi-regional market segments show some interesting
patters of asset allocation. For instance, global emerging market funds invest mainly in
emerging Asia, followed by Latina America, emerging Europe, and emerging MiddleEast and Africa. Global equity funds invest mainly in developed Europe, North
America, and developed Asia, but within emerging markets follow a similar relative
pattern as global emerging market funds. These rankings suggest that funds invest
across regions in a manner that is roughly consistent with each region’s market size.
These patterns are also observed across the countries included in a region. For instance,
Latin America equity funds invest most of their assets in Brazil, emerging Europe funds
in Russia, and Asia ex-Japan funds in China and India (Appendix Table 4).
Bond funds and comparable equity funds allocate their portfolios across regions
in roughly the same manner. The main difference is that while emerging Asia is the
principal investment destiny of emerging equity funds, emerging bond funds invest
primarily in Latin America, followed by emerging Europe, and with emerging Asia in a
far third place. This probably reflects the relative size and development of Latin
American sovereign bond markets relative to Asian bond markets, which are, in relative
terms, much more largely concentrated on corporate bonds. Bond funds also hold more
cash on average than equity funds (8.55% of the portfolio for global bond funds
compared to 2.87% of the portfolio for global equity funds).

68

Although mutual funds invest in regions, countries, and segments in a manner
that is consistent with their specialization, the total net assets (TNAs) they hold in
target countries experience important variations that roughly coincide with the cycles of
international capital flows. Appendix Figure 1 plots the evolution of the median growth
rate of total assets held by equity funds (Panel A) and bond funds (Panel B) in a
typical country.34 It shows periods of expansion that coincide with tranquil times for the
global economy, followed by contractions that roughly match periods of global turmoil.
For instance, Panel A shows a clear expansion at the beginning of the sample period
(1996) until the beginning of the Asian crisis, followed by a short-lived expansion that
collapses during the Russian crisis. It similarly shows the expansion following the 2001
crisis that lasts until the beginning of the global financial crisis. The pattern of asset
evolution for bond funds, reported for the shorter period for which bond fund data are
available, displays an analogous picture. At the regional level, there is more variation in
the growth rate of fund assets on the median country (unreported), but the overall
pattern of expansions and contractions coinciding with regional crises persists.
Overall, the basic statistics reported in this appendix indicate that the mutual
funds in our sample allocate funds across countries and regions in a manner that is
consistent with their specialization, and also change their total holdings in different
countries in a way that follows periods of global expansions and contractions. These
34

Growth rates are computed considering only continuing funds (those present both at t and t-1) and as a

share of the average assets between in t and t-1. Then, the median country is obtained considering the
median of growth rates in different countries at a certain point in time.

69

findings provide support for the use of EPFR Global funds to understand the behavior
of global investors.

70

Appendix 2: How Much Do Country Weights Vary?
To better understand the variation in country weights in fund portfolios, we compute
coefficients of variation (CVs) of different types of funds. These CVs correspond to the
standard deviation of country weights across funds and within funds (over time) relative
in both cases to the corresponding average weight across funds. We normalize the
across-fund and within-fund standard deviations by the same mean value for ease of
comparison. Appendix Table 5 shows the CVs for the funds’ weights across countries
within the target region, in both the target and non-target regions, and in cash. It does
so for funds investing in different geographical areas and market segments. The
classification of target regions is shown in Appendix Table 6 and is taken from MSCI.
We compute the target region as the sum of country weights belonging to the target
region for each type of fund. The non-target region is calculated as 100 minus cash and
target-region weights. The table also shows the CV within the target region, where the
CV is computed first in a country and then aggregated across countries in the target
region, with the median CV across funds being reported.
Appendix Table 5 shows the result of this exercise. When one focuses on
individual countries within that target region (Column (2)) mutual funds show
substantial variation in their investments, however, there is little variation when the
target region is aggregated (Column (3)). When focusing at the country level, the CVs
in are in various cases larger than one, which means that, for a given country in the
region, the standard deviation of country weights across funds is larger than the

71

corresponding average weight. Within the target region, different funds follow different
investment strategies. Not surprisingly, mutual funds have a much more volatile
allocation in the non-target region compared to their target countries (Column (4)).
Their cash allocation also suffers important variations relative to their average cash
weight (Column (5)).
Appendix Table 5 shows, moreover, that the variation within funds is smaller
than across funds, suggesting that different strategic allocations are behind differences in
weights across funds. However, fund allocations to countries within the relevant regions
vary substantially over time (Column (2)). The within-fund CVs are again about half of
the across-fund CVs, but of the same order of magnitude than the average weights in
each country. This indicates substantial within-fund variation in country allocations.
Understandably, the variation in country weights is larger than that of the main target
region. Namely, Asia funds switch among countries in Asia more than what they switch
in and out of Asia, since they have to be invested in that region.
Appendix Table 7 shows similar estimates of the CVs, but partitioning the
sample by active and passive funds and looking at different geographical regions. The
table shows that the CVs are larger for active funds than for passive funds when
considering the within-fund variation. That is, managers of active funds seem to be
more active than those of passive funds. This pattern does not hold for the CVs across
funds, denoting similar differences in strategic allocation across passive and active funds,
due for instance to the tracking of different benchmarks. In sum, the CVs show that

72

weights vary as expected but also that there is substantial variation in weights, that is,
weights do not remain constant across countries and regions, across and within funds.
Of course, these results do not explain what drives the changes in weights; in particular,
to what extent this variation is driven by prices. While prices will tend to affect
weights, they cannot be the sole source of variation since active funds display larger
CVs than passive ones.

73

Appendix 3: Partial Adjustment Model
The parameter estimates of Equation (5) can be interpreted in light of a basic partial
adjustment model. Starting with the identity in Equation (4) and transforming it into
an estimable equation requires an expression for the relative flows. Intuitively, relative
flows depend on the portfolio weight a fund wants to have in a given country at a point
in time and its current portfolio weight on that country. If the former is greater than
the latter, the fund will try to move relatively more money into the country and vice
versa. This intuition can be captured by a simple partial adjustment model,

where

,

(A1)

is the log desired weight in the country and

is the

log buy-and-hold weight that fund
parameter
of

faces before any flows or injections are realized. The

captures the fund’s speed of adjustment towards its desired weight. A value

equal to one implies that the fund immediately adjusts its weights to its desired

level through movements in relative flows, and a value smaller than one means that
adjustment costs preclude a fund from immediately reaching its target.
This simple description of flows is completely agnostic about the desired portfolio
weight

, which is likely the outcome of a fund’s optimal portfolio allocation.

However, one can parametrically relate these desired weights to country and fund
characteristics. In particular, we consider the following equation for log desired weights
.

74

(A2)

Although admittedly arbitrary, this specification is also very flexible and embeds several
alternative forms for the desired weights. For instance, if
zero, and

, , and

are all equal to

is different from zero, it implies that a fund’s desired country weights are

roughly constant. On the other hand, if

is different from zero, it means that the
variables allow us to test

desired weight responds to changes in relative returns. The
for the impact of crises on desired weights.

Replacing Equation (A2) in Equation (A1) we obtain an expression that is
analogous to Equation (5) above. Thus, Equation (5) may be interpreted as a reduced
form representation of this partial adjustment model. Analogously, replacing Equations
(A1) and (A2) in Equation (4) we obtain the following estimable equation
1

λ 1

1

1

(A3)
,

After grouping parameters, Equation (A3) is analogous to Equation (6). This
representation makes apparent that the coefficients on lagged weights
returns

and relative

embed both the pure buy-and-hold effect (captured by the 1 embedded in

the coefficients) and the response of relative flows to these variables due to adjustment
costs (the speed of adjustment
weights and relative returns (

) and the sensitivity of desired weights to lagged

and ).

Under some identification assumptions, the simple framework described above
allows us to use the parameters estimated from Equation (6) to learn about the
determinants of the behavior of portfolio managers. The presence of lagged weights in
Equation (A2) captures the persistence of some determinants of desired weights that are
75

not captured by the rest of the model. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that
If one assumes that

0, the coefficient on log lagged weights provides direct

information on the speed of adjustment. The smaller the coefficient
implied

0.

and the smaller the adjustment costs (a lower

, the larger is the

is associated with greater

adjustment costs). Similarly, finding a coefficient on relative returns,

, different from

one does not provide immediate evidence that portfolio managers adjust their desired
weights

in response to returns, because it may just come from the presence of costs

of adjusting portfolio weights (

1

when

0).

0, what really provides information about

Under the mild assumption that

the relation between returns and desired weights is the difference between the
coefficients estimated for relative returns and log lagged weights, which corresponds to
. In this case, a coefficient on relative returns larger than the coefficient for
lagged weights means that

is also positive and that desired weights and, hence,

relative flows, increase with relative returns (inducing a momentum component in the
behavior of relative flows).
The results described above for the preferred specifications including fund-time
and country of destiny-fund fixed effects yield coefficients for relative returns that are
larger than those for lagged weights (Table 5, Columns 5 and 6). This suggests that
desired portfolio weights are positively correlated with a country’s relative return.
Namely, funds would like to reduce their portfolio weights in a country with negative
relative returns. However, to the extent that the impact of relative returns on desired

76

weights is less than one-to-one (
returns to buy-and-hold weights (

1 in Equation (A2)), the pass through from relative
) dominates and the fund increases its relative

flows to that country. Intuitively, what is going on is that desired weights are declining
less than the direct decline resulting from relative returns. This may paradoxically result
in relative flows that are negatively associated with relative returns.

77

Appendix 4: Two Other Decompositions of Gross and Net Flows
To obtain other decompositions of gross and net flows, we start with Equation (7) for
gross flows:

∑

∑

. Note that the first term may grow because of

increases in country returns, since a country weight can also be expressed as
. Whether one should attribute that increase to a manager decision is
open to debate and depends on what “passive benchmark” one has in mind (the
counterfactual weight under a “passive” strategy). Attributing the whole growth in
weights to managers is akin to having the past period’s weight as the passive
benchmark. One way of tackling this issue, which is equivalent to considering a different
benchmark, is to re-arrange Equation (7) in a way that removes changes in relative
returns from the first term,
∑

∑
∑

,
∑

where the second step uses the fact that

,

(A4)

. In this decomposition, the first

component corresponds to the growth in weights that is not related to returns and
depends only on relative flows from fund

to country ,

. This way of measuring

the contribution of managers implicitly assumes a buy-and-hold strategy as the passive
benchmark and only considers deviations from buy-and-hold weights as the
responsibility of the managers. The second component has no clear economic
interpretation and embeds the other two forces that drive the growth in total assets:
injections and the return of the country.

78

From Equation (8), net flows to a country (growth in total assets net of returns)
can be similarly decomposed as follows to isolate the contribution of total changes in
weights:
∑

∑

.

(A5)

The first term in Equation (A5) allows us to separate the contribution of the total
growth in weights to net flows, but in this case the second term embeds the contribution
of injections net of relative returns.
Results using Equation (A4) are displayed in Appendix Table 9, Panel A. The
results suggest that the growth rate of weights net of returns explains a smaller share of
both the level and variance of the growth rate of assets (22% and 32% respectively)
when compared to the growth rate of weights reported in Table 8, Panel A. This
pattern suggests that the trend of gross flows is slightly dominated by the growth of
fund assets, but that most fluctuations around that trend come from the growth in
weights. The only exception is non-emerging developing countries, where the growth in
weights also explains a large share of the growth in gross assets. This indicates that
these countries have benefited from net reallocation vis-à-vis other regions.
Appendix Table 9, Panel B shows the results for the decomposition of Equation
(A5). In this case, the growth of weights explains on average 78% of the level of net
flows and 77% of their variance. A comparison with the results in Table 8, Panel B
shows that the role of manager behavior is larger when it is associated with changes in
weights adjusted by relative returns (equivalent to relative flows) than when considering
the total growth of weights. Net flows are more closely associated, at least on a monthly
79

frequency, with relative flows allocated by managers across countries than with
movements in returns.

80

Appendix Figure 1
Growth Rate of Total Assets for the Median Country
This figure presents the growth rate of the total amount of assets for the median country for equity
and bond funds in Panels A and B. Growth rates are obtained as a share of the average amount of
assets between t and t-1, considering only funds available both at t and t-1. The median country is
obtained using the median of the growth rates for different countries in each month. Shaded areas
indicate times of global turmoil. Panel C shows summary statistics.

A. Equity Funds
20%
10%
0%
-10%
-20%
Asian
Crisis

-30%

Russian
Crisis

Global Financial
Crisis

2001 Crisis

-40%

B. Bond Funds
20%

10%

0%

-10%

-20%

-30%

C. Growth Rate of Total Assets for the Median Country

Equity Funds
Bond Funds

Mean
0.11%
0.82%

81

Median
0.76%
1.05%

Std. Deviation
6.15%
3.82%

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

-40%

Appendix Table 1
Number of Funds by Asset Management Companies
This table presents the number of funds per family for families with at least two funds. "Other Asset Management Companies" includes all the families with less than two funds.

Management Company

Number of
Management Company
funds

Number of
Management Company
funds

Number of
Management Company
funds

Number of
funds

Aberdeen Asset Management
ABN AMRO Asset Management

48
8

Charlemagne Capital Limited
Clariden Leu

8
5

ING Investment Management
Institutional Capital LLC

5
2

RBC Global Investment Management
RCM Capital Management

3
8

Absolute Asia Asset Management
Activest
AGF International Advisors
AIB Govett Asset Management
Algebra Capital

2
3
4
2
2

Claymore Advisors
Comgest S.A.
Credit Lyonnais International Asset Management
Credit Suisse Asset Management
Daiwa International Capital Management

2
16
4
16
2

Invesco Asset Management
Investec Asset Management
ISI - Sydinvest International
JO Hambro Capital Management
JPMorgan Asset Management

46
2
6
6
63

Rexiter Capital Management
Robeco Asset Management
Schroder Investment Management
Scottish Widows Investment Partnership
Securities & Inv. Company (SICO)

2
3
40
3
2

AllianceBernstein Capital Management
Allianz Dresdner Asset Management
Allianz Global Investors
Amundi Luxembourg SA
Arisaig Partners

3
5
14
5
2

Deutsche Asset Management
Dexia Asset Management
Edinburgh Fund Managers
ERSTE-Sparinvest
Federated Global Investment Management

37
2
2
2
4

Jyske Invest
Lazard Asset Management
Legg Mason Capital Management
Lloyd George Management
Lombard Odier International Portfolio Advisors

7
3
3
5
2

SG Asset Management
Silk Invest
Societe Generale Asset Management
Standard Americas
State Street Global Advisors

2
2
8
5
18

Artisan Partners
Ashmore Inv. Management
Assenagon Asset Management

5
13
3

Fidelity Management & Research
First State Investments
Foreign & Colonial Emerging Markets

9
12
6

M&G Investment Management
Martin Currie Investment Management
Matthews International Capital Management

5
9
2

Swisscanto Asset Management
T Rowe Price Associates
TCW Investment Management

2
4
3

Aviva Investors
AXA Framlington Investment Management
AXA Inv. Managers
Baillie Gifford
BankInvest
Baring Asset Management

8
5
5
13
8
12

Franklin Templeton Investment Management
Gartmore Investment Limited
Genesis Investment Management
Glitnir Asset Management
Global Asset Management
Goldman Sachs Asset Management

35
29
5
5
7
4

Mondrian Inv. Partners Limited
Morgan Stanley Investment Management
Natixis Asset Management
Nevksy Capital LLP
Nicholas-Applegate Capital Management
Nordea Investment Management

2
32
3
4
2
2

Thames River Capital
Threadneedle Investment Management
Trident Investment Management
UBS Global Asset Management
Union Investment GmbH
Van Eck Global Asset Management

5
15
2
16
6
4

Batterymarch Financial Management
BCV Asset Management

18
6

Goodman & Company, Investment Counsel
Grantham, Mayo, van Otterloo (GMO)

4
8

Pictet Asset Management
PIMCO

13
4

Vanguard Group
Vontobel Asset Management

2
3

BlackRock Investment Management
BNP Paribas Inv. Partners
Brandywine Asset Management
Capital Invest KAG
Capital Research & Management

55
27
2
2
11

Griffin Capital Management
Halbis Capital Management
Hansberger Global Investors
Henderson Global Investors
HSBC Asset Management

2
11
3
11
10

PineBridge Investments LLC
Pioneer Investment Management
PowerShares Capital Management
Putnam Investment Management
Raiffeisen Capital Management

16
3
5
10
2

Wells Capital Management
WestLB Asset Management
William Blair & Co.
WisdomTree Asset Mgt./BNY Investment Advisors
Other Asset Management Companies

2
8
7
2
83

Total Number of Funds: 1,076

82

Appendix Table 2
Weights in Mutual Funds by Geographical Regions
Panel A reports the average weights invested by equity funds in each of the geographical regions reported in the columns and cash. Panel B reports the average weights invested by bond funds. Columns (2)-(10)
are obtained by calculating the average weights within funds over time, and then obtaining the mean across funds. Funds are divided according to their target region. The geographical region with the largest
average for each type of fund is marked in bold.
A. Equity Funds

Fund Target Region
Asia Ex-Japan
BRIC
Emerg. Europe, Middle East, and Africa
Emerging Europe
Europe
Global
Global Emerging
Latin America
Pacific
Investor Type
Active
Passive

Number of
Funds
(1)
201
18
38
91
143
155
187
91
41

Developed Asia
and Pacific
(2)
32.83
0.97
0.07
0.06
0.14
16.59
2.54
0.00
66.79

Developed
Europe
(3)
0.04
0.01
1.10
4.08
97.16
41.52
1.05
0.02
0.13

917
48

12.89
12.67

21.09
33.65

Emerging Asia
(4)
63.20
46.46
0.00
0.41
0.07
5.03
46.01
0.00
29.91
25.46
17.63

Average Weight (%)
Emerging
Middle East and
Latin America
North America
Europe
Africa
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
16.84
32.58
0.00
0.00
14.12
0.00
77.44
0.00
91.17
0.15
0.43
0.00
0.34
0.08
0.26
0.05
0.64
2.29
1.28
28.57
12.03
22.87
10.97
0.01
0.00
97.06
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
12.01
10.98

14.72
12.04

5.33
7.92

4.60
4.63

Other

Cash

(9)
0.02
0.91
0.19
0.06
0.04
1.20
1.20
0.04
0.13

(10)
3.89
2.22
7.09
3.62
1.85
2.87
3.32
2.88
3.04

0.50
0.01

3.40
0.47

Other

Cash

(9)
3.44
2.23

(10)
8.55
4.45

2.63
0.00

5.66
2.00

B. Bond Funds

Fund Target Region
Global
Global Emerging
Investor Type
Active
Passive

Number of
Funds
(1)
81
30

Developed Asia
and Pacific
(2)
10.62
0.83

Developed
Europe
(3)
35.72
0.30

108
3

3.57
0.00

10.14
0.00

Emerging Asia
(4)
3.78
13.62
10.74
18.84

83

Average Weight (%)
Emerging
Middle East and
North America
Latin America
Africa
Europe
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
2.42
4.21
0.90
29.74
27.78
43.42
7.32
0.05
20.62
32.05

32.67
38.18

5.49
8.79

8.29
0.13

Appendix Table 3
Country Classification
This table presents the regional classification of countries provided by EPFR Global. Note that the weights for some of these countries may
be always zero. Column (8) represents investments in other countries not covered by EPFR Global in both equity and bond funds.
Developed Asia
and Pacific
(1)

Developed
Europe
(2)

Emerging Asia
(3)

Australia
Hong Kong

Austria
Belgium

Cambodia
China

Japan
New Zealand

Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Other Europe
Portugal

India
Indonesia
Korea (North)
Korea (South)
Malaysia
Mongolia
Other Asia
Pakistan
Philippines
Sri Lanka
Taiwan
Thailand

Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
U.K.

Turkmenistan
Vietnam

Papua New
Guinea
Singapore

Emerging
Europe
(4)

Latin America
(5)

Albania
Baltic Republics

Argentina
Bolivia

Belarus

Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba

Bosnia and
Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Estonia
Georgia
Hungary
Kazakhstan
Latvia

Dominican
Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Guatemala
Jamaica
Mexico

Lithuania
Macedonia
Moldova
Poland
Romania

Nicaragua

Russia

Trinidad and
Tobago

Serbia and
Montenegro
Slovakia
Slovenia
Tajikistan
Turkey

Other
Latin America
Panama
Peru

Uruguay
Venezuela

North
America
(6)
Canada
U.S.

Middle East
and Africa
(7)
Algeria
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Botswana
Congo-Kinshasa
Egypt
Gabon
Ghana
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Ivory Coast
Jordan
Kenya
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya
Malawi
Mauritius
Morocco
Namibia
Nigeria
Oman
Other Middle East
and Africa
Qatar

Ukraine

Saudi Arabia
South Africa
Swaziland
Tanzania
Tunisia
Uganda
United Arab
Emirates
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe

84

Other
(8)
Other Fixed Income
Other Equity

Appendix Table 4
Country Weights in Mutual Funds (Country Examples)
Panel A reports the average weights of individual equity funds in each of the countries reported in the columns. Panel B reports the average
weights of individual bond funds. Columns (2)-(9) are obtained by calculating the average weights within funds, and then obtaining the mean
across funds. Funds are divided according to their target region.
A. Equity Funds
Average Weight (%)

Target Region
Asia Ex-Japan
BRIC
Emerg. Europe, Middle East, and Africa
Emerging Europe
Europe
Global
Global Emerging
Latin America
Pacific
Investor Type
Active
Passive

Number of
Funds
(1)
201
18
38
91
143
155
187
91
41
917
48

Brazil

China

Germany

India

Japan

Russia

U.K.

U.S.

(2)
0.00
32.70
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.44
13.04
45.59
0.00

(3)
11.16
31.42
0.00
0.00
0.02
1.57
8.42
0.00
8.10

(4)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
17.73
5.76
0.00
0.00
0.00

(5)
5.22
15.07
0.00
0.00
0.08
0.63
6.94
0.00
2.92

(6)
0.03
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
11.89
0.00
0.00
35.04

(7)
0.00
16.84
5.35
46.14
0.14
0.38
5.77
0.00
0.00

(8)
0.07
0.00
0.21
0.00
15.11
13.60
0.06
0.01
0.21

(9)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.06
24.14
0.00
0.00
0.00

7.75
9.23

4.83
8.08

3.27
6.55

2.83
2.85

3.46
5.15

5.19
7.09

4.32
6.15

4.27
4.16

B. Bond Funds
Average Weight (%)

Target Region
Global
Global Emerging
Investor Type
Active
Passive

Number of
Funds
(1)
81
30
108
3

Brazil

China

Germany

India

Japan

Russia

U.K.

U.S.

(2)
13.44
1.16

(3)
0.43
0.00

(4)
0.00
8.48

(5)
0.58
0.06

(6)
0.00
11.11

(7)
8.40
1.18

(8)
0.00
9.43

(9)
0.03
24.76

10.53
7.50

0.38
0.00

2.48
0.00

0.39
0.00

2.33
0.00

7.58
7.54

2.11
0.00

7.79
0.13

85

Appendix Table 5
Coefficients of Variation in Mutual Funds
This table reports the coefficients of variation (CVs) in the target region, non-target region, and cash by funds
investing in different areas of the world. The target region is the sum of country weights of countries that belong to
that region in each fund type. The non-target region is 100, minus cash, minus the target region. Column (2)
reports the CVs within the target region. The CVs within the target region are first calculated for each country, and
then the median across countries is calculated for the target region. The means for the CVs in Columns (3)-(5) are
obtained by calculating means of weights within funds, and then obtaining the average across funds. To calculate
the coefficients across funds, the standard deviation is calculated across funds after obtaining the mean within
funds. For the within funds coefficients, the standard deviation and the CVs are calculated within funds, and then
averaged across funds.

Number of
Funds
(1)

Within Target
Region

Target Region

Non-Target
Region

Cash

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Equity Funds
Asia Ex-Japan

201

BRIC

18

Emerg. Europe,
Middle East, and
Africa

38

Emerging Europe

91

Europe

143

Global

155

Global Emerging

187

Latin America

91

Pacific

41

Across Funds

0.83

0.11

1.82

1.27

Within Funds

0.44

0.05

0.45

1.03

Across Funds

0.24

0.05

1.97

0.93

Within Funds

0.10

0.02

0.54

0.72

Across Funds

2.05

0.74

0.48

0.84

Within Funds

0.37

0.13

0.13

0.76

Across Funds

0.54

0.13

0.99

1.23

Within Funds

0.37

0.07

0.49

0.99

Across Funds

1.10

0.04

1.31

1.05

Within Funds

0.55

0.03

0.60

1.06

Across Funds

1.57

0.07

0.66

1.15

Within Funds

0.61

0.05

0.41

0.72

Across Funds

0.66

0.04

1.56

0.85

Within Funds

0.53

0.03

0.68

0.93

Across Funds

0.62

0.04

1.08

0.89

Within Funds

0.49

0.04

0.73

1.12

Across Funds

0.89

0.07

0.94

0.90

Within Funds

0.39

0.04

0.44

0.78

Bond Funds
Global

30

Global Emerging

81

Across Funds

2.09

0.19

0.56

1.22

Within Funds

0.66

0.08

0.22

0.46

Across Funds

1.23

0.14

1.35

1.78

Within Funds

0.44

0.05

0.35

1.21

86

Appendix Table 6
Relevant Region Classification
This table presents the target region classification used in this paper, following MSCI.

Asia Ex-Japan

BRIC

(1)
China
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Korea (South)
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Taiwan
Thailand

(2)
Brazil
China
India
Russia

Emerg. Europe,
Middle East, and Emerging Europe
Africa
(3)
(4)
Czech Republic
Czech Republic
Egypt
Hungary
Hungary
Poland
Morocco
Russia
Poland
Turkey
Russia
South Africa
Turkey

Europe

Global

(5)
Austria
Belgium
Czech Republic
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Russia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
U.K.

(6)
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
Chile
China
Colombia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Egypt
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hong Kong
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Korea
Malaysia
Mexico
Morocco
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Russia
Singapore
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
Turkey
U.K.
U.S.

87

Global Emerging Latin America
(7)
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
China
Colombia
Czech Republic
Egypt
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Korea
Malaysia
Mexico
Morocco
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Russia
South Africa
Taiwan
Thailand
Turkey

(8)
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Mexico
Peru

Pacific
(9)
Australia
China
Hong Kong
Indonesia
Japan
Korea
Malaysia
New Zealand
Philippines
Singapore
Taiwan
Thailand

Appendix Table 7
Coefficients of Variation in Mutual Funds by Investment Strategy
This table reports the coefficients of variation (CVs) by type of fund in each geographical region and cash. All the CVs are computed with the same mean. This mean is calculated first
within funds, and then across funds. The CVs across funds are obtained by first calculating the standard deviation within funds and then across funds. The CVs within funds are obtained
by calculating the standard deviation and the CVs within funds, and then averaging across funds.
Coefficients of Variation
Investment
Strategy

Number of
Funds

Active

917

Passive

48

Active

108

Passive

3

Equity Funds

Bond Funds

Developed Asia Developed
and Pacific
Europe

Emerging
Asia

Emerging
Europe

Latin
America

Middle East
and Africa

North
America

Other

Cash

Across Funds

1.46

1.65

1.10

2.23

1.94

2.92

2.87

2.94

1.12

Within Funds

0.20

0.08

0.14

0.12

0.09

0.19

0.12

0.94

0.93

Across Funds

2.05

1.27

1.51

2.51

1.99

3.02

3.16

3.68

2.96

Within Funds

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.04

0.05

0.73

0.89

Across Funds

2.00

1.82

0.77

0.62

0.63

0.99

2.00

1.16

1.58

Within Funds

0.31

0.23

0.27

0.18

0.14

0.37

0.22

0.79

0.91

Across Funds

-

-

0.20

0.03

0.04

0.06

1.73

-

1.04

Within Funds

-

-

0.02

0.01

0.01

0.01

2.00

-

0.47

88

Appendix Table 8
Behavior of Relative Flows
This table presents the results of ordinary least squares regressions of the difference of log country weights and log buy-and-hold weights on different variables.
Panel A presents the results for equity funds and Panel B for bond funds. The "country crisis" variable is a dummy that indicates if a country has a banking, debt,
or currency crisis during a given year. The "relative returns" variable is the difference between country net returns and fund net returns, expressed as decimals.
Estimations are performed at different frequencies and include different combinations of fixed effects. Only countries in the target region are considered for each
type of fund. Errors are clustered by country of origin-time. Standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% level, respectively.
A. Equity Funds
(2)

-0.014 ***

-0.018 ***

(0.001)
-0.378 ***

(0.001)
-0.353 ***

(0.001)

(0.051)

(0.057)

(0.013)

Variables
Log Lagged Weights
Relative Returns

Log Country Weights Minus Log Buy-and-Hold Weights
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

(1)

Monthly
-0.017 ***
-0.101 ***
(0.002)

-0.007

-0.402 ***
(0.049)

-0.099 ***
(0.002)
-0.041 ***
(0.013)

Country Crisis

-0.099 ***
(0.002)
-0.044 ***
(0.013)
-0.02 ***

(7)

(8)

Semi-Annual
-0.432 ***

Annual
-0.693 ***

(0.012)
-0.143 ***
(0.032)
-0.069 ***

(0.026)
-0.433 ***
(0.035)
-0.118 ***

(0.003)

(0.017)

(0.026)
No

Fund Fixed Effects

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

Time Fixed Effects

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

No

Fund-Time Fixed Effects

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Country of Destiny-Fund Fixed Effects
Number of Observations
R-squared

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

458,458

458,458

458,458

458,458

458,458

458,458

62,949

26,018

0.018

0.023

0.120

0.079

0.174

0.174

0.384

0.545

B. Bond Funds
(1)

(2)

Variables
Log Lagged Weights
Relative Returns

Log Country Weights Minus Log Buy-and-Hold Weights
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

(0.002)

(0.003)

Monthly
-0.030 ***
-0.132 ***
(0.003)
(0.008)

-0.763 ***
(0.091)

-0.762 ***
(0.091)

-0.362 ***
(0.079)

-0.026 ***

-0.031 ***

-0.781 ***
(0.084)

-0.134 ***

-0.134 ***

(7)

(8)

Semi Annual
-0.552 ***

Annual
-0.898 ***

(0.009)

(0.009)

(0.037)

(0.059)

-0.392 ***
(0.073)

-0.389 ***
(0.073)

-0.704 ***
(0.101)

(0.100)

Country Crisis

-0.69 ***

-0.016

-0.017

-0.026

(0.011)

(0.050)

(0.084)
No

Fund Fixed Effects

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

Time Fixed Effects

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

No

Fund-Time Fixed Effects

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Country of Destiny-Fund Fixed Effects
Number of Observations
R-squared

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

39,183

39,183

39,183

39,183

39,183

39,183

5,035

1,959

0.028

0.036

0.123

0.109

0.198

0.198

0.495

0.700

89

Appendix Table 9
Decomposition of Gross and Net Flows by Regions
This table presents the decomposition of gross and net flows into the growth rate of country weights and other terms for different
regions. Panel A presents the decomposition of gross flows adjusting the weights for returns, while Panel B presents the decomposition
of net flows without adjusting for returns. Shares are calculated as the median share of individual components for each country,
averaged across time, and then averaged across all countries in each region. The variance decomposition is obtained by taking the
variance of each individual component at the country level, and then averaging it across countries. Both gross and net flows are
computed as the sum of the two terms in the decompositions. Since the two terms are not orthogonal, the covariance term is imputed
equally to each component. Outliers are filtered by the share of the component associated with weights in each decomposition. Only
observations within the 10th and 90th percentile of the share of this component are considered.
A. Gross Flows Adjusting Weights for Returns
Shares
(% of Gross Flows)

Region
All Countries
Asia
Developed Countries
Non-emerging Developing Countries
Eastern Europe
Emerging Countries
Latin America

Variance Decomposition
(% of Variance of Gross Flows)

Return-Adjusted
Growth Rate of
Weights

Other

Return-Adjusted
Growth Rate of
Weights

Other

22.4%
-1.4%
18.5%
46.5%
29.6%
-1.8%
21.0%

77.6%
101.4%
81.5%
53.5%
70.4%
101.8%
79.0%

32.1%
5.7%
27.4%
61.4%
43.6%
2.6%
32.4%

67.9%
94.3%
72.6%
38.6%
56.4%
97.4%
67.6%

B. Net Flows without Adjusting Weights for Returns
Shares
(% of Net Flows)

Region
All Countries
Asia
Developed Countries
Non-emerging Developing Countries
Eastern Europe
Emerging Countries
Latin America

Variance Decomposition
(% of Variance of Net Flows)

Growth Rate of
Weights

Other

Growth Rate of
Weights

Other

78.0%
76.7%
80.8%
78.6%
73.5%
74.0%
71.8%

22.0%
23.3%
19.2%
21.4%
26.5%
26.0%
28.2%

77.4%
66.1%
83.0%
80.7%
71.8%
66.9%
75.2%

22.6%
33.9%
17.0%
19.3%
28.2%
33.1%
24.8%

90

