                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE FINANCIAL CRISIS AND THE GEOGRAPHY OF WEALTH TRANSFERS

                                     Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
                                            Hélène Rey
                                           Kai Truempler

                                        Working Paper 17353
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17353


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas acknowledges gratefully financial support from the International Growth
Center (grant RA-2009-11-002). Hélène Rey acknowledges gratefully financial support from the ERC
(Grant number #210584-IFA Dynamics). Kai Truempler is grateful to the AXA Research Fund for
financial support. Many thanks to Viral Acharya and Philipp Schnabl as well as Robert McGuire and
Goetz von Peter for sharing data with us, and to Eswar Prasad, Kristin Forbes and participants at the
NBER Bretton Woods conference for excellent comments. Collecting the Chinese data would have
been impossible without the generous and very competent help of Yi Huang, to whom we are very
grateful. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Hélène Rey, and Kai Truempler. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Financial Crisis and The Geography of Wealth Transfers
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Hélène Rey, and Kai Truempler
NBER Working Paper No. 17353
August 2011
JEL No. F3,F33,F41

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper studies the geography of wealth transfers during the 2008 global financial crisis. We construct
valuation changes on bilateral external positions in equity, direct investment and portfolio debt at the
height of the crisis to map who benefited and who lost on their external exposure. We find a very diverse
set of fortunes governed by the structure of countries' external portfolios. In particular, we are able
to relate the gains and losses on debt portfolios to the country's exposure to ABCP conduits and the
extent of dollar shortage.


Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas                           Kai Truempler
Department of Economics                             Kai Alexander Truempler
University of California, Berkeley                  Economics Department
508-1 Evans Hall #3880                              London Business School
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                             Regent's Park
and CEPR                                            London NW1 4SA
and also NBER                                       United Kingdom
pog@econ.berkeley.edu                               ktruempler.phd2007@london.edu

Hélène Rey
London Business School
Regents Park
London NW1 4SA
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
hrey@london.edu
1    Introduction

Two stylized facts dominate the global economy since 1970: the explosion in cross-border
financial flows and positions, and the -more recent- emergence of unusually large current
account surpluses and deficits (the so-called ‘global imbalances’). In the span of a little
less than two generations, the size and structure of international balance sheets has been
altered dramatically. Consider the case of the United States (Table 1). Forty years ago , in
1971, as the Bretton Woods system of fixed but adjustable exchange rates teetered on the
verge of collapse, the United States was a creditor country, with a positive Net International
Investment Position (NIIP) of about 6 percent of U.S. output. More importantly, U.S. gross
external claims and liabilities were quite small, at 17 and 11 percent of output respectively
reflecting the large direct and indirect costs of cross-border financial transactions. About a
third of these cross-border positions took the form of bank loans. Most (80 percent) of the
remaining claims were direct investment, while a sizeable share (45 percent) of remaining
liabilities were in the form of foreign holdings of US government securities. Fast forward
to 2007, on the eve of the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. By then, the
U.S. has become a sizeable debtor country, with a negative NIIP of about 12 percent of
output. More dramatically, gross external claims and liabilities soared, respectively, to 119
and 131 percent of output. While cross-border loans still represent roughly a third of cross-
border positions, the structure of the rest of the U.S. external balance sheet has become
substantially more complex. Debt instruments still account for about half of the remaining
external liabilities. However, holdings of US government securities now accounts for only half
of that amount. The other half includes corporate debt and, more importantly, structured
credit instruments such as US mortgage-backed securities. The composition of gross external
claims has changed too, with equity holdings and direct investment each accounting for 40
percent of remaining external claims. The case of the United States is hardly unique. As
the seminal work of Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001) and Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007)
has demonstrated, cross-border participations increased tremendously for many countries,



                                              1
including all advanced economies.

       Beyond this common trend, however, countries differ markedly in the structure of their
external balance sheet. As Gourinchas and Rey (2007) and others have pointed out, the U.S.
external balance sheet displays a very specific pattern: short in ‘safe’ or liquid securities and
long in ‘risky’ or illiquid ones. Interestingly, these patterns can persist through time, despite
the profound structural transformations described above. For instance, the share of ‘safe’
and liquid securities –defined as bank loans and debt instruments– in overall US external
liabilities was 67 percent in 1971 and 63 percent in 2007. Similarly, the share of ‘risky’ and
illiquid securities in gross external claims –defined as direct investment and equity claims–
was 54 percent in 1971 and 60 percent in 2007 (see Table 1). What constitutes ‘safe’ or ‘risky’
securities may have changed over time, but the overall pattern of liquidity and maturity
transformation revealed by the analysis of the U.S. external balance sheet did not.

       If the U.S. invests abroad in risky assets and funds itself with safe liabilities, two impli-
cations follow. First, we expect the US to earn a risk premium. A large body of evidence
on this question strongly suggests that it does (see Gourinchas, Rey and Govillot (2010) for
recent estimates).1 Second, and this is the focus of this paper, the US should suffer dispro-
portionate losses in times of crisis, when the value of its risky external financial portfolio
collapses relative to the value of its safe external liabilities. As Gourinchas, Rey and Govillot
(2010) document, this is indeed the case. Between 2007:4 and 2009:1, the US net foreign
asset position deteriorated by 21% of GDP, of which about 16% represents the net valuation
loss suffered by the US on its external portfolio (Table 2). This valuation loss amounts to
roughly $2,200 billion. Losses were especially acute for US equity and direct investments
abroad which shrunk in half over that period while U.S. government debt liabilities increased
by almost $1,000 bn, or about 7 percent of output.2
   1
    But see Curcuru, Dvorak and Warnock (2008) for a contrarian view.
   2
    Some of the decline in equity and direct investment represents net sales of foreign assets by US investors
over that period since both US and foreign investors ‘retrenched’ during the crisis (Forbes and Warnock
(2010)). Some of the increase in US government securities liabilities to foreigners also represent net purchases
of these instruments over the period.



                                                       2
       By construction, if the US is persistently short ‘safe’ and liquid assets and long ‘risky’
and illiquid ones, the rest of the world must display -in the aggregate– the exact opposite
pattern: long in ‘safe’ or liquid assets and short in ‘risky’ or illiquid ones. In normal times,
it earns lower return on its safe external claims than it pays on its risky external liabilities.
In times of crisis, however, the valuation loss of the US represents a valuation gain for the
rest of the world. In some of our other work (Gourinchas, Rey and Govillot (2010)), we have
argued that this pattern of wealth transfer in crisis times and excess returns in normal times
can be interpreted as a form of risk sharing between the US and the rest of the world where
the US plays the role of a ‘global insurer’. Because of their deep, liquid and historically
safe market for government securities, the U.S. exhibit a comparative advantage in liquidity
and maturity transformation. Since these attributes have remained largely intact through
the modern period, they also help us understand why the US retains its role at the center
of the International Monetary System, despite the lack of formal arrangement since the
collapse of the Bretton Woods system and why the structure of its external balance sheet,
while experiencing profound transformations, still performs essentially the same aggregate
liquidity and maturity transformation functions. Unlike earlier explanations emphasizing
the role of trade or economic size and network externalities for the determination of the
international currency, this interpretation emphasizes instead that it is a combination of
domestic financial development, economic size, and the fiscal capacity of the sovereign, that
determine whose currency and government security endogenously emerge as reserve currency
and reserve asset.3

       It does not follow from the preceding discussion that all countries benefit equally from
their exposure to the US. It is well-known, for instance, that the financial crisis, having
   3
    Currency internationalisation has been discussed in various contexts in the literature - see for example
Cohen (1971), McKinnon (1979), Krugman (1984), Alogoskoufis and Portes (1993), Matsuyama, Kiyotaki
and Matsui (1993), Zhou (1997), Hartmann (1998), Portes and Rey (1998), Rey (2001). The role of the centre
country in the international monetary system has mostly been construed as the one of international liquidity
provider. Because the medium of exchange function is characterized by network externalities, large economies
and economies dominating world trade such as nineteenth century Britain issue the international currency .
The importance of network externalities in foreign exchange markets is reflected in their organization around
vehicle currencies through which most of the transactions are done.



                                                     3
originated in the subprime segment of the U.S. housing market, propagated to rest of the
world partly through the heavy losses some European financial institutions suffered on their
holdings of US mortgage-backed securities (Acharya and Schnabl (2010)). Recent work also
documents that many emerging market economies concentrated their -growing- holdings of
external financial claims in the form of US government securities, which provided a safe
haven in the midst of the crisis (Bernanke et al. (2011) and Bertaut et al. (2011)). These
two examples illustrate the fact that different countries or regions may choose different locus
on the risk-return frontier offered by the menu of US financial assets. Beyond these direct
linkages, different countries may also have substantially different indirect exposure, through
their holdings of third-country assets, themselves differentially exposed to the financial crisis.
For instance, some countries may hold equity and debt claims on the European financial
sector, and thus be indirectly exposed to US housing risk. Others, as discussed extensively
by McGuire and von Peter (2009) in the context of the European dollar shortage, may rely
on short-term foreign currency borrowing, exposing themselves to rollover and funding risk
and to potentially severe deleveraging. Hence, countries were simultaneously hurt by their
exposure to the US financial markets (especially structured credit products) and sheltered
from the global financial storm trough their holdings of Treasuries and Agencies debt.
       The determinants of international portfolios can be quite complex and it is not the
purpose of this paper to explain the heterogeneity of portfolios across countries.4 . Rather,
we take them as given and explore the consequences of the crisis on net and gross foreign
asset positions.

       Understanding the overall structure of global financial linkages during the financial crisis
and the associated wealth transfers requires that we go beyond measuring changes in gross
and net foreign positions as recorded in the Net International Investment Position. Instead,
one needs estimates of bilateral external claims and liabilities and of their change during
the crisis. Such data would allow us to answer the following critical question: where did the
   4
   For recent attempts to endogenize the portfolio structures of the US vis a vis the rest of the world, see
Mendoza, Quadrini and Rios-Rull (2009) and Gourinchas, Rey and Govillot (2010).



                                                     4
$2,200 billion US wealth transfer go?5 This paper represents an attempt at answering this
question. It produces the first ‘heat-map’ of the geographic distribution of gains and losses,
by country and asset class between 2007:4 and 2008:4 for portfolio and direct investment,
such as figure 1. This figure reports gains and losses in billion of US dollar in green and
red respectively. Darker red corresponds to countries who suffered larger losses (in excess of
$600bn) while darker green colors corresponds to winners with gains in excess of $400bn. It
identifies relative winners and losers from the financial crisis, once direct and indirect external
wealth transfers are taken into account. To be sure, most countries were badly hit by the crisis
and their total financial wealth declined massively as we will see shortly. But, at the same
time, they made gains and losses on their external asset positions, which are not negligible,
even when compared to total wealth losses. Furthermore, external valuation gains and losses
differed greatly across countries, so that there are relative losers and relative gainers. For
instance, according to figure 1 countries like China, the Eurozone, or Switzerland all suffered
external losses, although more moderate than the US, while the UK enjoyed significant net
gains on its external position.
      In this paper we focus on this heterogeneity, which depends on the geography of cross
border linkages. We build on the careful and timely work of Milesi-Ferretti, Strobbe and
Tamirisa (2010) who construct a dataset of bilateral gross and net external positions on the
eve of the financial crisis for countries and groups of countries accounting for more than
97 percent of global external assets and liabilities.6 We extend their work along several
dimensions. First, we construct quarterly estimates of net and gross bilateral positions from
2007:4 to 2008:4. Second, we present separate estimates of bilateral positions for Brazil,
Russia, India, and most importantly, China, by relying on hand collected data of the balance
sheet of large state banks, in particular. This enables us to have a more precise measure of
Chinese portfolio debt and equity holdings. Third, we decompose the role of the exchange
rates and of asset prices in accounting for the gains and losses on external positions. Finally,
  5
    For an early discussion of this issue see the interesting column of Milesi-Ferretti (2009) in voxeu.
  6
    Earlier work by Kubelec and Sa (2010) also constructs bilateral holdings between 1980 and 2005 for a
larger group of countries using gravity equations to fill-in some of the positions.



                                                   5
we study the bilateral determinants of gains and losses during the height of the crisis.

   Our analysis is in some ways similar to He, Khang and Krishnamurthy (2010) who studied
balance sheet adjustments during the financial crisis. Their analysis focused on the balance
sheet of various US financial institutions and changes in holdings of securitized assets. Ours
concentrates on the external wealth of nations and changes in bilateral holdings of various
broad classes of assets. Both shed light on the evolution of leverage during the crisis.

   It is important to emphasize from the outset that data limitations induce substantial
uncertainty in an exercise of this nature. High quality data on bilateral positions and flows
are not systematically available. Instead, we are forced to rely on a number of empirical
assumptions and educated guesses in putting together our database. Important data limita-
tions arise from the limited coverage of bilateral banking transactions at market value; the
residence principle that underlies balance of payment data and results in excessively large
holdings attributed to custodial and offshore financial centers; and the general lack of data
availability for some groups of countries, including offshore financial centers, many middle
east oil producing countries as well as some emerging economies. Nevertheless, we believe
that despite the necessary inaccuracies implied by our empirical assumptions, some consis-
tent patterns emerge from the data, which will survive the additional empirical scrutiny that
we hope will be possible in the near future. We also endeavour to provide several versions of
the estimates of gains and losses of countries, some multilateral, some bilateral, some which
includes offshore centres, some which ventilates their positions across countries, some based
on FDI estimated at market value, some where FDI is at current cost, etc... in order to do
robustness checks.

   Our exercise reveals a number of important findings. First, as exemplified in figure 1, we
see large valuation changes during the crisis period, varying widely across countries. Most
countries made capital gains on their portfolio equity positions in the crisis as they were
either short on equity overall (like the UK, who made a gain of about $284 bn –see Table 3)
or held equity assets whose value declined less than equity liabilities during the crisis. On

                                              6
the other side, taking the capital loss, is of course the US, who is long equity and made very
large losses on its portfolio equity position ($1,153bn, according to table 3). The structure of
the external debt portfolio, in particular whether debt assets are mostly government bonds
or corporate bonds or asset backed mortgage securities, is also a crucial determinant of the
valuation gains and losses. Countries who self-insured by holding mostly foreign government
bonds tended to limit their losses or even post gains on their net debt portfolios, while
countries who levered heavily to invest in risky asset backed mortgage securities or other
toxic assets experienced losses on their net debt. We find a clear positive correlation in the
data between the countries with losses on their net debt portfolios and those who set-up
ABCP conduits. Though the sample coverage is relatively small, we also find a positive
correlation between countries who set up ABCP conduits and the McGuire and von Peter
(2009) measure of US dollar shortage, suggesting that the lack of dollar liquidity in the
banking system was associated with important losses on external debt portfolios.

    The next section reviews the evolution of the external balance sheets of the countries
in our sample, puts them in perspective by comparing them to changes in total wealth
of countries. We provide a world heatmap of external losses and decompose the effect of
exchange rates and asset prices on capital gains and losses. Section 3 discusses our empirical
methodology to construct bilateral gross and net positions for portfolio and direct asset
holdings, for which we have the most detailed data and presents the matrices of bilateral
gains and losses by asset class. Section 4 relates the distribution of wealth transfers to
observable determinants, such as the exposure to asset backed commercial paper (ABCP),
the overall dollar shortage as well as to measures of the regulatory environment. Section 5
concludes.



2     External Balance Sheet Adjustments

We begin our analysis by reviewing the evolution of the aggregate external balance sheet
for a large sample of countries from the end of 2007 to the end of 2008. This period covers

                                               7
the most acute phase of the crisis during the fourth quarter of 2008 following the collapse of
Lehman Brothers, and is therefore the most relevant from the perspective of wealth transfers.

       The recovery in many asset markets around the world in 2009 did reverse some of the
wealth transfers documented in this paper, perhaps as a result of the coordinated and ag-
gressive macroeconomic policies that may have helped stabilize the world economy. What
interests us here is a measure of the external wealth transfers resulting directly from the
crisis itself, i.e. measured at a time when the possibility and the effectiveness of coordinated
countercyclical policies remained remote and the risk of a second Great Depression was on
everyone’s mind. It would be interesting to quantify the impact of these external transfers
on the recovery path of the real economy across countries. Such an enterprise however goes
well beyond the current paper. One difficulty consists in controlling for the relative size
of the shocks hitting the various economies. Another lies in the endogeneity of the policy
responses. Instead, this paper focuses on the determinants of the relative gains and losses
on the external positions of countries and put those valuations in perspective by comparing
them to the contemporaneous changes in domestic household wealth.


2.1       Data and Methodology

Our sample includes most industrial countries (Canada, the Euro area, Japan, Switzerland,
the UK, the US), a group of other advanced economies (Australia, Denmark, New Zealand,
Norway and Sweden), some major emerging economies (Brazil, China, India, Russia, Singa-
pore, Hong-Kong) and a group of emerging Asian economies composed of Indonesia, South
Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand. Missing from this sample are oil exporters
and offshore financial centers, both with potentially large gross and net cross-border posi-
tions.7 For each country in the sample, we construct an estimate of the aggregate valuation
gain/loss as:
                                     V Ait = N Ait − N Ait−1 − CAit ,
   7
    See Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2009) for some estimates of offshore financial centers net asset positions.
We will use some bilateral data on offshore financial centres in section 3 and assess the robustness of our
results when we include them in our bilateral estimates of valuations.

                                                     8
where N Ait denotes the net foreign asset position at time t for country i and CAit the current
account balance during period t. We further break down the net foreign asset position into
net direct investment, equity, portfolio debt and other assets (mostly bank loans), according
to N Ait = c N Ai,c             i,c
           P
                  t where N At represents the net position of country i in asset class c at

time t. Using the balance of payment identity, we can write the valuation term as the sum of
the changes in the net asset position by asset classes, ∆N Ai,c
                                                            t , corrected for the net financial

flows in asset category c over the period, denoted N Fti,c .8

                                             X
                                   V Ait =       ∆N Ai,c     i,c
                                                     t − N Ft .                                   (1)
                                             c



2.2      Aggregate gains and losses

We collect quarterly and annual data on foreign assets and liabilities, at market value when-
ever possible, with corresponding financial flows, for this set of 11 individual countries and
3 country groups between 2007 and 2009. Assets and liabilities positions are broken down
into the following assets classes: portfolio debt, portfolio equity, direct investment, other in-
vestment and reserves (with matching flows, but excluding financial derivatives). For debt,
equity, direct investment and other investment positions we rely on national sources for
Canada, China, the Euro Area, Japan, Switzerland, United Kingdom and the United States
whereas for all other countries, data are from the IMF Balance of Payments Statistics. For
reserves we use “Total reserves minus gold” obtained from the IMF International Financial
Statistics. All flow data were obtained from the IMF Balance of Payments Statistics.9

      We first offer a geographical ‘heatmap’ of aggregate gains and losses around the globe
in figure 1. As mentioned previously, countries with darker red colors bear the larger losses
(in excess of $600bn). The lighter red color represents smaller losses. Similarly, countries
with dark green color enjoyed the largest gains (in excess of $400 bn) while lighter green
represents smaller gains. Countries in plain white, such as, for example, African countries,
  8
     The sum of net financial flows equals the current account balance, up to errors and omissions and
unilateral transfers and remittances, which we ignore in this decomposition.
   9
     For more details on our data see the Appendix.

                                                   9
are those for which we have no data. At a glance, we can see that most of the external
valuation losses are spread across the US, the Euro Area, Switzerland and China (Australia
and other advanced economies made very moderate losses). The UK on the other hand is at
the other end of the spectrum and made large capital gains on its net external asset position,
while Brazil, Russia and India made moderate gains.
       Table 3 reports the corresponding numerical estimates (all the numbers are in billions of
US$) and figures 2-3 present the corresponding heatmap for each asset class (debt, equity,
FDI and foreign exchange) with the same color coding. Finally, figure 4 reports the break-
down of gains/losses by asset class and country. For each country, or group of countries,
this last figure reports V Ait (the solid line) as well as the various components ∆N Aic
                                                                                      t − N Ft
                                                                                              ic


according to equation (1).10
   Figure 4 also includes the valuation gain/loss for the ‘rest of the world’ (RoW), defined as
the counterpart of the aggregate valuation term in our data: V Arow     = − i V Ait . This valu-
                                                                            P
                                                                    t

ation term accounts both for incomplete geographical coverage as well as any measurement
error. Accordingly, its interpretation should be subject to extra caution.
       For the purpose of comparability across countries, we constructed figure 4 and Table 3
with US direct investment positions measured at current cost. This brings down the overall
US valuation loss between 2007:4 and 2008:4 from -$2,069bn when using direct investment
at market value as in Table 1 and 2, to -$863bn.11 .

       A number of important features emerge from the data. First, the simple proposition that
the US suffered a valuation loss while other countries gained uniformly is not supported by
the data. The Euro area, mainland China and Switzerland all experienced sizeable losses, of
$185bn, $158bn and $53bn respectively whereas the UK ($542bn), Russia ($317bn), Brazil
($292bn) and emerging Asia ($245bn) were the main net beneficiaries. Taken together, the
countries of our sample –outside the US– experienced a positive wealth transfer of $1,145bn
  10
    For table 3 and 4 we grouped debt and foreign exchange reserves in the debt category.
  11
    The valuation component on US net direct investment at market value is -$1,150bn and $56bn at current
cost. By construction, the difference, equal to $1,206bn, must be accounted for by valuation gains on net
direct investment (at market value) in other countries. The next section will provide rough estimates of
bilateral direct investment positions at market value.


                                                   10
exceeding the $863bn losses of the U.S., the difference being attributed to the rest of the
world.

   Second, most of the US losses arise from the $1,153bn decline in its net equity portfolio.
By construction, the cross section distribution of valuations within each asset class sums to
zero, that is for each asset class c:
                                         X
                                               V Ai,c
                                                  t = 0,
                                           i

where V Ai,c     i,c    i,c
         t = ∆N At −N Ft . Inspection of table 3 and figure 4 reveals that the counterpart

of the US net equity losses were widely distributed, most countries realizing gains on their
equity portfolio, especially the Euro area ($506bn), the UK ($284bn), Russia ($208bn), Brazil
($205bn), emerging Asia ($192bn) and Japan ($176bn). In all these countries, the gains arise
from a drastic reduction in the value of equity liabilities, relative to equity holdings. All these
countries had short cross border equity positions as of 2007.

   Third, the gains/losses attributable to US cross-border portfolio debt holdings are rela-
tively small, all of the increase in debt liabilities ($505bn) being more than accounted for by
gross capital inflows ($591bn) especially into US government securities. The small associ-
ated valuation loss on US portfolio debt liabilities (-$86bn) underlies the relative stability of
U.S. government securities during the crisis. By contrast, the U.K., experienced a valuation
gain of $339bn on its net debt position, largely due to the decline in the value of its debt
liabilities (-$515bn), some of which can be attributed to the decline in the value of the Ster-
ling relative to the US dollar during that period. Conversely, the Euro area suffered large
valuation losses on its external debt claims (-$461bn) most likely related to the collapse in
the value of its portfolio of US structured credit products. Overall, the contrast between
these three countries is consistent with the US issuing safe public debt and risky private-label
debt (see Bernanke et al. (2011)); the Euro area holding a portfolio of risky private-label
debt assets; the U.K. issuing Sterling denominated debt and risky private-label debt both of
which declined in value during the crisis.



                                                11
       Fourth, despite large holdings of U.S. public securities China suffered an overall negative
wealth transfer during the crisis ($158bn), representing about 3.5 percent of its output.
China also suffered a $61bn loss on its foreign exchange reserve holdings, as a result of
the markdown on its non-dollar reserves when most currencies lost ground against the US
dollar.12    13
                  . These findings highlight that the decline in China’s net external wealth would
have been much more pronounced, were it not for its large holdings of US government
securities.

       Taken together, the results from table 3 and figure 4 reveal a remarkable pattern. If
we define ex-post global insurers as the set of countries that provided significant positive
transfers to the rest of the world during the financial crisis, this set includes the following
countries: the United States ($863bn, 6 percent of GDP), the Euro area ($185bn, 1.36
percent of GDP), Switzerland ($53bn, 10.6 percent of GDP) and China ($158bn, 3.5 percent
of GDP).14 The channels through which each of these countries experienced valuation losses
vary. For the US, it is the collapse in its long net equity position, relative to its short debt
position, which did not decline nearly as much. For Switzerland and the Euro area, it is
the decline in the value of their debt holdings, which were infested by toxic assets, and the
decline in the value of their long direct investment position. For China, as discussed above,
it is the losses on the non-dollar components of its foreign exchange reserves, due to a dollar
appreciation.

       These findings indicate that the heatmap of gains and losses is substantially more complex
than expected. In particular, it suggests that it is incorrect to think of the United States as
  12
      We measure gains and losses in dollars. If we measured valuation effects in a currency basket instead,
such as the SDR, China would record a gain of about 2.6 bn SDR on its official foreign exchange holdings,
as the SDR depreciated against the dollar at the height of the crisis. Except for this ”level effect” the choice
of a numeraire has no consequence on our results.
   13
      The official IIP figures also indicate increases in the value of Chinese FDI and equity liabilities. These
numbers are however not at market value. Given that the Chinese stock market suffered a massive decline
during the crisis, Chinese liabilities are likely to be overstated in official IIP data. Hence, Chinese losses are
likely to be also overstated. In the next section of the paper we discuss in more details the shortcomings of
Chinese data.
   14
      Technically, the list should also include Singapore ($56bn valuation loss representing 29 percent of its
output). However, Singapore is a regional financial center and discrepancies between claims and liabilities
lead to us to interpret these numbers with caution.


                                                       12
the single provider of global liquidity. The allocation of losses is still extremely asymmetric
–with the US accounting for about 68 percent of the cross border wealth losses, the Euro
area for 15 percent, China for 13 percent and Switzerland for 4 percent.15 Nevertheless
it provides perhaps an early indication that the global economy may have already moved
towards a multilateral system, where the provision of global liquidity is not concentrated in
the hands of the United States any longer. On the whole, our results are also consistent with
the recent work emphasizing the resilience of emerging economies during the recent crisis
(see Kose and Prasad (2010) and Gourinchas and Obstfeld (2011)).


2.3        Exchange rate accounting, total wealth and valuations

The crisis period has been characterized by large gyrations in exchange rates, with, in par-
ticular a substantial appreciation of the dollar against most currencies. It is interesting
to decompose gains and losses on external balance sheets into fluctuations in asset prices
(equity, FDI, bond prices) and exchange rate movements. We attempt here such an account-
ing exercise in order to assess how much exchange rate movements explain our change in
valuations.
       We use the geographical distribution of bilateral weights of assets and liabilities as well as
some crude assumptions on their currency composition to compute the relevant exchange rate
movements. In particular, we assume that all FDI and equities holdings are in the currency
of the issuer and that all bank loans are fully hedged and hence immune to exchange rate
effects. We use the Lane and Shambaugh’s exchange rate weights for the debt data.16
       Our results presented in table 4 have striking features. All the countries we identified
  15
     For the reasons mentioned above and discussed in more details below, the numbers for China are likely
to be very imprecise. The share of the US losses in total losses would be even larger if we measured direct
investment at market value since the US valuation loss would be roughly three times as large.
  16
     In our benchmark case, we assume that all the assets that our source countries own in offshore centers
are in US dollars. This may be a problematic assumption for some of our countries, like the UK, which have
susbstantial links with offshore centres and is likely to use sterling for at least part of these transactions. As
a robustness check, we assumed that all the UK assets vis-à-vis all offshore centers are in Sterling. The only
large difference is for the exchange rate valuation on FDI assets: instead of incurring a loss of $80 bn, the
UK would incur a loss of $156 bn. While not negligible, this is unlikely to change our results in a material
way (UK offshore FDI assets are only 15% of total UK FDI assets).



                                                       13
in the previous section as ex post global insurers (US, Euro Area, Switzerland, China and
Singapore, with the addition of Japan) suffered valuation losses due to adverse exchange rate
movements. These are countries whose currencies have tended to hold rather well or even to
appreciate at the height of the crisis mainly due to their role as safe havens. Liabilities of
these countries are mainly in domestic currency and their assets mainly in foreign currencies,
hence an appreciation of the domestic exchange rate tends to decrease the value of their net
foreign assets. Our table shows that exchange rate movements account for about 31% of
US external valuation changes (when US FDI is measured at market value). This sizable
number (corresponding to a valuation loss of about $650 bn) is not surprising as the currency
composition of US external assets and liabilities is very asymmetric: almost all US liabilities
are in dollars while about two thirds of US assets are in foreign currencies. As the dollar
appreciated sharply in 2008 in part due to inflows into the Treasuries market, the value of
US external claims went down. For Switzerland and Japan, the losses stemming from the
strength of their currencies were partly compensated by an increase in the value of their
external claims. Both Switzerland and Japan have short equity positions and benefit from a
collapse in equity prices. A contrario, the Sterling collapse led to large exchange rate gains
on the UK net external positions. Those gains explain 139% of the total valuation changes,
meaning that they were partly offset by decreases in the value of UK net external assets

       One legitimate question to ask is whether the international wealth transfers this paper
focuses on are relevant compared to the change in domestic financial wealth that occurred
during the crisis. We report in table 4 (columns (7) and (8)) changes in total domestic
household wealth for the subset of countries for which we could find data.17 First, declines
in wealth are indeed very large during the period we consider: $17.3 trillion for the United
States, $2.7 trillion for the UK and $2.3 trillion for Japan, $1.3 trillion for the Eurozone.
This should come as no surprise as our period spans the height of the financial crisis during
which many financial and real estate markets performed dismally. External valuation gains
  17
    Source: OECD Economic Outlook (2011). Our data cover the US, the UK, the Euro Area (limited here
to Germany, Italy and France), Japan and Canada.



                                                14
or losses, though smaller, are nevertheless quite sizeable as a proportion of total wealth
changes. Their absolute value range from 3% (for Japan) to 20% for the UK, reflecting both
the openness of the UK as a small open economy and the important role of London as an
international financial centre. For the US, external valuation changes amount to 12% of
the change in total household wealth, and for the Euro Area 14%. Hence, while there is
no doubt the negative domestic wealth effects dominate the macroeconomic landscape for
most of our countries, the international wealth transfers, determined by the heterogeneity of
external balance sheets, are far from being negligible.




3      Bilateral valuation gains and losses

Our world maps showed considerable geographical heterogeneity in external wealth changes
at the country level. We now refine our analysis and estimate the distributions of bilateral
valuations gains and losses during 2007-2008. Balance of payment data and international
investment positions are based on the concept of residency. This concept is not fully adequate
to analyze risk sharing in the international economy. Ideally, we would like to have data on
final ownership of assets. These data do not exist for portfolio investment or FDI however,
for which we will have to assume that residency and ownership coincide. The presence of
important financial links with offshore financial centres, which act merely as intermediate
financial platforms distort further the geographical picture of our data.18 All our results are
therefore subjected to these limitations. A second important difficulty is the estimation of
bilateral investment positions and bilateral flows in different asset classes. Kubelec and Sa
(2010) and Milesi-Ferretti, Strobbe and Tamirisa (2010) have done pioneering work in trying
to estimate bilateral investment positions. Nevertheless, data limitations remain severe in
terms of country coverage in particular and availability of data at market value (see the
appendix for a more detailed discussion of data issues).19
  18
     For an attempt to assess the robustness of our results to the inclusion of offshore centres, see next section.
  19
     We chose not to compute bilateral financial matrices for bank loans. The locational banking statistics
of the BIS, based on the concept of residency, give data on bilateral banking positions. These data however


                                                        15
3.1     Data and Methodology

For each asset class, we estimate the bilateral distribution of valuation gains and losses
   ij
V Xt+1 at time t + 1 between country i and j during the height of the crisis between 2007
                             ij
Q4 and 2008 Q4. We derive V Xt+1 using the following accounting identity:


                                     ij       ij
                                  V Xt+1 = P Xt+1 − P Xtij − F Xt+1
                                                                ij
                                                                    ,                                      (2)


where P Xtij denotes the holdings of country i in country j at time t, and F Xtij represents
the net financial purchases by residents of country i in country j in the asset class considered
between t and t + 1.
    Yearly data on some components of bilateral international portfolios holdings by asset
classes are available through the CPIS survey and other sources in recent years for a number
of countries. Bilateral flow data coverage is, however, generally far from complete or not
available. We use the following methodology to estimate bilateral flows on quarterly data.20

    Portfolio debt and portfolio equity
   We compute the bilateral portfolio weights wtij of country i vis-à-vis country j for a given
                                                                    X
asset class at date t using bilateral CPIS data as: wtij = P Xtij /     P Xtij . The coverage of
                                                                            j∈CP IS
the CPIS data is not exhaustive, hence the sum of all the bilateral positions of country i for
portfolio debt or equity covered by the CPIS does not correspond to the reported aggregated
IIP for these assets. Accordingly, we construct a coverage rate for country i at date t as
        X
αti =       P Xtij /P Xti , where P Xti is the reported aggregate (multilateral) international
       j∈CP IS
investment position for country i.21 We denote the aggregate flow in a given asset class by
are bound to be of little use for our purposes as loan books and large parts of the banking books are not
marked to market. The speed of write downs and the provisioning for bad loans have differed widely across
countries and it is unclear how much of this is reflected in the BIS numbers of 2007-2008. Furthermore, there
are large differences between consolidated statistics and locational statistics, suggesting that the concept of
residency, compatible with balance of payment accounting is bound to be very different from the ultimate
geographical distribution of gains and losses. Rather than attempt a heroic effort at reconciling loan data
on a bilateral basis, we preferred not to do bilateral financial matrices for this asset category.
  20
     We provide all our data sources for specific countries in the appendix. When CPIS data are not available
(as in the case of China) we use national data sources.
  21
     We make sure that the valuation methods for the numerator and the denominator are the same.


                                                      16
   i
F Xt+1 , and estimated variables with a ‘hat’. Our goal is to construct an estimate of the
quarterly bilateral flows F X̂tij . Our working assumption is that the geographical distribution
of flows over each quarter corresponds to the portfolio weights at the beginning of the quarter.
Scaling total flows in proportion to the data coverage on the positions, it results that our
estimated bilateral flows are constructed as:


                                               ij
                                           F X̂t+1 = wtij F Xt+1
                                                             i
                                                                 αti .


       An estimate of next quarter’s positions (ex-valuation gains) can then be constructed as:


                                               ij
                                           P X̂t+1 = P Xtij + F X̂t+1
                                                                  ij




                                                                                       ij
    The procedure is then iterated by defining the next quarter portfolio weights as ŵt+1 =
    ij
          X      ij
P X̂t+1 /    P X̂t+1 and using these to construct the following quarter bilateral flows etc...
           j∈CP IS
                                                                      ij
       We recover the yearly valuation term in the fourth quarter, V Xt+4 , as the difference
between end of year bilateral positions as recorded in the available surveys, adjusted for our
constructed cumulated bilateral flows:

                                                       4
                                                       X
                                ij           ij                   ij
                           V   Xt+4   =   P Xt+4   −          F X̂t+s − P Xtij
                                                       s=1
                                                             4
                                                             X
                                ij           ij                      ij
                           V   Xt+4   =   P Xt+4   −   αti         ŵt+s−1    i
                                                                           F Xt+s − P Xtij ,
                                                             s=1


                                      ij
where the second line substitutes F X̂t+s for its empirical counterpart. We emphasize again
that this approach is quite crude, given the data limitation and is likely to suffer from a
number of shortcomings. However, in the absence of more detailed data, it strikes us as
reasonable to assume that flows are allocated proportionally to observed positions.22
  22
    One simple case where our assumption would be violated is one where investors would want to maintain
fixed portfolios shares. In that case, investors would rebalance fully their portfolio every period, which would
require underweighting assets that outperform, so that the financial flows would not be exactly proportional
to beginning of period holdings. Our rule assumes that investors do not follow such a simple, full rebalancing
rule; indeed at the observed frequencies, portfolio weights are time varying.



                                                             17
       Bilateral FDI
       For our sample, up-to-date official data on FDI at market value is only available for the
following countries: the US, Hong Kong, Japan, Australia and Sweden.23 In order to obtain
bilateral FDI positions at market value we rely wherever possible on official estimates of the
aggregate FDI positions at market value. For countries that do not report such estimates,
we update an initial market value estimate by using equity price indices and aggregate FDI
flows. Once we have the derived - or provided - estimate of the aggregate market value FDI
stock for 2007 and 2008, we use the ratio of market value to book value of the aggregate
stock to infer the bilateral FDI stocks at market value.
       For the US, the BEA provides market value of the aggregate FDI stock which we use
to convert the bilateral BEA FDI positions at historical cost to market value. The same
method is used for Japan (where market value estimates are provided by the Bank of Japan)
and Sweden (with data from the Swedish Rijksbank).
       For the UK, Switzerland, Denmark, Canada and China we rely on an initial estimate of
the aggregate FDI positions at market value which we update by using destination coun-
try equity indices and aggregate direct investment flows. We rely on Kubelec, Orskaug and
Tanaka (2007) for UK direct investment positions as of 2005; Kumah, Damgaard and Elkjaer
(2009) for Denmark in 2006; Stoffes and Tille (2009) for Switzerland in 2005 and Statistics
Canada for Canada in 2005 (see the appendix for a more detailed discussion of our mar-
ket value estimation methodology). For the remaining countries in our sample we rely on
bilateral DI positions at market value derived from partner countries sources. With these
estimates of yearly positions in hand, we construct bilateral FDI flows and valuations using
the same approach as for portfolio debt and equity.

       Bilateral Foreign exchange data
       For the currency composition of foreign exchange reserves we use national sources (Canada,
Russia, Switzerland and the UK) or else adopt the 2007 currency share of official reserves
  23
     Of those, only Australia and Hong-Kong use market value as the primary FDI valuation method in their
official IIP release.



                                                   18
provided in Milesi-Ferretti, Strobbe and Tamirisa (2010) for 2008. For China, the currency
composition of reserves is usually not disclosed. We use the 2010 weights, as this is the only
year for which data are available. While this strategy is by no means optimal, we believe any
resulting errors to be comparatively small, in view of the relative stability of foreign reserve
currency shares over time.
       Bilateral FX reserves valuations are computed using exchange rate movements applied
to the currency composition of reserves. We prefer this direct valuation method as flows
are bound to be very badly observed (reserve flows are kept confidential by some countries),
while exchange rate movements and currency composition are relatively accurate.

       Treatment of offshore financial centres
       The main offshore centres are in our sample.24 Though the reporting is spotty (see
Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2009) for a thorough study) there are some important cross border
positions between some offshore centres (such as the Cayman Islands and the Bahamas, for
example) and advanced economies. It is very unlikely that the ultimate owners of financial
assets bought by offshore centres are actual residents of off-shore centres. Rather, offshore
centres act as intermediaries to channel funds across the globe, reflecting, among other things,
tax “optimization” and tax evasion. Zucman (2011) shows that a significant amount of rich
countries wealth seem to evaporate via those channels.
       Because, by design, the traceability of the geography of financial flows emanating from
and going into offshore centres is limited, we make two different assumptions in the course
of our analysis and investigate the robustness of our results. First we simply take the
offshore centres out of the bilateral financial matrices. This means that we focus only on
the financial linkages across countries that are explicitly (even if imperfectly) recorded in
official data. Second, we assume that the bulk of offshore financial transactions is done to
go around domestic fiscal authorities, legally or illegally. Hence most of those transactions
are really domestic transactions intermediated offshore. We therefore redistribute offshore
  24
   These include Aruba, Andorra, Bahamas, Barbados, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands,
Gibraltar, Guernsey, Isle of Man, Jersey, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Macao, Mauritius, Monaco, Netherland
Antilles, Panama, Samoa, San Marino, Vanuatu, Vatican, West Indies


                                                 19
centres external assets and liabilities to the other countries of our samples in the following
way. Take the US-Bahamas example. We assume that part of the external assets of the US
towards the Bahamas are actually US-US investments and we ventilate the rest according
to the weights of the US portfolio on external assets. Specifically we use the home bias of
the US equity portfolio to determine how many US-Bahamas claims are really US domestic
claims. On the liability side, we do a similar breakdown: US liabilities vis-à-vis the Bahamas
are assumed to be US-US liabilities (same home bias weight) and the remainder is ventilated
according to the weights in the US external liability portfolio.25
       While these assumptions on offshore centers have some effect on the results, especially for
the countries which trade most with offshore centers, such as the US, the UK and the euro
area, the overall pattern of transfers does not change, whether in the aggregate or by asset
classes.26 We conclude that while there is no denying offshore centres introduce some degree
of uncertainty in the geographical distribution of gains and losses, the relative magnitudes
are such that they probably are not large enough to significantly alter our global heatmaps.



3.2       Bilateral Financial Matrices

Traditionally, the propensity of countries to experience a financial crisis has been linked
to large current account deficits and net imbalances. As financial globalization proceeds,
cross border asset positions are growing at a rapid rate, and balance sheet effects are be-
coming increasingly important: even countries with net balanced positions and no current
account deficit can become financially illiquid. Nowadays, financial fragility has to be as-
sessed through information on gross external asset positions, disaggregated by asset classes.
Tracking the process of international transmission of financial shocks involves knowing the
network of bilateral gross exposures of countries. Hence, we believe that the construction of
bilateral matrices such as the ones we are presenting in this paper for the 2007-2008 crisis,
  25
     The home bias weights for equity and bonds are taken from Coeurdacier and Rey (2010). For FDI, we
use the same home bias weights as for the equity portfolio.
  26
     Bilateral financial matrices with ventilation of offshore positions are not reported here due to lack of
space. They are available upon request.


                                                     20
can be of great interest to understand better systemic risk and the propagation of shocks at
the international level. In what follows we present bilateral financial matrices on gains and
losses by asset categories (portfolio debt, equity and FDI).

       There are several ways of constructing valuation matrices. We can use data on bilateral
assets and liabilities of reporting countries or alternatively use data based only on the asset
side of reporting countries. Because data on the asset side is usually more reliable (see
Milesi-Ferretti, Strobbe and Tamirisa (2010) for a discussion), this is what we present in this
section.

Matrix of bilateral valuation gains and losses on the net equity portfolio
       Each matrix presents in columns the source country and in rows the destination countries.
Hence if we look at the bilateral ventilation of portfolio equity assets (table 5), in the first
column and second row (Brazil- Canada), the number 4,079 means that Brazil is making
a valuation gain of $4,079 millions on its net equity asset portfolio vis-à-vis Canada (and
conversely that Canada is making a valuation loss of the same amount in the first row/second
column of the table). The numbers across the diagonal are symmetric as we used exclusively
assets data. Several facts are noteworthy. First, despite the difference in coverage and
the assumptions we had to make when constructing the data, the sum of our bilateral
valuations (equal to $162,796 millions for Brazil) is usually reasonably close to the total
valuations computed directly from aggregated net positions in Table 3. In principle, the two
numbers should not necessarily be equal since the latter includes all countries while the
bilateral coverage in Table 5 is more limited. Nevertheless, the numbers should be close if
the omitted countries do not account for a significant share of cross-border equity positions.
For the United States, for instance, the two numbers are strikingly close (-$1,218 billions
versus -$1,153 billions).27 Second, we uncover a remarkable geographical pattern of gains
and losses. As risky assets valuation plummeted during the crisis, the United States, with
  27
     For other countries, the sum of our bilateral valuation effects can differ substantially. The discrepancy
is largest for China where aggregate equity data indicate a small valuation loss of $12 billions, while our
cumulated bilateral valuations report a gain of $186 billions. Besides measurement issues, the difference
could be due in part to valuation losses that China experienced against countries not included in our sample.


                                                     21
long equity positions vis-à-vis each of the other geographical entities in our sample, suffered
across the board losses. Furthermore, after controlling for their bilateral equity portfolio
gain against the US, all other advanced economies except Japan also made losses on their
net equity position, reflecting their overall short equity position vis-a-vis the US and long
position against the rest of the world. The case of the UK is particularly interesting. It
registers one of the biggest gain on its portfolio equity ($198 billions) and is characterized
by a massive short position vis-à-vis the US and a somewhat smaller short position vis-à-vis
the Euro Area and Canada. Emerging markets, on the other hand, tend to be short equity
vis-à-vis most of their partners, and as a result, benefited from the worldwide fall in equity
markets. This is particularly clear for the BRIC countries (Brazil, Russia, India and China)
who make gains on most of their bilateral net equity positions.

Matrix of bilateral valuation gains and losses on the net debt portfolio.
   The data on portfolio debt presented in table 6 show bigger gaps in coverage than the
equity data. In particular, the data coverage for the Euro area and the UK seems particularly
limited, as revealed by the comparison between the sum of bilateral gains and losses and the
aggregate figure obtained directly from the IIP in Table 3. Data coverage for the United
States seems adequate since we report a valuation loss of $58 billions while the aggregate
position indicates $46 billions. It would be ideal to be able to distinguish between government
debt and corporate debt, including structured credit products Unfortunately this breakdown
is not available. Hence the net valuation on the debt portfolio will depend on the relative
weights of US treasuries, say, versus asset-backed mortgage securities in countries portfolios.
As indicated, our matrix also does not include official reserve holdings with the data on
debt (unlike Table 3 above which aggregated the two). According to Bernanke et al. (2011),
saving glut economies such as China and Emerging Asia have concentrated their portfolio
holdings into government bonds, pushing downwards their yields and inducing more advanced
economies, in particular the euro area to invest in higher yielding securities, such as ABCP.
Our data seem consistent with this narrative, as the Euro Area has a large long position in
US debt in 2007, which translated in large losses during the crisis. Similarly, other advanced

                                              22
economies, Canada, Switzerland, who were also long in US debt and had presumably a
similar portfolio structure as the Euro area made losses on their net debt liabilities.                  A
noticeable exception is the UK, who, despite a long position in US debt realized a massive
gain, due mainly to the collapse of the value of US debt assets in the UK. The US makes gains
on its net debt portfolio vis-à-vis most advanced economies (except the UK) and conversely
makes losses vis-à-vis Russia and Hong Kong, which are likely to have accumulated more
US government bonds than corporate debt.

Matrix of bilateral valuation gains and losses on the net FDI portfolio
       Comparing the sum of our bilateral net valuations for FDI at market value presented
in Table 7 with the aggregate data on valuation estimated from reported IIP, our data
coverage is clearly limited for some areas.28 The Euro area coverage in particular seems
most problematic, since the sum of bilateral valuations indicates a gain of $575 billions,
while the corresponding aggregate figure in Table 3 is a loss of $334 billions (based on FDI
at book value). It seems unlikely that the discrepancy, a valuation loss in excess of $1,000
billions, could be accounted for purely by the gaps in our geographic coverage, especially
vis-à-vis other emerging markets. With this caveat in mind, the results on bilateral direct
investment still present some interesting features. Japan has net DI assets vis-à-vis all the
countries in our sample, except Switzerland. Consequently, it suffered bilateral losses against
each country (except Switzerland and India). Similarly the US made large losses vis-à-vis
the Euro area against which it holds a large long position. UK FDI in the US seems to have
particularly underperformed and is responsible for the gain that the US makes on its net
FDI portfolio vis-à-vis the UK.


       Matrix of bilateral valuation gains and losses on the foreign exchange reserves
       Since the dollar is the dominant reserve currency, using the dollar as the numéraire would
  28
    Note that for this matrix, we constructed market value FDI estimates wherever possible (see Appendix).
Thus, the data presented here differs from the data presented in Table 3, where, e.g. for the US we used FDI
at current cost to allow for better comparability across countries and, similarly, most other countries use
book values to compile their aggregate FDI data. In consequence, the sum of bilateral valuations in Table 7
is not directly comparable with the aggregate figures in Table 3.


                                                    23
lead to many entries being zero.29 For this matrix (and only this one), we therefore chose
to express valuations in terms of the SDR basket in Table 8. For the 2006-2010 period, the
SDR weights were 44% dollar, 34% euro, 11% yen, 11% sterling. Since the SDR depreciated
against the US dollar and the yen in 2008, countries holding reserves predominantly in US $
and /or yen have seen their official reserves appreciate, when measured in SDR. For example,
China made moderate net gains on its foreign reserves during this period, because of the
strengthening of the dollar and the yen. China made some losses on its euro and, even
more sizably on its sterling reserves. Russia, on the other hand suffered net losses due to its
exposure to euro and sterling assets. So did the euro area, as it is heavily exposed to sterling
assets.



4      Determinants of gains and losses

It is now well understood that before the crisis, a number of AAA-rated securities (mostly
asset-backed mortgage securities) were perceived as perfect substitutes for US government
securities. Following Bernanke et al. (2011), let us call them ‘private-label’ safe assets. Even-
tually, the safety of the private label assets proved illusory, and their price spiralled down-
wards during the crisis. By contrast, US Treasuries held-up remarkably well and even saw
their price rise due to inflows of capital seeking safe haven protection (see McCauley and
McGuire (2009)). Acharya and Schnabl (2010) estimate that the banks around the world
manufactured over $1,200 billion of these ‘private-label’ safe assets by selling short-term
Asset-Backed Commercial Paper (ABCP) via conduits to risk-averse investors and investing
the proceeds primarily in long-term U.S. securities. As liquidity in the dollar money markets
dried-up in 2007, many banks found themselves unable to roll over these ABCP and forced
to reinstate the mortgages from the conduits on their balance sheet, with significant losses.
Bilateral exposure data are ideal to investigate the macroeconomic impact of those invest-
  29
   We assume that currency and residency coincide, i.e. Chinese holdings of US$ reserves are assets of
China on the US. As there are few reserve currencies, there are already a large number of zeros in this
matrix.



                                                  24
ments by commercial banks, i.e. whether countries whose banks set up large asset-backed
commercial paper conduits also experienced large losses on their external debt portfolios,
as measured by the “Survey on Portfolio holdings of U.S. Securities”. Figure 5 illustrates
the positive correlation between the share of ABCP conduits in total external debt positions
as of 2007 and the rate of losses made on external debt portfolios between 2007 Q4 and
2008 Q4.30 Though the sample is small, the correlation is strikingly positive, suggesting
that setting up ABCP conduits is a major determinant of aggregate losses on external debt.
Furthermore, there is a strong mapping between the geographical distributions of losses and
the share of the various areas in total ABCP holdings. As pointed out in Bernanke et al.
(2011), the Euro area leveraged massively to invest in those private-label safe assets ending
up holding 40% of total outstanding ABCP and as a result saw massive decline in the value
of its external debt to the tune of 54% of total losses (Figure 6). The UK, who held 16% of
the total stock of ABCP bore 21% of total losses.

       Reinforcing the plausibility of the mechanism described above linking prevalence of ABCP
conduits and liquidity dry ups entailing losses on assets, we find a strong positive correlation
between the measures of dollar shortage in some banking systems developed by McGuire
and von Peter (2009) and the propensity of those systems to set up ABCP conduits. Figure
7 uses the upper limits of the dollar shortage measures developed by McGuire and von Peter
(2009) both at the office and at the group level. Those measures are constructed by assuming
that net interbank borrowing in dollar, net borrowing on the FX swap markets in dollars
(which the authors back out from the balance sheet identity assuming no open positions on
the forex), dollar borrowing from official monetary authorities, as well as liabilities to non
banks are all short term. The difference between those short term dollar liabilities and the
longer term dollar assets gives the dollar funding gap or dollar shortage of a country banking
system.31 With the exception of Switzerland, which did not appear to have any significant
  30
     We are very grateful to Viral Acharya and Philip Schnabl for sharing their data with us. Their dataset
consists in the following countries: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Frecnh, Germany, Italy,
Japan, Netherthelands, spain, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, USA.
  31
     We are grateful to the authors for providing us with their data, whose construction is described in
McGuire and von Peter (2009). The group-level estimates are constructed by aggregating banks’ global


                                                    25
exposure to ABCPs in 2007, there is a very clear link between measures of dollar shortage
and ABCP conduits.

    Finally, we report in Figure 8 the total valuation losses together with the Kaufmann,
Kraay and Mastruzzi (2010) indicator of the quality of the regulatory environment. Recent
research by Giannone, Lenza and Reichlin (2011) finds that the severity of the crisis was
strongly and robustly positively related to the degree of liberalization in credit markets, as
measured by indicators or ‘regulatory quality’.32             In our sample, the correlation between
losses and the Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi (2010) indicator of the quality of the regu-
latory environment is also positive (0.45) and visual inspection confirms that countries with
more liberalized credit markets tended to suffer larger valuation losses on their external port-
folio. One may conjecture, that the most deregulated markets where also the ones in which
investors ”splurged” the most and increased their loadings on (once lucrative) toxic assets.



5     Conclusion

The global crisis of 2007-2009 led to massive changes in relative asset prices. We construct
a dataset that allows us to analyze the geography of wealth transfers during the crisis. The
‘heatmap’ we produce highlight a very diverse set of outcomes depending on the structure
of the structure of countries’ external portfolios. Some saw the value of their net assets
plunging, others benefited from large capital gains. The countries whose net international
asset positions deteriorated provided wealth transfers to the others at a time where marginal
utility of consumption was very high. For that reason they can be regarded as ”global
insurers”, as suggested in Gourinchas, Rey and Govillot (2010). Interestingly, we find that
the United States, the country at the centre of the international monetary system and issuer
balance sheets into a consolidated whole, and then calculating funding risk on this aggregated balance sheet.
The office-level estimates are constructed by calculating funding risk at the office location level, and then
aggregating the series up across office locations for each banking system. By construction, the office level
estimates should at least be as large as the corresponding group level.
  32
     For group of countries, we assign the regulatory quality index as follows: Germany for euro area, St Kitts
for offshore centers, Saudi Arabia for oil exporters, Thailand for emerging Asia, Norway for other advanced
countries, and Peru for other latin-american countries.


                                                      26
of the main reserve assets, the US Treasuries, provided most of the insurance during the crisis,
as its international investment position deteriorated massively. But other countries, which
may be regarded more like regional insurers joined in, such as Switzerland, the Euro area
or even China. A general pattern in our data is that most countries long equity or direct
investment faced losses on their net positions, as risky assets took some of the sharpest
valuation falls in the crisis. For portfolio debt, the exact structure of portfolio matters, and
in particular the relative weights of government bonds versus toxic corporate debt made
an important difference for the outcomes. We find that some correlation of exposure to
ABCP conduits -mostly in US dollars, existing dollar shortage measures, and losses on the
debt portfolio. Finally our exercise, just like Milesi-Ferretti, Strobbe and Tamirisa (2010)
underlines important data issues regarding cross country coverage of international investment
positions and flows.




                                              27
References
Acharya, Viral V., and Philipp Schnabl. 2010. “Do Global Banks Spread Global Im-
 balances? Asset-Backed Commercial Paper during the Financial Crisis of 200709.” IMF
 Economic Review, 58(1): 37–73.

Alogoskoufis, George, and Richard Portes. 1993. “Establishing a Central Bank: Issues
 in Europe and Lessons from the US, Cambridge.” , ed. Matthew Canzoneri, Vittorio Grilli
 and Paul Masson, Chapter European Monetary Union and International Currencies in a
 Tripolar World, 273–301. Cambridge University Press.

Bernanke, Ben S., Carol Bertaut, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, and Steven Kamin.
 2011. “International capital flows and the returns to safe assets in the United States, 2003-
 2007.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System International Finance Discussion
 Papers 1014.

Bertaut, Carol C., and Ralph W. Tryon. 2007. “Monthly estimates of U.S. cross-
 border securities positions.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.)
 International Finance Discussion Papers 910.

Bertaut, Carol, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, Steven Kamin, and Ralph Tryon. 2011.
 “ABS Inflows to the United States and the Global Financial Crisis.” Board of Governors
 of the Federal Reserve System mimeo.

Coeurdacier, Nicolas, and Hélène Rey. 2010. “Home Bias in Open Economy Financial
 Macroeconomics.” London Business School 2011.

Cohen, Benjamin. 1971. The Future of Sterling as an International Currency. London:
 MacMillan.

Curcuru, Stephanie E., Tomas Dvorak, and Francis Warnock. 2008. “Cross-border
 returns differentials.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4): 1495–1530.

Forbes, Kristin J., and Francis E. Warnock. 2010. “Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops,
  Flight and Retrenchment.” MIT and University of Virginia mimeo.

Giannone, Domenico, Michele Lenza, and Lucrezia Reichlin. 2011. “Market Freedom
 and the Global Recession.” IMF Economic Review, 59(1): 111–135.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Hélène Rey. 2007. “From World Banker to World
 Venture Capitalist: US External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege.” 11–55.
 Chicago,:University of Chicago Press,.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Maurice Obstfeld. 2011. “Stories of the Twentieth
 Century for the Twenty-First.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcom-
 ing.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Hélène Rey, and Nicolas Govillot. 2010. “Exorbitant
 Privilege and Exorbitant Duty.” UC Berkeley mimeo.


                                             28
Hartmann, Philip. 1998. Currency Competition and Foreign Exchange Markets: The Dol-
 lar, the Yen and the Euro. Cambridge University Press.

He, Zhiguo, In Gu Khang, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2010. “Balance Sheet Ad-
 justments during the 2008 Crisis.” IMF Economic Review, 58(1): 118–156.

Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi. 2010. “The worldwide gov-
 ernance indicators : methodology and analytical issues.” The World Bank Policy Research
 Working Paper Series 5430.

Kose, M. Ayhan, and Eswar S. Prasad. 2010. Emerging markets: Resilience and growth
 amid global turmoil. Washington, DC:Brookings Institution Press.

Krugman, Paul. 1984. Currencies and Crises. MIT Press.

Kubelec, Chris, and Filipa Goncalves Sa. 2010. “The geographical composition of
 national external balance sheets: 1980-2005.” Bank of England Bank of England working
 papers 384.

Kubelec, Chris, Bjorn-Erik Orskaug, and Misa Tanaka. 2007. “Financial Globali-
 sation, External Balance Sheets and Economic Adjustment.” Bank of England Quarterly
 Bulletin, 2: 244–57.

Kumah, Emmanuel, Jannick Damgaard, and Thomas Elkjaer. 2009. “Valuation of
 Unlisted Direct Investment Equity.” International Monetary Fund IMF Working Paper
 WP/09/242.

Lane, Philip, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2009. “Cross-Border Investment in Small
  International Financial Centers.” IIIS The Institute for International Integration Studies
  Discussion Paper Series iiisdp316.

Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2001. “The External Wealth of Na-
  tions: Measures of Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Countries.”
  Journal of International Economics, 55: 263–94.

Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2007. “The External Wealth of
  Nations Mark II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-
  2004.” Journal of International Economics, 73(2): 223–250.

Matsuyama, Kiminori, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, and Akihiro Matsui. 1993. “Toward a
 Theory of International Currency.” Review of Economic Studies, 60(2): 283–307.

McCauley, Robert N, and Patrick McGuire. 2009. “Dollar appreciation in 2008: safe
 haven, carry trades, dollar shortage and overhedging.” BIS Quarterly Review.

McGuire, Patrick, and Goetz von Peter. 2009. “The US dollar shortage in global
 banking.” BIS Quarterly Review.

McKinnon, Ronald. 1979. Money in International Exchange: The Convertible Currency
 System. Oxford: Oxford University Press.


                                             29
Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull. 2009. “Fi-
 nancial Integration, Financial Development, and Global Imbalances.” Journal of Political
 Economy, 117(3): 371–416.

Milesi-Ferretti, Gian-Maria. 2009. “A $2 trillion question.” http: // www. voxeu. org/
 index. php? q= node/ 2902 .

Milesi-Ferretti, Gian-Maria, Francesco Strobbe, and Natalia Tamirisa. 2010. “Bi-
 lateral Financial Linkages and Global Imbalances: A View on The Eve of the Financial
 Crisis.” CEPR Discussion Paper 8173.

Portes, Richard, and Hélène Rey. 1998. “The Emergence of the Euro as an International
 Currency.” Economic Policy, 305–343.

Rey, Hélène. 2001. “International Trade and Currency Exchange.” Review of Economic
 Studies, 68(2): 443–464.

Simard, Eric, and Eric Boulay. “Market valuation of Equity in the International Invest-
  ment Position: Canada’s Experience.” Prepared for the Nineteenth Meeting of the IMF
  Committee on Balance of Payments Statistics Frankfurt, Germany, October 23-26, 2006.

Stoffes, Nicolas, and Cedric Tille. 2009. “Where have the Savings gone to? Assessing
  the Return on Switzerland’s External Assets.” Graduate Institute for International and
  Development Studies working paper.

Zhou, Ruilin. 1997. “Currency Exchange in a Random Search Model.” Review of Economic
 Studies, 64: 289–310.

Zucman, Garbiel. 2011. “The Missing Wealth of Nations: Are Europe and the U.S. net
 Debtors or net Creditors?” Paris School of Economics mimeo.




                                           30
References
Acharya, Viral V., and Philipp Schnabl. 2010. “Do Global Banks Spread Global Im-
 balances? Asset-Backed Commercial Paper during the Financial Crisis of 200709.” IMF
 Economic Review, 58(1): 37–73.

Alogoskoufis, George, and Richard Portes. 1993. “Establishing a Central Bank: Issues
 in Europe and Lessons from the US, Cambridge.” , ed. Matthew Canzoneri, Vittorio Grilli
 and Paul Masson, Chapter European Monetary Union and International Currencies in a
 Tripolar World, 273–301. Cambridge University Press.

Bernanke, Ben S., Carol Bertaut, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, and Steven Kamin.
 2011. “International capital flows and the returns to safe assets in the United States, 2003-
 2007.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System International Finance Discussion
 Papers 1014.

Bertaut, Carol C., and Ralph W. Tryon. 2007. “Monthly estimates of U.S. cross-
 border securities positions.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.)
 International Finance Discussion Papers 910.

Bertaut, Carol, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, Steven Kamin, and Ralph Tryon. 2011.
 “ABS Inflows to the United States and the Global Financial Crisis.” Board of Governors
 of the Federal Reserve System mimeo.

Coeurdacier, Nicolas, and Hélène Rey. 2010. “Home Bias in Open Economy Financial
 Macroeconomics.” London Business School 2011.

Cohen, Benjamin. 1971. The Future of Sterling as an International Currency. London:
 MacMillan.

Curcuru, Stephanie E., Tomas Dvorak, and Francis Warnock. 2008. “Cross-border
 returns differentials.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4): 1495–1530.

Forbes, Kristin J., and Francis E. Warnock. 2010. “Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops,
  Flight and Retrenchment.” MIT and University of Virginia mimeo.

Giannone, Domenico, Michele Lenza, and Lucrezia Reichlin. 2011. “Market Freedom
 and the Global Recession.” IMF Economic Review, 59(1): 111–135.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Hélène Rey. 2007. “From World Banker to World
 Venture Capitalist: US External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege.” 11–55.
 Chicago,:University of Chicago Press,.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Maurice Obstfeld. 2011. “Stories of the Twentieth
 Century for the Twenty-First.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcom-
 ing.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Hélène Rey, and Nicolas Govillot. 2010. “Exorbitant
 Privilege and Exorbitant Duty.” UC Berkeley mimeo.


                                             31
Hartmann, Philip. 1998. Currency Competition and Foreign Exchange Markets: The Dol-
 lar, the Yen and the Euro. Cambridge University Press.

He, Zhiguo, In Gu Khang, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2010. “Balance Sheet Ad-
 justments during the 2008 Crisis.” IMF Economic Review, 58(1): 118–156.

Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi. 2010. “The worldwide gov-
 ernance indicators : methodology and analytical issues.” The World Bank Policy Research
 Working Paper Series 5430.

Kose, M. Ayhan, and Eswar S. Prasad. 2010. Emerging markets: Resilience and growth
 amid global turmoil. Washington, DC:Brookings Institution Press.

Krugman, Paul. 1984. Currencies and Crises. MIT Press.

Kubelec, Chris, and Filipa Goncalves Sa. 2010. “The geographical composition of
 national external balance sheets: 1980-2005.” Bank of England Bank of England working
 papers 384.

Kubelec, Chris, Bjorn-Erik Orskaug, and Misa Tanaka. 2007. “Financial Globali-
 sation, External Balance Sheets and Economic Adjustment.” Bank of England Quarterly
 Bulletin, 2: 244–57.

Kumah, Emmanuel, Jannick Damgaard, and Thomas Elkjaer. 2009. “Valuation of
 Unlisted Direct Investment Equity.” International Monetary Fund IMF Working Paper
 WP/09/242.

Lane, Philip, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2009. “Cross-Border Investment in Small
  International Financial Centers.” IIIS The Institute for International Integration Studies
  Discussion Paper Series iiisdp316.

Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2001. “The External Wealth of Na-
  tions: Measures of Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Countries.”
  Journal of International Economics, 55: 263–94.

Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2007. “The External Wealth of
  Nations Mark II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-
  2004.” Journal of International Economics, 73(2): 223–250.

Matsuyama, Kiminori, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, and Akihiro Matsui. 1993. “Toward a
 Theory of International Currency.” Review of Economic Studies, 60(2): 283–307.

McCauley, Robert N, and Patrick McGuire. 2009. “Dollar appreciation in 2008: safe
 haven, carry trades, dollar shortage and overhedging.” BIS Quarterly Review.

McGuire, Patrick, and Goetz von Peter. 2009. “The US dollar shortage in global
 banking.” BIS Quarterly Review.

McKinnon, Ronald. 1979. Money in International Exchange: The Convertible Currency
 System. Oxford: Oxford University Press.


                                             32
Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull. 2009. “Fi-
 nancial Integration, Financial Development, and Global Imbalances.” Journal of Political
 Economy, 117(3): 371–416.

Milesi-Ferretti, Gian-Maria. 2009. “A $2 trillion question.” http: // www. voxeu. org/
 index. php? q= node/ 2902 .

Milesi-Ferretti, Gian-Maria, Francesco Strobbe, and Natalia Tamirisa. 2010. “Bi-
 lateral Financial Linkages and Global Imbalances: A View on The Eve of the Financial
 Crisis.” CEPR Discussion Paper 8173.

Portes, Richard, and Hélène Rey. 1998. “The Emergence of the Euro as an International
 Currency.” Economic Policy, 305–343.

Rey, Hélène. 2001. “International Trade and Currency Exchange.” Review of Economic
 Studies, 68(2): 443–464.

Simard, Eric, and Eric Boulay. “Market valuation of Equity in the International Invest-
  ment Position: Canada’s Experience.” Prepared for the Nineteenth Meeting of the IMF
  Committee on Balance of Payments Statistics Frankfurt, Germany, October 23-26, 2006.

Stoffes, Nicolas, and Cedric Tille. 2009. “Where have the Savings gone to? Assessing
  the Return on Switzerland’s External Assets.” Graduate Institute for International and
  Development Studies working paper.

Zhou, Ruilin. 1997. “Currency Exchange in a Random Search Model.” Review of Economic
 Studies, 64: 289–310.

Zucman, Garbiel. 2011. “The Missing Wealth of Nations: Are Europe and the U.S. net
 Debtors or net Creditors?” Paris School of Economics mimeo.




                                           33
                                                 1971:3 2007:2
                     Gross Liabilities             11.2 130.8
                     Bank Loans                     3.1   38.8
                     Debt                           4.4   44.2
                     of which:
                     Government                    3.7    21.2
                     Corporate                     0.8    23.1
                     Equity                        2.6    22.2
                     Direct Investment             1.2    25.6

                     Gross Asset                  16.9   119.1
                     Gold                          1.1     1.2
                     Bank Loans                    5.3    36.1
                     Debt                          1.4    10.0
                     Equity                        0.7    35.0
                     Direct Investment             8.4    36.5

                     Net                           5.7   -11.7

                     Safe & Liquid/Liabilities    66.6    63.5
                     Risky & Illiquid/Assets      53.9    60.0


Table 1: US External Balance Sheet, percent of US GDP. FDI at market value. Source:
Gourinchas, Rey and Govillot (2010)




                                         34
       Positions as of:            2007:4 2009:1                   Change
                                     % of GDP            % of GDP bn (US dollars)
       Net                          -10.2  -31.4              -21.1       -2,966
       of which
       cumulated current account                              -5.5           -767
       valuation change                                      -15.7         -2,199

       Gross Liabilities            132.6        113.3       -21.6         -3,040
       Bank Loans                    38.9         34.8        -4.8           -669
       Debt                          46.0         48.8         2.1            288
       of which:
       Government                    22.3         29.7         7.0            987
       Corporate                     23.7         19.2        -5.0           -699
       Equity                        22.6         13.5        -9.5         -1,333
       Direct Investment             25.2         16.2        -9.4         -1,326

       Gross Asset                  122.5         81.8       -42.7         -6,006
       Gold                           1.5          1.7         0.2             22
       Bank Loans                    36.2         35.4        -1.4           -200
       Debt                          11.1          8.8        -2.5           -353
       Equity                        36.7         17.0       -20.4         -2,866
       Direct Investment             36.9         19.0       -18.6         -2,609


Table 2: Change in US External Balance Sheet. Percent of US GDP. 2007:4 to 2009:1. FDI
at market value. Source: Gourinchas, Rey and Govillot (2010)




                                            35
                          Valuation             Equity               Direct Investment      Debt             Loans
      Country                         Claims      Liab.    Net Claims Liability Net Claims Liab. Net Claims Liab.              Net
      U.S.                     -863    -2,398    -1,245 -1,153   -161       -218    56 -120   -86 -34   149 -119               268
      Euro area                -185    -1,171    -1,677    506   -607       -273 -334  -461 -135 -326  -394 -363               -31
      U.K.                      542      -567      -851    284   -423       -337 -86   -176 -515 339   -332 -337                 5
      Japan                      65      -244      -420    176       7        46 -39    -66   126 -193  419     298            121
      Switzerland               -53      -197      -220     23      28        77 -49    -45    -6 -39     13      2             11
      Canada                     17      -261      -189    -71     -78      -131    53  -24   -41   18    -7    -25             18
      Other advanced             -3      -434      -401    -33   -221       -234    14 -135 -142     8 -101 -111                10
      Brazil                    292        -2      -207    205       7       -67    74    8   -15   23    -3      7             -9




36
      India                      20         0       -18     18       0       -24    24  -25      0 -24    -1     -3              3
      Russia                    317        -1      -209    208   -220       -350 130    -18   -18    0   -50    -29            -21
      Emerging Asia             245       -54      -246    192     -10       -67    57  -24    -8 -16    -35    -48             13
      China                    -158         1        13    -12      16        64 -48    -61    -2 -59    -22     17            -39
      Hong Kong                 101      -258      -237    -21   -300       -421 122      7      2   5    -8     -4             -4
      Singapore                 -56       -80       -74     -5     -27       -22    -6  -31      0 -31   -15      0            -15
      Rest of the World        -282                       -314                      32             329                        -329
     Table 3: The Geography of Wealth Transfers, 2007:4-2008:4. Decomposition of the valuation change into a net equity, net direct
     investment, net debt and net bank loans components. FDI as in official figures; US FDI at current cost
                              Exchange rate valuation     External valuation Exchange/External Wealth change External/Wealth
      Country        FDI       Equity Debt & FX Total
      United States* -322        -363            35 -650              -2,069              31%         -17,352           12%
      Euro area**    -243         100            17 -127                -185              69%          -1,335           14%
      United Kingdom 252          430            73   755                542             139%          -2,714          -20%
      Japan           -68        -352             0 -420                  65            -647%          -2,340           -3%
      Switzerland     -63         -64           -16 -144                 -53             271%
      Canada           72          49            16   137                 17             807%             291            6%
      Other advanced  113          91            21   225                 -3           -7502%
      Brazil           59          72            -3   129                292              44%




37
      India            20          20            -8    33                 20             164%
      Russia           91          61           -22   130                317              41%
      Emerging Asia    71          86           -26   130                245              53%
      China           -49          -8           -31   -88               -185              55%
      Hong Kong        17          -8            -6     3                101               3%
      Singapore       -21          -8            -4   -33                -56              58%
     Table 4: Exchange rate valuations, total external valuations and wealth changes The table shows the share of valuation changes
     accounted for by the exchange rate and the size of total external valuation changes relative to domestic wealth changes. * denotes
     FDI at market value. ** for the wealth variable, only Germany, France and Italy. Billions of US dollars.
                   Brazil   Canada     China    Em. Asia    Euro       H.K      India     Japan     Oth. adv.   Russia     SGP      Switz     U.K.        U.S.
     Brazil             0    -4,079       613     -2,710   -36,836        -7         0     -3,948      -4,062        -1     -256    -1,070    -9,537     -100,903
     Canada         4,079         0     1,160      7,864    41,309     2,763     1,727      7,233       3,063     1,927    1,211       707    35,989      -89,550
     China           -613    -1,160         0    -13,372   -29,698   -64,464        -8   -11,264       -1,309        -7   -1,407      -623   -23,307      -36,921
     Em. Asia       2,710    -7,864    13,372          0   -46,681     6,134     3,555        406      -7,059       -75   -9,175    -1,383   -22,144     -113,855
     Euro          36,836   -41,309    29,698     46,681         0    22,587    46,872    52,977      -48,374    37,099    2,930   -40,352    53,355     -302,371
     H.K.               7    -2,763    64,464     -6,134   -22,587         0     1,159     -7,547      -5,406        11   -5,422      -811     8,031      -53,478
     India              0    -1,727         8     -3,555   -46,872    -1,159         0     -4,536      -4,156         0   -8,074      -312   -25,972      -52,799
     Japan          3,948    -7,233    11,264       -406   -52,977     7,547     4,536          0        -494     3,428    4,067      -328   -29,373      -93,657
     Other adv.     4,062    -3,036     1,309      7,059    48,374     5,406     4,156        494           0     6,113     -707    10,273    12,967      -23,622




38
     Russia             1    -1,927         7         75   -37,099       -11         0     -3,428      -6,113         0     -528    -3,431   -11,482      -54,779
     SGP              256     -1211      1407       9175     -2930      5422      8074      -4067         707       528        0      -355      -811      -25,941
     Switz.         1,070      -707       623      1,383    40,352       811       312        328     -10,273     3,431      355         0   -14,341      -45,710
     U.K.           9,537   -35,989    23,307     22,144   -53,355    -8,031    25,972    29,373      -12,967    11,482      811    14,341         0     -225,292
     U.S.         100,903    89,550    36,921    113,855   302,371    53,478    52,799    93,657       23,622    54,779   25,941    45,710   225,292            0
     Sum          162,796   -19,455   184,152    182,060   103,371    30,476   149,152   149,678      -72,848   118,715    9,747    22,365   198,669   -1,218,878

        Table 5: Matrix of bilateral valuation gains and losses on the net equity portfolio. The table reports the bilateral valuation
        gain(+)/loss(-) between 2007:4 and 2008:4, for each source/partner pair. Source countries are in culomns, partner countries in
        rows. Millions of US dollars.
                   Brazil Canada China Em. Asia Euro     H.K.   Japan Other adv. Russia  SGP     Switz.  U.K.     U.S.
      Brazil            0    -322      0  2,293 -7,961       4   3,502    -1,089     -2     -14     195  -2,682    3,367
      Canada          322       0     -2    160   2,352   -109 -3,998      2,493     36     -96   1,107   1,224    2,342
      China             0       2      0    -15   7,436 3,298 -2,712         -48      5     644       1     345 -15,445
      Em. Asia     -2,293    -160     15      0 -23,596 -3,135   2,637     2,694    -28 -18,134     303  -4,892    6,787
      Euro          7,961  -2,352 -7,436 23,596       0 -9,263 -78,117     1,803  5,793 -6,851 -7,479 29,244      58,566
      H.K.             -4     109 -3,298  3,135   9,263      0 -13,138     7,678    -86     733     360 -16,618   -3,044
      Japan        -3,502   3,998 2,712  -2,637 78,117 13,138        0   -14,909    300     812 -1,828   -8,095   15,930
      Other adv.    1,089  -2,493     48 -2,694 -1,803 -7,678 14,909           0    735 -5,619 -1,904 -17,100      2,347




39
      Russia            2     -36     -5     28 -5,793      86    -300      -735      0     -93     -64  -7,411   -2,353
      SGP              14      96   -644 18,134   6,851   -733    -812     5,619     93       0      27   1,787    2,355
      Switz.         -195  -1,107     -1   -303   7,479   -360   1,828     1,904     64     -27       0   9,691    3,598
      U.K.          2,682  -1,224   -345  4,892 -29,244 16,618   8,095    17,100  7,411 -1,787 -9,691         0 -132,915
      U.S.         -3,367  -2,342 15,445 -6,787 -58,566 3,044 -15,930     -2,347  2,353 -2,355 -3,598 132,915          0
      Sum           2,709  -5,829 6,489  39,802 -15,464 14,910 -84,038    20,163 16,673 -32,786 -22,573 118,409 -58,464
     Table 6: Matrix of bilateral valuation gains and losses on the net debt portfolio. The table reports the bilateral valuation
     gain(+)/loss(-) between 2007:4 and 2008:4, for each source/partner pair. Source countries are in culomns, partner countries in
     rows. Millions of US dollars.
                   Brazil    Canada     China    Em. Asia     Euro       H.K.       India      Japan     Oth. adv.   Russia     SGP        Switz.      U.K.       U.S.
     Brazil              0    10,200      -339        n.a.       n.a.       n.a.       n.a.     -5,876      -4,287       na        n.a.     -6,426     -3,623    -44,398
     Canada       -10,200          0       779      2,524    -12,770      2,460      8,075     -10,354       5,723      547      1,987      -7,519    -14,077    -70,157
     China            339       -779         0     -3,236      3,125    -85,816         -29    -28,202      -2,139    1,743      8,819      -1,350     -2,353     -4,089
     Em. Asia         n.a.    -2,524     3,236           0       n.a.      -316        n.a.    -56,466      -6,453      n.a.     8,703      -6,452    -18,515    -47,748
     Euro             n.a.    12,770    -3,125        n.a.          0       n.a.       n.a.   -143,819      25,293      n.a.     7,348    -62,018     -96,831   -315,257
     H.K.             n.a.    -2,460    85,816        316        n.a.          0       n.a.     -6,970      -2,306      n.a.     1,476     -1,887     -52,641    -37,307
     India            n.a.    -8,075        29        n.a.       n.a.       n.a.          0      1,197        -428      n.a.     4,522     -1,101      -5,575     -9,530
     Japan          5,876     10,354    28,202     56,466    143,819      6,970    -1,197            0      22,311      117     18,526      -3,886     34,718     69,084
     Other adv.     4,287     -5,723     2,139      6,453    -25,293      2,306        428     -22,311           0    2,395        369      -3,247    -30,125      2,788
     Russia           n.a.      -547    -1,743        n.a.       n.a.       n.a.       n.a.       -117      -2,395         0       n.a.    -2,148     -13,027     -7,739




40
     SGP              n.a.    -1,987    -8,819     -8,703     -7,348     -1,476    -4,522      -18,526        -369      n.a.          0     -7,624     -5,403    -90,158
     Switz.         6,426      7,519     1,350      6,452     62,018      1,887      1,101       3,886       3,427    2,148      7,624           0     -2,869     -9,019
     U.K.           6,323     14,077     2,353     18,515     96,831     52,641      5,575     -34,718      30,125   13,027      5,403       2,869          0     25,355
     U.S.          44,398     70,157     4,089     47,748    315,257     37,307      9,530     -69,084      -2,788    7,739     90,158       9,019    -25,355          0
     Sum           54,749    102,981   113,969    126,535    575,639     15,963    18,962     -391,361      65,534   27,716    154,935    -91,770    -235,677   -538,175

        Table 7: Matrix of bilateral valuation gains and losses on the net FDI portfolio. The table reports the bilateral valuation
        gain(+)/loss(-) between 2007:4 and 2008:4, for each source/partner pair. Source countries are in culomns, partner countries in
        rows. Source/partner pairs with bilateral direct investment positions unavailable at market value are denoted with n.a.. Millions
        of US dollars.
                   Brazil Canada China Em. Asia Euro H.K. India Japan Other adv. Russia SGP Switz. U.K. U.S.
      Brazil           0       0       0      0      0     0     0      0      0      0      0    0    0     0
      Canada           0       0       0      0      0     0     0      0      0      0      0    0    0     0
      China            0       0       0      0      0     0     0      0      0      0      0    0    0     0
      Em. Asia         0       0       0      0      0     0     0      0      0      0      0    0    0     0
      Euro          -501    -256 -5,392  -1,581      0 -207 -1,036 -2,258 -1,134 -2,682   -571 -283 -391 -284
      H.K.             0       0       0      0      0     0     0      0      0      0      0    0    0     0
      India            0       0       0      0      0     0     0      0      0      0      0    0    0     0
      Japan            0      94   8,166  4,451    845   544   852      0  1,353    664 2,294   791  783 4,426
      Other adv.       0       0       0      0      0     0     0      0      0      0      0    0    0     0




41
      Russia           0       0       0      0      0     0     0      0      0      0      0    0    0     0
      SGP              0       0       0      0      0     0     0      0      0      0      0    0    0     0
      Switz.           0       0       0     75    172     9    13      0      0      0     37    0    0     0
      U.K.             0       0 -12,626 -8,682 -5,982 -721 -2,615      0   -855 -7,548 -1,926 -734    0     0
      U.S.         1,786     241 12,472   1,662 1,805 1,531 2,076 9,802      733  2,751 1,122   156  186     0
      Sum          1,284      71   2,620  4,075 -3,160 1,156  -710 7,544      97 -6,815    956  -70  577 4,143
     Table 8: Matrix of bilateral valuation gains and losses on the foreign exchange reserves. The table reports the bilateral valuation
     gain(+)/loss(-) between 2007:4 and 2008:4, for each source/partner pair. Source countries are in culomns, partner countries in
     rows. Millions of SDR.
                                     Appendix


A     Countries and regional groups
Individual countries:
Brazil, Canada, China, Hong Kong, India, Japan, Russia, Singapore, Switzerland, United
Kingdom, United States
Regional groups:
Emerging Asia: Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand.
Euro area: Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain.
Other advanced countries: Australia, Denmark, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden.
Country groups that are only included as a vis-à-vis category:
Offshore centers: Aruba, Andorra, Bahamas, Barbados, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands,
Cayman Islands, Gibraltar, Guernsey, Isle of Man, Jersey, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Macao,
Mauritius, Monaco, Netherlands Antilles, Panama, Samoa, San Marino, Vanuatu, Vatican,
West Indies.
Oil exporters: Algeria, Bahrain, Gabon, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates.
Other Latin American countries: Argentina, Chile, Mexico.


B     Data Appendix
B.1    Aggregate positions and flows
International Investment Position (except foreign exchange reserves): we rely on na-
tional sources for Canada (Statistics Canada), China (State Administration of Foreign Ex-
change (SAFE)), Euro Area (European Central Bank), Japan (Bank of Japan), Switzerland
(Swiss National Bank), United Kingdom (Pink Book) and the United States (Bureau of
Economic Analysis). Data for all other countries were obtained from the IMF Balance of
Payments database.
Foreign exchange reserves: we use “total reserves minus gold” available from the IMF
International Financial Statistics database.
Financial flows: IMF Balance of Payments statistics

B.2    Bilateral positions
The data construction closely follows Milesi-Ferretti, Strobbe and Tamirisa (2010). We
collect annual bilateral positions data for end-2007 and end-2008.

                                         Brazil



                                           42
FDI: reported bilateral FDI assets and liabilities are measured at book value. To obtain
market value estimates of Brazil’s bilateral direct investment positions, we use market value
data derived from partner countries’ reported assets and liabilities vis-à-vis Brazil. Bilateral
positions are imputed from the following countries: Australia, Canada, China, Denmark,
Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and the United States.
Portfolio equity and debt: based on reported and derived portfolio equity/debt assets
and liabilities available in IMF Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey tables 1.1, 1.2 and
5.1, 5.2.
Foreign Exchange Reserves: following Milesi-Ferretti et al. (2010), the US dollar share
of total reserves is estimated as the difference between US debt liabilities vis-à-vis Brazil and
Brazil’s debt assets in the US as reported in the CPIS. The remainder is assumed to be held
in euros.

                                            Canada

FDI: we use the data on Canadian direct investment abroad and foreign direct investment
to Canada by country and sector available from the Office of the Chief Economist of the Cana-
dian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Trade (http://www.international.gc.ca/economist-
economiste/statistics-statistiques/investments-investissements.aspx?lang=eng)
Portfolio equity and debt: based on reported and derived portfolio equity/debt assets
and liabilities available in IMF Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey tables 1.1, 1.2 and
5.1, 5.2.
Foreign exchange reserves: we use the currency composition of reserves published by the
Canadian department of Finance (http://www.fin.gc.ca/pub/oir-ro-archives-eng.asp)

                                             China

    China does not report the geographical allocation of its portfolio investment holdings,
as it does not take part in the CPIS. We investigated details national sources and hand
collected data to remedy this shortcoming. International Investment Position data are not
at market value in official sources (SAFE). We construct data on bilateral equity assets and
liability and market value as well as data on debt assets. We also manage to reconstruct
bilateral FDI assets and liabilities at market value using Ministry of Commerce data. We
reconstructed bilateral data on Chinese external assets at market value from various Chinese
data sources.

FDI Assets: The only market value estimates of Chinese FDI have been done in 2004.This
was the first survey ever been done on Chinese FDI. After 2004, government agencies added
up flow data to estimate the official IIP. Therefore, the official IIP of 2005-2011 are not at
market value.
We obtain Ministry of Commerce data with a very good geographical breakdown. The
aggregate numbers are not exactly identical to the IIP SAFE numbers as the Ministry of
Commerce has a different statistics standard from SAFE. The data are at market value so
we use the 2004 stock (based on survey data) and cumulate flows using the corresponding
stock indexes for valuation adjustment.
FDI Liabilities: We use the 2004 stock (based on survey data) and cumulate flows using
the Shanghai stock index for valuation adjustment.

                                               43
Portfolio debt: Portfolio debt is held mainly by 5 Chinese state-owned international banks
(Bank of China, Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, China Construction Bank, Agri-
cultural Bank of China, Chinese Development Bank) and the sovereign wealth fund CIC. We
have a detailed geographical decomposition of cross border claims (into Hong Kong, Other
Asia Pacific locations, North and South America, Europe, Middle East and Africa) , and
separately, a currency breakdown (RMB, dollar, euro, HK dollar, yen, CHF and other) of
overseas loans and of securities held for the Bank of China33 . In 2010, the total amount
of cross border claims for BoC is 1,260,10 millions RMB while the amount of non RMB
assets is about double at 2,526,5777 millions RMB. This indicates that a sizable amount
of the domestic assets of the BoC are in foreign currency. Making a set of straightforward
assumptions34 , we are able to construct for 2007-2010 a table of cross border security hold-
ings disaggregated by country and currency. The Bank of China is historically the main
player overseas (Bank of China has been ranked No. 3 in 2009 within all banks in the world
by market capitalization). We have a coarser set of data for the three other banks (ICC,
CCB, ABC). We obtained as detailed data as possible from the banks report. For the other
banks (except CDB), we could obtain data only on their cross border claims by locations.
We apply the Bank of China weights to allocate assets between investment securities and
total claims, by location, thereby constructing a table of securities by location35 . For CDB,
we obtained securities by currencies. We allocated the dollar securities to the US and the
(small) remainder of overseas currency securities to Hong Kong.
  33
      We have a breakdown into: derivative financial assets; loans and advances to customers (net); investment
securities (broken down in available for sale ; held to maturity and loans and receivables) and other assets.
We present in our spreadsheet all the source data we gathered. We work with the assumptions that all the
investment securities are debt securities. In principle they could also be equities. In 2007-2008 however we
have the exact amount of portfolio equity bought by all our 5 banks via the QDII system (see below for
the construction of portfolio equity assets). This amount is less than $4 bn, so we treat it as negligible (the
order of magnitude of our total debt asset numbers are in the range of $200 bn).
   34
      The data indicate that there is more Hong Kong dollar assets than claims to Hong Kong, more dollar
assets than claims to North and South America, less euro and sterling assets than claims to Europe, less
yen assets than claims to other Asia Pacific location. We make the following assumptions: all Hong Kong
claims are in HK$; all euro and sterling assets are to Europe, all yen assets are to ”other Asia Pacific”; all
North and South America, Middle East and Africa claims are in $. Any remaining Europe claims not in
euro or sterling are assumed to be in $, any other Asia Pacific claims not in yen are assumed to be in US $.
We compute the share of investment securities in total US $ assets and use this weight to derive securities
holdings in dollar portfolios, for all geographical areas.
   We focus on the investment securities part of the claims (securities available for sale; held to maturity and
loans and receivables) of the bank balance sheet. We do not use here the data on loans. We check that the
total amount of US $ securities we obtain for cross border holdings is inferior to the total amount of reported
US $ securities in the total assets of the bank. For example for 2010, the amount of US $ denominated
cross border securities we estimate is 105, 883 millions RMB and the reported US dollars securities of the
bank amount to 290,943 millions RMB. The difference is therefore domestic holdings of US $ denominated
securities.
   35
      We give below the market capitalization of the four largest stated owned banks in China.The Bank of
China (BoC), the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC), the China Construction Bank (CCB)
, the Agricultural Bank of China (ABC). These are the only banks having significant international activity
and its is clear that the Bank of China is by far the most international one.
     Banks: (2010)                           Bank of China ICBC            CCB            ABC
     Total Assets (million RMB)              10,459,865        12,779,711 10,810,317 10,337,406
     Cross border claims (million RMB) 1,260,170               381,982     272,829        82,254
     overseas assset ratio                   12.0%             3.9%        2.5%           0.8%



                                                      44
We have data on fixed income holdings for CIC but we do not have explicit geographical
data. We are told however (private communication with Chinese sources) that it is almost
all US debt.
It is our belief that the union of these five banks and CIC cover the universe of Chinese
investors in international debt assets (foreign exchange reserves are accounted for separetely).
Portfolio debt liabilities: We do not have any direct source for debt liabilities and have
to take the official IIP numbers. The amount involved are very small (in the order of 20
times smaller than debt assets according to the IIP data).
Foreign exchange reserves: The currency composition of the Chinese reserves is not
disclosed. Nevertheless, we have one snapshot of the currency weights. In September 2010,
the China Securities Journal revealed the following breakdown for the $2,450 billion reserves
of the People’s Bank of China: 65% in dollars, 26% in euros, 5% in sterling, and 3% in yen.
We assume that these weights are similar in 2007-2008, as they are likely to be slow moving
(by doing so we probably slightly underestimate the dollar share in 2007-2008). For the
aggregate amount of reserves we use total reserves minus gold from IFS.
Portfolio equity assets: Equity investment overseas is strictly regulated. QDII is a quota
system for domestic investors to hold equity abroad. We obtained a record of all authorized
investments in foreign equity for the years 2006-2010. from SAFE. According to Chinese
sources, most of the investment reported in QDII is in equity, ETFs or commodities. Un-
fortunately, we have the breakdown by domestic investor name but not disaggregated by
geographical area of investment. However, the amounts involved are very small due to QDII
having been launched only in 2006. Besides, China does not have many wealth management
services to help Chinese invest in overseas equity markets. For 2006, the total flows amount
to $9,675 million, for 2007 $30,544.7 million and for 2008 $3,255 million. Furthermore, pri-
vate communication with Chinese sources indicate that about 50% of the QDII allocation is
equity out of which about 40% is in the Hong Kong market 5% to the US and 5% to Sin-
gapore. We value the remaining QDII assets using a global commodity price index (Source
IMF: PALLFNF Index).
We have detailed data on the geographical location of the equity holdings of the sovereign
wealth fund CIC. It is our belief that CIC and QDII cover the entire spectrum of portfolio
equity investment overseas.
Portfolio equity liabilities: We use partner country data.

                                       Emerging Asia

FDI: reported bilateral FDI assets and liabilities are measured at book value. To obtain
market value estimates of Emerging Asia’s bilateral direct investment positions, we use
market value data derived from partner countries’ reported assets and liabilities vis-à-vis
Emerging Asia. Bilateral positions are imputed from the following countries: Australia,
Canada, China, Denmark, Hong Kong, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Singapore, Sweden,
Switzerland, United Kingdom and the United States.
Portfolio equity and debt: based on reported and derived portfolio equity/debt assets
and liabilities available in IMF Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey tables 1.1, 1.2 and
5.1, 5.2.
Foreign exchange reserves: We use the 2007 currency composition in Milesi-Ferretti,
Strobbe and Tamirisa (2010), netting-out the Taiwan-US debt liabilities position from the


                                              45
Milesi-Ferretti, Strobbe and Tamirisa (2010) bilateral USD FX position. For 2008, we assume
that the currency share is unchanged from 2007.

                                         Euro Area

FDI: reported bilateral FDI assets and liabilities are measured at book value. To obtain
market value estimates of the Euro area’s bilateral direct investment positions, we use market
value data derived from partner countries’ reported assets and liabilities vis-à-vis the Euro
area. Bilateral positions are imputed from the following countries: Australia, Canada, China,
Denmark, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Singapore, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom
and the United States. The Euro area total is calculated as the sum of the individual member
countries bilateral positions.
Portfolio equity and debt: based on reported and derived portfolio equity/debt assets
and liabilities available in IMF Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey tables 1.1, 1.2 and
5.1, 5.2. The Euro are total is calculated as the sum of the individual member countries
bilateral positions, netting-out the intra Euro area positions.
Foreign exchange reserves: we use the 2007 currency composition in Milesi-Ferretti,
Strobbe and Tamirisa (2010) and, for 2008, assume that the currency shares are unchanged
from 2007.

                                         Hong Kong

FDI: we use tables 050 and 048 on the geographical breakdown of outward and inward FDI
published by the Census and Statistics Department of the Government of Hong Kong.
(http://www.censtatd.gov.hk/hong kong statistics/statistics by subject/index.jsp)
Portfolio equity and debt: based on reported and derived portfolio equity/debt assets
and liabilities available in IMF Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey tables 1.1, 1.2 and
5.1, 5.2.
Foreign exchange reserves: we use the 2007 currency composition in Milesi-Ferretti,
Strobbe and Tamirisa (2010) and, for 2008, assume that the currency shares are unchanged
from 2007.

                                            India

FDI: reported bilateral FDI assets and liabilities are measured at book value. To obtain
market value estimates of India’s bilateral direct investment positions, we use market value
data derived from partner countries’ reported assets and liabilities vis-à-vis India. Bilateral
positions are imputed from the following countries: Australia, Canada, China, Denmark,
Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Singapore, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and the
United States.
Portfolio equity and debt: based on reported and derived portfolio equity/debt assets
and liabilities available in IMF Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey tables 1.1, 1.2 and
5.1, 5.2.
Foreign exchange reserves: we estimate the currency composition of reserves based on
the aggregate currency shares for emerging markets in the IMF COFER database.

                                            Japan

                                              46
FDI: we use the geographical breakdown of outward and inward FDI provided in the Bank of
Japan publication “Regional direct investment position assets and liabilities (end of 2009)”
(http://www.boj.or.jp/en/statistics/br/bop/index.htm/)
Portfolio equity and debt: based on reported and derived portfolio equity/debt assets
and liabilities available in IMF Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey tables 1.1, 1.2 and
5.1, 5.2.
Foreign exchange reserves: we use the 2007 currency composition in Milesi-Ferretti,
Strobbe and Tamirisa (2010) and, for 2008, assume that the currency shares are unchanged
from 2007.

                                      Other advanced

FDI: For Australia we use table 2, “Foreign Investment in Australia, Level of Investment by
country and Country Groups by type of investment and year”, and table 5 “Australian Invest-
ment Abroad, Level of Investment by country and Country Groups by type of investment and
year” provided by the Australian Bureau of Statistics (http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS).
For Denmark we use the geographical breakdown provided in table 3 “Direct Investments bro-
ken down by country” provided by the central bank of Denmark ( http://www.nationalbanken.dk).
For New Zealand we use the geographical breakdown provided in table 3: ”Stock of direct
investment by country” in the “Balance of Payments and International Investment Position:
Year ended 31 March 2010” provided by Statistics New Zealand (http://www.stats.govt.nz).
For Sweden and Norway we obtain the geographical breakdown of direct investment from the
OECD (http://stats.oecd.org/BrandedView.aspx?oecd bv id=idi-data-en&doi=data-00337-
en).
Portfolio equity and debt: based on reported and derived portfolio equity/debt assets
and liabilities available in IMF Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey tables 1.1, 1.2 and
5.1, 5.2. The country group total is calculated as the sum of the individual member countries
bilateral positions.
Foreign exchange reserves: we use the 2007 currency composition in Milesi-Ferretti,
Strobbe and Tamirisa (2010) and assume that the 2008 currency shares are unchanged from
2007.

                                            Russia

FDI: reported bilateral FDI assets and liabilities are measured at book value. To obtain
market value estimates of Russia’s bilateral direct investment positions, we use market value
data derived from partner countries’ reported assets and liabilities vis-à-vis Russia. Bilateral
positions are imputed from the following countries: Australia, Canada, China, Denmark,
Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and the United States.
Portfolio equity and debt: based on reported and derived portfolio equity/debt assets
and liabilities available in IMF Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey tables 1.1, 1.2 and
5.1, 5.2.
Foreign exchange reserves: we use the currency composition reported in the annual
reports of the central bank of Russia (http://www.cbr.ru/eng/publ/main.asp?Prtid=God).

                                          Singapore


                                               47
FDI: for outward direct investment we use table 2 “Total Direct Investment Abroad by Coun-
try/Region, 2000-2009” of the report “Singapore’s Investment Abroad 2009” and for inward
direct investment we use table 2 “Foreign Direct Investment in Singapore by Country/Region,
1998-2008” of the report “Foreign equity investment in Singapore, 2008”. Both reports are
published by Statistics Singapore (http://www.singstat.gov.sg/pubn/business.html).
Portfolio equity and debt: based on reported and derived portfolio equity/debt assets
and liabilities available in IMF Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey tables 1.1, 1.2 and
5.1, 5.2.
Foreign exchange reserves: we use the 2007 currency composition in Milesi-Ferretti,
Strobbe and Tamirisa (2010) and assume that the 2008 currency shares are unchanged from
2007.

                                       Switzerland

FDI: we rely on the geographical composition provided in table 1.2 “Swiss direct investment
abroad by country” (http://www.snb.ch/en/iabout/stat/statpub/fdi/stats/fdi/fdi ChDirAus LgKapBe)
and table 2.2 “Foreign direct investment in Switzerland, by country”
(http://www.snb.ch/en/iabout/stat/statpub/fdi/stats/fdi/fdi AusDirCh KapBeHL) published
by the Swiss National Bank.
Portfolio equity and debt: based on reported and derived portfolio equity/debt assets
and liabilities available in IMF Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey tables 1.1, 1.2 and
5.1, 5.2.
Foreign exchange reserves: we use the currency allocation of official reserves provided in
chapter 5 of the annual reports of the Swiss National Bank
(http://www.snb.ch/en/iabout/pub/annrep/id/pub annrep)

                                    United Kingdom

FDI: we use the geographical composition provided in table 3.1 “Net FDI international in-
vestment position abroad analysed by area and main country, end 2000 to end 2009” and
table 6.1 “Net FDI International positions in the United Kingdom analysed by area and main
country, 2000 to 2009” in the “Foreign Direct Investment Business Monitor MA4” published
by the Office of National Statistics (http://www.statistics.gov.uk/statbase/product.asp?vlnk=9614).
Portfolio equity and debt: based on reported and derived portfolio equity/debt assets
and liabilities available in IMF Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey tables 1.1, 1.2 and
5.1, 5.2.
Foreign exchange reserves: we use the currency composition of the UK government’s of-
ficial reserves published in the quarterly annex to the “UK International Reserves & Foreign
Currency Liquidity Template” (http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/reserves/intro.htm).

                                      United States

FDI: for bilateral outward direct investment we rely on the table “U.S. direct Investment
Abroad: Selected Items by Detailed Country, 2005-2009”
(http://www.bea.gov/international/di1usdbal.htm) and for bilateral inward direct invest-
ment on the table “Foreign Direct Investment in the United States: Selected Items by De-
tailed Country, 2005-2009” (http://www.bea.gov/international/xls/LongCountry.xls) both
published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

                                            48
Portfolio equity and debt: for portfolio equity and debt assets we use IMF CPIS tables
1.1 and 1.2. Portfolio equity and debt liabilities were obtained from the Survey on Portfolio
Holdings of U.S. Securities as of June 2007 and June 2008, published by the U.S. Treasury (
HREFhttp://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/tic/Pages/fpis.aspx). Po-
sitions are updated using the monthly estimates provided in Bertaut and Tryon (2007)
(HREFhttp://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/ifdp/2007/910/default.htm)
Foreign exchange reserves: we use the 2007 currency composition in Milesi-Ferretti,
Strobbe and Tamirisa (2010) and assume that the 2008 currency shares are unchanged from
2007.

B.3    FDI market value estimation
We denote market value by MV, book value by BV, current cost by CC and historical cost
by HV. The list of countries providing both aggregate and bilateral FDI positions data at
MV includes:

   • Australia (IIP & bilateral positions; see http://abs.gov.au/austats/abs@.nsf/mf/5370.0.55.001)

   • Hong Kong (IIP & bilateral positions)

   • New Zealand (IIP & bilateral positions, except for some firms that provide positions
     at BV; see http://www.unctad.org/sections/dite fdistat/docs/wid cp nz en.pdf)

   • Norway (IIP & bilateral positions; see http://www.ssb.no/intinvpos en/about.html)

For the following countries, we estimate both the aggregate FDI positions and the bilateral
positions at MV:

   • Canada (IIP & bilateral positions = BV, we estimate MV, initial 2005 market to book
     value ratio provided by Simard and Boulay (n.d.))

   • China (IIP & bilateral positions = BV, we estimate MV, initial 2004 aggregate and
     bilateral FDI positions are at market value)

   • Denmark (IIP & bilateral positions = BV, we estimate MV, initial 2006 market value
     estimate provided by Kumah, Damgaard and Elkjaer (2009))

   • Switzerland (IIP & bilateral positions = BV, we estimate MV, initial 2005 market
     value estimate provided by Stoffes and Tille (2009))

   • United Kingdom (IIP & bilateral positions = BV, we estimate MV, initial 2005 market
     value estimate provided by Kubelec, Orskaug and Tanaka (2007))

Countries providing aggregate FDI data at market value along with official valuation series:

   • Japan (IIP & bilateral positions = BV, Bank of Japan provides estimate of aggre-
     gate FDI abroad & inward market-to-book value ratio, we use this to obtain bilateral
     positions at MV)


                                             49
   • Sweden (IIP & bilateral positions = BV, also provides estimate of aggregate FDI at
     MV, we use these to obtain bilateral positions at MV)

   • United States (IIP = CC, BEA bilateral positions = HC, market-to-HC ratio provided
     by BEA, we use these to obtain bilateral positions at MV)

The following countries do not report aggregate FDI at MV and we are unable to compute
our own estimates. Reported bilateral positions are at BV.

   • Brazil (IIP = BV, bilateral positions at MV imputed from partner countries)

   • Emerging Asia (IIP = BV, bilateral positions at MV imputed from partner countries)

   • Euro Area (IIP & bilateral = BV, bilateral positions at MV imputed from partner
     countries)

   • India (IIP = BV, bilateral positions at MV imputed from partner countries)

   • Russia (IIP = BV, bilateral positions at MV imputed from partner countries)

Methodology for market value estimation:

  1. we start from an initial estimate of the aggregate FDI abroad/inward position at MV
     (usually for 2005, provided by statistical agency or other, see above).

  2. multiply the date t position in USD with the weighted average of the destination
     countries’ USD ex-dividend equity index returns, with weights corresponding to the
     date t FDI portfolio weights (FDI abroad); or home country USD equity index return
     (inward FDI)

  3. add USD financial outflow/inflow to obtain date t+1 position at MV

  4. calculate market-to-book value ratio for each date

  5. calculate bilateral positions at MV using 4)

   Due to data limitations, we are unfortunately unable to obtain full bilateral FDI balance
sheets at market value for those countries where positions were imputed from partner country
FDI assets and liabilities. Instances with bilateral positions unavailable for at least one
country of a source/partner country pair are indicated with ”na” in the matrix of bilateral
valuation gains and losses on the net FDI portfolio.




                                            50
   File    View   Edit   Visualize   Merge


   Showing all rows options                                                                 Map style saved.

Location    kml_4326          Display as heat map Configure info window Configure styles Export to KML Get KML network link Get embeddable link
   51




            2000 km
            2000 mi                                                                                                                           Map data ©2011 Geocentre Consulting,MapLink,Tel




                                                           Figure 1: Heat Map of Valuation Gains and Losses
            The figure reports total valuation gains/losses. Dark red: losses in excess of $600bn. Light red: losses smaller than $600bn. Light green: gains smaller
            than $400bn. Dark green: gains in excess of $400bn.
+Pierre-Olivier Gmail Calendar Documents Photos Reader W eb more                                                            Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas   0     Share!

   heatmap_082111               Natural Earth

   File    View   Edit   Visualize   Merge
                                                Figure 2: Heat Map of Valuation Gains and Losses
   Showing all rows options                                                                 Map style saved.

Location    kml_4326          Display as heat map Configure info window Configure styles Export to KML Get KML network link Get embeddable link




+Pierre-Olivier Gmail Calendar Documents Photos Reader W eb more                                                            Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas   0     Share!

   heatmap   _08
        2000 km 2111            Natural Earth
            2000 mi                                                                                                                           Map data ©2011 Geocentre Consulting,MapLink,Tele Atlas
   File    View   Edit   Visualize   Merge


   Showing all rows options                                                             Map style saved.
                                                                              (a) Portfolio  Equity
Location    kml_4326          Display as heat map Configure info window Configure styles Export to KML Get KML network link Get embeddable link




            2000 km
            2000 mi                                                                                                                           Map data ©2011 Geocentre Consulting,MapLink,Tele Atlas




                                                                               (b) Portfolio Debt

           The figure reports portfolio gains/losses for equity (panel (a)) and debt (panel(b)). Dark red: losses in
           excess of $600bn. Light red: losses smaller than $600bn. Light green: gains smaller than $400bn. Dark
           green: gains in excess of $400bn.




                                                                                          52
+Pierre-Olivier Gmail Calendar Documents Photos Reader W eb more                                                            Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas   0     Share!

   heatmap_082111               Natural Earth

   File    View   Edit   Visualize   Merge
                                                Figure 3: Heat Map of Valuation Gains and Losses
   Showing all rows options                                                                 Map style saved.

Location    kml_4326          Display as heat map Configure info window Configure styles Export to KML Get KML network link Get embeddable link




+Pierre-Olivier Gmail Calendar Documents Photos Reader W eb more                                                            Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas   0     Share!

   heatmap   _08
        2000 km 2111            Natural Earth
            2000 mi                                                                                                                           Map data ©2011 Geocentre Consulting,MapLink,Tele Atlas
   File    View   Edit   Visualize   Merge


   Showing all rows options
                                                                            (a) Direct Map style saved.
                                                                                       Investment
Location    kml_4326          Display as heat map Configure info window Configure styles Export to KML Get KML network link Get embeddable link




            2000 km
            2000 mi                                                                                                                           Map data ©2011 Geocentre Consulting,MapLink,Tele Atlas




                                                                        (b) Currency Gains/Losses

           The figure reports direct investment valuation gains/losses (panel (a)) and currency gains/losses (panel (b)).
           Dark red: losses in excess of $600bn. Light red: losses smaller than $600bn. Light green: gains smaller
           than $400bn. Dark green: gains in excess of $400bn.




                                                                                          53
                  800

                  600

                  400

                  200

                     0

                  -200

                  -400

                  -600

                  -800




54
                -1,000

                -1,200

                -1,400




                             Net Equity         Net Direct Investment          Net Debt         Net Bank Loans          Valuation


                                                     Figure 4: The Geography of Wealth Transfers

     Author’s Calculations. The figure reports the external valuation gain(+)/loss(-) between 2007:4 and 2008:4, broken down by asset class (equity, direct
     investment, debt and bank loans) and corrected for current account flows over the same period. See appendix for data sources.
             Figure 5: Exposure to ABCP and Portfolio Debt Losses, by country

            0.6

            0.5

            0.4

            0.3
                                                                      rate of loss on debt assets
            0.2

            0.1                                                       share of ABCP in debt
                                                                      assets
              0




The figure reports for each country or group the share of ABCP in that country debt claims position in
2007, as well as the rate of loss on debt assets between 2007:4 and 2008:4. Source: Authors’ calculations and
Acharya and Schnabl (2010)    LM0PW202.wmf




                                                     55
          Figure 6: Exposure to ABCP and Portfolio Debt Losses, fraction of total

            0.6

            0.5

            0.4

            0.3
                                                                   share of total outstanding
            0.2                                                    ABCP

            0.1                                                    share of total loss

             0




The figure reports for each country or group the share of ABCP in total ABCP hholdings in 2007, as well
as the share of overall loss on debt assets between 2007:4 and 2008:4. Source: Authors’ calculations and
Acharya and Schnabl (2010)   LM0PW203.wmf




                                                  56
                          Figure 7: Dollar Shortage and ABCP exposure




        2500


        2000


        1500


        1000


         500


           0




                   USD shortage (Office)   USD shortage (Group)   ABCP exposure (100mil USD)




The figure reports the upper limit of the dollar shortage measures constructed at the office and group level
together with ABCP exposure data at the country level. Source: McGuire and von Peter (2009) and Acharya
and Schnabl (2010)




                                                      57
                   Figure 8: Regulatory Environment and Valuation Losses

300
250
200
150
100
 50
  0
 ‐50
‐100
‐150
‐200
 200




                                 Valuation losses        Regulatory Quality



The figure reports the index of regulatory quality from Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi (2010), together
with total valuation losses (+) or gains (-)




                                                    58
