                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  CAPITAL FLOWS, PUSH VERSUS PULL FACTORS AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL
                                CRISIS

                                         Marcel Fratzscher

                                        Working Paper 17357
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17357


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




I would like to thank Charles Engel, Kristin Forbes, Jeff Frankel, and my discussant Carmen Reinhart,
as well as the other participants at the 2010 pre-conference and the 2011 Bretton Woods conference
of the NBER/Sloan Global Financial Crisis project for comments and discussion. I am grateful to Daniel
Schneider for excellent research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Central Bank, the Eurosystem, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Marcel Fratzscher. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Capital Flows, Push versus Pull Factors and the Global Financial Crisis
Marcel Fratzscher
NBER Working Paper No. 17357
August 2011
JEL No. F21,F30,G11

                                             ABSTRACT

The causes of the 2008 collapse and subsequent surge in global capital flows remain an open and highly
controversial issue. Employing a factor model coupled with a dataset of high-frequency portfolio capital
flows to 50 economies, the paper finds that common shocks – key crisis events as well as changes
to global liquidity and risk – have exerted a large effect on capital flows both in the crisis and in the
recovery. However, these effects have been highly heterogeneous across countries, with a large part
of this heterogeneity being explained by differences in the quality of domestic institutions, country
risk and the strength of domestic macroeconomic fundamentals. Comparing and quantifying these
effects shows that common factors (“push” factors) were overall the main drivers of capital flows during
the crisis, while country-specific determinants (“pull” factors) have been dominant in accounting for
the dynamics of global capital flows in 2009 and 2010, in particular for emerging markets.


Marcel Fratzscher
European Central Bank
Kaiserstrasse 29
D-60311 Frankfurt/Main
GERMANY
marcel.fratzscher@ecb.int
1. Introduction

The 2007-08 global financial crisis had been preceded for many years by substantial global
imbalances in trade and capital flows. It is in particular the United States which was not only
the origin of the financial crisis, but which had been among the economies globally relying
most heavily on capital inflows to finance a growing trade deficit. Many observers argued
before the crisis that such a status quo was unsustainable and that ultimately deficit countries,
such as the United States, would see capital inflows dwindle and exchange rates and asset
prices fall during an adjustment process. However, the crisis played out very differently, with
capital of domestic and foreign investors flowing massively into US assets between July 2008
and April 2009, and in particular after the collapse of Lehman Brothers. Yet what has been
striking about the crisis was not only its global reach, but also the high degree of heterogeneity
with which it affected different countries, both among advanced economies as well as among
emerging market economies.

Moreover, it was not only the global transmission of the 2007-08 crisis, but also the recovery
period since 2009 that has sparked a controversy about the drivers of global capital flows. Some
emerging market economies (EMEs) have experienced massive portfolio capital inflows over
the past two years, raising concerns about their viability and effects on domestic economies,
exchange rates and capital markets. EME policy-makers have stressed the importance of “push”
factors, i.e. in particular monetary and fiscal policies in advanced economies, as the main
culprits behind this surge in capital flows. By contrast, others have emphasized “pull” factors,
such as real divergences between EMEs and advanced economies (AEs), as the main driver of
the current pattern of capital flows. In fact, this controversy has become one of the core issues
of debate in international fora, such as the G20 which is considering a code of conduct for
capital flow management, including the imposition of capital controls to deal with volatile
capital flows.

The objective of the paper is to analyze the role of different drivers of global capital flows
during the crisis and the subsequent recovery. The focus is on two questions: first, how
important have been common, global shocks for capital flows? And second, how relevant have
been macroeconomic policies, institutions and financial policies in helping countries shield
themselves from such global shocks? The first of the questions is informative about the role of
push factors – if common global shocks explain a large part of the dynamics of global capital
flows, then push factors are important. The second question allows gauging the relevance of
pull factors – if capital flows are highly heterogeneous across countries, and if this differential
pattern is accounted for by country-specific characteristics, then pull factors are relevant.

The paper’s focus is at the micro level, i.e. at the level of individual investment funds (both
mutual funds and hedge funds), across a broad geographic coverage of 50 countries and
markets worldwide. The paper uses a novel dataset which stems from EPFR Global, which
contains portfolio investment flows, allowing a distinction also between equity and bond
portfolio investment flows. It contains weekly flows and geographic allocations by more than
14,000 equity funds and more than 7,000 bond funds, with USD 8 trillion of capital under
management.

The first part of the paper intends to establish a number of stylized facts about the high-
frequency dynamics of capital flows during the crisis and the recovery. The strength of EPFR
data is not only its disaggregated information at the fund level, but crucially also the high time
frequency. Compared to the pre-crisis period, the data shows remarkably strong divergences in
capital flows across countries during the crisis, and more precisely a massive reallocation of
capital from emerging markets (and a few advanced economies) to the US. The high data
frequency allows gauging that this portfolio reallocation intensified substantially after a few




                                                2
key events, such as the collapse of Lehman Brothers in mid-September 2008 or key policy
decisions.

The second part of the paper aims to explain this heterogeneity of global capital flows during
the financial crisis and the subsequent recovery. A factor model for the determinants of capital
flows is formulated, distinguishing between different factors as well as allowing for a
distinction of drivers during non-crisis times and those during the crisis. The focus is on the
effect of a set of common global shocks – with a specific emphasis on liquidity and risk shocks
as well as macro news shocks – as well as a set of idiosyncratic, country-specific shocks on
capital flows. The findings show that the global factors account for a large share of the global
capital flow pattern during the crisis. Importantly, the signs of the model parameters change
substantially during the crisis episode. For instance, while an increase in risk before the crisis
was associated with capital flows out of AEs and into EMEs, this effect reversed during the
crisis inducing a substantial reallocation of capital from many EMEs into a few AEs. A similar
shift in coefficients is also found for other common shocks. This evidence is thus consistent
with the hypothesis that the dynamics of capital flows was primarily driven by safe-heaven
flows during the crisis.

Another striking finding of the analysis is the large degree of heterogeneity with which
different countries were affected by the same global shocks, in particular during the crisis and
also the subsequent recovery. The third part of the paper analyses the role of potential
determinants of these differences in sensitivity to common shocks. A distinction is made
between macroeconomic fundamentals (growth, current account, public debt and deficits, short-
term debt, etc.), the quality of countries’ institutions and country risk, financial policies as well
as the role of external exposure through trade and financial linkages.

The findings indicate that it has been the institutional quality, country risk together with the
strength of macroeconomic fundamentals and policies that explain a large share of the
heterogeneity of capital flows during the crisis. By contrast, countries’ external (real and
financial) exposure appears to have largely been irrelevant for understanding the global capital
flow dynamics, including the retrenchment of capital during the crisis, in particular for
emerging economies.

The final part of the paper attempts to quantify and compare the relative importance of common
shocks (“push” factors) and country-specific determinants (“pull” factors). The findings
indicate that common factors were more important overall as a driver of net capital flows for
many countries in 2005-07, as well as in particular during the 2007-08 financial crisis.
However, in the recovery period since March 2009, common factors appear to have become
less important as drivers of global capital flows, whereas it is domestic pull factors that have
come to dominate in explaining capital flows, in particular for countries in Emerging Asia and
Latin America.

Putting these findings into perspective, the analysis of push factors versus pull factors as drivers
of global capital flows in the present paper focuses on a relatively short period of time – a time
span of about five years between end 2005 and end 2010 – while the discussion of push and
pull factors has traditionally been made with reference to much longer cycles of capital flows. It
is also important to highlight that this period of 2005 to 2010 has been in many ways
extraordinary throughout for the dynamics of global capital flows, as a period of a sharp
contraction of capital flows, in particular to some EMEs, during the 2007-08 crisis was
followed by an equally extraordinary surge in capital flows to EMEs. Hence an important open
issue is whether the current dynamics of global capital flows will continue well into the future,
and what it implies for the risk of sudden stops and capital flow reversals with all its adverse
implications for global growth and financial stability. But in particular because it is so




                                                 3
important to understand better the dynamics and risks of periods of financial stress, the findings
of the current paper may be instructive about how future crisis may play out.

The paper has a number of implications for economic policy and for policy-makers. On the one
hand, financial globalization and the exposure to common global factors have made countries
more vulnerable to external and global shocks. Yet, on the other hand, the exposure to domestic
risks has also been a relevant factor during the crisis and in the global capital flow surge
thereafter, in particular those domestic risks related to poor macroeconomic fundamentals,
policies and institutions. This implies that countries are far from innocent bystanders that are
powerless in being exposed to volatile global markets, and that indeed they have tools to
insulate to some extent their economies from adverse global shocks.

These findings have a bearing in particular on the current debate on how EMEs should deal
with volatile capital flows. To the extent that capital flows are driven by global factors, some
EME policy-makers have argued that this would justify the use of capital controls as well as
policy interventions e.g. in FX markets. However, such policies may be misguided if the drivers
of capital flows are mainly found in idiosyncratic, country-specific policies and conditions,
which calls for policy-makers to rather focus on making their domestic economies more
resilient by improving institutions, deepening financial markets and enhancing macroeconomic
and maroprudential policies.

The paper is related to various strands of the literature. First, it relates to a growing literature on
the 2007-2008 financial crisis, which has partly focused on the US and its policy responses (e.g.
Calomiris 2008, Taylor 2009), while the literature on the global transmission of the crisis has
been more limited (e.g. Blanchard, Das and Faruqee 2010, Rose and Spiegel 2011). Second, it
links to the literature on capital flows during crises and other periods of extreme changes in
capital flows, such as sudden stops, surges, retrenchments and capital flight.1 A recent focus in
this literature has been on gross capital flows. Forbes and Warnock (2010) distinguish between
the four different types of extreme capital movements (surges, stops, flights and
retrenchments), separating the activity by domestic and foreign residents, and their
determinants. Milesi-Ferretti and Tille (2010) and Broner, Didier, Erce and Schmukler (2010)
analyze the link between gross capital flows and crises, in particular the 2007-08 episode.

While recent work has underlined the importance of analyzing gross flows and distinguishing
across asset classes, relatively little work so far has been undertaken on investment decisions
and capital flows at the micro level of individual investors and funds. Notable exceptions are
Calvet, Campbell and Sodini (2009), Froot and Ramadorai (2005), Hau and Rey (2008), and
Jotikasthira, Lundblad, and Ramadorai (2010).

A third related strand of the literature is the work on determinants of capital flows, and in
particular the distinction between global factors and domestic factors and their transmission
channels. There is a large literature on the global transmission of past financial crises, with a
strong interest in the role of different channels (e.g. Forbes and Rigobon 2002, Bekaert, Harvey
and Ng 2005; Bae et al. 2003, Karolyi 2003, Dungey et al. 2005, Bekaert, Ehrmann, Fratzscher
and Mehl 2010). Some of this work analyze the role and mostly finds strong evidence for the
transmission of global shocks to financial markets and capital flows (Bacchetta and van
Wincoop 2010, Gourio, Siemer and Verdelhan 2010), including shocks to liquidity
(Brunnermeier 2009, Calvo 2009, Kalemli-Ozcan, Papaioannou and Perri 2010).



1
 Examples of recent key papers on capital flow surges are Reinhart and Reinhart (2009) and Cardarelli,
Elekdag and Kose (2009); on sudden stops are Calvo (1998) and Calvo, Izquierdo and Meijía (2008); and
on capital flight are Dooley (1988) and Rothenberg and Warnock (2010).



                                                  4
A specific angle of this literature on crisis focuses on the role of contagion, which is defined by
most studies as transmission of shocks or crises above and beyond what domestic fundamentals
as well as common shocks can explain. Specific examples including the implications for capital
flows and asset prices, are Forbes and Rigobon (2002), Dungey, Fry, González-Hermosillo and
Martin (2011), Broner, Gelos and Reinhart (2006) and Claessens and Forbes (2001). Bekaert,
Ehrmann, Fratzscher and Mehl (2010) analyze the presence of contagion in equity markets
during the 2007-08 financial crisis and find evidence that contagion was mostly domestic in
nature, i.e. comovements mainly among domestic firms increased substantially.

As to the structure of the paper, the next section presents the data and aims at establishing a
number of stylized facts about the high-frequency dynamics of global capital flows during the
crisis. The third section of the paper outlines the empirical methodology. Section 4 presents the
empirical findings on the determinants and the effects of common and idiosyncratic shocks on
capital flows. Section 5 concludes.



2. Global fund-level data and stylized facts of capital flows
This section presents the data on which the analysis of the paper is based (section 2.1), and then
outlines a number of key facts and characteristics of the high-frequency dynamics of global
capital flows during and around the 2007-08 financial crisis (section 2.2).

2.1 The data on capital flows

The paper uses a dataset on portfolio capital flows and performance at the fund level, compiled
by EPFR. It is a fairly novel database, which to the best of my knowledge, has so far been only
used by one paper (Jotikasthira, Lundblad and Ramadorai 2010) and in a very different context.
It contains daily, weekly and monthly flows by more than 16,000 equity funds and more than
8,000 bond funds; hence its focus being on different types of portfolio investment. There is
some difference in coverage, with the data at a monthly frequency covering a somewhat larger
number of funds. Although EPFR data captures only about 5-20% of the market capitalization
in equity and in bonds for most countries, it is a fairly representative sample; Jotikasthira,
Lundblad and Ramadorai (2010) make this point convincingly by showing in detail a close
match between EPFR portfolio flows and portfolio flows stemming from total balance-of-
payments data.

Importantly, EPFR data contains information on the total assets under management (AUM) at
the end of each period, as well as allowing for a distinction between net capital flows (i.e. net of
valuation changes) and valuation changes (due to asset returns and exchange rate changes) to
calculate each period’s change in AUM. Two important points about the data construction
relate to the definition of net flows and the domicile of investors. Net flows in the EPFR
information is defined as the change in AUM due to active increases or reductions, abstracting
from potential portfolio changes within each fund. Moreover, it should be stressed that the
domiciles for most of the funds covered by EPFR are in advanced countries. Table 1 provides
an overview of the number of funds and total AUM by fund group available in the raw EPFR
data set.

                                              Table 1

This raw data is paired down and transformed into a sample that fits the purpose of the analysis
for the present paper. As the main focus of the paper is on portfolio capital flows across
countries, net capital flows are aggregated at the level of each recipient country. Moreover, the
analysis below is conducted for data at weekly frequency. Weekly frequency is preferred over



                                                 5
data at monthly frequency, at which the effect of specific shocks and important crisis events on
capital flows are harder to identify cleanly. Using data at a daily frequency has the drawback
that it may not allow tracing the effect of specific shocks due to different trading times in
different regions. Moreover, many fund managers are unlikely to make portfolio decisions at
such high frequency.

Some data cleaning is done to avoid that the measures of capital flows are strongly influenced
by outliers or the emergence or disappearance of individual funds from the sample. Small funds
with less than USD 5 million are excluded, as well as funds that record at times extreme net
inflows or net outflows, i.e. those with weekly net inflows above 50% or below -50% of total
assets under management (AUM). Also those funds are excluded for which no geographic
allocations information is available, i.e. for which no sufficient information exists on the
countries in which they are invested.

Moreover, in order to have a stable sample of funds, the period analyzed is limited to start on
12 October 2005 and end on 22 November 2010. Only those funds are retained which are
continuously reporting every week throughout this sample period. This means that funds are
excluded that either appear or disappear from the sample during this period. Although e.g.
including in the sample a fund which closes down, e.g. at the height of the financial crisis, and
liquidates assets in recipient countries is indeed informative, there is no way to distinguish why
a particular fund joins or exits the data sample, which may alternatively simply be due to an
increase or decrease in the fund coverage by EPFR. Moreover, funds that report only for part of
this sample period constitute merely about 1% of all observations and AUM.

A key strength of the data is the high frequency of reported flows. A second advantage is the
broad geographic coverage which includes not only advanced economies (AEs) but many
emerging market economies (EMEs). The allocation component of the data allows gauging
which funds have invested in which countries and what types of assets (equities or bonds).

Overall, to my knowledge, this data source is the most comprehensive one of international
capital flows, in particular at higher frequencies, and in terms of its geographic coverage at the
fund level. It is thus well suited for the objective of the paper.

                                             Table 2

Table 2 provides an overview of the coverage and some summary statistics of the data sample
derived through the above steps from the EPFR fund-level data. It covers 50 countries, a
majority of which are EMEs. Assets under management are in the billions of US dollars for
almost all of the countries and asset classes, while the USA clearly dominates in terms of the
size of asset holdings. The size of equity holdings is somewhat larger than bond holdings for
most of the countries. Most of the analysis below is based on total portfolio holdings (the sum
of equity and bond holdings for each recipient country), though some of the analysis also makes
an explicit split between equities and bonds.

The middle set of columns provides an indication about the magnitude of weekly net capital
flows, which are in absolute terms at around 0.4-0.5% of total assets under management
(AUM). The standard deviation of weekly net flows is about 0.6%. The final two columns of
the table show the cumulated, total net capital flows in the pre-crisis period, i.e. from
November 2005 to August 2007, and in the crisis period after the collapse of Lehman Brothers
in September 2008. While cumulated net capital inflows in the pre-crisis period were on
average around 12% and net capital outflows around 10% during the crisis, these two periods
show a remarkable degree of heterogeneity in net capital flows across countries. The analysis of
the empirical sections below tries in particular to understand and explain this cross-country
heterogeneity in net capita flows.



                                                6
2.2 Stylized facts of high-frequency capital flows during crisis

I now turn to the key features and stylized facts of the data, with a specific focus on the
dynamics and heterogeneity of capital flows during the financial crisis. In particular, this sub-
section aims to draw out in more detail the cross-country heterogeneity that is already apparent
from the aggregate data in Table 2.

                                           Figures 1 – 2

Figures 1 and 2 show the high-frequency dynamics of capital flows during the financial crisis.
The figures emphasize four key events through vertical lines: the start of the liquidity crunch on
7 August 2007 when markets first experienced serious liquidity problems; the collapse of Bear
Stearns on 15 March 2008; the collapse of Lehman Brothers on 15 September 2008, and the
intensification of the European sovereign debt crisis, which is here dated as 15 March 2010
though a precise timing of the latter is difficult. The figures highlight a number of striking
stylized facts. First, they indicate the stark difference in the capital flow dynamics for advanced
economies (AEs) and emerging market economies (EMEs). On aggregate, AEs experienced net
capital outflows quite continuously after the start of the crisis in August 2007. In fact, net total
portfolio outflows seemed to even have slowed initially after the Lehman collapse in September
2008 (Figure 1.A). By contrast, net portfolio flows to EMEs were hardly adversely affected at
the beginning of the crisis as net inflows were positive through July 2008 and only then
dropped substantially before and after the collapse of Lehman Brothers and well into early
2009.

Second, there is a significant divergence in the dynamics of net flows between equities and
bonds. Figure 1.B shows that net flows into bonds underwent substantially larger swings than
net flows for equities. In fact, net holdings of AE equities remained relatively stable throughout
the crisis, and also only declined modestly for EME equities following the Lehman collapse
before recovering strongly in 2009. By contrast, the Lehman event triggered substantial
outflows out of EME bonds, by about 30% (excluding valuation changes) over a span of 4-5
months. However, investments in EME bonds subsequently recovered substantially, with AUM
in this asset class almost doubling between March 2009 and the end of the sample in November
2010.

Third, there are also sharp cross-country divergences among AEs and among EMEs. Figure 2
shows that among AEs it was mainly the US that experienced little change in either equity
flows or bond flows during the height of the crisis. By contrast, among AEs it was mainly euro
area countries that recorded the strongest net outflows, in particular in bonds, throughout the
crisis. Among EMEs, EM Europe seems to have suffered the strongest by registering the largest
net outflows and slowest recovery in both equity and bond flows throughout the crisis and
thereafter, while Latin American economies fared better.

Fourth, focusing on the period after the global financial crisis of 2007-08, it is striking that the
European sovereign debt crisis of 2010 is hardly visible in the aggregate capital flows data at
the regional level. As to EMEs, what stands out from Figure 2 is the enormous increase in net
capital flows into EMEs since April 2009. Not only did net AUM (net of valuation changes) in
EME equities increase by about 30-40 percentage points and in bonds almost double between
the trough in March 2009 and the end of 2010, but total net AUM for both EME asset classes
stood in late 2010 substantially above those before the start of the 2007-08 crisis.

                                           Figures 3 – 4




                                                 7
Figures 3 and 4 provide a more detailed break-down of net capital flows, total and by asset
class, for the six distinct period of the pre-crisis, crisis and post-crisis. They highlight in
particular the difference of the three crisis sub-periods and how these differ from other sub-
periods before and after the crisis.

                                                       Figure 5

Finally, Figure 5 shows the cross-country heterogeneity or dispersion in net capital flows,
which is measured as the standard deviation of weekly net capital flows across countries, over a
centered moving window of 6 months (normalized to have a mean of one for each group over
the entire sample period). The figure indicates that capital flow dispersion was not particularly
high within Advanced Europe or among other advanced economies e.g. during the period after
the Lehman collapse. By contrast, net capital flows exhibited a very high degree of
heterogeneity across EMEs during the height of the 2007-08 financial crisis. This is an
important stylized fact because it underlines that the experience of countries with capital flows
indeed differed markedly during the crisis.

In summary, two key stylized facts stand out from the high-frequency portfolio flow data. First,
there has been a massive reallocation of portfolio capital during the 2007-08 financial crisis. In
the early period of the crisis, most advanced economies experienced net outflows while EMEs
recorded balanced flows into the summer of 2008. The collapse of Lehman Brothers then
reversed this trend, with capital exiting EMEs on a massive scale and repatriating to the USA
and some other advanced economies. This pattern was much stronger for bond flows than for
equity flows. The second key stylized fact is that despite this overall pattern in capital flows,
the heterogeneity and dispersion in capital flows across countries increased sharply during the
height of the financial crisis, implying that investors did not flee regions (in particular EME
regions) indiscriminately, but that they indeed did discriminate quite closely in their investment
decisions.


3. Empirical methodology
The objective of the empirical analysis is to explain the global dynamics of capital flows during
and around the 2007-08 financial crisis, and in particular the heterogeneity in capital flows
across countries, as highlighted in the previous section.

The empirical model to get at these questions is a factor model with two types of factors – a set
of global/common factors, and a set of domestic/idiosyncratic factors, S t  [ S tG , S iD,t ] , in order
to test whether portfolio capital flows during and around the 2007-08 crisis reflected common
shocks, domestic/idiosyncratic shocks and to what extent an increased vulnerability at the
country level:

                               f i ,t  Et 1 [ f i ,t ]   i ,t 1 ' S t  ei ,t                   (1)
                                            i ,t 1   i ,0   1 ' Z i ,t 1   i ,t 1 Dt       (2)
                                           i ,t 1   i , 0   1 ' Z i ,t 1                      (3)

where fi,t is the net capital flow to country i during week t, Et-1[fi,t] is the expected net flows,
measured as a function of lagged values of net flows and interest rate differentials, St is the
vector of the observable factors, Dt a financial crisis dummy, and Zi,t a vector of determinants
that explains differences in the factor loadings across countries. The sample period from 12
October 2005 to 22 November 2010 has about 266 weekly observations for equity and bonds




                                                            8
flows to 50 countries. The financial crisis Dt is defined from 7 August 2007 to 15 March 2009,
with robustness tests specifically focusing on the period after the collapse of Lehman Brothers
on 15 September 2008. As most of the common shocks are US variables, note that the US as a
recipient country of capital flows is excluded from all model estimations. The factor model (1)-
(3) is in the spirit of standard asset-pricing models and related to the work by Bekaert,
Ehrmann, Fratzscher and Mehl (2010), who focus on equity market contagion and equity
returns at the firm level during the 2007-08 financial crisis.

The first set of hypotheses to be tested relates to the coefficients on the factors (i,0 , i,0) as well
as the role of the determinants in conjunction with these factors (1 , 1) on capital flows, and
whether and how these coefficients have changed during the financial crisis. This allows us to
understand the overall drivers and the transmission channels of the crisis. The inclusion of the
crisis dummy in equation (2) allows for a change in the factor loadings during the crisis via  in
equation (2). Such change in the transmission during the crisis may be either due to an
unconditional increase in the factor loadings (i,0) or a change in the factor loadings conditional
on the determinants Zi,t (1).

The second main hypothesis is to gauge to what extent it has been drivers associated with push
factors – effects of factors common to all countries – and to what extent drivers related to pull
factors – effects specific to individual countries and their own characteristics – which accounts
for the dynamics of capital flows during the crisis and non-crisis times.

Specifically, the contributions of push factors and of pull factors to net capital flows are derived
from the factor model (1)-(3) in the following way:

                                               fˆi ,Gt  (  i ,0   i ,0 Dt )' S tG                                      (4)
                 fˆi ,Dt  Et 1 [ f i ,t ]  (  1 ' Z i ,t 1   1 Z i ,t 1 Dt )' S t  (  i ,0   i ,0 Dt )' S tD   (5)


where fˆi ,Gt is the contribution of push factors due to common shocks for each country i. fˆi ,Dt is
the contribution of pull factors, which is the sum of the expected net flows, the component of
net flows due to country-specific determinants Zi,t, and the component due to country-
specific/idiosyncratic factors. The total share of net capital flows accounted for by push factors
and by pull factors for a particular country i during time t can then be calculated respectively as

                                                   X iG,t  fˆi ,Gt / fˆi ,t
                                                   X iD,t  fˆi ,Dt / fˆi ,t

Concerning the definitions of the different variables in the empirical model (1)-(3), I first turn
to the set of common and idiosyncratic factors St, summary statistics of which are given in
Table 3.A. The set of common shocks St consists of specific exogenous crisis events, measures
of global risk and liquidity, as well as US macroeconomic news and US equity market returns.

                                                Table 3 and Figure 6

The level of risk may substantially increase during the crisis, making investors shun risky assets
and flee into safer assets, in particular government bonds in the US and other advanced
economies. I proxy for changes to risk through the VIX index of the S&P500. Moreover, a
liquidity squeeze and the freezing of credit markets during the crisis made it difficult for
financial and non-financial institutions to obtain capital, and thus may have been key in




                                                              9
spreading or exacerbating the crisis (Adrian and Brunnermeier 2010, Brunnermeier and
Pedersen 2009). I use the TED spread as a measure of liquidity.

As to the crisis event, the objective is to identify events that were important and largely
exogenous to the dynamics of capital flows. Table 3.B shows the list of 8 key events which
have been integral parts of the crisis dynamics and which allow analyzing how capital flows
have reacted in the immediate aftermath of these shocks.

In addition, two macro news shocks are included, one for the US and one for each of the
countries in the sample, in order to proxy developments on the real side of the economies.
Macroeconomic news shocks are the unexpected components of announcements about key
macroeconomic variables, such as GDP, industrial production, unemployment or the trade
balance, defined as the difference between the announced value and the expected value based
on the median expectation expressed in Bloomberg surveys prior to the releases. Based on 9
US-specific news, I construct a composite US macro shock, which is the weekly sum across
these news (after standardizing each news variable to raise net capital flows into the domestic
market by 1% in the pre-crisis period), and analogously a domestic news shock.

Table 3.A and Figure 6.A show summary statistics for these composite macro shocks and its
components. The advantage of using such macro “shocks” is that not only can they be
identified cleanly and separated from other shocks – in particular as there is a time series for all
of them, with each announcement usually taking place once a month – but equally importantly,
using these news we can gauge how a given shock has been transmitted before versus during
the financial crisis, and thus whether the transmission process and the transmission channels
have changed during the crisis. Figure 6.A shows that these US macro shocks are indeed white
noise over time – as they should be, as they are based on the unexpected components of macro
announcements – though in some periods news tend to be more often negative, such as after the
Lehman collapse, or positive for some time.2

Finally, I include US equity market returns and domestic equity market returns as factors into
the model. The inclusion of these two equity market returns into the factor model is meant to
account for the fact that there is likely to be a relationship between flows and returns.

A crucial issue is the exogeneity of the factors. Crisis events (such as the default by Lehman
Brothers) and the macroeconomic news shocks should be largely exogenous to cross-border
capital flows, in particular given the definition of the latter as unexpected components of
announcements. Yet, US returns, the Ted spread and the VIX may be influenced by capital
flows and other developments in one of the 50 individual countries, though all three are US-
specific variables and it is unlikely that capital flows to and from smaller economies may be
important enough to influence US equity markets during a particular week. Hence, strictly
speaking, the term “factor” is more appropriate than “shock” when thinking about the
interpretations of the vector Si,t in the factor model (1)-(3).

As a final note on the vector of common and idiosyncratic factors, some of these factors may be
correlated with one another. I attempt to reduce this potential problem by orthogonalising VIX
and TED spread, which is done by regressing the VIX on the TED spread and using the residual
as a pure measure of risk. Similarly, domestic equity returns are regressed on US returns and
the residuals used as the measure of the domestic returns. Table 3.C shows a table with

2
  A large literature using such macro news focuses on analyzing how they affect asset prices, both in the
United States and globally. A detailed account of the construction of the news component of the
announcements and their financial market effects are provided in Andersen et al. (2007), Ehrmann and
Fratzscher (2004, 2005), and Gürkaynak, Sack and Swanson (2005). The data source is Bloomberg, both
for the announcements and for the surveys of market participants’ expectations.



                                                   10
correlation coefficients across the different shocks, indicating the correlations across the seven
factors are generally small.

                                               Table 4

I next turn to the set of determinants Zi,t which may explain the transmission of a particular
shock on net capital flows fi,t. Table 4 provides summary statistics with definitions and data
sources for all of the determinants. A distinction is made between four groups of determinants.
The first set of variables primarily measures the external exposure via trade and financial
openness, which has been pointed out by many researchers to play a role in explaining financial
interdependencies (see e.g. Forbes and Chinn 2004, Kaminsky and Reinhart 2000, Baele and
Inghelbrecht 2009, Bekaert and Harvey 1995). More specifically, the exposure variables
included are trade openness (sum, of exports plus imports), the total stock of portfolio
investment assets and the stock of portfolio investment assets (sourced from CPIS), the size of
depth of domestic financial markets (proxied by the stock market capitalization) as well as the
degree of de facto capital account openness (using the Chinn-Ito (2008) index). All variables,
except the last one, are scaled by domestic GDP.

Second, proxies for institutions and country risk are included, such as quality of political
institutions or financial risk (using ICRG measures), as well as the sovereign rating of a
particular country. Third, I control for macroeconomic variables at the country level, such as a
country’s current account position, FX reserve holdings, the performance of the economy (GDP
growth, inflation, interest rate), and the government budget balance, public debt and short-term
external debt.

The hypothesis for their inclusion is that countries with good institutions and strong
macroeconomic fundamentals may be less likely to experience sharp capital flow reversals
during the crisis. As to the transmission of shocks, the prior is that better institutions and
fundamentals may be instrumental in insulating a country from negative external shocks and
hence capital outflows may be smaller, or a country with strong fundamentals may even
experience net capital inflows during the crisis as a flight-to-safety phenomenon among
investors starts to dominate investment decisions.

Fourth, I try to include the policy reaction of governments to the financial crisis and in
particular their attempt to shield the domestic financial sector from the crisis. One striking
feature of the crisis has been the massive policy response by policymakers, in particular the
substantial financial policy interventions in the form of capital injections in both financial and
non-financial firms, as well as broad set of new or extended deposit guarantees and debt
guarantees in a number of countries. There is a growing literature showing that such measures
have indeed been fairly effective in supporting individual financial institutions and even
countries’ financial systems.3

The hypothesis for the present paper is that these financial policy responses may have helped
countries to be more insulated and less affected by shocks and capital retrenchment during the
crisis. To get at this hypothesis, I investigate the effect of different types of financial policies –
capital injections, deposit guarantees, debt guarantees, credit intervention, asset relief
programmes and capital control measures – on the transmission process during the crisis. A key
feature exploited for this analysis is that not all countries have seen such financial policies, and




3
 For instance, King (2009) provides an event-study analysis of the effects of such financial policies by
governments on the stock market value of banks directly concerned.



                                                  11
moreover there are differences in the precise measures and timing with which these were
implemented.4


4. Empirical results

This section presents the empirical results of the factor model. It starts by first estimating model
(1)-(3) and outlining the findings for the effects of shocks on global capital flows (section 4.1)
and the determinants that explain the cross-country heterogeneity in capital flows in response to
these shocks (section 4.2). The section concludes by gauging the economic relevance of the
various drivers associated with push and pull factors in explaining net capital flows during the
2007-08 crisis and its subsequent recovery (section 4.3).


4.1 Common and idiosyncratic factors as drivers of capital flows

The first step is to estimate the model (1)-(3) with the vector of shocks St, but without the
determinants Zi,t. Table 5 shows the results for the effect of shocks on capital flows in the non-
crisis period (i,0) and for the additional effect during the crisis (i,0) for each of the five
common factors and two idiosyncratic factors. Recall that in model (1)-(3) i,0 gives the
difference in the effect of a particular factor during the crisis, while (i,0 + i,0) provides the
overall effect during the crisis. The reported coefficients are averages across country-specific
coefficients as specified in equations (1)-(3).

                                                Table 5

The key crisis events had a significant negative effect on capital flows, yet only for EMEs and
not for AEs. Looking at liquidity shocks, a rise in the TED spread, i.e. a worsening in liquidity
conditions, induces net portfolio outflows. Yet the effect was smaller during the crisis than in
the non-crisis period. However, this should not be interpreted that liquidity shocks have become
less important as drivers of capital flows during the crisis as the magnitude of such shocks has
increased enormously in the crisis.5

The response to changes in risk, as proxied by the VIX, during the crisis yields a striking result.
While higher risk during the crisis is associated with some net portfolio outflows, there is a
remarkable heterogeneity in the effect across country groups. While a rise in the VIX led to net
outflows out of AEs before the crisis and into EMEs, this effect reversed during the crisis, when
the sharp increase in global risk induced net inflows into AEs and net outflows out of EMEs.
This suggests that the pricing of risk changed fundamentally during the crisis. The finding is
consistent with the flight-to-safety phenomenon stressed as a key driver of global capital flows
in the crisis.

In the non-crisis period, a positive US macro shock induces capital outflows – presumably as
capital is repatriated into the US – while a positive domestic macro shock leads to net capital
inflows into the domestic economy. Yet, the sign for domestic macro shocks changes in the
4
  The information stems from a variety of data sources, mainly from the BIS. It should be noted that it is
not only advanced economies which implemented such policies, but a number of emerging markets did
so as well, while some advanced economies implemented no or only a few of such policy measures. The
magnitude and coverage of such financial policies of course differ significantly across countries. To the
extent possible, I have derived measures about the size of capital injections relative to domestic GDP.
However, the empirical findings are qualitatively unchanged whether we use simple dummy variables or
such ratios in the estimation.
5
  See Figure 6.B for the (normalized) evolution of the TED spread over time, showing that at times
during the crisis the TED spread rose by 5 standard deviation relative to the whole sample period.



                                                   12
crisis for AEs, suggesting that negative domestic shocks during the crisis triggered capital
outflows out of EMEs but net inflows into AEs, e.g. a repatriation of capital from abroad of
investors based in AEs. If one considers AEs as relatively saver, this finding is again consistent
with the flight-to-safety hypothesis. This is further corroborated by the change in sign for US
macro news, similarly indicating a repatriation of capital into the US in response to negative US
macro shocks during the crisis.

Finally, positive US equity returns and domestic equity returns both lead to more capital
inflows into all economies. The coefficients do not change markedly during the crisis,
suggesting that the transmission mechanism of asset price changes to capital flows has not
changed materially.

                                            Tables 6 – 9

Table 6 shows the coefficients of a further disaggregation by region and underlines the high
degree of heterogeneity across countries. Among regions, it is in particular Emerging Europe
that is most adversely affected by the global/common shocks during the crisis. By contrast, in
response to an increase in the Ted spread or the VIX, there are net capital inflows into
Advanced Europe, consistent with the (relative) safe-heaven pattern of global capital flows
emphasized above.

Table 7 provides a breakdown of portfolio flows into equity flows and bond flows. While the
results for aggregate portfolio flows largely hold also for both asset classes, there are a few
noteworthy differences. The first one relates to the sensitivity of flows to crisis events: the crisis
events triggered substantial capital outflows out of equities in both advanced and emerging
economies as well as out of EME bonds, but induced net inflows into bonds of advanced
economies.

As a second feature, an increase in risk during the crisis led to a particular strong response in
the form of net outflows out of EME bonds, but to some net inflows into AE equities. In
particular, the much stronger sensitivity of EME bond flows to risk changes (as well as to event
shocks and increases in the Ted spread) help explain the larger net outflows out of EME bonds
as highlighted among the stylized facts in section 2. A third feature is the opposite sign for
domestic macro shocks between equity and bond flow, implying that for AEs before the crisis
negative domestic macro news induced a portfolio rebalancing by shifting fund flows from
equities into bonds.

Table 8 gives the estimates for a robustness check in which the crisis period is reduced to
capture only the post-Lehman period from 15 September 2008 till 14 March 2009, which was
the period with the sharpest net capital outflows, in particular out of EMEs, as was shown in
section 2. The findings are qualitatively similar to those of the benchmark model of Table 5,
though capital flows are generally more sensitive during the Post-Lehman period to the various
common and idiosyncratic shocks, suggesting that investors have reacted particular sensitively
to new information during that period of turmoil. In particular the coefficients to liquidity
shocks and to US macro shocks are substantially higher in the post-Lehman period.

Another potentially important issue is whether the European sovereign debt crisis in 2009 and
2010 has played a relevant role in the surge in capital flows to some EMEs. In other words, this
crisis may well have functioned as a “push” factor of capital flows to EMEs. To test for this
hypothesis formally, the benchmark model is extended to include key events of the European
sovereign debt crisis as a separate variable.6 The upshot of such an extension is that there

6
  These events are the first rumors about sovereign debt strains in Greece in February 2011, the first
official Eurogroup statements acknowledging the issue in March 2010, the adverse market contraction



                                                 13
appears to be a slight positive effect of such events on capital flows to EMEs, but the
coefficient is neither economically nor statistically significant. As an interpretation, these
findings suggest that European sovereign debt events of 2009-10 have not had a global
outreach, thus neither exerting a positive nor a negative effect of portfolio flows to EMEs.7

Table 9 provides a complementary perspective on the change in the parameters between the
non-crisis and crisis periods. It shows the correlation coefficient between the non-crisis and
crisis parameters for the 49 countries in the sample. What is most striking from the table is the
strong negative correlation between non-crisis and crisis parameters for each shock (see the
boxed cells in the table), which means e.g. that countries with large negative coefficients for
risk shocks in the non-crisis period were those with the least negative (or most positive)
coefficients during the crisis, and vice versa. This pattern holds across all common and
idiosyncratic shocks.

                                              Figure 7

This negative correlation implies that capital flows to countries that exhibited a high sensitivity
to common shocks before the crisis – i.e. in many cases emerging economies in Europe, Asia
and Latin America – also experienced the sharpest reductions or even reversals of these
elasticities during the crisis. To shed more light on this issue, as well as to gauge the goodness
of fit of the factor model, Figure 7 plots the actual cumulated flows during the crisis (vertical
axis) against the fitted cumulated flows (horizontal axis) from the factor model (1)-(3). Figure
7.A is based on the estimation of the model without crisis interaction terms (but with common
and idiosyncratic shocks); the figure in Panel B on the model without any common shocks (but
with crisis interaction terms); and Figure 7.C on the full model with both crisis interaction
terms and common shocks.

Figure 7.A highlights that the above-mentioned reduction of elasticities during the crisis was
particularly strong for EMEs. Most EMEs lie above the 45-degree line, which means that the
non-crisis parameters i predict that EMEs would have been more strongly affected and
experienced larger capital outflows than was actually the case. By contrast, most AEs lie below
the 45-degree line indicating that the non-crisis model under-predicted the severity with which
AEs were actually affected by the crisis.

However, this does not mean that common factors have become less important as overall
drivers of capital flows during the crisis. In fact, common factors such as the Ted spread and
the VIX have exhibited movements that were magnitudes larger during the crisis than before.
Figure 7.B stresses this point by showing that when excluding the five common factors from
the model (i.e. thus only including the domestic factors and the controls in factor model) the
model does a very poor job in accounting for actual capital flows in the crisis. In fact, such a
model strongly under-predicts the capital outflows during the crisis. Most importantly, the
largest underprediction of such a model is for EMEs which are furthest below the 45-degree
line.

Finally, Figure 7.C shows the model predictions with the full specification, indicating a fairly
good fit of the model in accounting for global capital flow dynamics during the crisis, as well
explaining well the large degree of heterogeneity in country-specific experiences with capital
flows across the 49 countries in the sample.




and policy reaction of early May 2010, related market events of July 2010, and two events in September
and October 2010 about banking sector problems in Ireland.
7
  The empirical results are not shown here for brevity reasons, but are available upon request.



                                                 14
In summary, the empirical findings show that the drivers of capital flows during the crisis have
changed substantially. While an increase in risk triggered net capital inflows into EMEs and net
outflows out of AEs before and after the crisis, this relationship switched with the sharp rise in
global risk during the crisis being associated with a repatriation of capital out of EMEs and into
AEs. Also other common shocks, such as specific crisis events, a worsening in liquidity
conditions and negative US macro news affected capital flows to EMEs more adversely than
those to AEs. The evidence is, overall, consistent with a flight-to-safety phenomenon that has
been widely cited in the literature as a key motivation of global capital flows during the 2007-
08 financial crisis. Moreover, the evidence shows that common, global shocks have been
important in explaining both the magnitude as well as the cross-country heterogeneity of capital
flows during the 2007-08 financial crisis, with such common shocks having exerted a
particularly large effect on EMEs.


4.2 Determinants of capital flows

What explains the high degree of heterogeneity in capital flows across countries? And in
particular, what accounts for the change in the sign and size of the sensitivity of countries’
capital flows to common and idiosyncratic shocks during the 2007-08 crisis? This section
discusses the estimates of the factor model (1)-(3) when including the vector of instruments Zi,t.
As detailed in section 3, these instruments relate to a country’s economic fundamentals (size of
reserves, current account position, fiscal position, growth, etc.), its institutional environment
(sovereign risk, institutional quality), its financial policies during the crisis, and its external
exposure (through trade and financial linkages).8

                                               Figure 8

The main question is whether and which of these instruments has been important during the
crisis as a facilitator or insulator of capital flows in response to common and idiosyncratic
shocks. A first look at the data is quite informative. Figure 8 is based on the parameter
estimates of the analysis of the previous sub-section, i.e. without including instruments Zi,t, and
plots the crisis coefficients i,0 for the effect of the crisis events on capital flows against four
specific instruments Zi,t for each of the 49 countries the sample. The figures show a strikingly
strong correlation pattern. Specifically, countries with a high sovereign rating and with a good
quality of policy institutions experience much smaller sensitivity of their net capital flows to
adverse crisis events.

A formal test for the role of instruments Zi,t is obtained by estimating the full factor model (1)-
(3). More specifically, for instance, as crisis events triggered overall net capital outflows during
the crisis (a negative coefficient in Tables 6-9), then 1 > 0 for a particular instrument Zi,t
implies that a higher value of this instrument (i.e. better fundamentals or institutions, the
implementation of financial policies or more openness/integration) helps to reduce the negative
impact of these shocks on capital flows. The opposite is the case if the shock has a positive sign
on capital flows overall, so that 1 > 0 means that the transmission of the shock is magnified.
The second row of Tables 11 and 12 shows the expected signs of the coefficients for the
instruments under the null that the instrument functions as a shock insulator or absorber, i.e.
reduces the impact of the respective shock on capital flows.

The estimator used is a pooled OLS, with the estimation following an encompassing strategy
starting from a full model including all determinants Zi,t and then in a stepwise procedure

8
  Note that all instruments Zi,t are defined so that a higher value means better fundamentals, better
institutions, the implementation of financial policies, and more trade and financial integration. This is
helpful so that the coefficients can be more easily be interpreted across variables.



                                                   15
excluding variables if they are not statistically significant at the 20% level, while also at each
step testing whether already excluded variable become again statistically significant and need to
be included.

                                            Tables 10 – 11

Table 10 shows the estimates for the parameters 1 when estimating the factor model (1)-(3)
without the crisis parameters . Table 11 then provides the estimates for 1 when allowing for
shocks and instruments to exert a different effect on capital flows during the crisis.

Table 10 indicates that – when estimating the model over both crisis and non-crisis periods –
there are some systematic relationships between the quality of fundamentals or institutions,
financial policies or openness, on the one hand, and the strength with which shocks affect
global capital flows, on the other. The null hypothesis (shown in the second row of the table)
consistent with a particular instrument Zi,t helping to reduce the effect of a specific shocks is in
some cases confirmed, though the effects are modest in size.

Looking at Table 11, this finding changes substantially when allowing for instruments to exert
a different effect on the shock transmission during the crisis. The null hypothesis is confirmed
in more than 9 out of 10 cases. For instance, a better sovereign rating reduces the negative
effect of a crisis event and of changes in the Ted spread or in risk (i.e. 1 > 0 in Table 11).
Similarly, the positive coefficients for US or domestic macro news (i.e. a negative macro shock
triggering capital outflows) becomes smaller during the crisis for countries with a good
sovereign rating.

The same holds for several of the macroeconomic fundamentals and policy intervention
variables, with the exception of FX reserves.9 Moreover, comparing the estimates for 1 across
shocks indicates that the instruments are more often statistically significant for common shocks
(far fewer 1 are significant for the two idiosyncratic shocks). One interpretation of this is that
these instruments do a better job in explaining the differences in the effects of common shocks
than the effects of idiosyncratic shocks.

                                            Figures 9 – 10

A number of additional tests are presented in Figures 9-10, which aim to highlight the
economic relevance of the determinants Zi,t in explaining differences in capital flows during the
non-crisis and crisis times. Figure 9 shows the response patterns of capital flows to common
shocks during the crisis for different country groupings, where countries are grouped according
to the strength of their fundamentals and institutions or the openness of their economies. Figure
10 shows a similar analysis for VIX changes, but also distinguishes between the pre-crisis and
crisis transmissions. Both confirm that the differences in the strength of the shock transmission
are quite substantial and of meaningful across fundamentals and institutions, yet are small for
external exposure variables. Moreover, both sets of figures show dynamic response patterns by
allowing for lagged effects of the shocks in the factor model (1)-(3), indicating that the effects
exhibit some persistence for a number of weeks.

In summary, the main finding of this sub-section is that country-specific fundamentals and
institutions are important for explaining differences in capital flows, and in particular during the

9
 The only fundamental that persistently has the opposite sign from the null is for FX reserve holdings,
implying that countries with high reserve holdings suffered larger capital outflows during the crisis and
were also more exposed to common and idiosyncratic shocks. This is somewhat unexpected, but is
consistent with the fact that countries with high reserve holdings are generally EMEs, i.e. those with
poorer institutional quality.



                                                   16
2007-08 crisis. More specifically, countries with a high institutional quality and strong
macroeconomic fundamentals succeeded to insulate their financial markets from adverse
common and idiosyncratic shocks during the financial crisis. By contrast, the external exposure
of countries, either through trade or through finance, appears to have played at most a minor
role in accounting for cross-country differences in the transmission of global shocks.


4.3 Economic relevance of drivers associated with push versus pull factors

The purpose of the final step of the analysis is to gauge the economic relevance of the identified
effects and to compare the overall importance of different drivers associated with push factors
versus pull factors in explaining global capital flows.

                                                                Table 12

Looking at the fitted values if the model is a first way to gauge how much of net capital flows
can be accounted for by drivers associated with push factors – i.e. shocks that are common to
all countries – and how much by drivers related to pull factors – i.e. factors specific to
individual countries’ policies, institutions and fundamentals. Using the definitions of equations
(4) and (5), Table 12 shows actual and fitted net capital flows during each of three sub-periods
(pre-crisis, crisis, and post-crisis) against the fitted cumulated flows from the factor model (1)-
(3). The fitted net flows are also split up into a part explained by common factors fˆi ,Gt and a
part accounted for by domestic factors fˆi ,Dt , together with the shares of fitted net capital flows
accounted for by common factors and by domestic factors calculated respectively as
X iG,t  fˆi ,Gt / fˆi ,t and X iD,t  fˆi ,Dt / fˆi ,t .

The main finding of Table 12 is that common factors are, overall, about as important as
domestic factors as drivers as net capital flows over the period 2005-2010. However, there are
some interesting differences across regions and over time. Importantly, while common factors
appear to have been more important during the crisis – accounting for about 73% of net capital
flows for the median country – domestic factors have come to dominate in explaining net
capital flows since 2009. Looking at different regions, domestic factors have become particular
important for EMEs in Latin America and Asia in the 2009-10 surge in capital flows to EMEs,
accounting for most of the cumulated net capital flows during that period.

A number of caveats apply to these calculations. Although the fit of the model (1)-(3) is overall
good, relevant common or idiosyncratic drivers may be excluded from the model. Moreover,
the comparison of the fit of the model with actual net capital flows is done for the whole of the
three sub-periods, which implies that the numbers of Table 12 provide overall figures, while
over shorter periods there may indeed be significant changes as to whether common factors or
domestic factors drive capital flows.

A second way to gauge the economic relevance of the drivers associated with various pull
factors, is to estimate model (1)-(3) as an unconditional one in order to see whether and how the
various country-specific determinants Zi,t may be related to capital flows at particular points in
time. To do so, the factors St are dropped from the benchmark model, so that the model
becomes:

                                         f i ,t  Et 1 [ f i ,t ]   1 ' Z i ,t 1  ei ,t     (6)




                                                                     17
Since Zi,t are slowly changing over time (many having annual or quarterly frequency) and
capital flows tend to be highly volatile, an estimation with weekly frequency yields little
information about the relationship between these determinants and capital flows. The
estimation of (6) is therefore conducted for longer sub-periods of the crisis and periods around
the crisis, in particular the pre-crisis period (12 October 2005 through 7 August 2007), the crisis
(8 August 2007 – 14 March 2009) and the post-crisis period (15 March 2009 – 22 November
2010) as discussed in section 2. Hence fi,t for this pure cross-section estimations are the
cumulated, total capital flows to country i over each of these specific sub-periods. As before,
the estimation follows an encompassing strategy starting from a full model including all
determinants Zi,t and then in a stepwise procedure excluding variables that are not statistically
significant at the 20% level, while also at each step testing whether already excluded variable
become again statistically significant and need to be included.

                                              Table 13

Table 13 shows the estimates of equation (6) for the three separate sub-periods. The columns
labeled “decile” show the difference in the response of capital flows for a country with the
determinant at its 90th percentile compared a country at its 10th percentile. The table again
confirms the findings of the conditional analysis of the previous sub-section (where the analysis
conditioned on various common or idiosyncratic shocks) that in particular countries with strong
macro fundamentals and with good institutions experienced smaller outflows (or more capital
inflows) during the crisis than countries with weak fundamentals and high country risk. More
specifically, countries with a strong current account, a good fiscal position and relative lower
short-term debt fared significantly better during the crisis in terms of capital flows. Among the
institutional variables, it is in particular the sovereign rating and the quality of institutions that
exerted a significant effect on capital flows during the crisis.

Most importantly, the effects of fundamentals and institutional factors on capital flows are
sizeable. What is striking for these two sets of variables is the change in the sign of the
coefficients in the crisis compared to the pre- or post-crisis periods. It implies that countries that
were relatively more risky – e.g. a lower sovereign rating, worse institutions or higher short-
term debt – experienced larger capital outflows during the crisis but also higher net inflows
before and after the crisis. For instance, countries with a poor sovereign rating (10th percentile)
experienced 15.2% higher net capital outflows during the crisis but 9.2% larger net inflows in
the 2009-10 recovery.

By contrast, there is no systematic evidence that either trade or financial integration and
exposure explain any of the cross-sectional differences in capital flows during the crisis.
However, there is some indication that more financial open economies experienced somewhat
larger capital outflows, though the point estimate is marginally insignificant.

                                             Figure 11

Figure 11 illustrates the relationship between total cumulated capital flows and sovereign
ratings and the institutional quality across countries. The figures show a quite striking switch in
the sign in the link between capital flows and the determinants from the crisis period to the pre-
and post-crisis periods. For instance, Figure 11 shows that while a better rating meant smaller
capital outflows during the crisis, the opposite relationship held both before the crisis and
during the 2009-10 recovery. This is indeed intuitive as we have seen that it was particularly
EMEs, i.e. those with generally worse sovereign ratings, which experienced that sharpest
declines in capital flows during the crisis, yet also the strongest increases in capital inflows
before and after the crisis. A similar switch in sign in the relationship is observed for the and
for the quality of domestic institutions (Panels B and D) as well as other variables (Table 13).




                                                 18
5. Conclusions

Global portfolio capital flows have exhibited a collapse and substantial shift during the height
of the 2007-08 crisis, and an even more sustained surge since the beginning of 2009. The paper
has analyzed the drivers behind this collapse and surge over the past few years, building on a
novel, high-frequency database of fund-level flows in portfolio equities and bonds. It has
attempted to shed light in particular on the debate whether it has been push factors or pull
factors that have been the main drivers behind this global capital flow pattern for a broad set of
50 advanced and emerging economies.

The findings indicate that common shocks – such as specific crisis events, changes to global
liquidity and risk conditions – have exerted a substantial effect on global capital flows.
Moreover, the effects of such global factors have changed markedly during the crisis. In
particular the rise in risk and important crisis events triggered a reallocation of flows from
many EMEs to some AEs during the crisis, while they have had the opposite effect before and
after the crisis, consistent with a “flight-to-safety” hypothesis during the crisis.

The second main finding of the paper is that much of the cross-country heterogeneity to
common shocks is related to country-specific determinants, and these effects are indeed
economically meaningful.

The empirical results have implications for the ongoing policy debate about the drivers of
capital flows. A highly contentious issue is whether it is push factors – i.e. shocks in advanced
economies and common to all economies, or rather pull factors – i.e. factors that are specific to
countries themselves, which have been driving capital flows over the past few years. The
findings of the paper indicate that push factors in the form of shocks to liquidity and risk as
well as to macroeconomic conditions and policies in advanced economies, in particular the US,
have indeed exerted a significant effect on capital flows to EMEs as well as other advanced
economies. Although these effects have been larger during the 2007-08 crisis, they have
continued to exert a sizeable effect on global capital flows also during the subsequent recovery.

However, the findings of the paper also underline that the drivers of capital flows are strongly
related to pull factors, and in particular countries’ macroeconomic fundamentals, institutions
and policies, which in fact have been the dominant drivers of capital flows in the 2009-10
recovery. By contrast, real and financial openness are found to play little or no role for the
exposure and vulnerability of capital flows of countries to common global shocks emanating
from advanced economies. Hence the implication of this finding is making the domestic
economy more closed through capital controls may be largely ineffective, while it is rather
sound macroeconomic policies and an improvement in the institutional setting that helps
countries reduce their exposure to external shocks.




                                               19
                                         References

Adrian, Tobias and Markus Brunnermeier, 2010. “Hedge Fund Fat Tail Risk.” Working paper.
Andersen, T., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F. and C. Vega, 2007. ‘Real-Time Price Discovery in
   Stock, Bond and Foreign Exchange Markets’ Journal of International Economics 73, 251-
   277
Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop. (2010). “On the Global Spread of Risk Panics.”
   Mimeo. mimeo.
Bae, Kee-Hong, Andrew Karolyi, Rene Stulz, 2003. “A new approach to measuring financial
   contagion,” Review of Financial Studies 16: 717-763.
Baele, L. & K. Inghelbrecht, 2009. “Time-varying integration and international diversification
   strategies,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 16(3): 368-387.
Bekaert, Geert, Michael Ehrmann, Marcel Fratzscher and Arnaud Mehl, 2010. Global crises
   and equity market contagion, mimeo.
Bekaert, G., & C.R. Harvey, 1995. “Time-varying world market integration,” Journal of
   Finance, 50 (2): 403-444.
Bekaert G., C. R. Harvey and A. Ng. 2005. “Market Integration and Contagion,” Journal of
   Business: 39-69.
Blanchard, Olivier, Mitali Das, and Hamid Faruqee. (2010). “The Initial Impact of the Crisis on
   Emerging Market Countries.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 263-307.
Broner, Fernando, Tatiana Didier, Aitor Erce and Sergio Schmukler. (2010). “Financial Crises
   and International Portfolio Dynamics.” Mimeo.
Broner, Fernando, Gaston Gelos, and Carmen Reinhart. (2006). “When in Peril, Retrench:
   Testing the Portfolio Channel of Contagion.” Journal of International Economics 69(10):
   203-30.
Brunnermeier, Markus. (2009). “Deciphering the Liqudity and Credit Crunch 2007-8.” Journal
   of Economic Perspectives 23(1): 77-100.
Brunnermeier, M. and L. Pedersen, 2009. “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity,” Review of
    Financial Studies.
Calomiris, Charles W. 2008. “The Subprime Turmoil: What’s Old, What’s New and What’s
   Next”, mimeo, Columbia Business School.
Calvet, L., J. Campbell and P. Sodini (2009), "Fight of Flight? Portfolio Rebalancing by
   Individual Investors," Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (1): 301-348.
Calvo, Guillermo. (2009). “Financial Crises and Liquidity Shocks: A Bank-Run Perspective.”
   NBER Working Paper 15425.
Calvo, Guillermo. (1998). “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of
   Sudden Stops.” Journal of Applied Economics (Nov): 35-54.
Calvo, Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis-Fernando Mejía. (2008). “Systemic Sudden
   Stops: The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects and Financial Integration.” NBER Working
   Paper 14026.
Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart. (1996). “Inflows of Capital to
    Developing Countries in the 1990s.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 10(2): 123-139.
Cardarelli, Roberto, Selim Elekdag and M.Ayhan Kose. (2009). “Capital Inflows:
    Macroeconomic Implications and Policy Responses.” IMF Working Paper WP/09/40.
Chinn, Menzie and Kristin Forbes. (2004). “A Decomposition of Global Linkages in Financial
    Markets Over Time.” Review of Economics and Statistics 86(3): 705-722.
Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito. (2008). “A New Measure of Financial Openness.” Journal of
    Comparative Policy Analysis 10(3): 309-22.
Chudik, Alexander, and Marcel Fratzscher, 2011. Identifying the Global Transmission of the
    2007-09 Financial Crisis in a GVAR Model, forthcoming European Economic Review.
Chuhan, P., Stijn Claessens, and N. Mamingi. (1998). “Equity and bond flows to Latin America
   and Asia: the role of global and country factors.” Journal of Development Economics 55
   (2), 439 - 463.




                                              20
Claessens, Stijn and Kristin Forbes. (2001). “International Financial Contagion: An Overview”
    In Stijn Claessens and Kristin Forbes, eds. International Financial Contagion. Kluwer
    Academic Publishers, pgs. 3-17.
Daude, C. and M. Fratzscher (2008), "The Pecking Order of Cross-Border Investment," Journal
    of International Economics, 74(1), pp. 94-119.
Dooley, Michael. (1988). “Capital flight: a response to differences in financial risks.” IMF Staff
    Papers 35: 422-436.
Dungey, Mardi, Renée Fry, Brenda González-Hermosillo, and Vance Martin. (2011).
    Transmission of Financial Crises and Contagion: A Latent Factor Approach, Oxford
    University Press (New York, NY).
Ehrmann, Michael, and Marcel Fratzscher, 2005. Equal size, equal role? Interest rate
    interdependence between the euro area and the United States, Economic Journal 115: 930-
    50.
Ehrmann, Michael and Marcel Fratzscher, 2004. Taking Stock: Monetary Policy Transmission
    to Equity Markets. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 36(4): 719-37, August 2004.
Forbes, Kristin. (2010). “Why do Foreigners Invest in the United States?” Journal of
    International Economics 80(1): 3-21.
Forbes, K. and R. Rigobon, 2002. “No Contagion, Only Interdependence: Measuring stock
    Market Comovements”, Journal of Finance, 57 (5): 2223-2261.
Froot, K. and T. Ramadorai (2005), "Currency Returns, Intrinsic Value and Institutional
    Investor Flows," Journal of Finance, pp. 1535-1566.
Gürkaynak, Refet, Sack, Brian and Eric Swanson, 2005. Do Actions Speak Louder than
    Words? The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements.
    International Journal of Central Banking 1: 55-94.
Hau, H. and H. Rey (2006), "Exchange Rate, Equity Prices and Capital Flows," Review of
    Financial Studies, 19 (1), pp. 273-317.
Hau, H. and H. Rey (2008), "Global Portfolio Rebalancing under the Microscope," mimeo.
Jotikasthira, Chotibhak, Lundblad, Christian T. and Ramadorai, Tarun, 2010. Asset Fire Sales
    and Purchases and the International Transmission of Financial Shocks. CEPR Discussion
    Paper No. 7595.
Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Elias Papaioannou and Fabrizio Perri. (2010). “This Time is
    Different: Financial Integration and the 2007 Crisis.” Mimeo.
Karolyi, A., 2003. “Does International Finance Contagion Really Exist?”, International
    Finance 6: 179-199.
King, Michael, 2009. “Time to buy or just buying time? The market reaction to bank rescue
    packages”, BIS Working Paper No. 288, September 2009.
Klaus, B. and B. Rzepkowski, 2009. Risk spillover among hedge funds: The role of
    redemptions and fund failures, ECB Working Paper No. 1112.
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria and Cédric Tille. (2010). “The Great Retrenchment: International
    Capital Flows during the Global Financial Crisis.” Mimeo.
Peek, Joe, and Eric Rosengreen. (1997). “The International Transmission of Financial Shocks:
    The Case of Japan,” American Economic Review 87(4): 495-505.
Reinhart, Carmen and Vincent Reinhart. (2009). “Capital Flow Bonanzas: An Encompassing
    View of the Past and Present,” in Jeffrey Frankel and Francesco Giavazzi, eds. NBER
    International Seminar in Macroeconomics 2008. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Rose, Andrew and Mark Spiegel. (2011). “Cross-Country Causes and Consequences of the
    2008 Crisis: International Linkages and American Exposure.” Forthcoming European
    Economic Review.
Rothenberg, Alex and Francis E. Warnock. (2010). “Sudden Flight and True Sudden Stops.”
    Review of International Economics (forthcoming).
Tong, Hui and Shang-Jin Wei, 2008. “Real Effects of the Subprime Mortgage Crisis: is it a
    Demand or Finance Shock?” mimeo.




                                               21
TABLES AND FIGURES




        22
                                  Figure 1: Capital flows during the crisis

                                   A. Advanced versus emerging economies

                    130
                    120
                    110
                    100
                    90




                    1 Jan 2007         1 Jan 2008      1 Jan 2009.
                                                                               1 Jan 2010       1 Jan 2011

                                        Advanced             Emerging                 Key events




                                             B. Equities versus bonds
                   140
                   120
                   100
                   80
                   60




                   1 Jan 2007         1 Jan 2008       1 Jan 2009
                                                             .
                                                                               1 Jan 2010       1 Jan 2011

                                 AE equity      EME equity           AE bond         EME bond




Notes: The figures show the cumulated total capital flows (net capital flows in USD to total assets under management)
relative to the beginning of the crisis (7 Aug. 2007 = 100), distinguishing between advanced and emerging economies
(panel A) and by type of portfolio investment (Panel B).




                                                         23
                                  Figure 2: Capital flows during the crisis – breakdown by region and asset class
                                   Major Advanced Economies                                                                 Major Advanced Economies




              110




                                                                                                  140
                                                                                                  120
              100




                                                                                                  100
              90




                                                                                                  80
                                                                                                  60
              80




                                                                                                  1 Jan 2007        1 Jan 2008         1 Jan 2009
                                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                                        1 Jan 2010      1 Jan 2011
             1 Jan 2007       1 Jan 2008        1 Jan 2009        1 Jan 2010    1 Jan 2011
                                                                                                               USA equity        EA equity          Other AE equity   USA bond
                                                           .




                          USA              Euro area           Other Advanced                                  EA bond           Other AE bond



                                             EME regions                                                                            EME regions
             140




                                                                                                  140
                                                                                                  120
             120




                                                                                                  100
             100




                                                                                                  80
                                                                                                  60
             80




                                                                                                  1 Jan 2007        1 Jan 2008         1 Jan 2009
                                                                                                                                                .
                                                                                                                                                         1 Jan 2010     1 Jan 2011
            1 Jan 2007       1 Jan 2008         1 Jan 2009
                                                       .
                                                                  1 Jan 2010    1 Jan 2011                     LA equity           EM Eur equity       Asia equity    LA bond
                          Latin America          EM Europe            EM Asia                                  EM Eur bond         Asia bond




Notes: The figures show the cumulated total capital flows (net capital flows in USD to total assets under management) relative to the beginning of the crisis (7 Aug. 2007 =
100), providing a further breakdown within advanced and within emerging economies and by type of portfolio investment.


                                                                                             24
                         Figure 3: Capital flows during the crisis – event-study breakdown, Advanced economies


                                               Portfolio flows                                                                  Equity flows




                                                                                                99 100 101 102 103
                            102
                            100 101
                            99
                            98




                                                                                                98
                                      0   20       40    .
                                                             60       80       100                                   0   20        40        .
                                                                                                                                                 60       80      100


                                                 Bond flows                                                                   Portfolio flows
                            110




                                                                                          98 99100101102
                            105
                            100




                                                                                                                     0   20       40     .
                                                                                                                                                 60       80      100

                                                                                                                         Liquidity crunch             Post-Bear Stearns
                            95




                                                                                                                         Post Lehman                  2009 recovery
                                                                                                                         European debt                Tranquil
                                      0   20       40    .
                                                             60       80       100


Notes: The figures show – for advanced economies – the cumulated total capital flows (net capital flows in USD to total assets under management) relative to the beginning
of each sub-period (normalized to 100) providing a distinction across the six non-crisis and crisis regime periods. The horizontal axis shows the number of days after the
beginning of the respective sub-period. Tranquil: 7 May 2007 – 7 Aug 2007; Liquidity crunch: 8 Aug 2007 – 14 March 2008; Post-Bear Stearns: 15 March 2008 – 14 Sept
2008; Post-Lehman: 15 Sept 2008 – 14 March 2009; 2009 recovery: 15 March 2009 – 14 March 2010; 2010 European/sovereign debt crisis: 15 March 2010 – 22 Nov 2010.




                                                                                     25
                         Figure 4: Capital flows during the crisis – event-study breakdown, Emerging economies


                                               Portfolio flows                                                        Equity flows




                            110




                                                                                                110
                            105




                                                                                                105
                            100




                                                                                                100
                            95
                            90




                                                                                                95
                                  0      20        40    .
                                                             60       80       100                         0   20        40        .
                                                                                                                                       60       80      100


                                                 Bond flows                                                         Portfolio flows
                            120




                                                                                          90 95100105110
                            110
                            100




                                                                                                           0   20       40             60       80      100
                            90




                                                                                                                               .




                                                                                                               Liquidity crunch             Post-Bear Stearns
                            80




                                                                                                               Post Lehman                  2009 recovery
                                                                                                               European debt                Tranquil
                                  0      20        40    .
                                                             60       80       100


Notes: The figures show – for emerging economies – the cumulated total capital flows (net capital flows in USD to total assets under management) relative to the beginning
of each sub-period (normalized to 100) providing a distinction across the six non-crisis and crisis regime periods. The horizontal axis shows the number of days after the
beginning of the respective sub-period. Tranquil: 7 May 2007 – 7 Aug 2007; Liquidity crunch: 8 Aug 2007 – 14 March 2008; Post-Bear Stearns: 15 March 2008 – 14 Sept
2008; Post-Lehman: 15 Sept 2008 – 14 March 2009; 2009 recovery: 15 March 2009 – 14 March 2010; 2010 European/sovereign debt crisis: 15 March 2010 – 22 Nov 2010.




                                                                                     26
                                                               Figure 5: Dispersion in capital flows

                          Euro area vs other advanced                                                                                  EME regions
      2




                                                                                                        2
      1.5




                                                                                              f2all_pc_het_group1_m
                                                                                                                 1.5
      1




                                                                                                        1
      .5




                                                                                              .5        0
      0




      1 Jan 2007      1 Jan 2008      1 Jan 2009
                                           .
                                                         1 Jan 2010         1 Jan 2011              1 Jan 2007            1 Jan 2008     1 Jan 2009
                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                      1 Jan 2010    1 Jan 2011

                    Euro area           Other advanced                Key events                                       Latin America      EM Europe       EM Asia




Notes: The figures show the dispersion – measured as the cross-section standard deviation – of cumulated total capital flows (net capital flows in USD to total assets under
management) over 6-month (centered moving) windows, distinguishing within advanced and emerging economies. Each dispersion measure is normalized so as to be equal
to one for the entire sample period.




                                                                                         27
     Figure 6: Time-series evolution of US macroeconomic news, Ted spread and VIX

                                         A. US macroeconomic news
                 .4
                 .2
                 0
                 -.2




                 2005w26       2006w26        2007w26        2008w27      2009w26      2010w26



                                             B. Ted spread and VIX
                   6
                   4
                   2
                   0
                   -2




                  1 Jul 2005    1 Jul 2006     1 Jul 2007    1 Jul 2008   1 Jul 2009   1 Jul 2010

                                                    Ted spread              VIX

            33
Notes: The figures show the evolution of US macroeconomic news (Panel A), Ted spread and VIX (Panel B). The latter
two are normalized so as to have a zero mean and a standard deviation of unity.




                                                        28
Figure 7: Goodness of fit – actual versus fitted capital flows in crisis

                       A. Factor model without crisis interaction terms
      0
                                                                                            Chn
                                                                                    Egy
                                                                                            Chl
                                                                                                      Saf
                                                                                   Bra
                                                                                      Kor
                                                                                     Ind
                                                                                      Hon
      -10




                                                                       Rus        Tha                        Swi
                                                                                 Aus
                                                                      Mal
                                                                          NZ      Can        Nor
                                                                Mex                           UK
                                                          Idn         Sin                    Den
actual flows




                                                                                               Fra
                                                                                          Spa
                                        Per                                           GerNet
                                                                                     Swe
    -20




                                        Phi         Tur                                  Fin
                                  Arg                                       CzeJapBel
                         Col                                                         Gre
                                 Kaz                                         Ire
                                                                              Ita
                                                                                      Aut
                                              Pol
                   Ukr
      -30




                                        Hun



                   Bul
                         Cro
      -40




                         Rom

                 -40                 -30                        -20                             -10                       0
                                                           fitted flows



                           B. Factor model without common shocks
         0




                                                                                                                           Chn
                                                                                                            Egy
                                                                                                                           Chl
                                                                                                                   Saf
                                                                                                                               Bra
                                                                                                               Kor
                                                                                                            Ind
                                                                                                 Hon
         -10




                                                                                     Swi        RusTha Aus
                                                                                                   Mal
                                                                                     Nor        NZCan
                                                                                           UK          Mex
                                                                                      Den    Sin          Idn
  actual flows




                                                                                     Fra
                                                                                      Spa
                                                                                       Net
                                                                                         Swe                                   Per
                                                                                        Ger
      -20




                                                                                  Fin            Tur    Phi
                                                                              CzeJap
                                                                               Bel                 Arg
                                                                                  Gre                                     Col
                                                                                   Ire
                                                                                  Ita                      Kaz
                                                                                Aut
                                                                                   Pol
                                                                                                                         Ukr
         -30




                                                                        Hun



                                           Bul
                                                          Cro
         -40




                                           Rom

                 -40           -30               -20              -10                       0
                                                            fitted flows




                                                            29
                                        C. Factor model, full specification


                  0
                                                                                                                   Chn
                                                                                                   Egy
                                                                                                             Chl
                                                                                                                    Saf
                                                                                                       Bra
                                                                                                 Kor
                                                                                                 Ind
                                                                                           Hon
                  -10


                                                                                      Rus    Tha Swi
                                                                                        Aus
                                                                                    Mal
                                                                             NZ      CanNor
                                                                              Mex        UK
                                                                           Idn
                                                                            Sin     Den
            actual flows




                                                                                       Fra
                                                                Per                Spa
                                                                               Swe Net
                                                                            Ger
                -20




                                                           Phi Tur            Fin
                                                         Arg    CzeJap  Bel
                                                  ColKaz                  Gre
                                                                    Ire
                                                                   Ita
                                                                            Aut
                                                   Pol
                                          Ukr
                  -30




                                            Hun



                                 Bul
                                  Cro
                  -40




                                 Rom

                           -40              -30                  -20                     -10                              0
                                                            fitted flows

Notes: The figures show the actual cumulated flows during the crisis (vertical axis) against the fitted cumulated
flows (horizontal axis) from the factor model (1)-(3). The figure in Panel A is based on the estimation of the model
without crisis interaction terms and with common and idiosyncratic shocks; the figure in Panel B on the model with
crisis interaction terms but without any common shocks; and the figure in Panel C both with crisis interaction terms
and with common shocks.




                                                           30
                           Figure 8: Determinants of effect of crisis events on capital flows
              25




                                                                 50 60 70 80 90
                                                                 quality of institutions
                  20
     country risk
         15   10




                                                                                40
              5




                          -3     -2      -1      0      1                                       -3   -2   -1   0   1
              200




                                                                                           20
                                                                 current account-GDP ratio
                                                                                    10
              100 150
     financial openness




                                                                   -20 -10      0
        50    0




                                                                                -30




                          -3     -2      -1      0      1                                       -3   -2   -1   0   1




Notes: The figures show on the horizontal axis the response coefficients of portfolio capital flows to key crisis
events for each of the countries in the sample; the vertical axis shows the values of the four respective determinants
for each of the countries.




                                                            31
Figure 9: Determinants of capital flows during crisis – dynamic effects

                                                         A. Effect of crisis events

                                 FX reserves                                           Current account                                                Public debt




                                                           -.8 -.6-.4 -.2 0 .2




                                                                                                                     -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2
  0
  -.5
  -1




                         0   2      4    6      8   10                            0     2    4     6    8      10                           0     2      4    6       8   10


                             Sovereign rating                                         Political institutions                                    Deposit guarantees
  -.8-.6-.4-.2 0 .2




                                                           -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2




                                                                                                                     -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0
                         0   2      4    6      8   10                            0     2    4     6    8      10                           0     2      4    6       8   10


                             Debt guarantees                                                 Trade                                                    FPI liability
  -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2




                                                                                                                     -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2
                                                           -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0




                         0   2      4    6      8   10                            0     2    4     6    8      10                           0     2      4    6       8   10




                                                    B. Effect of US macro shocks

                                  FX reserves                                          Current account                                                Public debt
      1




                                                            -1 0 1 2 3 4




                                                                                                                    -1 -.5 0 .5 1
      -1 -.5 0 .5




                         0    2      4   6      8   10                            0     2    4     6    8      10                           0     2      4    6       8   10


                             Sovereign rating                                         Political institutions                                    Deposit guarantees
                                                                                                                    -1 -.5 0 .5 1 1.5
      -1 0 1 2 3 4




                                                            1
                                                            0
                                                            -1
                                                            -2




                         0    2      4   6      8   10                            0     2    4     6    8      10                           0     2      4    6       8   10


                             Debt guarantees                                                 Trade                                                    FPI liability
                                                            .5
      -1 0 1 2 3 4




                                                                                                                    .5
                                                            0




                                                                                                                    0
                                                            -.5




                                                                                                                    -.5
                                                            -1




                                                                                                                    -1




                         0    2      4   6      8   10                            0     2    4     6    8      10                           0     2      4    6       8   10




                                                                                                                                                                               (cont.)…


                                                                                             32
   Figure 9 (cont.): Determinants of capital flows during crisis – dynamic effects

                                                         C. Effect of US equity markets


                                       FX reserves                                      Current account                                            Public debt
           0 .01.02.03.04.05




                                                               0 .01.02.03.04.05




                                                                                                                     0 .01 .02 .03 .04
                               0   2      4   6      8    10                       0     2    4     6    8      10                       0     2      4    6       8   10


                                   Sovereign rating                                    Political institutions                                Deposit guarantees
           .02 .04 .06




                                                               .02 .04 .06




                                                                                                                     0 .01.02.03.04.05
           0




                                                               0




                               0   2      4   6      8    10                       0     2    4     6    8      10                       0     2      4    6       8   10


                                   Debt guarantees                                            Trade                                                FPI liability
           0 .01.02.03.04.05




                                                                                                                     0 .01.02.03.04.05
                                                               0 .01 .02 .03 .04




                               0   2      4   6      8    10                       0     2    4     6    8      10                       0     2      4    6       8   10




Notes: The figures show the dynamic response of portfolio capital flows over a window of 10 weeks – in Panel A
to crisis events; in Panel B to US equity markets; and in Panel C to US macro shocks. The light/orange lines show
the responses for countries with values above the cross-country average for the respective determinants; while the
dark/blue lines show the corresponding responses for countries below the average. Dotted lines provide 90%
confidence intervals.




                                                                                              33
                 Figure 10: Determinants of effect of changes in risk on capital flows

                                   A. Good fundamentals, good institutions, open economy

                                      FX reserves                          Current account                       Sovereign rating
                   .06




                                                                                                 .04
                                                                .02




                                                                                                 .03
                   .04




                                                                .01




                                                                                                 .02
                   .02




                                                                                                 .01
                   0




                                                                0
                   -.04 -.02




                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                 -.01
                               0       1     2      3       4   -.01   0    1     2     3    4               0     1    2      3    4


                                   Political institutions                       Trade                              FPI liability




                                                                                                 .03
                   .03




                                                                .03




                                                                                                 .02
                                                                .02
                   .02




                                                                                                 .01
                                                                .01
                   .01




                                                                0




                                                                                                 0
                   0




                                                                -.01




                                                                                                 -.01
                               0       1     2      3       4          0    1     2     3    4               0     1    2      3    4



                                   B. Poor fundamentals, poor institutions, closed economy

                                      FX reserves                          Current account                       Sovereign rating
                   .04




                                                                                                 .06
                                                                .04
                   .03




                                                                                                 .04
                                                                .03
                   .02




                                                                                                 .02
                                                                .02
                   .01




                                                                .01




                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                 -.04 -.02
                   0




                                                                0
                   -.01




                                                                -.01




                               0       1     2      3       4          0    1     2     3    4               0     1    2      3    4


                                   Political institutions                       Trade                              FPI liability
                   .06




                                                                .03




                                                                                                 .03
                   .04




                                                                .02




                                                                                                 .02
                   .02




                                                                                                 .01
                                                                .01
                   0




                                                                                                 0
                                                                0
                   -.02




                                                                                                 -.01
                                                                -.01




                               0       1     2      3       4          0    1     2     3    4               0     1    2      3    4



Notes: The figures show the effects of changes in risk (VIX) on portfolio capital flows over a window of 4 weeks. Panel A only
includes countries that have good fundamentals (high reserves, string current account position), good institutions (high
sovereign rating, good political institutions), or are open to trade and finance, relative to the average of the cross-country
distribution. Panel B includes those countries below these respective averages. The light/orange lines show the responses in the
non-crisis period, the dark/blue lines show those during the crisis. Dotted lines provide 90% confidence intervals.


                                                                                34
                                    Figure 11: Determinants of capital flows – Country risk/sovereign rating and quality of institutions

A. Post-Lehman versus pre-crisis period – Sovereign rating                                    B. Post-Lehman versus pre-crisis period - quality of institutions




                                                                                                             50
             25




                                                                                                             45
             20




                                                                                                    fin. institutions
      country rating




                                                                                                           40
           15




                                                                                                             35
             10




                                                                                                             30
             5




                              -30               -20            -10                  0    10                                    -30               -20            -10                  0    10
                                                      capital flows                                                                                    capital flows

                                     Post-Lehman                  pre-crisis                                                          Post-Lehman                  pre-crisis


 C. Post-Lehman versus 2009 recovery – Sovereign rating                                        D. Post-Lehman versus 2009 recovery - quality of institutions




                                                                                                              50
              25




                                                                                                              45
              20




                                                                                                     fin. institutions
       country rating




                                                                                                            40
            15




                                                                                                              35
              10




                                                                                                              30
              5




                        -40               -20              0                   20       40                               -40               -20              0                   20       40
                                                      capital flows                                                                                    capital flows

                                    Post-Lehman                 2009 recovery                                                        Post-Lehman                 2009 recovery


Notes: The figure shows the distribution, across the full set of countries, for total capital flows (total net capital flows in USD over the entire period relative to total assets
under management at the beginning of the period, in %) against the country rating (a higher value implying a better rating) at the beginning of each period for different sub-
periods of the non-crisis and the crisis.
                                                                                              35
       Table 1: EPFR fund-level portfolio flow database, November 2010

                        A. Equity Funds Database Coverage
                         Daily Report           Weekly Report           Monthly Report
Fund Group:        # of Funds $US billions # of Funds $US billions # of Funds $US billions

Asia ex-Japan            1193         199         1211        206        1354         251
EMEA                      479          40          487         42         543          42
GEM                       743         251          745        272         866         322
Global                   2989         752         3037        780        3908        1680
Japan                     561          40          563         40         629          48
Latin America             229          50          231         54         236          63
Pacific                   173          22          173         22         221          37
USA                      5523        1624         5673       1820        6738        3276
Western Europe           1940         315         1944        317        2218         443
TOTAL                   13830        3294        14064       3552       16713        6163


                         B. Bond Funds Database Coverage
                         Daily Report           Weekly Report           Monthly Report
Fund Group:        # of Funds $US billions # of Funds $US billions # of Funds $US billions

Balanced                  476         244         491         261         639         584
Emerging Markets          645          69         664          80         736          96
Global                   1309         330        1330         341        1541         677
High Yield                534         123         547         136         704         221
Money Market             1617        2620        1721        2885        1879        3322
USA                      2256         635        2492         706        2853        1349
TOTAL                    6837        4020        7245        4410        8352        6248




                                            36
         Table 2: Summary statistics of EPFR weekly and cumulated net capital flows


                   Assets under management                   Weekly net capital flows,        Cumulated net capital
                      (AUM), USD million                            % of AUM                   flows,   % of AUM
                   Total       Equity        Bond         Mean         Mean      Std. dev.     Pre-crisis     Crisis (Lehman)
                              22 Nov 2010               abs. flows                           (12/10/05-7/8/07) (14/8/08-14/3/09)

Argentina             6,663       1,940         4,722     0.50          0.15       0.64          28.53             -19.24
Australia            40,291      32,418         7,873     0.30          0.12       0.38          22.50              -5.38
Austria               8,679       5,262         3,417     0.37         -0.06       0.51           5.85              -5.78
Belgium              13,057       9,793         3,264     0.24         -0.05       0.32           6.45              -7.49
Brazil              136,570     117,967        18,603     0.50          0.19       0.66          29.19              -5.85
Canada               96,863      65,210        31,653     0.29          0.05       0.43          11.32              -7.84
Chile                 7,802       6,021         1,781     0.52          0.21       0.65          27.99              -0.70
China               170,449     168,416         2,033     0.62          0.21       0.83          39.23              -0.29
Colombia              4,773       1,122         3,651     0.60          0.22       0.77          29.79             -21.79
Czech Republic        3,140       2,525           615     0.36         -0.09       0.52          -7.21             -14.66
Denmark              11,022       9,772         1,251     0.19         -0.03       0.26          10.53              -4.34
Egypt                 4,394       3,474           920     0.44          0.13       0.56           4.96              -8.10
Finland               9,733       8,473         1,260     0.24         -0.06       0.32           9.15              -4.84
France              113,449     100,294        13,155     0.21         -0.05       0.28           8.44              -2.97
Germany             141,035     112,715        28,320     0.39         -0.01       0.79           7.57              -5.23
Greece                1,711       1,530           182     0.27         -0.06       0.39           8.36              -5.72
Hong Kong            50,073      48,406         1,667     0.36          0.09       0.47          21.02              -6.94
Hungary               6,292       2,827         3,466     0.48         -0.08       0.66          -8.19             -21.15
India                79,137      77,677         1,460     0.46          0.12       0.62          14.75              -5.80
Indonesia            28,660      17,997        10,663     0.41          0.13       0.50          12.48             -13.23
Ireland              10,079       6,248         3,830     0.25         -0.04       0.35           9.33              -7.00
Italy                37,082      19,854        17,228     0.26         -0.06       0.35           8.36              -6.72
Israel                5,766       5,477           289     0.54          0.07       0.36           4.71              -3.22
Japan               148,805     112,023        36,782     0.28         -0.05       0.37          10.28             -10.41
Kazakhstan            3,474         840         2,634     0.55          0.13       0.67          18.65             -19.40
Korea                75,450      67,651         7,799     0.38          0.12       0.47          13.06              -4.11
Lithuania             1,861          18         1,843     0.63          0.16       0.79          -0.62              -9.78
Malaysia             16,664      11,295         5,369     0.45          0.13       0.54          13.36              -6.72
Mexico               36,845      24,840        12,006     0.49          0.14       0.59          25.65              -8.84
Netherlands          46,010      35,096        10,914     0.21         -0.03       0.28           8.45              -4.56
New Zealand           2,192         188         2,004     0.29          0.08       0.51          15.36              -9.27
Norway               14,530      11,039         3,490     0.21         -0.01       0.33          11.29              -2.77
Peru                  8,534       4,072         4,462     0.52          0.21       0.62          28.67             -14.98
Philippines           6,887       3,494         3,393     0.46          0.15       0.59          17.23             -18.24
Poland               16,055       7,067         8,988     0.47         -0.05       0.64          -8.41             -17.47
Portugal              1,784       1,659           125     0.24         -0.02       0.35           0.89              -3.44
Romania                 561         333           228     0.53         -0.17       0.77          -8.22             -28.91
Russia               60,074      51,891         8,183     0.48          0.11       0.63           7.61             -11.35
Saudi Arabia          1,306         728           578     0.62          0.17       1.05           3.44             -18.08
Singapore            19,199      17,403         1,796     0.36          0.08       0.49          29.79             -11.58
South Africa         34,627      26,358         8,269     0.37          0.12       0.47           6.51              -0.49
Spain                27,596      22,037         5,559     0.25         -0.04       0.33          9.53               -3.55
Sweden               23,978      19,003         4,975     0.24         -0.01       0.31          13.03              -5.97
Switzerland         106,005      97,410         8,595     0.22         -0.02       0.40          8.56               -1.84
Taiwan               59,590      59,370           220     0.36          0.03       0.46          4.49               -3.93
Thailand             18,245      16,253         1,992     0.42          0.11       0.54          10.84              -5.96
Turkey               25,848      19,354         6,494     0.48          0.07       0.63          7.46              -16.67
UK                  210,590     178,471        32,119     0.18          0.00       0.24          9.50               -2.27
USA               2,935,701   1,870,097     1,065,604     0.21          0.02       0.27          -0.51              -0.78
Vietnam               1,661       1,149           512     0.47          0.27       0.79          22.67              -6.69




                                                        37
                                Table 3: Summary statistics of shocks

                                A. Definitions and summary statistics
    Variable                       Definition / Unit                         Obs.        Mean        std. dev.

    Crisis events                  Dummy variable                              8
    Liquidity - TED                Ted spread, standardised                  13300         0.000       1.000
    Risk - VIX                     VIX, orthog.to Ted, standardised          13300         0.000       1.000
    US macro shock                 Composite of indiv. US shocks              266         0.0013      0.0746
    Domestic macro shock           Composite of indiv. dom. shocks           13300       -0.0004      0.0157
    US equity returns              Weekly % returns, USD                      266         0.0369      2.7062
    Domestic equity returns        Weekly % returns, LC, orthog to US        13300        0.0000      3.2870

    Individual US macro shocks:
    GDP                         Quarterly YoY % change                         56         0.071        0.407
    Consumer confidence         index (around 100)                            174         0.009        0.193
    Housing starts              Monthly, in 1000                              169        0.037         0.269
    Industrial production       MoM % change                                  150        -0.031        0.765
    NAPM / ISM                  index (around 50)                             172        -0.018        0.382
    NF payroll employment       MoM change (100,000)                          175        -0.001        0.007
    Retail sales                in %                                          152        -0.024        0.842
    Trade balance               in USD billion                                175         0.001        0.138
    Unemployment                in %                                          111        -0.018        0.115
    Individual domestic macro shocks:
    Trade balance              in USD billion                                2021        0.007         1.429
    GDP                        Quarterly YoY % change                         983         0.015        0.392
    Industrial production      MoM % change                                  2129        -0.029        0.416
    Unemployment               in %                                          1675        -0.009        0.112

    Sources: Bloomberg for all individual macro shocks as well as for equity returns (MSCI market indices).

                                           B. List of crisis events
       date         event
  09 August 2007    First incidence of major liquidity squeeze in global money markets
  14 March 2008     Bear Stearns near collapse - Fed arranges financing with JPMorgan Chase
   13 July 2008     U.S. Treasury Department announces increase of credit lines of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
15 September 2008   Lehman Brothers declares bankruptcy, the largest ever in the United States
29 September 2008   U.S. House Rejects $700 Billion Financial-Rescue Plan
 27 October 2008    Iceland's Kaupthing Bank Defaults on Its Samurai Bonds as Yields Hit 450%
14 November 2008    Freddie Mac Posts Record Loss, Asks Treasury for $13.8 Billion
09 December 2008    Goldman, UBS, Deutsche Bank Among 12 Banks Lowered by S&P



                        C. Correlations across shocks – full sample period
                                                                              Domestic           Domestic
                                 Crisis    Liquidity -            US macro     macro   US equity   equity
                                 events       TED      Risk - VIX  shock       shock    returns   returns

     Crisis events                   1
     Liquidity - TED              0.2849       1
     Risk - VIX                  0.1317        0            1
     US macro shock              -0.0048    -0.0538      0.0205        1
     Domestic macro shock        0.0127     -0.0123     -0.0234    0.0139         1
     US equity returns           -0.1094    -0.2399     -0.1434    -0.0762      0.027         1
     Domestic equity returns     -0.0907    -0.0284      -0.035     0.0437     -0.0062        0          1




                                                        38
                                                              Table 4: Summary statistics of determinants

                                  Units                             Definition                                        Source                 Mean     Std. dev.    Min      Max

Macro fundamentals
Growth                   y-o-y growth rate, in %   GDP growth rate                                 IMF, Haver, Bloomberg                       4.17     2.57       -8.79     12.23
FX reserves              % of GDP                  Ratio of FX reserves to GDP                     IMF, Haver, Bloomberg                      15.88    18.79        0.04     97.58
Current account          % of GDP                  Ratio of current account position to GDP        IMF, Haver, Bloomberg                      -0.48     7.84      -24.37     24.27
Fiscal balance           % of GDP                  Ratio of fiscal balance to GDP                  IMF, Haver, Bloomberg                      -2.15    4.19       -14.20     20.37
Inflation                in %                      CPI inflation rate                              IMF, Haver, Bloomberg                       4.97     4.68       -1.30     33.50
ST interest rate         in %                      3-month money market rate                       IMF, Haver, Bloomberg                       5.29    2.74         0.34     12.24
Public debt              % of GDP                  Total government debt to GDP                    IMF, Haver, Bloomberg                     -45.78    21.28       -4.09   -191.97
Short-term debt          % of GDP                  Short-term external debt to GDP                 IMF, Haver, Bloomberg                     -23.08    8.21        -4.42    -54.50
Bank credit growth       y-o-y growth rate, in %   Growth rate in credit to banks                  IMF, Haver, Bloomberg                      18.37    35.62        3.17     14.42
Institutions
Sovereign rating         continuous variable, 6-   Rating of country's sovereign debt, linear      IMF, Haver, Bloomberg                     16.72      4.82        6        22
                         22                        transformation
Rating change            indicator                 -1: downgrade; 0: no change; +1: upgrade        IMF, Haver, Bloomberg                     0.00       0.01        -1       1

Financial institutions   index from 0-100          political risk index, higher number = better    International Country Risk Guide (ICRG)   38.75      4.32       31        48
                                                   institutions
Political institutions   index from 0-100          financial risk index, higher number = better    International Country Risk Guide (ICRG)   38.92      4.79       28        50
                                                   institutions
Policy interventions
Capital controls     0-1 dummy                     dummy=1 after announcement of policy            BIS, CGFS database (plus Bloomberg for    0.01       0.11        0        1
                                                   measure                                         missing countries)
Credit intervention      0-1 dummy                 dummy=1 after announcement of policy            BIS, CGFS database (plus Bloomberg for    0.04       0.19        0        1
                                                   measure                                         missing countries)
Deposit guarantees       0-1 dummy                 dummy=1 after announcement of policy            BIS, CGFS database (plus Bloomberg for    0.08       0.28        0        1
                                                   measure                                         missing countries)
Debt guarantees          0-1 dummy                 dummy=1 after announcement of policy            BIS, CGFS database (plus Bloomberg for    0.15       0.36        0        1
                                                   measure                                         missing countries)
Asset relief             0-1 dummy                 dummy=1 after announcement of policy            BIS, CGFS database (plus Bloomberg for    0.06       0.23        0        1
                                                   measure                                         missing countries)
Capital injection        0-1 dummy                 dummy=1 after announcement of policy            BIS, CGFS database (plus Bloomberg for    0.14       0.35        0        1
                                                   measure                                         missing countries)
Exposure
Trade                    % of GDP                  Ratio of exports plus imports to GDP            IMF, Haver, Bloomberg                     87.27     87.22      30.60    473.00
FPI liability            % of GDP                  Ratio of external portfolio liab. to GDP        IMF, CPIS                                 13.97      13.77      1.07     62.80
FPI assets               % of GDP                  Ratio of external portfolio assets to GDP       IMF, CPIS                                 36.45     44.93       2.69    168.89
Market capitalisation    % of GDP                  Ratio of equity market cap. to GDP              Bloomberg                                 73.55     114.26     13.40    381.80
KA openness              index                     Inverse measure of restrictions on capital      Chinn & Ito                                1.94      1.01       1.14      2.50
                                                   account, normalised



                                                                                                  39
                          Table 5: Effect of shocks on total portfolio capital flows – Crisis versus non-crisis period

                                                      Full sample                                            Advanced economies                            Emerging economies
                                          Non-crisis                          Crisis                        Non-crisis                Crisis             Non-crisis                  Crisis

                                         coef.     s.e.                coef.          s.e.              coef.         s.e.    coef.           s.e.     coef.         s.e.    coef.           s.e.

      Common / global shocks
      Crisis events                                                  -0.807     ***   0.128                                     0.134   *     0.077                           -1.333   ***   0.120
      Liquidity - TED                  -0.340 *** 0.044               0.179     ***   0.032            -0.212   ***   0.023     0.189   ***   0.027   -0.404   ***   0.069     0.168   ***   0.052
      Risk - VIX                        0.010     0.012              -0.106     ***   0.025            -0.052   ***   0.011     0.077   ***   0.017    0.044   ***   0.016    -0.214   ***   0.022
      US macro shocks                  -0.703 *** 0.089               0.873     ***   0.158            -0.719   ***   0.124     0.800   ***   0.122   -0.670   ***   0.129     0.894   ***   0.258
      US equity markets                 0.096 *** 0.006              -0.009           0.005             0.051   ***   0.003    -0.004         0.005    0.125   ***   0.005    -0.011         0.008
      Domestic shocks
      Domestic macro shocks             0.213     0.568               1.231           1.373            -0.259     0.399        -1.190 ** 0.591        0.526     0.936          2.846 *** 1.218
      Domestic equity markets           0.042 *** 0.006              -0.001           0.005             0.022 *** 0.006         0.002    0.008        0.057 *** 0.008         -0.003     0.008
      Controls
      Lagged flows                      0.394 *** 0.019              -0.023     0.029                  0.306    ***   0.039     0.059     0.049        0.453 *** 0.013        -0.072 ** 0.034
      US interest rate change           0.756 *** 0.046              -0.446 *** 0.050                  0.634    ***   0.050    -0.644 *** 0.075        0.838 *** 0.069        -0.303 *** 0.053
      Dom. interest rate change        -0.005     0.114               0.087     0.179                  0.247    *     0.129     0.187     0.293       -0.166     0.171         0.030     0.244
      Constant                          0.150 *** 0.017              -0.304 *** 0.020                  0.067    ***   0.013    -0.282 *** 0.015        0.192 *** 0.022        -0.316 *** 0.031
      Observations                     13515
      R-squared                        0.583


Notes: The table shows the coefficients  (“Non-crisis”) and  (“Crisis”) from the effect of the various common and domestic shocks on total portfolio flows, based on the
estimation of the factor model without inclusion of instruments Zi,t:
                                                 f i ,t  Et 1 [ f i ,t ]   i ,t 1 ' S t  ei ,t                                           (1’)
                                                  i ,t 1   i , 0   i , 0 Dt                                                              (2’)
The coefficients shown are averages across country coefficients. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                                                       40
                        Table 6: Effect of shocks on total portfolio flows by region – Crisis versus non-crisis period

                                 Emerging Asia          Emerging Europe             Latin America           Africa/Middle East Advanced Europe Other Advanced
                               Non-crisis    Crisis     Non-crisis    Crisis      Non-crisis    Crisis      Non-crisis   Crisis     Non-crisis      Crisis      Non-crisis   Crisis

   Common / global shocks
   Crisis events                             -0.935 ***              -1.606   ***            -1.531 ***            -1.507 ***                       0.182   ***            -0.046
   Liquidity - TED              -0.217 ***    0.095     -0.611 ***    0.212   *** -0.515 *** 0.240      -0.208 *** 0.139 *** -0.213 ***             0.215   *** -0.210 *** 0.088 **
   Risk - VIX                    0.011       -0.153 *** 0.083 ***    -0.312   *** 0.028      -0.200 *** 0.086 *** -0.175 *** -0.064 ***             0.106   *** -0.006     -0.033
   US macro shocks              -0.422 **     0.109     -1.344 ***    2.275   *** -0.346 *    0.522     -0.310 *    0.497     -0.809 ***            0.818   *** -0.380 *    0.731 ***
   US equity markets             0.114 ***    0.004      0.130 ***   -0.003        0.140 *** -0.036      0.111 *** -0.033 *** 0.050 ***            -0.007        0.054 *** 0.006 ***
   Domestic shocks
   Domestic macro shocks        -0.182        5.580      0.868       0.924         0.626        4.336 ***    1.865 *   -4.891       -0.466         -1.335        0.519     -0.648
   Domestic equity markets       0.073 ***   -0.012 *    0.035 ***   0.015         0.063 ***   -0.013        0.048 *** 0.003         0.020 ***     -0.002        0.029 *** 0.019
   Controls
   Lagged flows                  0.467 ***   -0.047      0.490 ***   -0.015        0.394 *** -0.090          0.427 *** -0.294 ***    0.285   ***    0.110 ***    0.387 *** -0.130
   US interest rate change       0.844 ***   -0.220 *** 0.741 ***    -0.248 ***    1.024 *** -0.578 ***      0.675 *** -0.132 *      0.628   ***   -0.691 ***    0.653 *** -0.465 *
   Dom. interest rate change    -0.224        0.515     -0.551 ***    0.117        0.334     -0.821          0.040     -0.022        0.299   *     -0.036        0.053      1.021
   Constant                      0.200 ***   -0.241 *** 0.103 ***    -0.409 ***    0.325 *** -0.413 ***      0.123 *** -0.081 ***    0.045   ***   -0.279 ***    0.146 *** -0.297 ***
   Observations                 13515
   R-squared                     0.583


Notes: The table shows the coefficients  (“Non-crisis”) and  (“Crisis”) from the effect of the various common and domestic shocks on total portfolio flows by region,
based on the estimation of the factor model without inclusion of instruments Zi,t. The coefficients shown are averages across country coefficients. ***, **, * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                                      41
                            Table 7: Effect of shocks on equity versus bond flows – Crisis versus non-crisis period
                                                         Full sample                         Advanced economies                            Emerging economies
                                               Non-crisis              Crisis               Non-crisis                Crisis             Non-crisis                  Crisis

                                             coef.    s.e.       coef.         s.e.     coef.         s.e.    coef.           s.e.     coef.         s.e.    coef.           s.e.

                                                                       Equity portfolio flows
                Common / global shocks
                Crisis events                                   -0.855 *** 0.113                               -0.080         0.080                           -1.286 *** 0.116
                Liquidity - TED             -0.097 *** 0.022     0.037     0.025       -0.091   ***   0.022     0.096   ***   0.031   -0.091 *** 0.033        -0.001     0.037
                Risk - VIX                  -0.021     0.014    -0.035     0.024       -0.093   ***   0.009     0.136   ***   0.014    0.017     0.019        -0.137 *** 0.024
                US macro shocks             -0.607 *** 0.089     0.500 *** 0.126       -0.880   ***   0.131     0.842   ***   0.132   -0.427 *** 0.116         0.271     0.188
                US equity markets            0.115 *** 0.008    -0.039 *** 0.006        0.052   ***   0.004    -0.015   **    0.007    0.153 *** 0.007        -0.051 *** 0.008
                Domestic shocks
                Domestic macro shocks       0.180     0.681      0.452    1.251        0.534     0.433         -2.712 *** 0.949       -0.032     1.132         2.486    1.968
                Domestic equity markets     0.049 *** 0.006     -0.011 ** 0.005        0.028 *** 0.007         -0.006     0.009        0.066 *** 0.008        -0.014 ** 0.007
                Controls
                Lagged flows                0.334 *** 0.022     -0.080 *** 0.028       0.261    ***   0.044     0.044     0.044        0.387 *** 0.021        -0.156 *** 0.032
                US interest rate change     0.992 *** 0.061     -0.506 *** 0.055       0.724    ***   0.071    -0.672 *** 0.096        1.172 *** 0.080        -0.380 *** 0.059
                Dom. interest rate change   0.045     0.136     -0.014     0.213       0.455    ***   0.159    -0.010     0.385       -0.212     0.196        -0.018     0.273
                Constant                    0.073 *** 0.014     -0.158 *** 0.009       0.022    **    0.011    -0.181 *** 0.011        0.102 *** 0.020        -0.149 *** 0.012
                Observations                13515
                R-squared                   0.564

                                                                         Bond portfolio flows
                Common / global shocks
                Crisis events                                   -0.585   ***   0.208                            0.948   *** 0.255                             -1.450   ***   0.136
                Liquidity - TED             -0.906 *** 0.050     0.524   ***   0.048   -0.664   ***   0.055     0.502   *** 0.074     -1.050   ***   0.064     0.540   ***   0.067
                Risk - VIX                   0.127 *** 0.011    -0.309   ***   0.020    0.128   ***   0.018    -0.154   *** 0.018      0.130   ***   0.016    -0.404   ***   0.016
                US macro shocks             -0.243     0.177     1.057   ***   0.249    0.595   ***   0.175     0.164         0.153   -0.706   ***   0.233     1.556   ***   0.379
                US equity markets            0.061 *** 0.004     0.059   ***   0.006    0.046   ***   0.005     0.038   *** 0.009      0.071   ***   0.006     0.070   ***   0.008
                Domestic shocks
                Domestic macro shocks       -2.014 ** 0.942      5.044 *** 1.822       -3.693 *** 1.128        2.531     1.750        -1.085     1.414        6.972 *** 2.865
                Domestic equity markets      0.005    0.004      0.030 *** 0.006       -0.006     0.007        0.033 *** 0.010         0.012 *** 0.005        0.030 *** 0.008
                Controls
                Lagged flows                 0.403 *** 0.032     0.161   ***   0.052    0.386 *** 0.056         0.237   **    0.121    0.413 *** 0.040         0.118 *** 0.043
                US interest rate change      0.048     0.079    -0.290   ***   0.073    0.029     0.112        -0.280   **    0.132    0.053     0.114        -0.298 *** 0.092
                Dom. interest rate change   -0.593 *** 0.152     1.197   **    0.597   -0.906 *** 0.175         0.942   ***   0.306   -0.433 * 0.227           1.439     1.001
                Constant                     0.316 *** 0.020    -0.673   ***   0.021    0.252 *** 0.017        -0.733   ***   0.043    0.349 *** 0.030        -0.634 *** 0.021
                Observations                13515
                R-squared                   0.596

Notes: The table shows the coefficients  (“Non-crisis”) and  (“Crisis”) from the effect of the various common and domestic shocks on equity and bond portfolio flows,
separately, based on the estimation of the factor model without inclusion of instruments Zi,t. The coefficients shown are averages across country coefficients. ***, **, *
indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, 10% levels, respectively.
                                                                                       42
                  Table 8: Effect of shocks on total portfolio capital flows – Robustness: Post-Lehman as crisis period

                                                       Full sample                          Advanced economies                            Emerging economies
                                         Non-crisis                  Crisis                Non-crisis                Crisis             Non-crisis                  Crisis
                                       coef.         s.e.       coef.     s.e.         coef.         s.e.    coef.           s.e.     coef.         s.e.    coef.           s.e.

    Common / global shocks
    Crisis events                                              -0.615 *** 0.086                               -0.162   **    0.080                           -0.869   ***   0.109
    Liquidity - TED                  -0.210    ***   0.011      0.020     0.026       -0.238   ***   0.010     0.200   ***   0.023   -0.194 *** 0.016        -0.086   ***   0.025
    Risk - VIX                       -0.018    *     0.010      0.004     0.022       -0.062   ***   0.009     0.140   ***   0.025    0.006     0.014        -0.085   ***   0.021
    US macro shocks                  -0.928    ***   0.065      1.806 *** 0.181       -0.693   ***   0.083     1.040   ***   0.185   -1.044 *** 0.087         2.184   ***   0.242
    US equity markets                 0.118    ***   0.006     -0.056 *** 0.006        0.081   ***   0.004    -0.039   ***   0.006    0.143 *** 0.006        -0.067   ***   0.009
    Domestic shocks
    Domestic macro shocks            -0.867 * 0.463            -6.716 * 4.061         -1.230 *** 0.514        -0.963     1.344       -0.694     0.721       -10.808         6.799
    Domestic equity markets           0.047 *** 0.005          -0.018 *** 0.006        0.033 *** 0.005        -0.022 *** 0.008        0.059 *** 0.007        -0.017 *       0.009
    Controls
    Lagged flows                      0.449 *** 0.018          -0.200 *** 0.037        0.462 *** 0.040        -0.146 *** 0.053        0.452   ***   0.014    -0.239 *** 0.052
    US interest rate change           0.943 *** 0.051          -1.232 *** 0.068        0.704 *** 0.037        -1.136 *** 0.097        1.099   ***   0.070    -1.261 *** 0.094
    Dom. interest rate change        -0.046     0.085           0.148     0.487        0.179     0.129         0.398     0.326       -0.192   *     0.113     0.000     0.807
    Constant                          0.081 *** 0.017          -0.388 *** 0.050       -0.018     0.014        -0.119 *** 0.021        0.132   ***   0.020    -0.530 *** 0.065
    Observations                     13515
    R-squared                        0.523


Notes: The table shows the coefficients  (“Non-crisis”) and  (“Crisis”) from the effect of the various common and domestic shocks on total portfolio flows, based on the
estimation of the factor model without inclusion of instruments Zi,t. The crisis period here is defined to be limited to the Post-Lehman period from 15 September 2008 till 14
March 2009. The coefficients shown are averages across country coefficients. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                                      43
                Table 9: Correlation pattern across coefficients of shock transmission – Crisis versus non-crisis period

                                                                    Crisis                                                         Non-crisis

                                        Crisis Liquidity - Risk -     US     US    Domest. Domest.           Liquidity - Risk -     US     US    Domest. Domest.
              Country coefficients of   events   TED        VIX     macro   equity  macro   equity             TED        VIX     macro   equity  macro   equity
                   shocks to:                                       shocks markets shocks markets                                 shocks markets shocks markets
            Crisis
            Crisis events                 1

            Liquidity - TED             0.090       1
                                         0.53
            Risk - VIX                  0.767    -0.245      1
                                         0.00     0.08
            US macro shocks             -0.255   0.142     -0.344      1
                                         0.07     0.32      0.01
            US equity markets           -0.087   -0.108    -0.063    0.380       1
                                         0.55     0.45      0.66      0.01
            Domestic macro shocks       -0.279   -0.039    -0.176    0.037    -0.001      1
                                         0.05     0.79      0.22      0.80     1.00
            Domestic equity markets     -0.109   0.011     -0.203    0.507    0.461     -0.312      1
                                         0.45     0.94      0.15      0.00     0.00      0.03
            Non-crisis
            Liquidity - TED             0.349    -0.822    0.647    -0.475    -0.081    -0.015   -0.277         1
                                         0.01     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.57      0.92      0.05
            Risk - VIX                  -0.706   0.287     -0.752    0.229    -0.012    0.179     0.106       -0.521       1
                                         0.00     0.04      0.00      0.11     0.93      0.21      0.46        0.00
            US macro shocks             0.005    -0.139    0.150    -0.828    -0.252    -0.044   -0.282       0.321      0.063      1
                                         0.97     0.33      0.29      0.00     0.07      0.76      0.05        0.02      0.66
            US equity markets           -0.642   -0.140    -0.617   -0.124    -0.456    0.217    -0.283       -0.118     0.416    0.151       1
                                         0.00     0.33      0.00      0.39     0.00      0.13      0.04        0.41      0.00      0.29
            Domestic macro shocks       0.025    -0.050    -0.086    0.023    0.046     -0.480    0.190       -0.025    -0.091    -0.103   0.070       1
                                         0.86     0.73      0.55      0.88     0.75      0.00      0.18        0.86      0.52      0.47     0.63
            Domestic equity markets     -0.125   -0.355    0.004    -0.423    -0.244    0.172    -0.598       0.373     -0.129    0.181    0.529     0.061       1
                                         0.38     0.01      0.98      0.00     0.08      0.23      0.00        0.01      0.37      0.20     0.00      0.67


Notes: The table shows the correlations (together with their statistical significance in italics below) across the country coefficients of shock transmission during the crisis and
the non-crisis period, based on the factor model (1)-(3) without inclusion of instruments Zi,t. Bold numbers indicate significance at the 10% level.




                                                                                       44
                    Table 10: Determinants of shock transmission to capital flows – Non-crisis parameters

                                                                                                    US macro          US equity          Domestic         Domestic
                                            Liquidity - Ted                Risk - VIX
           Shock to:                                                                                  news             market           macro news      equity market
   Null hypothesis:                               1  0                       1  0                 1  0            1  0             1  0           1  0
                                                 coef. s.e.                   coef. s.e.             coef. s.e.        coef. s.e.        coef. s.e.        coef. s.e.

Macro fundamentals
Growth                                      -0.167*** 0.025                                                          0.008** 0.003      0.519* 0.274    0.006*** 0.001
FX reserves                                                                                                         -0.001** 0.001
Current account                                                               0.000 0.005          0.027** 0.011
Fiscal balance                                                                                     -0.038* 0.020                                          -0.001 0.000
Inflation                                   -0.037*** 0.009              0.008*** 0.002
ST interest rate
Public debt                                   0.005** 0.002                                                          -0.028* 0.000
Short-term debt                                                               0.002 0.001
Institutions
Sovereign rating                                                                                   0.048** 0.022                                           0.001 0.001
Rating change
Financial institutions                                                  -0.010*** 0.003                                                  0.150 0.101
Political institutions                      -0.028*** 0.007                                       -0.026*** 0.008                        0.098 0.070    0.001*** 0.000
Exposure
Trade                                                                    0.001*** 0.000                                0.000*   0.000                   -0.000*** 0.000
FPI liability                                                                                         0.006 0.004       0.001   0.000    -0.041 0.031
FPI assets                                    0.003** 0.001                                       -0.004*** 0.001   -0.000***   0.000
Market capitalisation                           0.001 0.000                                         -0.001* 0.001     -0.000*   0.000                     0.000* 0.000
KA openness                                                                -0.022 0.013                               -0.006*   0.003

Observations                                    12318
R-squared                                        0.43

Notes: The table shows the coefficients  of the following model, which is based on the benchmark model (1)-(3), but excludes the crisis interactions:
                                       f i ,t  Et 1 [ f i ,t ]   i ,t 1 ' S t  ei ,t                                      (1)
                                        i ,t 1   i , 0  1 ' Z i ,t 1                                                     (2)
It follows the encompassing approach of variable selection described in the text. The row labelled “Null hypothesis” provides the prior under which improved
fundamentals, better institutions or more exposure provide insulation, i.e. reduce the impact of the respective shock. ***, **, and *, indicate statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10%, levels, respectively.




                                                                                             45
                         Table 11: Determinants of shock transmission to capital flows – Crisis parameters

                                                                                        US macro            US equity        Domestic           Domestic
           Shock to:      Crisis event Liquidity - Ted         Risk - VIX
                                                                                          news               market         macro news        equity market
   Null hypothesis:           1    0         1    0           1    0                 1    0            1    0          1    0         1    0
                            coef. s.e.       coef. s.e.         coef. s.e.               coef. s.e.          coef. s.e.        coef. s.e.       coef. s.e.

Macro fundamentals
Growth                                     0.127*** 0.046                             -0.202***   0.055                                        -0.377* 0.189
FX reserves         -0.831** 0.308                            -0.004**   0.002         0.016***   0.004    0.099** 0.044    -0.133** 0.051    0.071*** 0.026
Current account       1.295* 0.675          0.043** 0.017       0.013*   0.007        -0.050***   0.015                       -0.397 0.237    -0.115** 0.046
Fiscal balance       2.423** 1.113          0.036** 0.014       0.092*   0.052        -0.078***   0.023   -0.411** 0.186
Inflation             1.052* 0.570         0.088*** 0.024     0.019***   0.004
ST interest rate   -23.790** 9.185                              -0.026   0.016                            -1.952** 0.945                       -0.539* 0.302
Public debt           0.04** 0.002           0.06* 0.003                                                     0.000 0.000
Short-term debt                                                                          0.018 0.013
Institutions
Sovereign rating          3.335*** 1.014    0.058* 0.033      0.027*** 0.007          -0.137*** 0.033     -0.321** 0.149     -0.806* -0.462
Rating change
Financial institutions                                                                                    -0.627** 0.249       0.781 0.496
Political institutions     2.105* -1.123   0.040*** 0.013     0.004** 0.002              0.024 0.015
Policy interventions
Capital controls     -24.422*** 7.631                         0.151*** 0.048                              -6.073*** 2.200
Deposit guarantees      1.302** 0.486        -0.196 0.131                             -0.466** 0.223        -3.004* 1.551    7.579*** 2.719    -1.292* 0.719
Debt guarantees         1.050** 0.408      1.390*** 0.463       -0.084 0.053                               6.072*** 2.105   -7.526*** 2.371    -1.280* 0.644
Capital injection                          0.551*** 0.149     0.173*** 0.046                                                 -4.701** 2.186
Exposure
Trade
FPI liability                                                                                              -0.087* 0.050
FPI assets                                   -0.004 0.003                               0.003* 0.002
Market capitalisation     -0.169** 0.070   -0.002** 0.001    -0.001*** 0.000                                -0.016 0.010      0.012* 0.007
KA openness
Observations               12318
R-squared                    0.50



Notes: The table shows the estimates for the parameters  of the model (1)-(3). It follows the encompassing approach of variable selection described in the text. The
row labelled “Null hypothesis” provides the prior under which improved fundamentals, better institutions, policy interventions in the crisis or more exposure provide
insulation, i.e. reduce the impact of the respective shock. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%, levels, respectively.


                                                                                 46
                     Table 12: Actual versus fitted net capital flows – common factors vs. domestic factors

                     Actual net capital flows, Fitted net capital flows,                                  Fitted -- common factors                                 Fitted -- domestic factors
                            % of AUM                  % of AUM
                       Pre-     Crisis      Post-         Pre-        Crisis       Post-         Pre-crisis            Crisis           Post-crisis         Pre-crisis            Crisis          Post-crisis
                      crisis                crisis       crisis                    crisis
                                                                                                % of      % share   % of    % share     % of    % share    % of    % share     % of    % share    % of     % share
                                                                                                AUM        fitted   AUM      fitted     AUM      fitted    AUM      fitted     AUM      fitted    AUM       fitted


ALL countries          12.7      -15.7       26.4         14.1         -16.0        22.8         9.2       65.4     -11.6    72.8      10.3      45.0       4.9      34.6      -4.4     27.2      12.6      55.0

EM Asia                18.3       -9.6       39.7         18.8          -9.2        34.6        9.1       48.3       -7.8   84.9        6.3      18.1       9.7      51.7      -1.4      15.1     28.3      81.9
EM Europe               9.2      -29.5       35.7         10.4         -30.4        29.7        9.0       86.6      -28.3   93.2       23.9      80.3      1.4       13.4      -2.1      6.8      5.9       19.7
Latin America          27.4      -14.0       53.6         32.4         -14.1        47.0        15.8      48.8      -21.2   150.0      17.3      36.9      16.6      51.2       7.1     -50.0     29.6      63.1
Africa/Middle East      1.5       -5.1       28.1          4.4          -5.5        23.8        4.8       109.3      -5.7   104.4      13.0      54.8      -0.4      -9.3       0.2      -4.4     10.8      45.2
Advanced Europe         8.7      -18.5        5.0          8.9         -18.8         4.4        8.1        90.8      -4.4   23.2        3.7      84.2       0.8       9.2     -14.5      76.8      0.7      15.8
Other advanced         14.3      -14.2       13.3         16.1         -14.9        11.9        12.2      76.1      -12.0   80.5        7.0      58.8       3.8      23.9      -2.9      19.5     4.9       41.2


Notes: The table shows the actual cumulated flows during each of the three sub-periods against the fitted cumulated flows from the factor model (1)-(3). The fitted
net capital flows are split up into a part explained by common factors and a part accounted for by domestic factors, as outlined in equations (4)-(5):

                                                                 fˆi ,Gt  (  i ,0   i ,0 Dt )' S tG                                          (4)

                                   fˆi ,Dt  Et 1 [ f i ,t ]  ( 1 ' Z i ,t 1   1 Z i ,t 1 Dt )' S t  (  i ,0   i ,0 Dt )' S tD        (5)


where   fˆi ,Gt is the contribution of common factors and fˆi ,Dt is the contribution of domestic factors, which is the sum of the expected net flows, the component of net
flows due to country-specific determinants Zi,t, and the component due to country-specific/idiosyncratic factors. The shares of fitted net capital flows accounted for
by common factors and by domestic factors for a particular country i during time t can then be calculated as                          X iG,t  fˆi ,Gt / fˆi ,t and X iD,t  fˆi ,Dt / fˆi ,t , respectively.
The numbers shown in the table are averages across all 49 countries (“all”) or across countries within a particular region.




                                                                                           47
          Table 13: Determinants of portfolio capital flows – Cross-country estimations

                                     Pre-crisis                         Crisis                         Post-crisis
                                     12 Oct 2005 -                   8 Aug 2007 -                      15 Mar 2009 -
                                      7 Aug 2007                     14 Mar 2009                       22 Nov 2010

                                  coef. s.e.      decile           coef. s.e.       decile           coef. s.e.     decile

    Macro fundamentals
    Growth                      1.708** 0.805     11.22                                             0.808 0.509     5.31
    FX reserves                                                 -0.083*    0.046    -2.43
    Current account                                              0.253*    0.135    5.42
    Fiscal balance                0.650   0.386   6.50          0.201**    0.095    2.01          0.418** 0.198     4.18
    Inflation                     1.100   0.717   7.98           0.457*    0.245    3.31
    ST interest rate              0.882   0.648   5.46
    Public debt                -0.238**   0.095   -6.99
    Short-term debt               0.278   0.211   8.45         -0.203*** 0.055      -6.08          0.197* 0.101     5.99
    Bank credit growth
    Institutions
    Sovereign rating            -1.202* 0.596     -14.40       1.271*** 0.291       15.25        -0.779*** 0.27     -9.24
    Rating change                                              8.688*** 2.253       8.688          -3.620* 1.984    -3.62
    Financial institutions
    Political institutions                                      1.081** 0.400       11.89
    Policy interventions
    Capital controls
    Credit intervention
    Deposit guarantees                                          6.235** 3.007       6.235         -9.461* 5.214     -9.46
    Debt guarantees                                             5.998** 2.323       5.998
    Asset relief
    Capital injection                                              3.014 1.866      3.014        -8.023*** 2.2      -8.02
    Exposure
    Trade                                                       -0.016** 0.006      -1.32
    FPI liability
    FPI assets
    Market capitalisation
    KA openness                -3.098** 1.488     -11.23         -0.612 0.74        -2.22          -1.125 0.785     -4.07
    Constant                 15.151*** 21.128     3.584      -28.071*** 5.269       5.269       32.883*** 4.524     4.524

    Observations                     49                               49                               49
    R-squared                      0.52                             0.71                             0.78



Notes: The table shows the coefficients for the cross-section estimation of        f i     ' Z i  ei , across the full set of
countries, with fi the size of capital flows (net capital flows in USD relative to total assets under management at the beginning
of the period, in %) and Zi as a vector of independent variables. The estimation follows a backward stepwise procedure, where
in each step the least significant variable is dropped (while in each step also testing whether already excluded variables become
again significant at the 20% level), so that in the final encompassing model only variables significant at the 15% level are
included. The table shows estimates for the pre-crisis, crisis, and post-crisis periods. The column labelled “decile” shows the
difference in the response of capital flows for a country with the determinant at its 90th percentile compared a country at its
10th percentile. As most of the common shocks are US variables, note that the US is excluded from all model estimations. ***,
**, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, 10% levels, respectively.




                                                              48
