                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                CAPITAL FLOW WAVES:
                      SURGES, STOPS, FLIGHT, AND RETRENCHMENT

                                          Kristin J. Forbes
                                         Francis E. Warnock

                                        Working Paper 17351
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17351


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




We thank for helpful comments and conversations Alain Chaboud, Marcos Chamon, Bernard Dumas,
José de Gregorio, Charles Engel, Jeffrey Frankel, Marcel Fratzscher, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Philip
Lane, Patrick McGuire, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, Bent Sorenson, Charles Thomas, and participants
at the meetings of the NBER/Sloan Global Financial Crisis project and AEA annual conference and
in seminars at Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, Bank of England, BIS Asia, European Central Bank, Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, INSEAD, Johns Hopkins, MIT, Monetary Authority of Singapore,
Reserve Bank of Australia, Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Trinity College Dublin, UC Berkeley,
and UVA-Darden. Vahid Gholampour provided research assistance. Warnock thanks the Darden School
Foundation, Asian Institute of Management, and the BIS Asia office for generous support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Kristin J. Forbes and Francis E. Warnock. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight, and Retrenchment
Kristin J. Forbes and Francis E. Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 17351
August 2011, Revised February 2012
JEL No. F3

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes waves in international capital flows. We develop a new methodology for identifying
episodes of extreme capital flow movements using data that differentiates activity by foreigners and
domestics. We identify episodes of “surges” and “stops” (sharp increases and decreases, respectively,
of gross inflows) and “flight” and “retrenchment” (sharp increases and decreases, respectively, of gross
outflows). Our approach yields fundamentally different results than the previous literature that used
measures of net flows. Global factors, especially global risk, are significantly associated with extreme
capital flow episodes. Contagion, whether through trade, banking, or geography, is also associated
with stop and retrenchment episodes. Domestic macroeconomic characteristics are generally less important,
and we find little association between capital controls and the probability of having surges or stops
driven by foreign capital flows. The results provide insights for different theoretical approaches explaining
crises and capital flow volatility.


Kristin J. Forbes
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-416
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
kjforbes@mit.edu

Francis E. Warnock
Darden Business School
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
and NBER
warnockf@darden.virginia.edu
1. Introduction

         Many countries experienced waves of international capital flows in the 1980s and 1990s. In the
past decade, capital flow volatility increased even more. Capital flows dried up in late 2001, surged
throughout the mid-2000s, contracted sharply during the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2008-2009,
and then rebounded quickly in 2010. Capital flow volatility can have widespread economic
consequences, such as amplifying economic cycles, increasing financial system vulnerabilities, and
aggravating overall macroeconomic instability. Capital flows, however, can also be benign and even
provide substantial benefits. For example, even as global liquidity contracted during the GFC, several
countries received beneficial capital inflows driven by a “retrenchment” of domestic investors who
liquidated foreign investments.
         Waves in capital flows have generated an extensive academic literature. Several papers have
examined “sudden stops” (when foreign capital inflows suddenly slow), “surges” or “bonanzas” (when
foreign capital inflows increase rapidly), or capital “flight” (when domestic investors send capital
abroad). Other papers have focused on explaining contagion in capital flows, current account reversals
and crises, or capital flows more broadly. In addition, the GFC has spurred a resurgence of theoretical
papers on capital flows. This paper synthesizes these different literatures—reviewed in detail in Sections
2 and 3—in an effort to better understand the major ebbs and flows of international capital. It does not
attempt to explain small fluctuations in capital flows, but instead focuses on extreme movements or
“waves”. In contrast to previous work that focused on a single type of capital flow episode in isolation
(such as a stop, surge, or flight), this paper considers each of these three types of episodes, as well as
periods of “retrenchment”, in order to understand the full cycle of international capital flows.
         Our analysis focuses on gross capital inflows and outflows, differentiating between capital
movements viewed as being initiated by foreigners and by domestic investors. In contrast, almost all
previous work on capital flow episodes relied on proxies for net capital flows, which cannot differentiate
between changes in foreign and domestic behavior. Figure 1 highlights the distinction between gross and
net flows by depicting net capital flows into Chile and its two components: foreign inflows into Chilean
assets (gross inflows) and Chilean flows into non-Chilean assets (gross outflows). 1 The literature’s


1
  Following standard balance-of-payments accounting, an outflow is expressed as a negative value. The terminology can be
confusing. “Gross inflows” and “gross outflows” are actually “net” items; gross inflows is the net of foreign purchases of
domestic securities and foreign sales of domestic securities, while gross outflows is the net of domestic residents’ purchases
of foreign securities and domestic residents’ sales of foreign securities. We follow the literature and use the standard
terminology of gross inflows, gross outflows, and the net of the two (net inflows).
earlier focus on net flows is understandable; in the early and mid-1990s net capital inflows roughly
mirrored gross inflows, so the capital outflows of domestic investors could often (but not always) be
ignored and changes in net inflows could be interpreted as being driven by changes in foreign flows.
More recently, however, as the size and volatility of gross flows have increased while net capital flows
have been more stable, the differentiation between gross inflows and gross outflows has become more
important. Foreign and domestic investors can be motivated by different factors and respond differently
to various policies and shocks. Policymakers might also react differently based on whether episodes of
extreme capital flow movements are instigated by domestic or foreign sources. Analysis based solely on
net flows, while appropriate a few decades ago, would miss the dramatic changes in gross flows that
have occurred over the past decade and ignore important information contained in the these flows. As
domestic investors’ flows have become increasingly important, changes in net flows can no longer be
interpreted as being driven solely by foreigners.
       This paper builds a database of episodes when domestic or foreign investors substantially
increase or decrease capital flows into or out of a country, what we call “surge”, “stop”, “flight”, and
“retrenchment” episodes. The underlying quarterly data on gross inflows and gross outflows covers the
period from 1980 (at the earliest) through 2009 and include over 50 emerging and developed economies.
Using this database, we document the incidence of each type of episode of extreme capital flow
movements over time, by income level and region. We show that the recent crisis saw an unprecedented
incidence of stops and retrenchment, as investors around the world liquidated foreign investment
positions and brought money home.
       Next, the paper shifts to its second goal of understanding the factors that are associated with
episodes of extreme capital flows. We briefly review the theoretical literature, which describes capital
flow episodes as being driven by specific global factors, contagion, and/or domestic factors. Our
analysis indicates that waves of capital flows are primarily associated with global factors. Global risk,
which incorporates both risk aversion and economic uncertainty, is the only variable that consistently
predicts each type of capital flow episode; an increase in global risk is associated with more stops and
retrenchments and fewer surges and flight. Other global factors are related to certain types of episodes.
For example, strong global growth is associated with an increased probability of surges and decreased
probability of stops and retrenchment. High global interest rates are associated with retrenchments.
Contagion, whether through financial linkages, trade linkages, or just regional proximity, is strongly
associated with stop and retrenchment episodes. In contrast to the important role for global factors and

                                                                                                            2
contagion, domestic factors are generally insignificant in explaining capital flow waves. There is some
evidence that countries with a negative growth shock are more likely to experience stops and rich
countries are more likely to have retrenchments, but most of the domestic variables are not consistently
significant across robustness tests. In some cases, this lack of significance is noteworthy; for example,
there is no significant relationship between capital controls and a country’s likelihood of experiencing a
surge or stop of capital inflows from abroad. There is also no significant relationship between global
liquidity and any type of episode.
       The results in this paper, and especially the prominent correlation between global risk and capital
flow waves, provide insights for theory. Much of the theoretical literature on sudden stops, capital flow
volatility, and crises emphasizes the role of domestic conditions such as current account deficits or
financial system vulnerabilities. Other papers have highlighted the role of contagion or global factors
(such as global interest rates, demand, or risk aversion). A more recent series of theoretical models has
attempted to explain the GFC by focusing on global shocks—whether changes in risk, wealth, or
liquidity/credit—with little role for domestic factors. Our finding that the primary factor associated with
capital flow episodes is changes in global risk supports this recent theoretical focus on global factors,
especially risk. The results, however, do not support the widespread presumption that changes in global
liquidity or interest rates in a major economy, such as the United States, are important factors driving
surges in capital flows (independent of any effect on global risk and growth). Also, the emphasis of
many theoretical models on productivity shocks as key determinants of capital flows (such as the real
business cycle literature) might be relevant in explaining gross capital inflows, but appears to be less
applicable in explaining the volatility in domestic residents’ international investment; a country’s
economic growth is associated with surges and stops but not episodes driven by domestics.
       The analysis in this paper also informs empirical research. Our more disaggregated focus on
gross flows by the type of investor allows a finer delineation of different types of capital flow episodes,
a delineation that is necessary to understand the underlying causes of capital flow waves. By
differentiating gross inflows from gross outflows, our analysis shows that many episodes previously
identified as “surges” of foreign investment are actually driven by the retrenchment of domestic
residents. Similarly, the earlier methodology missed periods of sudden stops in foreign capital inflows
when these stops occurred simultaneously with an increase in global risk and retrenchment by domestic
investors. More generally, previous empirical research on international capital flows that focused on
more aggregate data was unable to capture the complete dynamics and causes of capital flow waves.

                                                                                                              3
        Finally, our results on the significant relationship between global, contagion, and domestic
factors and extreme movements in capital flows have important implications for economic policy.
Capital flow volatility can have substantial economic costs, especially in emerging economies. For
example, past work finds that surges are correlated with real estate booms, banking crises, debt defaults,
inflation, and currency crises, and that sudden stops are correlated with currency depreciations, slower
growth, and higher interest rates. For policymakers hoping to reduce these vulnerabilities and mitigate
negative outcomes, a clear identification of episodes and an understanding of their causes are vital.
While we do not assess causation in this paper, our results suggest that most domestic factors only have
a limited correlation with capital flow volatility. We find no evidence that capital controls insulate an
economy against capital flow waves. As a result, governments concerned about the effects of capital
flow volatility should prioritize strengthening their country’s ability to withstand this volatility rather
than trying to reduce it. Finally, the results indicate a significant role for global factors and contagion,
suggesting an important role for global institutions and cross-country cooperation in reducing capital
flow volatility.
        The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section 2 focuses on measures of extreme capital flow
episodes. It reviews the sudden stops and bonanzas literature, discusses traditional definitions of
episodes, develops our new methodology based on gross capital flows, and analyzes patterns in the data.
Section 3 reviews the capital flows literature; discusses the global, contagion, and domestic factors we
use to explain the incidence of surges, stops, flight, and retrenchment; explains the estimation strategy;
and reports results on the factors associated with capital flow waves, including extensive sensitivity
tests. These results provide insights for different theoretical models. Section 4 concludes.


2. Measuring Extreme Capital Flow Episodes
        This section reviews the existing literature on stops, bonanzas and flight and presents a detailed
description of traditional measures of sudden stops. It then develops our new measures and discusses the
insights from using data on gross instead of net flows when analyzing capital flow waves.


2.1 The Literature on Stops, Bonanzas, and Flight
        The literature on extreme capital flow episodes originated with Calvo (1998) in his analysis of
“sudden stops”, defined as sharp slowdowns in net capital inflows. Recent papers broadened this
original definition by adding criteria such as (1) the requirement that the stop occurred at the same time

                                                                                                               4
as an output contraction in order to exclude positive terms of trade shocks (Calvo, Izquierdo, and Mejía,
2004), or (2) that the stop had to occur in conjunction with a sharp rise in interest rate spreads in order to
capture a global component and qualify as a “systemic sudden stop” (Calvo, Izquierdo, and Mejía,
2008). 2 The mirror image of the traditional sudden stop measure is a capital flow “bonanza” or “surge”
(Reinhart and Reinhart, 2009), defined as a sharp increase in net capital inflows. 3
         While not focusing specifically on extreme capital flows, two recent papers shifted attention to
the importance of considering gross capital flows instead of simply net flows. Milesi-Ferretti and Tille
(2010) examine capital flows during the recent crisis, while Broner, Didier, Erçe, and Schmukler (2010)
analyze how capital flows relate to business cycles and crises. 4 Combining this new focus on gross
flows with an older literature on capital flight—such as Khan and Ul Haque (1985), Lessard and
Williamson (1987), and Dooley (1988)—are recent papers that recognize that traditionally defined
sudden stops may contain an element of capital flight as domestic residents send money abroad
(Faucette, Rothenberg, and Warnock, 2005, and Cowan and De Gregorio, 2007). Building on this,
Cowan, De Gregorio, Micco, and Neilson (2008) and Rothenberg and Warnock (2011) point out that
measures of “sudden stops” constructed from proxies for net inflows are not able to differentiate
between stops that are due to the actions of foreigners and those due to locals fleeing the domestic
market; both use the standard approach to define sudden stops, and then break these down into “true
sudden stops” (when gross capital inflows decrease more than gross capital outflows increase) and
“sudden flight” (when gross capital outflows increase more than gross capital inflows decrease). 5


2.2 Earlier Methodology Using Proxies for Net Inflows
         A “sudden stop” episode has traditionally been identified using the following approach, as in
Calvo et al. (2004). First, construct a proxy for monthly net private capital inflows, Pt, by subtracting


2
  Closely related to a sudden stop is a current account reversal. See Milesi-Ferretti and Razin (2000), Chinn and Prasad
(2003), Edwards (2005), Freund (2005), Adalet and Eichengreen (2007), and Freund and Warnock (2007).
3
  Additional papers on bonanzas or surges include Aizenman and Jinjarak (2009), Cardarelli, Elekdag, and Kose (2009), and
Caballero (2010). Related to the surge literature is a series of papers focusing on domestic credit booms and credit cycles,
such as Gourinchas, Valdés, and Landerretche (2001) and Mendoza and Terrones (2008); these differ from the traditional
stops literature by defining episodes as increases in credit relative to a stochastic trend.
4
  Similar in spirit to studies of gross flows is another related literature on the cross-country allocation of investment. This
literature essentially studies changes in gross positions. See, for example, Bertaut and Kole (2004), Edison and Warnock
(2004), Faruqee, Li, and Yan (2004), Aggarwal, Klapper, and Wysocki (2005), Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008), Leuz, Lins,
and Warnock (2009), Burger, Warnock, and Warnock (2010), and Forbes (2010).
5
  Rothenberg and Warnock (2011) find that many traditionally defined sudden stops are actually sudden flight, while Cowan
et al. (2008) point out that some countries tend to simultaneously experience retrenchment and stops.

                                                                                                                              5
monthly changes in international reserves from the quarterly current account balance. Then define Ct to
be a 12-month moving sum of lagged values and compute annual year-over-year changes in Ct:


                         11
                  Ct = ∑ Pt −i               t = 1, 2, …, N .                                                         (1)
                        i =0


                  ∆C t = C t − C t −12       t = 13, 14, …, N .                                                       (2)


         Sudden stop episodes were traditionally defined as periods of marked slowdowns in this proxy
for net capital inflows. Anyone working in this literature must make several ad hoc decisions to
operationalize “marked slowdown”. For example, a slowdown relative to what? And how sharp must the
slowdown be? For “relative to what”, Calvo et al. (2004) compare ∆C t (the amount of net private
inflows in the last 12 months compared to the amount in the preceding 12 months) to its historical mean,
with the mean computed using all available historical data up to month t (and requiring at least 24
months of ∆C t ). For “how sharp”, Calvo et al. (2004) mark the beginning of an episode at the month t

when ∆C t falls one standard deviation below its rolling historical mean, providing that at some point

within the episode ∆C t falls at least two standard deviations below its mean. The episode ends once

∆C t again exceeds one standard deviation below its mean. Surges (also called capital flow bonanzas)
have been defined analogously, also with net inflow proxies (i.e., Reinhart and Reinhart, 2009).


2.3 Our Methodology Using Gross Flows
         Several methodologies can be used to identify capital flow episodes; each has advantages and
disadvantages. Our methodology builds on the traditional measures of sudden stops and capital flow
bonanzas, which allows us to better highlight the differences from focusing on gross instead of net
capital flows. Specifically, we make three fundamental changes to the traditional approach. First, we use
data on actual flows instead of current-account-based proxies for flows. Second, we use data on gross
flows from the outset to identify episodes, rather than relying on proxies for net flows. 6 Finally, we

6
 To be specific, whether a flow is a gross inflow or gross outflow is determined by the residency of the asset. Net foreign
purchases of domestic assets are gross capital inflows, whereas net purchases of foreign assets by domestic investors are
gross outflows. We will refer to gross inflows (outflows) as being driven by foreigners (domestics), although technically all
we know is the residency of the asset and that a trade between domestic and foreign investors occurred. Note too that the use
of tax havens, or any low-tax areas, can confound residency-based capital flows data. For example, if a U.S.-based investor

                                                                                                                            6
analyze both large increases and large decreases of both inflows and outflows, instead of just focusing
on increases or decreases, in order to improve our understanding of all types of capital flow episodes.
This approach, and especially our ability to capture distinctions in the behavior of domestic and foreign
investors by using gross instead of net flows, allows a more nuanced understanding of extreme capital
flow episodes.
    More specifically, we use quarterly gross flows data in a sample of 58 countries over the period from
1980 through 2009 to identify four types of episodes: 7


    •    “Surges”: a sharp increase in gross capital inflows;
    •    “Stops”: a sharp decrease in gross capital inflows;
    •    “Flight”: 8 a sharp increase in gross capital outflows; and
    •    “Retrenchment”: a sharp decrease in gross capital outflows.


The first two types of episodes—surges and stops—are driven by foreigners while the last two—flight
and retrenchment—are driven by domestic investors.
    We calculate year-over-year changes in four-quarter gross capital inflows and outflows and define
episodes using three criteria: (1) current year-over-year changes in four-quarter gross capital inflows or
outflows is more than two standard deviations above or below the historic average during at least one
quarter of the episode; (2) the episode lasts for all consecutive quarters for which the year-over-year
change in annual gross capital flows is more than one standard deviation above or below the historical
average; and (3) the length of the episode is greater than one quarter. 9
    To provide a more concrete example of our methodology, consider the calculation of surge and stop
episodes. Let Ct be the 4-quarter moving sum of gross capital inflows (GINFLOW) and compute annual
year-over-year changes in Ct:



books a U.S. equity purchase through the Cayman Islands, this will look like a foreign inflow into U.S. equities. To our
knowledge, no residency-based system can get around this issue.
7
  We start with as broad a sample as possible and only exclude countries that do not have detailed quarterly gross flows data.
Due to the availability of explanatory variables, our baseline regression sample includes 54 countries.
8
  “Flight” has also been referred to as “starts”, as in Cowan et al. (2008), or “sudden diversification”.
9
  Summing capital flows over four quarters is analogous to the traditional literature’s focus on one year of flows and also
eliminates the impact of seasonal fluctuations. The historical average and standard deviation are calculated over the last five
years (20 quarters), which means that episodes are always defined relative to the recent past. We require that countries have
at least 4 years worth of data to calculate a “historic” average.

                                                                                                                              7
           𝐶𝑡 = ∑3𝑖=0 𝐺𝐼𝑁𝐹𝐿𝑂𝑊𝑡−𝑖 ,                                 with t = 1, 2, …, N and              (3)

           ∆Ct= Ct - Ct-4 ,                                        with t = 5, 6, …, N .               (4)

Next, compute rolling means and standard deviations of ∆Ct over the last 5 years. A “surge” episode is
defined as starting the first month t that ∆Ct increases more than one standard deviation above its rolling
mean. The episode ends once ∆Ct falls below one standard deviation above its mean. In addition, in
order for the entire period to qualify as a surge episode, there must be at least one quarter t when ∆Ct
increases at least two standard deviations above its mean.
           A stop episode, defined using a symmetric approach, is a period when gross inflows fall one
standard deviation below its mean, provided it reaches two standard deviations below at some point. The
episode ends when gross inflows are no longer at least one standard deviation below its mean.
           Episodes of flight and retrenchment are defined similarly, but using gross private outflows rather
than gross inflows, and taking into account that in BOP accounting terms outflows by domestic residents
are reported with a negative value. In other words, when domestic investors acquire foreign securities, in
BOP accounting terms gross outflows are negative. A sudden flight episode therefore occurs when gross
outflows (in BOP accounting terms) fall one standard deviation below its mean, provided it reaches two
standard deviations at some point, and end when gross outflows come back above one standard
deviation below its mean. A sudden retrenchment episode occurs when gross outflows increase one
standard deviation above its mean, providing it reaches two standard deviations above at some point,
and ends when gross outflows come back below one standard deviation above its mean.
           Our primary source of flow data is the International Monetary Fund’s International Financial
Statistics (IFS, accessed through Haver Analytics in January 2012) on quarterly gross capital inflows
and outflows. There are a number of modifications necessary, however, to transform the IFS flow data
into a usable dataset; some are straightforward, whereas others involve detailed inspection of country
data and the filling of gaps using source-country information. The creation of the underlying flows
dataset is described in more detail in Appendix A.
           The resulting sample consists of 58 countries listed in Appendix Table 1. 10 The table also lists
the start date for which quarterly capital flow data is available for each country. All countries have data
through the end of the sample, but start dates differ: 30 countries provide data in 1980, 37 countries in

10
     China is not in our sample, as it only recently began to publish quarterly capital flow data.

                                                                                                               8
1990, 52 countries in 1995 and the full sample of 58 countries by 2000 through the sample end in 2009.
In our baseline measure, we define gross capital inflows as the sum of inflows of direct investment,
portfolio inflows, and other inflows; gross private capital outflows are defined analogously as the sum of
direct investment outflows, portfolio outflows, and other outflows, with reserve accumulation omitted.
We also conduct a series of sensitivity tests using alternative measures. 11 In 2007, our sample includes
$10.8 trillion of gross capital inflows, capturing 97% of global capital inflows recorded by the IMF. 12
         Figure 2 shows our identification of surges and stops for one country (Brazil) from 1990 through
2009. The solid line is the change in annual gross capital inflows as defined in equation (4). The dashed
lines are the bands for mean capital inflows plus or minus one standard deviation, and the dotted lines
are the comparable two-standard-deviation bands. We classify an episode as a sudden stop if the change
in annual capital inflows falls below the lowest line (the two-standard-deviation line) for at least one
quarter, with the episode starting when it initially crosses the one-standard-deviation line and ending
when it crosses back over the same line. Similarly, we classify an episode as a sudden surge if annual
capital flows rise above the highest line (the two-standard-deviation line), with the episode starting when
flows initially cross the one-standard-deviation line and ending when they cross back over the same line.
         According to these criteria, four periods qualify as sudden stops since 1990: 1993Q1 to 1993Q3
(a period of hyperinflation in Brazil), 1995Q1 to 1995Q2 (the Mexican peso crisis), 1999Q1 to 1999Q2
(a devaluation in Brazil), and 2008Q2 to 2009Q3 (the GFC). Four other periods qualify as sudden
surges: 1990Q2 to 1991Q1 (after Brazil’s first democratic election in decades amid hopes inflation
would fall), 1994Q1 to 1994Q3 (before the Mexican peso crisis), 1995Q4 to 1996Q2 (before the Asian
crisis), and 2006Q3 to 2007Q4 (just before the GFC).


2.4 The Episodes: Surges, Stops, Flight, and Retrenchment
         Using the quarterly gross flows data and the criteria discussed above, from 1980 through 2009
we identify 167 surge, 221 stop, 196 flight, and 214 retrenchment episodes; Appendix Table 2 lists
episodes by country. Table 1 aggregates these results and reports summary statistics on the incidence of




11
   There are a number of reasonable alternative measures of gross flows—such as excluding currency swap arrangements by
the Federal Reserve Board during the recent crisis or including changes in reserves in capital outflows in order to capture
total outflows rather than private outflows. Sensitivity analysis shows these alternate definitions have no significant effect on
the key results, although including reserves in capital outflows can affect episode dates for some countries.
12
   Estimates based on worldwide financial account liabilities (inflows) of $11.2 trillion in 2007 as reported by the IMF.

                                                                                                                                9
episodes for the full sample and on the average length of each episode by income group and region. 13
Stops are slightly more prevalent than surges, but surges last longer; for the full sample, the average
length of each type of episode is roughly one year, with surges lasting the longest with an average length
of 4.5 quarters and retrenchments the shortest with an average length of 3.9 quarters. The breakdown by
income group indicates that lower income countries experience shorter episodes than the high income
countries over the full sample period, on average, even for episodes such as stops and flight.
        Given how we identify episodes (using a two-standard deviation cutoff), a country’s gross flows
will be in an episode about one-third of the time. As Appendix Table 2 suggests, however, there is
considerable cross-country variation in the incidence of different types of episodes. For example,
focusing on the gross inflows measures, Argentina has experienced many fewer surges than stops, being
in a surge episode only 12 percent of the time from 1985 through 2009, but in a stop episode in 1 out of
every 4 quarters. In contrast, other countries (such as India) were almost twice as likely to be in a surge
as in a stop. This variation across countries is what this paper seeks to explain.


2.5. A Comparison of Episodes based on Gross and Net Flows
        Our episodes defined using gross capital flows are substantially different from those in previous
work that used proxies for net capital flows and did not differentiate between the behavior of domestic
and foreign investors. To better understand the differences, we use the two techniques to identify
episodes during the height of the GFC—the two quarters from 2008 Q4 to 2009 Q1. Table 2 lists the
countries defined as having a surge or stop episode using net capital inflows (similar to the measures
used in previous work) and gross flows (as used in this paper). For each column we use the methodology
discussed in Section 2.2, except the net flows measures of surges and stops are defined as periods when
net capital inflows are above or below the threshold, respectively, while the episodes defined using gross
flows are periods when gross inflows are above or below the threshold.
        During the height of the GFC, net flows data identify more surge episodes and fewer stop
episodes. The left half of Table 2 shows that measures based on net flows identify thirteen surges from
2008 Q4 to 2009 Q1, while gross flows data identify only one surge (Bolivia, for whom a surge that

13
  We use income classifications in the year 2000 based on GNI per capita as reported by the World Bank, with “lower
income” referring to countries classified as “Low income” and “Middle/lower income” by the World Bank, “Middle income”
referring to countries classified as “Middle/higher income”. “Higher income” refers to countries classified as “High income”.
We combine lower and middle/lower income into the group “lower income” because there are only four countries in our
sample that qualify as lower income based on the World Bank classification. We focus on six regions: North America,
Western Europe, Asia, Eastern Europe, Latin America, and Other. The “Other” region is South Africa and Israel.

                                                                                                                          10
began in 2007 was ending in 2008 Q4). For stops (the right side of the table), net flows identify less than
half as many episodes as gross flows (22 stop episodes based on net flows versus 47 based on gross
flows). The reason for the differences is that during the GFC many countries’ residents retrenched from
foreign markets, bringing money home. In fact, each country defined as having a surge episode based on
the net flows data—but not using the gross data—had a retrenchment episode. The sudden inflow of
capital as domestic investors sold their foreign holdings and brought the money home is classified as
“retrenchment” in our definitions based on gross flows. If the retrenchment outweighs actions by foreign
investors, however, it can show up as a “surge” using the older methodology based on net flows.
Similarly, most of the countries identified as having a stop episode based on the gross data, but not the
net data, also had a large retrenchment in capital flows. Foreigners did pull back from these countries—
gross inflows slowed—but in many cases the retrenchment by domestic investors counteracted the
sudden stop of foreign investment. Even though foreign capital inflows suddenly stopped, retrenchment
meant that net capital flows did not fall enough to qualify as a “sudden stop” episode based on the older
methodology.
       To clarify these differences, consider the example of Chile. Table 2 shows that during the GFC
Chile had a surge episode based on net capital flows (but not gross flows) and a stop based on gross (but
not net) capital flows. Figure 1 clarifies why these differences occurred. The figure shows that during
the GFC, Chile’s gross inflows suddenly dropped while gross outflows also fell sharply, reflecting a
retrenchment as domestic investors brought money home (or ceased to send money abroad). The
retrenchment by domestic investors outweighed the stop in capital inflows by foreign investors.
Episodes identified using net capital flow data—which comingles these different types of flows—would
describe this as a “surge”, while gross capital flow data would instead define this period as a “stop” in
foreign capital inflows combined with a “retrenchment” by domestic investors.


2.6 Descriptive Analysis
       Figure 3 shows the evolution of the incidence of each type of episode from 1980 through 2009,
broken down by income group. Most episodes are in high income countries, especially in the earlier
years of the sample, which is not surprising as high income countries tend to have more complete
historical data. More importantly, these graphs show waves in the incidence of capital flow episodes,
with large swings in the percent of the sample experiencing an episode. For example, in some years no
countries experience a stop or a retrenchment, while at other times a majority of the sample experiences

                                                                                                            11
these episodes. These cycles suggest an important role for global factors in driving episodes of extreme
capital flow movements.
         One aspect of the GFC stands out: an unprecedented number of countries experienced stops and
retrenchment. Retrenchment occurred during other periods, although not in so many countries at the
same time. With many countries retrenching during the GFC, it is not surprising that there was a spike in
the incidence of sudden stops to 78% of the sample in the 4th quarter of 2008; if most countries are
retrenching, gross inflows by foreigners will fall in most countries. This strong correlation between stops
and retrenchment, however, does not exist during all crises. For example, in 1998q4, just following the
collapse of LTCM, the incidences of stop and retrenchment episodes were elevated (at 35% and 19%,
respectively). As economic risk abated, by the 3rd quarter of 1999 the number of retrenchment episodes
declined rapidly to 6%, while the number of stop episodes fell more slowly to 15%.
         Figure 4 divides the sample by region instead of income group. Many of the capital flow cycles
appear to be dominated by trends in Western Europe, which is not surprising as this region encompasses
a large number of countries with more complete data coverage. This graph also shows preliminary
evidence of regional patterns, possibly indicating the role of common regional characteristics or other
forms of contagion in explaining these episodes. For example, about half of Eastern Europe experienced
surges in the first quarter of 2003.
         The correlations between types of episodes in Table 3 provide further information. The strong
positive correlations between stops and retrenchments (0.47) and surges and flight (0.37) are consistent
with an important role for global factors. 14 Correlations between the other episodes are fairly low and do
not support an important role for country-specific factors. If country-specific factors were important, we
would expect that when foreigners flee, domestic residents would also (a positive correlation between
stops and flight), and when there is a wave of foreign capital inflows, domestic investors would also
bring money home (a positive correlation between surges and retrenchment). The correlations between
stops and flight and between surges and retrenchment, however, are negative.



14
   It is worth noting that these high correlations are not automatic due to differences in country size. For example, if all
domestic investors in most countries “retrench” and invest less abroad, this would correspond to a “stop” in capital inflows
from foreigners for most countries in the world. This relationship will not automatically hold, however, for countries of very
different sizes. If domestic investors in many small countries follow the above pattern and retrench, but investors in one large
country continue to send large volumes of investment abroad, there could be continued “surges” into most countries in the
world combined with retrenchments in all countries except the large country, leading to a low correlation between stops and
retrenchment.

                                                                                                                             12
       The information in Table 3 and Figures 3 and 4 suggests that episodes are related to global and
possibly regional/contagion factors. A finer look at the episodes by country, however, suggests that
domestic fundamentals may also play a role. For example, even though a majority of the sample
experienced a retrenchment episode during the GFC, there are important differences across countries
and some countries’ residents did not unwind foreign positions and bring money home. More
specifically, during late 2008 and early 2009, there was concern about the outlook for Eastern Europe;
Poland, however, experienced a retrenchment episode as Polish citizens brought a substantial amount of
money home, while Russian citizens sent their money abroad. Other countries that did not have a
retrenchment episode during this period include Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Greece, India, Indonesia,
New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, the Slovak Republic, South Africa, and Turkey. Why did this diverse
group of countries not have retrenchment episodes as occurred in most of the rest of the sample?
Different patterns across countries—even countries in the same region—suggest that even in the
presence of substantial global shocks and possibly regional contagion, domestic characteristics may also
be important in determining whether a country experiences a surge, stop, flight, or retrenchment episode.


3. Global, Contagion, and Domestic Factors
       This section provides regression analysis of the relationship between our episodes of extreme
capital flows and global, contagion, and domestic factors. We first review the literature on capital flows
to motivate a parsimonious list of variables that might be associated with surge, stop, flight, and
retrenchment episodes. We then develop the empirical framework and assess the roles of these variables.
Next we compare empirical results to those when episodes are based on net flows and take a closer look
at key results related to the role of risk and capital controls. We conclude with an extensive series of
sensitivity tests and a summary of key results that are consistent across these tests.


3.1 The Literature on Capital Flows
       To inform our selection of variables that might be associated with surge, stop, flight, and
retrenchment episodes, we draw from the literature on sudden stops and bonanzas (described in Section
2.1) as well as on capital flows in general, including work on the cross-country allocation of investment,
contagion through capital flows, capital flow cycles, and the causes of financial crises. Each of these
literatures is extensive and only briefly summarized below.



                                                                                                           13
       A major theme that runs through much of this research is whether the forces driving capital flows
are “push” factors that are external to the country (including global or contagion effects) or domestic
“pull” factors. The seminal papers in this literature—Calvo, Leiderman, and Reinhart (1993, 1996),
Fernandez-Arias (1996), and Chuhan, Claessens, and Mamingi (1998)—find that push factors are more
important than domestic fundamentals in driving capital flows. There is also some role for domestic
factors; Calvo, Leiderman, and Reinhart (1996) argue that the surge of capital inflows into emerging
markets in the early 1990s was initially attributed to domestic developments (such as better policies and
economic performance), although global factors were more important, especially cyclical movements in
global interest rates. Griffin, Nardari, and Stulz (2004) focus on domestic and global equity market
performance to measure pull and push factors and argue that both are important in understanding cross-
border equity flows.
       Another set of push factors outside a country’s control is contagion, generally defined as
resulting from circumstances in another country or group of countries (but not the entire world). The
literature on contagion has identified a variety of reasons why events in one country can spread to other
countries; summaries of these models and explanations for contagion are Claessens, Dornbusch, and
Park (2001) and Claessens and Forbes (2001). The various transmission mechanisms for contagion can
be broadly broken into contagion through trade channels (which include direct trade, competition in
third markets, and changes in import prices), financial channels (including through bank lending and
portfolio flows), and “country similarities” (such as a shared regional location or similar economic
characteristics). Glick and Rose (1999), Forbes (2002), and Abeysinghe and Forbes (2005) focus on
contagion through trade, while Peek and Rosengreen (1997), Kaminsky, Lyons, and Schmukler (2001),
and Broner, Gelos, and Reinhart (2006) focus on the role of financial linkages. Van Rijckeghem and
Weder (2001), Forbes (2004), and Blanchard, Das, and Faruquee (2010) assess the relative importance
of each of these mechanisms in explaining why a crisis spreads from one country to another, with
different papers highlighting the roles of different transmission channels. Some papers consider
contagion in the context of push and pull factors. Chinn and Forbes (2004) find a role for global as well
as contagion effects. Dungey, et al. (2011) simultaneously consider the role of domestic, contagion, and
global factors in explaining crises and find a role for all three channels, although global market factors
often outweigh contagion effects.
       The GFC has recently spawned a surge in theoretical research on crises and capital flows. Much
of this focuses on “push” factors driving capital flows, and especially on the role of risk (Bacchetta and

                                                                                                             14
van Wincoop, 2010 and Gourio, Siemer, and Verdelhan, 2010), liquidity/credit (Giannetti, 2007,
Brunnermeier, 2009, Calvo, 2009, and Kalemli-Ozcan, Papaioannou, and Perri, 2010), or how wealth
and leverage amplify shocks across borders (Dedola and Lombardo, 2010 and Devereux and Yetman,
2010). 15 Others focus more on pull factors. For example, the recent theoretical work of Caballero et al.
(2008), Mendoza et al. (2009), Bacchetta and Benhima (2010), and Ju and Wei (2011) highlights the
size, depth, and fragility of a country’s financial system in either attracting capital flows from abroad
(for developed financial markets) or driving capital flows out of the country (for less developed financial
markets); for empirical support of these models, see Mendoza and Terrones (2008) and Forbes (2010).
         Two other factors figure prominently in recent research on capital flows. One is growth—both
global and domestic. A focus of several theoretical papers is the role of changes in global growth, often
caused by global productivity shocks (see Albuquerque, Loayza, and Serven, 2005). Business cycle
models highlight how domestic productivity or terms-of-trade shocks affect growth and in turn generate
lending booms and busts and corresponding shifts in capital flows; see Aguiar and Gopinath (2007) for a
theoretical model and Broner et al. (2010) for an empirical assessment. The other important factor
prominent in recent research is the extent of financial market liberalization and integration with global
financial markets; see Aghion, Bacchetta, and Banerjee (2004), Calvo et al. (2008), Edison and Warnock
(2008), and Milesi-Ferretti and Tille (2010).
         In summary, the theoretical and empirical research reviewed here and in Section 2.1 suggests
that a parsimonious list of factors that might be associated with capital flow waves would include global
factors such as global risk, liquidity, interest rates, and growth; contagion through trade linkages,
financial linkages, and geographic location; and domestic factors such as a country’s financial market
development, integration with global financial markets, fiscal position, and growth shocks.


3.2 Estimation Strategy and Variables
         To assess the role of these global, contagion, and domestic variables in determining the
conditional probability of having a surge, stop, flight, or retrenchment episode in a given quarter, we
estimate the model:

15
   Any model of international capital flows must assume, at least implicitly, some heterogeneity across agents. If everyone
were identical, there would be no need to trade upon the realization of a shock. Asset prices would adjust, as might portfolio
weights, but international capital flows need not occur. But everyone is not identical. In the theoretical literature explaining
international capital flows, the necessary heterogeneity can emerge from many sources, such as information asymmetries,
risk, and financial sector development. Models that explicitly exploit heterogeneity are in Brennan and Cao (1997),
Caballero, et al. (2008), Mendoza et al. (2009), Gourio et al. (2010), Dumas, et al. (2010), and Tille and van Wincoop (2011).

                                                                                                                             15
                                     Global                     Contagion         Domestic
                  𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏(𝑒𝑖𝑡 = 1) = 𝐹�𝚽𝑡−1    𝚩G + 𝚽𝑖,𝑡−1                     𝚩C + 𝚽𝑖,𝑡−1    𝚩D � ,                        (5)


where eit is an episode dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if country i is experiencing an episode
                                                      Global
(surge, stop, flight, or retrenchment) in quarter t; 𝚽𝑡−1    is a vector of global factors lagged by one
             Contagion                                            Domestic
quarter; 𝚽𝑖,𝑡−1          is a vector of contagion variables; and 𝚽𝑖,𝑡−1    is a vector of domestic variables.
The appropriate methodology to estimate equation (5) is determined by the distribution of the
cumulative distribution function, F(⋅). Because episodes occur irregularly (83 percent of the sample is
zeros), F(⋅) is asymmetric. Therefore we estimate equation (5) using the complementary logarithmic (or
cloglog) framework, which assumes that F(⋅) is the cumulative distribution function (cdf) of the extreme
value distribution. In other words, this estimation strategy assumes that:

                            F(z) = 1− exp[−exp(z)] .                                                                     (6)

         While we estimate each type of episode separately, we use a seemingly unrelated estimation
technique that allows for cross-episode correlation in the error terms. This captures the fact that the
covariance matrix across episodes is not zero, without assuming a structural model specifying a
relationship between episodes. We also cluster the standard errors by country.
         While our review of the theoretical and empirical research suggested a parsimonious list of
global, contagion and domestic factors, there are a number of variables that could be used to represent
each. We focus on measures that are available over the full sample period from 1985 to 2009 for most
countries in the sample. 16 The variables are discussed in detail below.


         3.2.1 Global Variables
         For our initial analysis, we measure global risk as the Volatility Index (VXO) calculated by the
Chicago Board Options Exchange. 17 This measures implied volatility using prices for a range of options
on the S&P 100 index and captures overall “economic uncertainty” or “risk”, including both the

16
   Most of the variables are available quarterly. For market statistics that are available at a higher frequency, we use quarterly
averages. Economic statistics that are only available on an annual basis are calculated by approximating quarterly values
based on the annual frequencies. Also, as specified in equation (5) each variable is lagged by one quarter unless noted.
17
   The VXO, as the old VIX is now known, is similar to the VIX. The VIX is calculated using a broader set of prices, but is
only available starting in 1990. Table 6a shows that the correlation between the two measures is 99%, so we focus on the
VXO for our baseline analysis to maximize sample size. Section 3.5 discusses alternative measures of risk.

                                                                                                                               16
riskiness of financial assets as well as investor risk aversion. To measure global liquidity we use the
year-over-year growth in the global money supply, with the global money supply calculated as the sum
of M2 in the United States, Euro-zone, and Japan and M4 in the United Kingdom, all converted into US
dollars. Global interest rates are measured using the average rate on long-term government bonds in the
United States, core euro area, and Japan. Global growth is measured by quarterly global growth in real
economic activity. The last three variables are based on data from the IMF’s International Financial
Statistics (IFS) database.


       3.2.2 Contagion Variables
       We use three measures to capture contagion effects. The first is a measure of geographic
proximity, with a dummy variable equal to one if a country in the same region has an episode. The
regions are described in Section 2.4. We also measure contagion through trade linkages (TL) as an
export-weighted average of rest-of-the-world episodes:


                 ∑ (Exports              * Episodei ,t )
                  n

                               x ,i ,t
                                                               Exports x ,t
        TLxt =   i =1
                         n
                                                           *
                        ∑ Exports
                                                                GDPx ,t
                                            x ,i ,t
                                                                                                      (7)
                        i =1


where Exportsx,i, t is exports from country x to country i in quarter t from the IMF’s Direction of Trade
Statistics, Exportsx,t/GDPx, t is a measure of country x’s trade openness, and Episodei, t =1 if country i had
an episode in the quarter. TLxt is calculated for each country x for each type of episode (surge, stop,
flight, and retrenchment) in each quarter t.
       We also include a measure of financial linkages that is as similar to the trade linkages measure as
possible, given the more limited data available on bilateral financial linkages. The measure is based on
banking data provided by the Bank of International Settlements and uses the algorithm underlying the
analysis in McGuire and Tarashev (2006, 2007). While no measure of financial linkages is perfect, we
focus on banking data because it is the only cross-country financial data that is of reasonable quality and
widely available across countries and time periods. Let BANKx,i be total bank claims between country x
and BIS reporting entity i, where some i are individual countries (the U.S., U.K., Netherlands, and
Japan) but for confidentiality reasons other i are groups of countries. 18 Our measure of financial linkages

18
  The groupings are: AT CY GR IE PT; BE LU; FR DE IT ES; FI DK NO SE; HK MO SG BH, BS BM KY AN PA; GG IM
JE; BR CL MX; TR ZA; TW IN MY KR; and CH AU CA.

                                                                                                            17
(FL) first computes the GDP-weighted averages of episodes within each group; call this “group
episodes”, which will vary between zero and one. 19 Then for a country x, FLx is a BANKx,i-weighted
average of the “group episodes” multiplied by a financial openness measure (BANKx/GDPx).


         3.2.3 Country Variables
         To capture the domestic factors we use five variables. We measure the depth of the financial
system as the sum of each country’s stock market capitalization divided by GDP from Beck and
Demirgüç-Kunt (2009); in robustness tests we use other measures that are only available for smaller
samples. We measure capital controls/financial market integration with a broad measure of the country’s
capital controls as calculated in Chinn and Ito (2008). 20 This statistic is one of the few measures of
capital controls available back to 1985 for a broad sample of countries and we explore the impact of a
range of other measures in Section 3.5. Real GDP growth is from the IFS, and we measure the growth
shock as the deviation between actual growth and the country’s trend growth. We measure country
indebtedness as public debt to GDP from the new database described in Abbas, Belhocine, ElGanainy,
and Horton (2010). We also include a control for GDP per capita. 21


3.3 Baseline Results
         To assess whether global, contagion, and domestic factors are associated with surge, stop, flight,
and retrenchment episodes, we estimate equation 5 using a complimentary logarithmic framework that
includes adjustments for covariances across episodes and robust standard errors clustered by country.
Results are in Table 4. 22




19
   The GDP-weighted average of episodes within a group is computed because we do not have the full matrix of bilateral
banking claims, just claims vis-à-vis groups (and a few individual countries).
20
   We focus on the KAOPEN measure of capital controls in Chinn and Ito (2008), updated in April 2011. KAOPEN is based
on the principal components from four binary variables reported by the IMF: (1) capital account openness; (2) current
account openness; (3) the stringency of requirements for the repatriation and/or surrender of export proceeds; and (4) the
existence of multiple exchange rates for capital account transactions. In order to be consistent with other measures of capital
controls in the additional tests in Section 3.5, we reverse the sign so that a positive value indicates greater controls.
21
   All country-level variables, except for the index of capital controls, GDP per capita, and the contagion variables, are
winsorized at the 1% level to reduce the impact of extreme outliers.
22
   In the sensitivity analysis we show that the key results are robust to the inclusion of fixed effects. Country dummy
variables should not be needed if we capture all of the country-specific factors determining whether a country has an episode.
These dummy variables are usually jointly significant, however, indicating that we are (not surprisingly) unable to capture all
country effects. Including these fixed effects, however, could cause a downward bias on coefficient estimates for country-
specific variables that have a significant effect on the probability of an episode but are fairly constant over the sample period.

                                                                                                                               18
       The variable that is most consistently significant in predicting all types of episodes is global risk.
Higher levels of global risk are positively correlated with stops and retrenchment and negatively
correlated with surges and flight (although only at the 10% significance level for flight). Extensive
sensitivity tests (in Sections 3.5 and 3.6) show that these significant coefficients on risk are quite robust
across a range of episode definitions, estimation frameworks, and the inclusion of other explanatory
variables. Other global factors are significantly correlated with the probability of certain types of
episodes, although usually not the full cycle of capital flow waves. For example, strong global growth is
associated with a higher probability of surges and a lower probability of stops and retrenchment. Higher
global interest rates are usually correlated with retrenchment episodes.
       The middle block of Table 4 shows that contagion is also important, especially for stops and
retrenchment. Countries are more likely to experience a stop or retrenchment episode if their major
trading or financial partners just experienced the same type of episode. Countries are also more likely
experience stops and flight if their neighbors had the same episode. These results suggest that not only
global factors (the top block of Table 4), but also linkages to certain subsets of countries—through trade,
finance, or just geography—also impact the probability of experiencing an extreme capital flow episode.
       In contrast to these significant results for global and contagion factors, few domestic factors are
consistently associated with a higher probability of an extreme capital flow episode. Stops are more
likely in countries experiencing a negative growth shock; surges are more likely in countries with a
positive growth shock; retrenchments are more likely in richer countries and flight episodes are more
likely in countries with greater capital controls and lower debt. Moreover, as shown in the sensitivity
analysis below, many of these results are not robust across alternative specifications. This series of
estimates suggests that extreme capital flow episodes are associated primarily with global factors
(especially risk) and contagion rather than domestic factors.
       Just as noteworthy as the significant variables in Table 4 are those that are not significant. There
is no evidence that capital controls reduce a country’s likelihood of having a surge or stop episode, and
therefore controls do not seem to reduce the extreme volatility of foreign capital flows. Capital controls
may increase the probability of domestic investors sending money abroad (flight), but this result has
fluctuating significance in the sensitivity tests discussed below. Also noteworthy is that global liquidity
and global interest rates are not significantly related to most extreme capital flow episodes. The only




                                                                                                           19
exception is that retrenchments are more likely when global interest rates are high. Finally, it is worth
noting that flight episodes appear to be more idiosyncratic and harder to explain than other episodes. 23


3.4 Regression Results: Gross versus Net Flows
         As discussed in Section 2, previous work analyzing sudden surges/bonanzas and stops in capital
flows focused on sudden increases or decreases in net capital flows, rather than disaggregating flows
into gross flows by domestic or foreign investors. Table 5 uses our definition of extreme capital flow
movements, but instead of focusing on gross flows uses the traditional measures based on net capital
flows. The table shows the starkly different results when capital flows are not disaggregated by investors
type . Global risk, which is associated with all types of episodes based on gross flows, is not
significantly related to either surges or stops based on net flows. In fact, some of the coefficient
estimates are now counterintuitive. For example, the results based on net flows suggest that countries are
more likely to have stop episodes if they have more stringent capital controls and lower debt ratios.
         These results support the key point raised throughout this paper that focusing on net capital flows
instead of gross capital flows may miss important dynamics in capital flow movements. Although net
capital flows may be the variable of interest for certain analyses, disaggregating capital flows by type of
investor improves our understanding of the nature and composition of the flows. For example, global
risk is not significantly related to surges or stops when measured based on net capital flows (Table 5),
but is when episodes are measured based on gross flows (Table 4). This difference occurs because
actions by foreign and domestic investors can counteract each other. Lower global risk is associated with
an increase in both capital inflows from foreigners and capital outflows by domestic residents— and
these large shifts in both flows may counteract each other so that changes in the aggregated net capital
flows are small. Focusing on gross capital flows instead of net flows permits this more nuanced
understanding of factors associated with extreme capital flow movements.


3.5 A Closer Look at Global Risk and Capital Controls
         Two key results from our baseline analysis of extreme capital flow episodes are the significance
of global risk and insignificance of capital controls. This section looks more closely at these results.



23
  For example, in a simple logit specification, the pseudo-R2 is only 0.04 for flight episodes, increasing to 0.07, 0.13, and
0.15 for surges, retrenchments, and stops, respectively.

                                                                                                                                20
         The finding that global risk is the most consistently significant factor associated with capital flow
episodes (measured based on gross flows) has important implications for understanding capital flow
movements. To better understand this role of risk, we use three different measures of risk (in addition to
our baseline measure of the VXO): the VIX, the CSFB Risk Appetite Index (RAI), and the Variance
Risk Premium (VRP). 24 The most common measures of risk—such as the VXO and the VIX—capture
both economic uncertainty as well as risk aversion. The RAI is constructed with the aim of capturing
only risk aversion (or risk appetite) while controlling for overall risk and uncertainty. Misina (2003)
shows, however, that it may not control for changes in overall risk unless a strict set of theoretical
conditions are met. 25 In contrast, the VRP index is based on a less rigid set of assumptions and therefore
is a more accurate measure of risk aversion independent of expectations of future volatility (i.e., future
risk). A minor disadvantage of the VRP (as well as the VIX) is that it is only available starting in 1990.
         Table 6a shows the correlations between these different risk measures and Table 7a reports the
estimated coefficients on the risk variable if the base regression reported in Table 4 is repeated with
these alternate measures of risk (with the top line replicating the baseline results from Table 4).
Throughout the table, the coefficient on risk continues to be highly significant, except in regressions for
flight episodes, which continue to be more idiosyncratic. Broad measures of risk (the VXO, VIX and
possibly the RAI) that capture both changes in economic uncertainty as well as changes in risk aversion
are positively correlated with stop and retrenchment episodes and negatively correlated with surges.
The measure that most accurately isolates changes in risk aversion (the VRP) is positively and
significantly related to stops and negatively related to surges. This suggests that risk aversion (and not
just increased economic uncertainty) is an important factor associated with stop and surge episodes.
         A second key result from the baseline regressions in Table 4 is that a country’s capital controls
are not significantly related to any type of extreme capital flow episode (except that countries with
greater controls are more likely to have flight episodes). This does not support the recent interest in

24
   See section 3.2.1 for details on the VXO and VIX, which are nearly identical. The RAI is the beta coefficient of a cross-
sectional regression of a series of risk-adjusted asset price returns in several countries on the past variance of these assets.
This calculation is based on 64 global assets, including equities and bonds for all developed countries and major emerging
markets. If the beta is positive, the price of riskier assets is rising relative to the price of safer assets, so risk appetite among
investors is higher. For more information, see “Global Risk Appetite Index” a Market Focus Report by Credit Suisse First
Boston (February 20, 2004). To simplify comparisons with the other risk measures, we reverse the sign of the RAI. The VRP
is the difference between the risk-neutral and objective expectation of realized variance, where the risk-neutral expectation of
variance is measured as the end-of-month observation of VIX-squared and de-annualized and the realized variance is the sum
of squared 5-minute log returns of the S&P 500 index over the month; see Zhou (2010).
25
   Misina (2003) shows that the risk appetite index will measure risk aversion only in the presence of a rank effect in which
the key condition is the linear independence of asset returns used to construct the index. This assumption is unlikely to hold.

                                                                                                                                  21
capital controls as a means of reducing surges of capital inflows and overall capital flow volatility. To
further explore this result, we use several different measures of capital controls. First, instead of a direct
de jure measure of capital controls, we use a broad de facto measure of financial integration—the sum of
foreign assets and liabilities divided by GDP. 26 Second, we consider a broad measure of capital account
restrictions from Schindler (2009) that is only available from 1995 to 2005. Third, we use measures of
capital account restrictions from the same source and time period, but that focus specifically on controls
on just inflows or outflows. 27 Finally, we also use two new indices of capital controls from Ostry, et al.
(2011) that measure capital controls in the financial sector and regulations on foreign exchange. 28
         Table 6b shows that the correlations between the different measures of capital controls are low,
in part because they measure different aspects of controls. Table 7b shows the coefficient estimates on
each of these capital control measures when we repeat the base regression from Table 4, but use the
alternate measure of controls or financial integration (with the top line replicating the baseline results).
For surges and stops, the episodes at which capital controls are generally directed, the coefficients on
capital controls continue to be insignificant, even for the more detailed measures. The only exception
when the coefficient on capital controls is significant at the 5% level is the regression for stops when
financial integration is measured by international exposure through foreign assets and liabilities—more a
measure of openness than of capital controls. The negative coefficient on financial integration in this
case suggests that countries that are more integrated with global financial markets are less likely to
experience stop episodes. The only other result that is significant at the 10% level is that FX regulations
may be negatively associated with surges (although this result is not robust to several sensitivity tests).


3.6 Sensitivity Tests
         We conduct an extensive series of sensitivity tests, focusing on different time dimensions and
estimation strategies, including additional control variables, using different measures for the control
variables, and calculating the episodes using different techniques.

26
   The financial integration data is from an updated and extended version of the dataset constructed by Lane and Milesi-
Ferretti (2007), available at: http://www.philiplane.org/EWN.html.
27
   For regressions predicting surges and stops we use the index of controls on local purchases and sales, respectively, by
nonresidents. For regressions predicting flight and retrenchments we use the index of controls on purchases or sales abroad,
respectively, by residents.
28
   The measure of capital controls in the financial sector includes: restrictions on borrowing abroad and restrictions on
maintenance of accounts abroad. The index of foreign exchange regulations includes: restrictions on lending locally in
foreign currency; purchases of locally issued securities denominated in foreign currency; and (iv) limits on open foreign
exchange positions. Both measures include differential treatment of accounts held by nonresidents.

                                                                                                                           22
         We begin by testing if the estimates are driven by the extreme volatility during the recent crisis
(as shown in Figures 3 and 4) by dropping the crisis period from 2008Q3 through 2009Q2 from the
sample. We also estimate each of the equations using fixed effects. This strategy controls for each
country’s fixed characteristics over the sample period and therefore estimates how changes in each
domestic variable from its mean for each country affects the probability of each country having a surge,
stop, flight or retrenchment in each quarter. This is a different question than for the base estimates that
do not include fixed effects and which instead estimate the effect of the level of each domestic
characteristic (rather than the change from the country mean) on the probability of the country having an
episode in each quarter. We also estimate the main model using a standard probit or logit estimation
(instead of the cloglog) and estimate each equation in isolation instead of as part of system estimation.
         In another set of sensitivity tests, we include additional control variables in the base regression to
test if other factors could affect the probability of having a capital flow episode. First, a number of
models (Domeij and Flodén, 2006; and Krueger and Ludwig, 2007) focus on the role of demographics in
driving capital flows, usually in an OLG framework. We follow Chinn and Prasad (2003) and include
two controls for demographic trends—the “youth dependency ratio” and “old dependency ratio” defined
as the population aged under 15 or over 65 respectively, both divided by the population aged 15 to 65. 29
Second we include a dummy variable equal to one if the country has a pegged exchange rate, based on
the exchange rate classification in Shambaugh (2004). 30 Third, we include a measure of the country’s
credit rating to capture country risk that may not be captured in its debt ratio and other measures. We use
the country’s Moody’s or S&P rating, with a numerical value assigned to each rating and a lower value
indicating a higher ranking. 31 Fourth, we add a control for the country’s terms-of-trade as measured by
the World Bank’s “Net Barter Terms of Trade Index”. Finally, we control for a country’s level of
reserves to GDP. 32
         Then we use a number of different measures for the control variables (in addition to the different
measures of risk and capital controls in Section 3.5). First, to measure global interest rates, instead of

29
   We do not include a demographic variable in the main analysis as the theoretical and empirical work indicates that
demographics affects capital flows over the medium and long term, but not necessarily over the shorter periods which are the
focus of this paper.
30
   Updated classification data were kindly provided by the author. A country is classified as having a pegged exchange rate if
it (a) has no fluctuation at all; (b) moves within 2% bands; or (3) has a one-time devaluation with 0% change after 11 months.
31
   For example, for Moody’s an “aaa” rating is scored as a 1, a “aa1” rating is scored as a 2, etc. In each case a 1 is the lowest
rating. Cantor and Packer (1996) show “that sovereign ratings effectively summarize and supplement the information
contained in macroeconomic indicators.”
32
   Data from 2000 to 2010 are the sum of monthly reserve data as reported by the IMF. Pre-2000 data are quarterized versions
of the annual Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007) dataset.

                                                                                                                              23
using the average rate on long-term government bonds in the United States, euro area, and Japan, we
simply use the rate for the United States. Second, to measure global liquidity, we use private credit
growth by deposit money banks and other financial institutions from Beck and Demirgüç -Kunt (2009).
Third, to measure the size of the financial system, instead of using just the country’s stock market
capitalization to GDP, we use the sum of the country’s stock market capitalization and private and
public bond market capitalization to GDP (which limits the sample size). Fourth, to measure the strength
of a country’s financial system instead of its size, we use the return on equity for the banking system
(also from Beck and Demirgüç-Kunt, 2009). Fifth, instead of measuring domestic growth shocks as the
country’s GDP growth versus a historic trend, we measure the shock versus growth as forecast in the
spring WEO. Finally, we also exclude the control for GDP per capita.
           As a final series of sensitivity tests, we implement different techniques for identifying the
episodes of surges, stops, flight, and retrenchment. First, instead of using a historic moving average to
calculate the episodes, we use an HP filter with episodes defined by 30% deviations from the stochastic
trend. Second, instead of the traditional two-standard deviation cutoff we use a three-standard deviation
cutoff for changes in capital flows to qualify as an episode, which greatly decreases the number of
episodes. Third, we exclude transactions by the monetary authorities from the 3rd quarter of 2008
through the end of the sample in order to remove any effect of the currency swap arrangements by the
Federal Reserve Board. 33 This has a minimal effect on the definitions of episodes. Fourth, we include
reserves in our definition of outflows by domestic residents, thereby focusing on movements in both
official and private capital flows instead of just private flows. This can affect the definition of flight and
retrenchment episodes. Finally, we include errors and omissions in the underlying gross flows data, as
specified in Appendix A, as a check on data quality issues.
           The results of a sample of these sensitivity tests are reported in Appendix Tables 3a – 3d and
confirm the baseline results discussed above. We will focus on variables significant at the 5% level, a
significance level that implies some degree of robustness; the tables also show which factors are
significant at the 10% level. Most consistent across episodes is the importance of global variables, and
especially global risk. Global risk is significantly related to surge, stop, and retrenchment episodes in
each of the robustness tests, and is often (although not always) significantly related to flight episodes.
This supports the focus of much of the recent theoretical literature that models how changes in global
risk can be a key factor driving crises. This is also in line with Fratzscher (2011), which finds that global

33
     See McGuire and von Peter (2009) for analysis of the swap arrangements.

                                                                                                             24
factors, and especially risk, account for a large share of global capital flow patterns immediately before
and during the recent crisis. Other global factors are significantly related to some, but not all, types of
episodes. As in the baseline regression, global growth is often (but not always) significantly associated
with surges, stops and retrenchments and higher global interest rates are associated with retrenchments.
        The results for the contagion variables are also largely consistent with the baseline regressions
and suggest that cross-country linkages through trade and finance are important in explaining stop and
retrenchment episodes, with an additional role for geographic location in explaining stops. Domestic
variables also continue to show less consistent patterns. There is some evidence that: country’s with
stronger domestic growth are less likely to experience stops and more likely to experience surges;
wealthier countries are more likely to experience retrenchments; country’s with lower debt burdens and
greater capital controls are more likely to experience flight; and countries with larger financial systems
may be more likely to experience stops. The significance of each of these results, and often the sign,
however, fluctuate across specifications. Other relationships between domestic variables and episodes
are weak or vary greatly by specification.
        Finally, just as noteworthy are some coefficients that are consistently insignificant. Capital
controls are not significantly related to the probability of having surge, stop, or retrenchment episodes.
There is no evidence that reduced integration with global financial markets, including through the use of
capital controls, is associated with a reduced vulnerability to episodes caused by foreigners. Greater
global liquidity is rarely associated with an increased probability of any type of episode. This does not
support recent concerns that increased liquidity from major economies (such as through quantitative
easing) significantly increases the probability of surges of capital inflows into other countries after
controlling for other variables. A country’s financial system (whether measured by size or efficiency)
does not have any significant relationship with surge, flight, or retrenchment episodes. This does not
support a recent focus of the theoretical literature on global imbalances on the role of the financial
system in driving capital inflows from abroad and outflows by domestic investors. Global interest rates
(whether measured as just U.S. rates or an average of major economies) have no significant relationship
with surges or flight after controlling for other factors.


4. Conclusions
        This paper has developed a new methodology to analyze extreme movements in capital flows
using data on both inflows and outflows by domestic and foreign investors. Compared to previous work

                                                                                                              25
that focused only on net capital flows, this new methodology yields substantially different definitions of
periods of “surges” and “stops” when foreign investors substantially increase or decrease capital flows
to a country. We also identify periods of “flight” and “retrenchment” when domestic investors
substantially increase or decrease their capital flows abroad. This more detailed disaggregation of capital
flows is critically important to understand what drives capital flow waves.
         The analysis finds that global factors, and especially global risk, are key to understanding periods
of extreme capital flows by domestic and foreign investors. Increases in global risk predict sudden stops
in capital flows by foreigners and retrenchments in capital flows by domestic investors. Decreases in
global risk predict surges in capital inflows by foreigners and flight in capital outflows by domestic
investors. The relationship between global risk and capital flows appears to work primarily through
changes in economic uncertainty, although changes in risk aversion are also significantly related to stops
and surges of foreign capital flows. Global growth can also predict certain types of episodes (surges,
stops and retrenchments). Contagion through financial linkages, trade flows, or simple geographic
proximity is also important. The results indicate a less important role for domestic factors in explaining
episodes. Flight episodes, when domestic investors send more money abroad, appear to be more
idiosyncratic and harder to explain than other types of extreme capital flow movements.
         Our results provide insights that can inform different theoretical approaches to modeling sharp
movements in capital flows. The primary role of global risk supports the recent focus in several
theoretical papers on global factors, and especially global risk, as a primary cause of crises. Our results
are less supportive of theoretical models that focus mainly on changes in interest rates or liquidity in a
major economy, such as the United States, as the major factor driving capital flows. Higher global
interest rates are associated with more retrenchment episodes, but global liquidity is rarely significant in
predicting any type of episode. 34 Finally, the results show that positive domestic growth shocks affect
foreign but not domestic investors, thereby providing mixed support for theoretical work focusing on
domestic productivity shocks as key determinants of capital flows (such as the real business cycle
literature).
         The results also have important implications for policymakers concerned about capital flow
volatility. Waves of capital flows can present substantial macroeconomic challenges, whether it is the
waves of capital inflows that cause currency appreciation and/or asset bubbles or the “undertows” as

34
  Bekaert, Hoerova, and Duca (2010) find that a lax monetary policy decreases risk aversion after about five months, so it is
possible that the risk measure may be capturing a lagged effect of monetary policy.

                                                                                                                           26
capital outflows cause a collapse in exchange rates and asset prices. One country characteristic that has
recently received substantial support in order to reduce this volatility—capital controls—is not
significantly associated with a reduced occurrence of surges, stops, or other capital flow episodes. Most
factors related to capital flow volatility—such as changes in global risk, global growth, and contagion—
are outside the control of policymakers in most countries. This suggests that governments may wish to
focus more on strengthening their country’s ability to withstand capital flow volatility rather than to
attempt to directly reduce this volatility. This also suggests an important role for global institutions and
cross-country cooperation for policymakers that hope to reduce the sharp volatility of global capital
flows.
         Finally, our results suggest that to understand the dynamics of capital flow waves it is important
to disaggregate capital flows by foreign and domestic investors. Domestic and foreign agents can
respond differently to shocks, due to factors such as different exposure to the domestic exchange rate or
different degrees of access to liquidity. In some cases their responses could partially counterbalance
each other, leading to greater stability in net flows. In other cases their actions could magnify each other,
increasing the instability of net flows. In yet other cases, only one set of investors may show any
significant response to certain shocks or policy actions. (For example, higher domestic growth is
correlated with stronger inflows of investment from foreigners, but has no significant effect on capital
flow episodes driven by domestics). A more complete understanding of these dynamics of not only how,
but why, domestic and foreign investors respond to different types of shocks is critically important to
better understand the drivers of extreme capital flow episodes.




                                                                                                           27
                                              References

Abbas, Ali, Nazim Belhocine, Asmaa ElGanainy, and Mark Horton. (2010). A Historical Public Debt
Database.” IMF Working Paper WP/10/245.

Abeysinghe, Tilak and Kristin Forbes. (2005). “Trade Linkages and Output-Multiplier Effects: A
Structural VAR Approach with a Focus on Asia.” Review of International Economics 13(2): 356-375.

Adalet, Muge and Barry Eichengreen. (2007). “Current Account Reversals: Always a Problem?” In
Richard Clarida, ed. G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment. University of
Chicago Press: 205-242.

Aggarwal, Reena, Leora Klapper, and Peter Wysocki. (2005). “Portfolio Preferences of Foreign
Institutional Investors.” Journal of Banking and Finance 29: 2919-46.

Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bacchetta, and Abhijit Banerjee. (2004). “Financial Development and the
Instability of Open Economies.” Journal of Monetary Economics 51(6): 1077-1106.

Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath. (2007). “Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle is the Trend.”
Journal of Political Economy 115(1): 69-102.

Aizenman, Joshua and Y. Jinjarak. (2009). “Current Account Patterns and National Real Estate
Markets.” Journal of Urban Economics 66(2): 75-89.

Albuquerque, Rui, Norman Loayza, and Luis Serven. (2005). “World Market Integration through the
Lens of Foreign Direct Investors.” Journal of International Economics 66(2): 267-295.

Bacchetta, Philippe and Kenza Benhima. (2010). “The Demand for Liquid Assets and International
Capital Flows.” Unpublished mimeo.

Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop. (2010). “On the Global Spread of Risk Panics.” Mimeo.
Paper presented at European Central Bank conference, “What Future for Financial Globalization” on
09/09/10.

Beck, Thortsen and Asli Demirgüç-Kunt. (2009). "Financial Institutions and Markets Across Countries
and over Time: Data and Analysis." World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 4943.

Bekaert, Geert, Marie Hoerova, and Marco Lo Duca. (2010). “Risk, Uncertainty and Monetary Policy.”
Mimeo.

Bertaut, Carol and Linda Kole. (2004). “What Makes Investors Over or Underweight?: Explaining
International Appetites for Foreign Equities.” International Financial Discussion Papers Number 819.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Blanchard, Olivier, Mitali Das, and Hamid Faruqee. (2010). “The Initial Impact of the Crisis on
Emerging Market Countries.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Spring, pgs. 263-307.

                                                                                                       28
Brennan, Michael J., and H. Henry Cao. (1997). “International Portfolio Investment Flows.” Journal of
Finance 52: 1851-1880.

Broner, Fernando, Tatiana Didier, Aitor Erçe, and Sergio Schmukler. (2010). “Financial Crises and
International Portfolio Dynamics.” Mimeo.

Broner, Fernando, Gaston Gelos, and Carmen Reinhart. (2006). “When in Peril, Retrench: Testing the
Portfolio Channel of Contagion.” Journal of International Economics 69(10): 203-30.

Brunnermeier, Markus. (2009). “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-8.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 23(1): 77-100.

Burger, John, Francis Warnock, and Veronica Warnock. (2012). “Emerging Local Currency Bond
Markets.” Financial Analysts Journal (forthcoming).

Caballero, Julian. (2010). “Do Surges in International Capital Flows Influence the Likelihood of
Banking Crises? Cross-Country Evidence on Capital Flows Bonanzas and Bonanza-Boom-Bust Cycles.”
Mimeo.

Caballero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. (2008). “An Equilibrium Model of
‘Global Imbalances’ and Low Interest Rates.” American Economic Review 98(1): 358-93.

Calvo, Guillermo. (2009). “Financial Crises and Liquidity Shocks: A Bank-Run Perspective.” NBER
Working Paper 15425.

Calvo, Guillermo. (1998). “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of Sudden
Stops.” Journal of Applied Economics (Nov): 35-54.

Calvo, Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis-Fernando Mejía. (2008). “Systemic Sudden Stops: The
Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects and Financial Integration.” NBER Working Paper 14026.

Calvo, Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis-Fernando Mejía. (2004). “On the Empirics of Sudden
Stops: The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects.” NBER Working Paper 10520.

Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart. (1996). “Inflows of Capital to
Developing Countries in the 1990s.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 10(2): 123-139.

Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart. (1993). “Capital Inflows and Real
Exchange Rate Appreciation in Latin America: The Role of External Factors.” IMF Staff Papers 40(1):
108–151.

Cantor, Richard and Frank Packer. (1996). “Determinants and Impact of Sovereign Credit Ratings.”
FRBNY Economic Policy Review, October, pgs. 37-54.

Cardarelli, Roberto, Selim Elekdag, and M. Ayhan Kose. (2009). “Capital Inflows: Macroeconomic
Implications and Policy Responses.” IMF Working Paper WP/09/40.

                                                                                                     29
Chinn, Menzie and Kristin Forbes. (2004). “A Decomposition of Global Linkages in Financial Markets
Over Time.” Review of Economics and Statistics 86(3): 705-722.

Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito. (2008). “A New Measure of Financial Openness.” Journal of Comparative
Policy Analysis 10(3): 309-22.

Chinn, Menzie and Eswar Prasad. (2003). “Medium Term Determinants of Current Accounts in
Industrial and Developing Countries: An Empirical Exploration." Journal of International Economics 59
(1, January): 47-76.

Chuhan, Punam, Stijn Claessens, and Nlandu Mamingi. (1998). “Equity and bond flows to Latin
America and Asia: The Role of Global and Country Factors.” Journal of Development Economics 55
(2), 439 - 463.

Claessens, Stijn, Rudiger Dornbusch, and Yung-Chul Park. (2001). “Contagion: Why Crises Spread and
How This Can Be Stopped.” In Stijn Claessens and Kristin Forbes, eds. International Financial
Contagion. Kluwer Academic Publishers, pgs. 19-41.

Claessens, Stijn and Kristin Forbes. (2001). “International Financial Contagion: An Overview” In Stijn
Claessens and Kristin Forbes, eds. International Financial Contagion. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
pgs. 3-17.

Cowan, Kevin, and Jose De Gregorio. (2007). “International Borrowing, Capital Controls and the
Exchange Rate: Lessons from Chile.” in Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies:
Policies, Practices and Consequences, Boston: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cowan, Kevin, José De Gregorio, Alejandro Micco, and Christopher Neilson. (2008). “Financial
Diversification, Sudden Stops and Sudden Starts.” in Kevin Cowan, Sebastian Edwards, and Rodrigo
Valdés (eds.), Current Account and External Finance, Central Bank of Chile.

Dedola, Luca and Giovanni Lombardo. (2009). “Financial Frictions, Financial Integration and the
International Propagation of Shocks.” Mimeo.

Devereux, Michael, and James Yetman (2010). “Leverage Constraints and the International
Transmission of Shocks.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42: 71-105.

Domeij, David and Martin Flodén. (2006). “Population Aging and International Capital
Flows.” International Economic Review 47(3): 1013–32.

Dooley, Michael. (1988). “Capital flight: a response to differences in financial risks.” IMF Staff Papers
35: 422-436.

Dumas, Bernard, Karen Lewis, and Emilio Osambela. (2010). “Differences of Opinion and International
Equity Markets.” SSRN Working Paper 1570168.




                                                                                                        30
Dungey, Mardi, Renée Fry, Brenda González-Hermosillo, and Vance Martin. (2011). Transmission of
Financial Crises and Contagion: A Latent Factor Approach, Oxford University Press (New York, NY).

Edison, Hali, and Francis E. Warnock. (2008). “Cross-Border Listings, Capital Controls, and Equity
Flows to Emerging Markets.” Journal of International Money and Finance 27: 1013-1027.

Edison, Hali, and Francis E. Warnock. (2004). “U.S. Investors’ Emerging Market Equity Portfolios: A
Security-Level Analysis.” Review of Economics and Statistics 84(3):691-704.

Edwards, Sebastian. (2005). “The End of Large Current Account Deficits, 1970-2002: Are There
Lessons for the United States?” In Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, The Greenspan Era: Lessons
for the Future. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City: 205-268.

Faruqee, Hamid, Shujing Li, and Isabel Yan. (2004). “The Determinants of International Portfolio
Holdings and Home Bias.” IMF Working Paper #WP/04/34.

Faucette, Jillian E., Alexander D. Rothenberg, and Francis E. Warnock (2005). “Outflows-induced
Sudden Stops.” Journal of Policy Reform 8:119-130.

Fernandez-Arias, Eduardo. (1996). “The New Wave of Private Capital Inflows: Push or Pull?” Journal
of Development Economics 48(2): 389-418.

Forbes, Kristin. (2010). “Why do Foreigners Invest in the United States?” Journal of International
Economics 80(1): 3-21.

Forbes, Kristin. (2004). “The Asian Flu and Russian Virus: The International Transmission of Crises in
Firm-level Data.” Journal of International Economics 63(1): 59-92.

Forbes, Kristin, (2002). “Are Trade Linkages Important Determinants of Country Vulnerability to
Crises? In Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey Frankel, eds. Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging
Markets. University of Chicago Press, pgs. 77-123.

Fratzscher, Marcel. (2011). “Capital Flows, Global Shocks and the 2007-08 Financial Crisis.” Mimeo.

Freund, Caroline. (2005). “Current Account Adjustment in Industrial Countries.” Journal of
International Money and Finance 24: 1278-1298.

Freund, Caroline and Francis Warnock. (2007). “Current Account Deficits in Industrial Countries: The
Bigger They Are, The Harder They Fall?” in Richard Clarida, ed. G7 Current Account Imbalances:
Sustainability and Adjustment. University of Chicago Press: 133-168.

Giannetti, Mariassunta. (2007). “Financial Liberalization and Banking Crises: The Role of Capital
Inflows and Lack of Transparency.” Journal of Financial Intermediation 16(1): 32-63.

Glick, Reuven and Andrew Rose. (1999). "Contagion and Trade: Why Are Currency Crises
Regional?" Journal of International Money and Finance 18: 603-617.

                                                                                                      31
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Rodrigo Valdés, and Oscar Landerretche. (2001). “Lending Booms: Latin
America and the World.” Economia 1(2), pgs. 47-99.

Gourio, Francois, Michael Siemer, and Adrien Verdelhan. (2010). “International Risk Cycles.” Mimeo.
Paper presented at European Central Bank conference, “What Future for Financial Globalization” on
09/09/10.

Griffin, John, Federico Nardari, and Rene Stulz. (2004). "Daily Cross-Border Flows: Pushed or Pulled?"
Review of Economics and Statistics 86(3): 641-657.

Ju, Jiandong and Shang-Jin Wei. (2011). “When is Quality of Financial System a Source of Comparative
Advantage?” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Elias Papaioannou, and Fabrizio Perri. (2010). “This Time is Different:
Financial Integration and the 2007 Crisis.” Mimeo.

Kaminsky, Graciela, Richard Lyons, and Sergio Schmukler. (2001). “Mutual Fund Investment in
Emerging Markets: An Overview,” in Stijn Claessens, and Kristin Forbes, eds. International Financial
Contagion. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, pgs. 158-185.

Khan, Moshin, and Nadeem Ul Haque. (1985). “Foreign borrowing and capital flight: a formal
analysis.” IMF Staff Papers 32: 606-628.

Krueger, Dirk and Alexander Ludwig. (2007). “On the Consequences of Demographic Change
for Rates of Return to Capital, and the Distribution of Wealth and Welfare.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 54(1): 49–87.

Lane, Philip and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. (2008). “International Investment Patterns.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 90(3, August): 538-549.

Lane, Philip and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. (2007). "The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised
and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970–2004." Journal of International
Economics 73( November): 223-250.

Lessard, Donald, and John Williamson. (1987). Capital Flight and Third World Debt. Washington:
Institute for International Economics.

Leuz, Christian, Karl Lins, and Francis Warnock. (2009). “Do Foreigners Invest Less in Poorly
Governed Firms?” Review of Financial Studies 22(8): 3245-3285.

McGuire Patrick and Nikola Tarashev. (2007). “International banking with the euro.” BIS Quarterly
Review (December).

McGuire Patrick and Nikola Tarashev. (2006). “Tracking international bank flows.” BIS Quarterly
Review (December).



                                                                                                      32
McGuire, Patrick and Goetz von Peter. (2009). “The U.S. Dollar Shortage in Global Banking and the
International Policy Response.” BIS Working Papers #291.

Mendoza, Enrique, Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose Victor Rios-Rull. (2009). “Financial Integration,
Financial Development and Global Imbalances.” Journal of Political Economy 117(3): 371-416.

Mendoza, Enrique and Marco Terrones. (2008). “An Anatomy of Credit Booms: Evidence from Macro
Aggregates and Micro Data.” NBER Working Paper #14049.

Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria and Assaf Razin. (2000). “Current Account Reversals and Currency Crises,
Empirical Regularities.” in Paul Krugman, ed. Currency Crises. Chicago: University of Chicago Press

Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria and Cédric Tille. (2010). “The Great Retrenchment: International Capital
Flows during the Global Financial Crisis.” Mimeo.

Misina, Miroslav. (2003). "What Does the Risk-Appetite Index Measure?," Working Papers 03-23,
Bank of Canada.

Ostry, Jonathan, Atish Ghosh, Marcos Chamon, and Mahvash Qureshi. (2011). “Managing Capital
Inflows: The Role of Controls and Prudential Policies.” IMF mimeo.

Peek, Joe, and Eric Rosengreen. (1997). “The International Transmission of Financial Shocks: The Case
of Japan,” American Economic Review 87(4): 495-505.

Reinhart, Carmen and Vincent Reinhart. (2009). “Capital Flow Bonanzas: An Encompassing View of
the Past and Present,” in Jeffrey Frankel and Francesco Giavazzi, eds. NBER International Seminar in
Macroeconomics 2008. Chicago: Chicago University Press.

Rothenberg, Alex and Francis E. Warnock. (2011). “Sudden Flight and True Sudden Stops.” Review of
International Economics 19(3): 509-524.

Schindler, Martin. (2009). “Measuring Financial Integration: A New Data Set.” IMF Staff Papers 56(1):
222-238.

Shambaugh, Jay. (2004). “Exchange Rate Regime Classification”. Data available at *** and developed
for the paper “The Effect of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 119 (1): 301-352.

Tille, Cedric and Eric van Wincoop. (2011). “International Capital Flows and Asset Prices: Two Peas in
a Pod.” mimeo, Geneva Graduate Institute and University of Virginia.

Van Rijckeghem, Caroline, and Beatrice Weder. (2001). “Sources of Contagion: Is it Finance or Trade?”
Journal of International Economics 54: 293-308.

Zhou, Hao. (2010). “Variance Risk Premia, Asset Predictability Puzzles, and Macroeconomic
Uncertainty.” Federal Reserve Board, unpublished working paper.

                                                                                                       33
                                          Table 1
                         Summary Statistics for Episodes (1980-2009)

                                                  Surge        Stop        Flight       Retrenchment

                                                                   % of sample with


Full sample                                        15%         18%          17%               17%


                                                   Average length of time for each (in quarters)

Full sample                                        4.5          4.0          4.1               3.9

By Income Group           High income              4.5          4.1          4.2               4.2
                          Med income               4.6          3.8          4.4               3.3
                          Lower income             4.3          3.7          3.8               3.6

By Region                 North America            3.8          4.0          3.8               3.9
                          Western Europe           4.5          4.2          4.2               4.2
                          Asia                     4.5          3.8          4.3               4.0
                          Eastern Europe           4.8          3.8          4.2               3.5
                          Latin America            4.4          3.9          3.8               3.2
                          Other                    4.3          3.7          4.4               3.6


  Notes: Income groups are based on World Bank definitions, with “Lower income” including both low income and
  middle/low income countries according to World Bank classification; “Middle income” is middle/high income;
  “Higher income” is high income.




                                                                                                            34
                                               Table 2
                     Episodes During the GFC Based on Net and Gross Capital Flows

                       Surges                                                         Stops
         Net Flows              Gross Flows                    Net Flows                      Gross Flows
      Belgium/Lux               Bolivia                     Argentina               Argentina          Austria
      Canada                                                Brazil                  Brazil             Belgium/Lux
      Chile                                                 Estonia                 Estonia            Canada
      Finland                                               Guatemala               Guatemala          Chile
      France                                                Iceland                 Iceland            Colombia
      Iceland                                               India                   India              Czech Rep
      Israel                                                Ireland                 Ireland            Denmark
      Netherlands                                           Latvia                  Latvia             France
      Singapore                                             Lithuania               Lithuania          Germany
      Sweden                                                Malaysia                Malaysia           Hong Kong
      Taiwan                                                New Zealand             New Zealand        Indonesia
      UK                                                    Norway                  Norway             Israel
      Venezuela                                             Peru                    Peru               Italy
                                                            Philippines             Philippines        Japan
                                                            Poland                  Poland             Korea
                                                            Romania                 Romania            Mexico
                                                            Russia                  Russia             Netherlands
                                                            South Africa            South Africa       Panama
                                                            Spain                   Spain              Portugal
                                                            Turkey                  Turkey             Singapore
                                                            Croatia                                    Slovenia
                                                            Greece                                     Sweden
                                                                                                       Switzerland
                                                                                                       Taiwan
                                                                                                       Thailand
                                                                                                       UK
                                                                                                       US

Notes: The "Net Flows" columns show episodes based on the net flows data, as used in the traditional sudden stops and
bonanzas literature. The "Gross Flows" columns show episodes based on gross flows data, as used in this paper. The
difference between the two is that episodes based on net flows include the actions of domestic investors, who retrenched in
many countries during the crisis. The crisis is defined as the two quarters 2008Q4 and 2009Q1.




                                                                                                                          35
                                 Table 3
          Correlation between Probability of Each Type of Episode

                 Surge            Stop           Flight      Retrenchment
Surge             1.000
Stop             -0.202          1.000
Flight            0.368          -0.134           1.000
Retrenchment     -0.135          0.468           -0.205             1.000




                                                                            36
                                    Table 4
             Regression Results: Episodes of Extreme Capital Flows

                             Surge              Stop              Flight        Retrenchment
Global Factors
 Risk                      -0.054**           0.023**            -0.031*            0.017**
                            (0.016)            (0.004)           (0.017)            (0.006)
 Liquidity                   5.034              3.921             -4.535             3.806
                            (4.684)            (4.744)           (4.806)            (4.688)
 Interest Rates             -0.007              0.058             -0.076            0.133**
                            (0.051)            (0.042)           (0.063)            (0.040)
 Growth                    26.416**          -11.041**             4.955           -9.427**
                            (9.501)            (2.594)           (5.622)            (2.852)

Contagion
 Regional                    0.429             0.632**           0.474**            0.076
                            (0.281)            (0.163)           (0.240)           (0.158)
 Trade                       0.848             1.093**             1.144           2.369**
                            (0.995)            (0.541)           (1.732)           (0.658)
 Financial                  -0.818*            0.217**            -0.413            0.212*
                            (0.444)            (0.095)           (0.409)           (0.126)

Domestic Factors
 Financial System           -0.137              0.197             -0.169            -0.021
                            (0.188)            (0.138)           (0.141)           (0.133)
 Capital controls            0.004             -0.047            0.136**             0.034
                            (0.074)            (0.052)           (0.063)           (0.050)
 Debt to GDP                -0.005              0.002           -0.005**            -0.001
                            (0.003)            (0.002)           (0.002)           (0.002)
 Growth Shock               0.568*            -1.285**            -0.013             0.264
                            (0.328)            (0.628)           (0.395)           (0.520)
 GDP per capita              0.003              0.000              0.010           0.016**
                            (0.006)            (0.004)           (0.007)           (0.004)

Observations                 3,446              3,446             3,446              3,446


Notes: The dependent variable is a 0-1 variable indicating if there is an episode (surge, stop,
flight or retrenchment). Variables are defined in Section 3.2. Estimates are obtained using the
complementary logarithmic (or cloglog) framework which assumes that F(⋅) is the cumulative
distribution function (cdf) of the extreme value distribution. To capture the covariance across
episodes, the set of four episodes is estimated using seemingly unrelated estimation with robust
standard errors clustered by country. ** is significant at the 5% level and * at the 10% level.




                                                                                                   37
                                   Table 5
           Regression Results: Episodes Based on Net Capital Flows

                                                Surge              Stop
                  Global Factors
                   Risk                        -0.012              0.012
                                               (0.009)            (0.008)
                   Liquidity                    7.524             -7.529
                                               (4.926)            (4.950)
                   Interest Rates              -0.012             -0.008
                                               (0.051)            (0.039)
                   Growth                       5.703           -10.323**
                                               (5.295)            (4.375)

                  Contagion
                   Regional                     -0.179             0.609
                                               (0.267)            (0.501)
                   Trade                       0.988**            0.770**
                                               (0.256)            (0.238)
                   Financial                  -0.978**           -1.321**
                                               (0.255)            (0.404)

                  Domestic Factors
                   Financial System             0.176              0.009
                                               (0.147)            (0.157)
                   Capital controls             0.026             0.121**
                                               (0.068)            (0.059)
                   Debt to GDP                -0.005**           -0.006**
                                               (0.003)            (0.003)
                   Growth Shock                 0.657            -1.350**
                                               (0.558)            (0.381)
                   GDP per capita               0.009              0.001
                                               (0.007)            (0.006)

                  Observations                  3,501              3,501


Notes: Capital flow episodes are defined using the traditional methodology based on net capital
flows instead of the methodology using gross capital flows developed in this paper. The
dependent variable is a 0-1 variable indicating if there is an episode (either surge or stop).
Variables are defined in Section 3.2. Estimates are obtained using the complementary
logarithmic (or cloglog) framework which assumes that F(⋅) is the cumulative distribution
function (cdf) of the extreme value distribution. To capture the covariance across episodes, the
regressions are estimated using seemingly unrelated estimation with robust standard errors
clustered by country. ** is significant at the 5% level and * at the 10% level.




                                                                                                   38
                                                      Table 6a
                                        Correlations between Risk Measures

                                                                                          Quality      CSFB
                                                                   VXO         VIX        Spread       RAI
                 VXO                                               1.000
                 VIX                                               0.992       1.000
                 CSFB Risk Appetite Index (RAI)                    0.550       0.535       0.358       1.000
                 Variance Risk Premium (VRP)                       0.692       0.712       0.443       0.428




                                                    Table 6b
                                 Correlations between Capital Control Measures

                                        Capital        Fin       Overall     Purch       Sales      Purch       Sales      Fin
                                        controls      Integ.     Restrict.   locally    locally     abroad     abroad    controls
Capital controls                         1.000
   Chinn-Ito (2008), updated 2011
Financial integration                    -0.330       1.000
   Lane-Milesi-Ferretti (2007)
Overall capital act restrictions         0.690        -0.257       1.000
   Schindler (2009)
Restrictions on purchases locally        0.284        -0.205       0.594      1.000
  by nonresidents, Schindler (2009)
Restrictions on sale or issue locally    0.512        -0.210       0.624      0.332      1.000
   by nonresidents , Schindler (2009)
Restrictions on purchases abroad         0.498        -0.159       0.782      0.328      0.375      1.000
   by residents, Schindler (2009)
Restrictions on sale or issue abroad     0.503        -0.198       0.758      0.482      0.558      0.579      1.000
   by residents , Schindler (2009)
Financial controls                       0.486        -0.409       0.636      0.471      0.365      0.475      0.411      1.000
   Ostry et al. (2011)
Forex regulations                        0.542        -0.459       0.602      0.457      0.426      0.381      0.275      0.618
   Ostry et al. (2011)

 Notes: All measures of capital controls have higher values if the country has greater capital controls, except the Lane-Milesi-
 Ferretti (2007) measure of financial integration which takes on a higher value if the country is more financially integrated
 (which usually implies fewer capital controls).




                                                                                                                             39
           Table 7a: Coefficient on Global Risk Variable with Alternate Measures of Risk

Risk Measured by:                           Surge              Stop              Flight        Retrenchment          # Obs
VXO                                       -0.054**           0.023**            -0.031*           0.017**              3,446
                                           (0.016)           (0.004)            (0.017)           (0.006)

VIX                                       -0.070**           0.028**            -0.036*            0.017**            3,291
                                           (0.022)           (0.005)            (0.020)            (0.006)

CSFB RAI                                  -0.052**           0.129**            -0.038             0.129**            3,453
                                           (0.025)           (0.022)            (0.028)            (0.024)

Volatility Risk Premium                   -0.025**           0.010**            -0.009              0.003             3,291
                                           (0.010)           (0.002)            (0.007)            (0.003)


Table 7b: Coefficient on Capital Control Variable with Alternate Measures of Capital Controls

                                           Surge               Stop              Flight        Retrenchment          # Obs
Capital Controls Measured by:
Capital controls                            0.004            -0.047             0.136**             0.034             3,446
Chinn Ito (2008)                           (0.074)           (0.052)            (0.063)            (0.050)

Financial Integration                       0.026           -0.131**            -0.035             -0.119**           3,446
Lane Milesi-Ferretti (2007)                (0.037)           (0.049)            (0.084)             (0.045)

Overall capital acct restrictions           0.417            -0.132              0.460              0.343             1,783
Schindler (2009)                           (0.466)           (0.405)            (0.460)            (0.354)

Specific capital acct restrictions          0.259            -0.013             -0.076              0.379             1,783
Schindler (2009)                           (0.266)           (0.250)            (0.282)            (0.263)

Financial controls                         -0.028            -0.174             -0.023              0.690             1,210
Ostry et al. (2011)                        (0.587)           (0.386)            (0.409)            (0.492)

Forex regulations                         -1.172*             0.241              0.428              0.505             1,240
Ostry et al. (2011)                       (0.609)            (0.483)            (0.560)            (0.486)


   Notes: Tables above report the coefficients on either Global Risk or Capital Controls when the base
   regressions reported in Table 4 are estimated except the corresponding variable is replaced with one of the
   alternative measures listed in the table. See Table 4 for additional information on estimation technique and
   additional variables included in the regressions. ** is significant at the 5% level and * at the 10% level.
   (1) All measures of capital controls have higher values if the country has greater capital controls, except the
        Lane-Milesi-Ferretti (2007) measure of financial integration which takes on a higher value if the country
        is more financially integrated.




                                                                                                                          40
                                          Figure 1
                            Net and Gross Capital Flows for Chile




Notes: This graph shows net capital flows and gross inflows and gross outflows for Chile from 1990
through 2009. Each flow is calculated as the 2-quarter moving average. Gross outflows are reported using
standard BOP definitions, so that a negative number indicates a gross outflow.




                                                                                                           41
                                            Figure 2
                          Construction of the Surge and Stop Episodes




Notes: The figure shows the construction of our measures of surges and stops for Brazil. A surge episode
begins when gross inflows (the solid line) exceed one standard deviation above the rolling mean, provided
they eventually exceed two standard deviations above the mean. The surge episode ends when gross inflows
again cross the one standard deviation line. Stops are defined analogously; a stop episode begins when gross
inflows fall one standard deviation below the rolling mean, provided they eventually fall two standard
deviations below the mean, and ends when gross inflows again cross the one standard deviation line.




                                                                                                               42
                                                     Figure 3
                         Percent of Countries with Each Type of Episode: By Income Group




Notes: Income classifications are based on groupings from the World Bank in the year 2000 based on GNI per capita. “Lower income” in
the graphs above refer to countries classified as “Low income” and “Middle/lower income” by the World Bank, “Middle income”
referring to countries classified as “Middle/higher income”. “Higher income” refers to countries classified as “High income”. We
combine lower and middle/lower income into the group “lower income” because there are only four countries in our sample that qualify
as lower income based on the World Bank classification.




                                                                                                                           43
                                         Figure 4
                Percent of Countries with Each Type of Episode: By Region




Note: The “Other” region is South Africa and Israel.




                                                                            44
                                             Appendix A: Data Set on Flows

         Our primary source of flow data is quarterly gross capital inflows and outflows from the International
Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics (accessed through Haver Analytics in March 2011).
There are a number of modifications necessary to transform the IFS flows data into a usable dataset:


     •   Many countries’ flows are reported in millions of U.S. dollars, but some are in billions. Because our
         episodes are defined within the context of a single country’s flows, this would not impact our
         empirical work, but we convert all to billions of U.S. dollars.
     •   Some countries (Taiwan and Singapore, for example, as well as 2001 data for the Slovak Republic)
         are not in the quarterly IFS flows data, but quarterly flows data are readily accessible from national
         sources. Using the quarterly data from national sources, we add Taiwan and Singapore to the dataset
         and fill in 2001 data for the Slovak Republic. 35
     •   Some countries (such as Norway for 1992 and 1993) have no quarterly BOP data in the IFS for a gap
         in the series, but annual BOP data exist for that period; we fill that gap by (equally) dividing the
         annual numbers into the quarters. 36
     •   For some countries, IFS flow data exist for certain time periods, but upon inspection it becomes
         obvious that the data are all zeros and/or have many gaps; in those cases we drop all data prior to
         certain dates (Greece pre-1999, Bolivia pre-1988, Peru pre-1991).
     •   Upon inspection it is not clear that the IFS properly differentiates between true zeros and NAs (not
         availables). We cannot settle this issue, but have a two-fold strategy to deal with it. First, if there is a
         string of NAs surrounded by strings of zeros, we replace those interior NAs with zeros. 37 Second, if
         these interior NAs or any reported zeros are actually due to the variable not being reported, there is a
         natural fix in the BOP presentation: errors and omissions (E&O). That is, if outward portfolio
         investment is not collected but is reported as zero, it should appear in the BOP accounts as a negative


35
   Sources for non-IFS data are as follows: Slovak Rep. (01q1-01q4) http://www.nbs.sk/en/statistics/balance-of-payments-
statistics/en-platobna-bilancia; Taiwan http://www.cbc.gov.tw/ct.asp?xItem=2070&ctNode=512&mp=2; and Singapore’s BOP
dataset.
36
   Other ‘annual to quarterly’ fixes include Poland 1995-1999 and India’s outward FDI 1991-1996.
37
   Interior NAs that we fill with zeros include the following: Taiwan (1990q4, portfolio investment liabilities), Slovenia (1994,
portfolio investment liabilities); India (1991-1996 and 1999, portfolio investment assets); Indonesia (1995Q2-Q4, portfolio
investment assets and other investment assets; 2003Q3-2003Q4, portfolio investment assets and direct investment assets);
Thailand (1991-1992, portfolio investment assets); Bangladesh (2001Q3-Q4, direct investment assets); Mexico (1994-1995, direct
investment assets); and Guatamala (1995-2000, direct investment assets). Note that while some of these are likely true zeros (and
so our fix is appropriate), those that are not should be alleviated by our E&O fix, described below.
         E&O. Our fix is, in robustness checks, to assign any positive E&O to inflows and any negative E&O
         to outflows. 38
     •   Finally, we compared annualized data from our final flows dataset to the annual IMF BOP dataset.
         For some countries (such as Switzerland) annual BOP data pre-date quarterly data. We do not use the
         annual data to backfill data for those countries, as annual data are decidedly different from quarterly
         when examining extreme flow episodes. Other than earlier start dates for some countries in the
         annual dataset, the two datasets are nearly identical, with the lone discrepancy being for Belgium-
         Luxembourg (a construct that, because of limited availability of some explanatory variables, does not
         appear in our regressions).

After making all of the adjustments described above, we include all countries for which quarterly data for
balance of payments flows are available for at least ten years. While data are available for 2010 for many
countries, capital flows data are prone to substantial revisions for a year, so we end our dataset in Q42009.




38
   We thank Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti for advising us on this particular fix. Note that a blanket fix, such as assigning all E&O to
unreported inflows or all to unreported outflows, might work for a particular country but not across a broad set of countries (as
some are more likely to have holes in different aspects of the BOP accounts). Thus, a data-driven fix is more appropriate: If E&O
is negative, assign it to outflows; when E&O is positive, assign it to inflows.

                                                                                                                                  46
                           Appendix Table 1: Country and Time Period Representation

                                                Start                                               Start
                       Country                  year                   Country                      year
                       Argentina                1980                   Latvia                       1993
                       Australia                1980                   Lithuania                    1993
                       Austria                  1980                   Malaysia                     1999
                       Bangladesh               1980                   Mexico                       1980
                       BelLux                   1980                   Netherlands                  1980
                       Bolivia                  1988                   New Zealand                  1980
                       Brazil                   1980                   Nicaragua                    1992
                       Canada                   1980                   Norway                       1980
                       Chile                    1991                   Panama                       1998
                       Colombia                 1996                   Peru                         1991
                       Croatia                  1993                   Philippines                  1980
                       Czech Republic           1993                   Poland                       1995
                       Denmark                  1981                   Portugal                     1980
                       Estonia                  1992                   Romania                      1991
                       Finland                  1980                   Russia                       1994
                       France                   1980                   Singapore                    1995
                       Germany                  1980                   Slovak Rep.                  1993
                       Greece                   1999                   Slovenia                     1992
                       Guatemala                1980                   South Africa                 1980
                       Hong Kong                1999                   Spain                        1980
                       Hungary                  1989                   Sri Lanka                    1980
                       Iceland                  1980                   Sweden                       1980
                       India                    1980                   Switzerland                  1999
                       Indonesia                1981                   Taiwan                       1987
                       Ireland                  1981                   Thailand                     1980
                       Israel                   1980                   Turkey                       1984
                       Italy                    1980                   UK                           1980
                       Japan                    1980                   US                           1980
                       Korea                    1980                   Venezuela                    1994

Notes. The table shows the 58 countries in our sample, as well as the dates for which quarterly gross capital flows data begin in
our dataset. All data series end in 2009 and are from the IFS unless noted in Appendix A.




                                                                                                                                    47
         Appendix Table 2: Surge, Stop, Flight, and Retrenchment Episodes by Country (1980 to 2009)
                           Surges                  Stops                     Flight               Retrenchment
                  Start             End   Start             End     Start              End     Start        End
Argentina         1990q4        1992q3    1982q4           1983q1   1989q3            1990q1   1982q3      1982q4
                  2003q1        2003q4    1989q2           1990q3   1991q2            1992q3   1988q3      1989q1
                                          1994q4           1995q1   2002q4            2003q1   1992q4      1993q2
                                          1998q4           1999q3   2006q3            2008q3   1998q3      1999q2
                                          2000q4           2002q2                              2009q2      2009q4
                                          2008q2           2009q3
Australia         1980q4        1983q1    1983q2           1984q1   1980q1            1980q2   1980q4      1981q2
                  1993q4        1994q3    1989q3           1991q3   1984q2            1985q1   1989q2      1991q1
                  1995q3        1996q3    1997q3           1998q1   1995q4            1996q3   1994q4      1995q2
                  2002q3        2002q4    1998q3           1998q4   2004q1            2004q3   2003q1      2003q3
                  2003q4        2004q3    2005q1           2005q4   2006q2            2007q1   2005q1      2005q4
                  2006q2        2007q1
Austria           1980q3        1980q4    1981q3           1982q3   1992q2            1993q1   1981q4      1982q3
                  1992q2        1993q1    1996q4           1997q1   1997q2            1998q1   1986q1      1986q2
                  1999q2        2000q1    1998q2           1998q3   1999q2            2000q1   1993q3      1993q4
                  2005q1        2005q4    2001q1           2002q1   2005q1            2005q4   1998q2      1998q3
                                          2006q1           2006q4                              2001q2      2002q1
                                          2008q3           2009q3                              2006q1      2006q4
                                                                                               2008q4      2009q4
Bangladesh        1989q1        1989q4    1982q4           1983q3   1987q1            1987q3   1992q2      1993q1
                  1998q1        1998q3    1991q3           1992q1   1988q2            1989q3   2001q1      2001q4
                  2003q4        2004q1    2006q1           2006q2   1995q3            1997q1   2009q3      2009q4
                  2005q1        2005q2                              2005q4            2006q3
                                                                    2008q2            2008q4
Belgium -         1987q1        1987q4    1981q1           1982q2   1987q1            1987q4   1981q1      1982q2
Luxembourg        1999q3        2000q3    1988q2           1989q1   1999q3            2000q3   1988q2      1989q1
                                          1994q1           1995q1   2005q2            2006q1   1994q1      1995q1
                                          2001q4           2002q3                              2001q4      2002q3
                                          2008q2           2009q3                              2008q2      2009q3
Bolivia           1996q1        1996q3    1995q1           1995q2   1994q1            1994q4   2004q3      2005q1
                  2007q3        2008q4    1999q2           2001q2   2001q1            2001q2   2006q2      2006q3
                                          2006q3           2007q2   2003q3            2004q1
                                                                    2008q4            2009q3
Brazil            1988q1        1988q4    1982q4           1983q4   1984q2            1985q1   1982q4      1983q4
                  1990q2        1991q1    1993q1           1993q3   1987q4            1988q3   1985q2      1985q4
                  1994q1        1994q3    1995q1           1995q2   1994q2            1994q4   1992q1      1992q4
                  1995q4        1996q2    1999q1           1999q2   1998q3            1999q2   1995q2      1996q1
                  2006q3        2007q4    2008q2           2009q3   2006q4            2007q3   1997q4      1998q2
                                                                                               2008q2      2008q3



                                                                                                                  48
                    Surges                  Stops                     Flight               Retrenchment
           Start             End   Start             End     Start              End     Start        End
Canada     1996q4        1997q3    1982q2           1983q2   1986q2            1986q4   1982q2      1983q2
           2000q1        2001q1    1991q2           1991q3   1994q2            1994q4   1993q2      1993q3
           2006q2        2007q1    1995q2           1996q1   1996q3            1997q2   1995q2      1996q1
                                   1999q1           1999q4   2000q1            2001q1   1998q1      1998q3
                                   2008q4           2009q2   2006q2            2007q1   2008q4      2009q3
Chile      2005q4        2006q3    2000q2           2001q1   1998q2            1999q4   1997q2      1997q3
           2007q4        2008q3    2007q1           2007q2   2006q1            2006q4   2000q2      2000q4
                                   2009q1           2009q3   2007q2            2008q1   2008q3      2009q3
Colombia   2005q4        2006q3    2008q2           2009q1   2006q2            2006q3   2002q2      2003q1
                                                                                        2007q2      2007q3
Croatia    2002q4        2003q4    1998q4           1999q2   2000q1            2000q4   2001q3      2002q1
                                   2004q4           2005q3   2002q4            2003q1   2004q4      2005q4
                                                             2006q4            2007q3
Czech      2002q3        2003q1    2003q2           2004q1   2003q3            2005q1   2000q1      2000q4
Republic                           2006q2           2006q4                              2002q1      2002q3
                                   2008q4           2009q3                              2008q4      2009q4
Denmark    1993q3        1994q2    1986q4           1987q2   1993q3            1994q2   1986q4      1987q2
           1995q3        1996q2    1989q2           1989q4   1999q4            2001q1   1992q2      1993q2
           2005q1        2005q4    1991q4           1993q2   2005q2            2005q4   1994q3      1995q1
                                   1994q3           1995q1                              2001q2      2002q2
                                   1998q3           1999q1                              2008q3      2009q4
                                   2001q2           2002q1
                                   2008q4           2009q4
Estonia    1997q4        1998q1    1998q3           1999q3   1997q4            1998q1   1998q4      1999q1
           2003q1        2005q1    2008q2           2009q4   2001q1            2001q2   2000q1      2000q2
                                                             2004q2            2005q3   2008q2      2009q3
Finland    1984q3        1985q1    1985q4           1986q2   1985q1            1985q2   1983q3      1984q2
           1987q1        1987q4    1991q1           1992q2   1986q3            1987q1   1985q4      1986q2
           1996q3        1997q3    2001q1           2001q4   1988q3            1989q1   1987q3      1987q4
           1998q4        1999q1    2009q2           2009q3   1993q1            1993q3   1990q3      1990q4
           2004q3        2004q4                              1998q4            1999q1   1992q1      1992q3
           2006q2        2007q1                              2004q3            2005q1   2001q1      2001q4
                                                             2006q2            2006q4   2009q1      2009q3
France     1986q3        1987q4    1981q3           1982q2   1986q4            1987q4   1981q1      1983q2
           1997q4        1998q3    1991q1           1992q1   1992q3            1992q4   1991q2      1992q1
           2001q1        2001q2    2001q4           2002q3   1997q4            1998q3   2001q4      2002q3
                                   2008q1           2009q3   2001q1            2001q2   2008q1      2009q3




                                                                                                           49
                     Surges                  Stops                     Flight               Retrenchment
            Start             End   Start             End     Start              End     Start        End
Germany     1980q1        1980q2    1981q4           1982q4   1984q3            1985q2   1981q4      1982q1
            1986q1        1986q4    1987q4           1988q3   1985q4            1986q4   1982q3      1983q2
            1989q2        1990q1    1994q1           1994q4   1993q1            1993q4   1987q3      1988q2
            1992q3        1993q2    2001q1           2002q2   2004q3            2005q4   1990q4      1992q2
            2005q1        2005q4    2008q3           2009q3                              1994q2      1994q4
            2007q2        2008q1                                                         2000q4      2002q2
                                                                                         2008q2      2009q3
Greece      2005q1        2005q4    2006q1           2006q4   2005q1            2005q3   2006q1      2006q4
                                    2009q2           2009q4
Guatemala   1987q4        1988q1    1994q4           1995q3   1990q3            1991q2   1988q3      1988q4
            2006q1        2006q4    2008q4           2009q3   1998q2            1998q3   1989q2      1990q1
                                                              1999q1            1999q4   1991q3      1992q1
                                                              2001q1            2001q3   2002q2      2002q3
                                                              2004q1            2004q4   2008q4      2009q3
Hong Kong                           2008q3           2009q3                              2008q3      2009q3
Hungary     2003q1        2003q4    1996q4           1997q1   1995q3            1995q4   2009q3      2009q4
            2004q2        2005q3    2002q2           2002q3   2001q2            2002q1
            2007q2        2008q1    2009q3           2009q4   2006q1            2008q1
Iceland     1987q1        1987q4    1982q4           1983q4   1983q3            1983q4   1981q4      1982q3
            1995q4        1996q4    1989q2           1990q1   1986q3            1987q2   1992q1      1992q3
            2003q3        2006q1    2001q2           2002q1   1993q2            1993q3   2001q3      2002q2
                                    2008q2           2009q3   1997q3            1998q2   2006q4      2007q1
                                                              1999q1            1999q4   2008q1      2009q2
                                                              2003q1            2006q1
India       1982q2        1982q3    1989q4           1990q4   1982q2            1982q4   1981q2      1981q4
            1984q1        1985q2    1991q3           1992q1   1990q3            1991q2   1983q2      1984q1
            1993q4        1994q4    1998q2           1998q3   1995q4            1996q4   1992q1      1992q4
            1996q2        1997q1    2008q3           2009q3   2000q4            2001q3   1999q2      2000q2
            2003q3        2004q2                              2004q1            2004q3   2002q1      2002q4
            2004q4        2005q3                              2008q4            2009q2   2007q4      2008q2
            2006q4        2008q1
Indonesia   1990q3        1991q2    1993q2           1993q3   1993q3            1994q3   1997q2      1998q3
            1995q2        1996q3    1997q4           1998q3   2002q3            2003q2   2003q3      2003q4
            2005q4        2006q1    2006q4           2007q1   2004q1            2005q1   2006q3      2007q1
                                    2009q1           2009q3   2005q3            2006q2




                                                                                                              50
                     Surges                     Stops                     Flight               Retrenchment
            Start              End     Start             End     Start              End     Start        End
Ireland     1986q4            1987q3   1991q3           1992q2   1987q2            1988q1   1991q4      1992q2
            1989q3            1990q2   2001q2           2001q3   1989q3            1990q1   2000q4      2001q3
            1992q4            1993q4   2008q2           2009q3   1992q3            1993q1   2008q2      2009q3
            1995q3            1996q3                             1995q4            1996q3
            1997q4            1999q1                             1997q4            1998q4
            2003q3            2004q2                             2003q3            2004q2
            2006q3            2007q3                             2006q3            2007q2
Israel      1986q2            1987q1   1980q2           1981q3   1986q2            1987q1   1981q1      1981q4
            1989q4            1990q3   1983q4           1984q4   1992q1            1992q3   1991q1      1991q3
            1999q2            2000q1   1988q3           1989q2   1998q1            1998q4   1993q3      1993q4
            2006q1            2006q4   1996q3           1996q4   2006q1            2006q4   1995q2      1995q3
                                       1998q3           1998q4                              2001q2      2002q2
                                       2001q2           2002q2                              2007q3      2009q2
                                       2007q3           2007q4
                                       2008q4           2009q2
Italy       1987q1            1987q3   1982q2           1983q1   1987q1            1987q3   1982q2      1983q1
            1996q1            1997q1   1991q4           1992q2   2003q1            2003q4   1986q1      1986q2
            2003q1            2003q4   1992q4           1993q3   2005q1            2005q4   1993q1      1993q3
            2005q2            2006q1   1999q1           1999q2                              2000q3      2002q3
                                       2000q4           2002q3                              2007q3      2008q4
                                       2007q3           2008q4
Japan       1986q2            1987q3   1982q4           1983q1   1986q1            1987q2   1982q4      1983q1
            1993q4            1995q1   1990q4           1991q4   1993q4            1994q4   1987q4      1988q3
            2000q2            2001q1   1992q2           1993q1   2000q2            2001q1   1990q3      1991q3
                                       1998q1           1999q1                              1996q3      1996q4
                                       2005q2           2005q3                              1998q2      1999q4
                                       2006q3           2007q1                              2008q3      2009q3
                                       2008q3           2009q3
Korea       1994q3            1995q4   1997q2           1998q3   1994q2            1995q4   1997q3      1999q1
                                       2008q1           2009q2   2002q4            2003q3   2005q1      2005q3
                                                                 2006q1            2007q4   2008q3      2009q3
            2003q3            2005q1   1998q4           1999q2   2006q3            2007q4   1998q4      1999q2
            2006q2            2007q4   2005q3           2005q4                              2005q3      2006q1
                                       2008q3           2009q3                              2008q3      2009q2
Latvia      2004q2            2004q3   2000q4           2001q2   2004q1            2004q4   2001q2      2001q3
            2005q4            2006q2   2008q3           2009q4                              2008q3      2009q3
            2006q4            2008q1
Lithuania   1986q4            1987q3   1991q3           1992q2   1987q2            1988q1   1991q4      1992q2
            1989q3            1990q2   2001q2           2001q3   1989q3            1990q1   2000q4      2001q3
            1992q4            1993q4   2008q2           2009q3   1992q3            1993q1   2008q2      2009q3


                                                                                                               51
                       Surges                     Stops                     Flight               Retrenchment
              Start              End     Start             End     Start              End     Start        End
Malaysia                                 2005q4           2006q3   2006q2            2007q4   2008q3      2009q2
                                         2008q3           2009q2
Mexico        1989q2            1991q2   1994q4           1995q4   1987q3            1988q2   1991q3      1991q4
              2007q3            2008q2   2008q4           2009q3   1990q1            1990q4   1992q2      1993q1
                                                                   1993q2            1994q1   1997q3      1997q4
                                                                   2001q3            2002q2   2008q4      2009q3
Netherlands   1985q3            1987q1   1981q1           1982q3   1980q1                     1980q4      1981q1
              1995q3            1996q2   1990q4           1991q4   1986q2            1987q1   1981q4      1983q2
              1997q4            1998q4   2001q2           2001q3   1997q4            1998q4   1990q4      1992q1
              2005q2            2006q2   2002q1           2002q4   2005q2            2006q2   2001q2      2001q3
                                         2008q1           2009q3                              2002q1      2002q4
                                                                                              2008q1      2009q3
New           1986q3            1987q2   1987q4           1988q3   1986q4            1987q2   1986q1      1986q2
Zealand       2000q2            2001q1   1996q4           1997q2   1989q2            1990q2   1988q1      1989q1
              2006q3            2007q3   1998q3           1999q2   1993q3            1994q2   2002q4      2003q3
                                         2008q2           2009q3   2000q2            2001q1   2005q3      2006q1
                                                                   2006q3            2007q3
Nicaragua                                2000q3           2001q2   2001q1            2001q2   1998q1      1998q4
                                                                   2001q4            2002q1   2002q4      2003q2
Norway        1982q3            1982q4   1988q3           1989q2   1986q3            1987q3   1981q1      1981q2
              1984q3            1985q3   1991q3           1992q2   1994q3            1995q3   1987q4      1988q4
              1992q4            1993q2   1997q4           1998q1   2000q2            2001q2   1992q2      1994q1
              2000q3            2000q4   2001q3           2002q1   2005q4            2007q1   1999q2      1999q3
              2002q4            2003q2   2007q4           2008q4                              2001q4      2002q3
              2005q4            2007q1   2009q2           2009q4                              2007q4      2008q3
                                                                                              2009q2      2009q4
Panama                                   2008q4           2009q3                              2008q4      2009q3
Peru          2006q4            2008q2   1998q1           1998q2   2001q1            2001q2   2007q1      2007q2
                                         1998q4           1999q3   2003q2            2004q1   2007q4      2008q3
                                         2005q4           2006q1   2005q4            2006q3
                                         2008q4           2009q3   2009q2            2009q4
Philippines   1984q4            1985q2   1983q2           1984q2   1991q4            1994q2   1997q3      1998q2
              1994q2            1994q3   1992q1           1992q2   1999q1            1999q2   2008q1      2008q4
              1996q1            1997q1   1997q3           1998q4   2007q1            2007q2
              2005q2            2005q4   2008q1           2009q1
              2007q1            2007q3
Poland        2003q4            2004q4   2001q4           2002q3   2004q2            2005q1   2002q3      2003q2
              2007q1            2008q2   2008q4           2009q3                              2008q3      2009q3




                                                                                                                 52
                     Surges                     Stops                     Flight               Retrenchment
            Start              End     Start             End     Start              End     Start        End
Portugal    1981q2            1982q3   1983q4           1984q3   1982q2            1982q3   1980q4      1982q1
            1987q3            1988q2   1992q3           1993q2   1983q3            1984q1   1987q4      1988q1
            1988q4            1990q2   1996q2           1996q3   1990q2            1991q2   1989q4      1990q1
            1994q3            1995q3   1999q3           1999q4   1993q1            1993q4   1992q1      1992q2
            2000q1            2000q4   2002q4           2003q1   2003q3            2004q1   1996q1      1996q3
            2003q4            2004q2   2004q4           2005q2                              2002q4      2003q1
            2006q1            2006q2   2008q3           2009q2                              2004q3      2005q2
Romania     1996q4            1997q3   1999q4           2000q1   2003q4            2004q1   2007q4      2008q2
            2000q4            2001q2   2008q3           2009q4   2004q4            2005q3
            2004q1            2005q3                             2006q4            2007q2
            2006q4            2007q4
Russia      2003q2            2004q1   2006q2           2006q3   2003q2            2004q2   2001q3      2002q2
            2007q1            2008q1   2008q4           2009q3   2007q2            2009q1   2009q3      2009q4
Singapore   2006q4            2008q1   2008q2           2009q2   2006q2            2007q4   2008q2      2009q2
Slovak      2004q3            2005q2   1998q4           1999q4   2008q2            2008q3   1999q1      1999q2
Republic                               2006q1           2006q4   2009q1            2009q4   2007q2      2007q3
Slovenia    2002q3            2003q3   1997q4           1998q4   1998q3            1999q2   2008q1      2009q3
            2007q1            2007q4   2003q4           2004q2   2002q4            2003q3
                                       2008q3           2009q3   2007q1            2007q4
South       1987q1            1987q4   1985q2           1986q3   1985q1            1985q4   1987q4      1988q2
Africa      1997q2            1998q1   1990q2           1990q4   1991q2            1993q1   1999q1      1999q2
            2003q4            2004q4   1998q3           1999q2   1995q3            1996q2   2000q3      2001q1
            2005q2            2006q2   2000q3           2001q1   1997q2            1998q2
                                       2007q1           2007q2   2003q4            2004q3
                                       2008q3           2009q3   2006q1            2006q4
Spain       1987q1            1988q2   1982q1           1983q2   1982q1            1982q4   1981q1      1981q2
            1990q4            1991q3   1985q2           1986q2   1988q2            1989q1   1983q2      1984q1
                                       1992q1           1992q2   1990q1            1991q2   1987q1      1987q3
                                       1994q2           1995q1   1992q3            1993q4   1991q4      1992q1
                                       2001q3           2002q2                              1994q2      1995q1
                                       2008q1           2009q4                              2001q3      2002q2
                                                                                            2007q3      2009q3
Sri         1989q4            1990q3   1983q4           1984q4   1982q4            1983q3   1990q1      1990q2
Lanka       2000q1            2000q4   1994q2           1994q3   1990q3            1991q2   1993q2      1994q3
                                       1995q4           1996q1   1995q1            1995q3   1998q4      1999q1
                                       1998q3           1999q1   2007q3            2008q1   2001q4      2002q3
                                       2001q2           2002q1   2009q1            2009q3
                                       2008q1           2008q2




                                                                                                                 53
                       Surges                  Stops                     Flight               Retrenchment
              Start             End   Start             End     Start              End     Start        End
Sweden        1985q3        1987q3    1983q4           1984q3   1981q4            1982q3   1984q1      1984q4
              1989q2        1990q4    1991q2           1992q2   1986q2            1988q1   1991q1      1992q1
              2004q4        2005q3    1997q1           1997q3   1988q4            1990q3   1997q1      1997q3
                                      2001q4           2002q3   1995q3            1996q3   2001q1      2002q3
                                      2008q4           2009q3                              2008q1      2009q3
Switzerland   2005q3        2006q2    2008q1           2009q1   2005q3            2006q1   2008q1      2009q1
Taiwan        1999q2        2000q2    1995q3           1995q4   1996q1            1996q3   1997q1      1997q4
              2003q3        2004q2    1997q4           1998q3   2000q1            2000q4   2002q2      2002q3
                                      2001q1           2001q2   2003q3            2004q1   2008q2      2009q2
                                      2005q1           2005q2
                                      2008q4           2009q2
Thailand      1987q4        1990q3    1982q1           1982q2   1983q2            1983q3   1984q2      1984q4
              1995q2        1996q1    1992q1           1992q4   1985q2            1986q1   1986q4      1988q4
              2004q3        2006q1    1996q3           1998q2   1989q3            1990q2   1991q2      1991q4
                                      2007q1           2007q4   1993q2            1994q2   1994q4      1995q1
                                      2008q3           2009q3   2005q1            2006q1   1996q3      1997q2
                                                                                           2008q1      2009q3
Turkey        1990q1        1990q4    1991q3           1991q4   1991q1            1991q2   1994q3      1995q3
              1992q3        1993q4    1994q2           1995q1   1995q4            1996q3   2007q4      2008q2
              2000q1        2000q3    2001q1           2001q4   2006q4            2007q3   2009q2      2009q4
                                      2007q4           2008q2
                                      2008q4           1980q1
UK            1980q1        1980q2    1990q1           1990q3   1980q1            1980q2   1982q2      1983q1
              1985q3        1987q2    1991q3           1992q1   1985q4            1987q2   1991q3      1992q2
              1992q3        1993q4    1994q2           1994q4   1992q4            1993q2   1998q1      1998q4
                                      1998q1           1998q4   2000q3            2000q4   2001q3      2002q2
                                      2001q3           2002q2                              2008q2      2009q2
                                      2008q2           2009q2
US            1982q1        1982q3    1983q1           1983q3   1981q4            1982q3   1983q1      1984q1
              1992q3        1992q4    1988q3           1988q4   1986q2            1986q4   1990q3      1990q4
              1993q3        1994q3    1989q4           1990q4   1993q3            1994q2   1998q1      1998q4
              1999q4        2000q3    1998q1           1999q1   2004q1            2004q4   2001q3      2002q2
              2006q4        2007q2    2001q3           2002q2   2006q4            2007q3   2008q1      2009q2
                                      2007q4           2009q2
Venezuela     2003q4        2004q1    2006q2           2006q4   2005q2            2006q2   2001q1      2001q4
              2005q2        2005q4                                                         2006q4      2007q1
              2007q2        2008q1                                                         2008q4      2009q3




                                                                                                                54
                                                           Appendix Table 3a: Sensitivity Tests—Surge Episodes
                                            Fixed              Add ER               Add                Global                                      Growth              Inc. Official           HP
                       DropCrisis1          Effects            Regime2             Moodys2             Credit3        Financial System3            Shock4                Flows5               Filter5
Global Factors
 Risk                    -0.053**         -0.053**             -0.053**            -0.063**           -0.054**              -0.055**              -0.053**               -0.054**           -0.022**
                          (0.016)          (0.020)              (0.016)             (0.020)            (0.017)               (0.019)               (0.018)                (0.017)            (0.007)
 Liquidity                 5.911            5.139                5.104                6.151            1.423*                 0.830                  4.861                  4.337              1.845
                          (4.729)          (5.153)              (4.649)             (5.664)            (0.771)               (5.775)               (5.640)                (4.963)            (2.375)
 Interest Rates            -0.012           0.028                -0.008              -0.031             -0.012                -0.016                -0.005                 -0.024             -0.000
                          (0.051)          (0.075)              (0.051)             (0.069)            (0.055)               (0.064)               (0.057)                (0.052)            (0.030)
 Growth                  24.115**         26.334**             26.007**            22.576**           24.267**               15.771*              18.399**               25.840**              3.951
                          (9.350)         (11.283)              (9.679)            (11.030)           (10.295)               (8.662)               (8.631)                (9.456)            (7.095)
Contagion
 Regional                  0.377             0.548               0.446                 0.517            0.500*                0.625*                0.540                  0.365              0.485
                          (0.273)           (0.367)             (0.284)              (0.381)           (0.298)               (0.353)               (0.333)                (0.283)            (0.404)
 Trade                     0.816             1.860               0.832                 0.446            1.037                 1.084                 0.727                 1.515**             0.558
                          (0.944)           (1.693)             (0.992)              (1.087)           (0.982)               (0.984)               (1.017)                (0.494)            (0.407)
 Financial               -0.894**            -0.842              -0.686               -0.642           -0.852*               -0.725*               -0.895*               -2.118**             0.362
                          (0.453)           (0.590)             (0.434)              (0.462)           (0.442)               (0.373)               (0.469)                (0.877)            (0.363)
Domestic Factors
 Financial System          -0.121            -0.233             -0.156               -0.229             -0.107                0.655                -0.123                 -0.229             0.085**
                          (0.194)           (0.397)             (0.188)             (0.193)            (0.180)               (0.545)               (0.201)                (0.189)            (0.043)
 Capital controls          0.005             -0.054              -0.010               0.058              0.020                -0.030                -0.009                 0.013              0.045*
                          (0.074)           (0.112)             (0.073)             (0.092)            (0.082)               (0.085)               (0.082)                (0.074)            (0.024)
 Debt to GDP               -0.004            -0.009             -0.005               -0.005             -0.004               -0.005*                -0.004                -0.005              0.002*
                          (0.003)           (0.007)             (0.003)             (0.003)            (0.003)               (0.003)               (0.003)                (0.003)            (0.001)
 Growth Shock             0.664**            0.289              0.576*              0.856**            0.707**                0.572*              12.658**                0.562*               0.523
                          (0.334)           (0.333)             (0.324)             (0.341)            (0.296)               (0.343)               (4.056)                (0.339)            (0.415)
 GDP per capita            0.005             0.001               0.004               -0.006              0.002                -0.002                 0.004                 0.002               0.004
                          (0.006)           (0.016)             (0.006)             (0.012)            (0.007)               (0.006)               (0.007)                (0.007)            (0.003)
Observations               3,242             3,446               3,446                2,958              3,291                3,313                  3,291                 3,446               3,202

    Notes: The dependent variable is a 0-1 variable indicating if there is an episode (either surge, stop, flight or retrenchment). Variables are defined in Section 3.2. Estimates are obtained
    using the complementary logarithmic framework with seemingly unrelated estimation across the four episodes and robust standard errors clustered by country. ** is significant at the 5%
    level and * at the 10% level. (1) Drops the recent crisis from 2008Q2 through 2009Q2 from the sample. (2) Additional control variables are included in the regression; for ER regime the
    control is a dummy equal to 1 if the country has a pegged exchange rate as defined in Shambaugh (2004); for Moodys the control is a numerical value for Moody’s index, with a higher
    value indicating lower credit. (3) Global liquidity is measured as the growth in private credit by deposit money banks and other institutions to GDP. Financial system measures the
    soundness of the financial system as bank return on equity. Both variables are from Beck and Demirgüç-Kunt (2009). (4) Growth shock is measured as the deviation between actual
    growth and forecasted growth, as forecast in the IMF’s WEO in the previous spring. (5) Episodes are constructed by either including reserves in order to capture private and official flows
    instead of just private flows or by using an HP filter with a 30% boundary.
                                                            Appendix Table 3b: Sensitivity Tests—Stop Episodes
                                            Fixed              Add ER               Add                Global                                      Growth              Inc. Official           HP
                       DropCrisis1          Effects            Regime2             Moodys2             Credit3        Financial System3            Shock4                Flows5               Filter5
Global Factors
 Risk                    0.025**           0.020**             0.023**              0.024**           0.027**               0.025**                0.021**                0.016**            0.024**
                          (0.006)          (0.005)              (0.004)              (0.005)           (0.005)               (0.005)                (0.005)               (0.004)            (0.004)
 Liquidity                 0.145            -0.421               3.932                7.784           2.647**                 4.761                 7.396*                 -1.804             -1.858
                          (4.932)          (5.196)              (4.748)              (5.333)           (0.865)               (4.030)                (4.296)               (4.633)            (2.391)
 Interest Rates           0.085*            0.062                0.057              0.099**            0.074*               0.071**                0.094**                  0.034              0.031
                          (0.045)          (0.056)              (0.041)              (0.049)           (0.043)               (0.033)                (0.035)               (0.043)            (0.020)
 Growth                 -12.389**           -4.092            -10.899**            -10.480**         -11.085**             -10.893**              -10.820**                 0.192           -6.141**
                          (2.772)          (3.099)              (2.606)              (3.014)           (2.728)               (2.853)                (2.692)               (3.248)            (1.853)
Contagion
 Regional                 0.594**          0.654**              0.638**             0.531**            0.601**              0.580**                0.491**                0.420**            0.195**
                          (0.156)          (0.168)              (0.162)             (0.177)            (0.166)              (0.163)                (0.157)                (0.141)            (0.093)
 Trade                     0.882           2.277**              1.090**              1.017*            1.101**              1.062**                 0.623                  0.583             0.547**
                          (0.673)          (1.043)              (0.542)             (0.523)            (0.489)              (0.507)                (0.515)                (0.502)            (0.224)
 Financial                 0.159           0.812**              0.233**             0.246**            0.210**              0.252**                0.281**                1.521**             0.183
                          (0.120)          (0.233)              (0.095)             (0.096)            (0.091)              (0.100)                (0.092)                (0.484)            (0.222)
Domestic Factors
 Financial System          0.164           0.750**               0.195                0.187            0.249**              -1.008**               0.314**                0.289**             -0.030
                          (0.141)           (0.234)             (0.137)              (0.132)           (0.122)               (0.378)                (0.121)               (0.107)            (0.045)
 Capital controls          -0.061            -0.022              -0.054               -0.007           -0.049                -0.025                 -0.020                -0.061            -0.048**
                          (0.056)           (0.114)             (0.057)              (0.061)           (0.057)               (0.048)                (0.047)               (0.051)            (0.019)
 Debt to GDP               0.002             -0.007              0.002                 0.003             0.003                0.001                 0.003*                 0.001              -0.001
                          (0.002)           (0.005)             (0.002)              (0.002)           (0.002)               (0.001)                (0.001)               (0.002)            (0.001)
 Growth Shock             -1.282*          -1.422**            -1.289**             -1.322**          -1.310**              -1.199**              -23.516**              -1.485**             -0.433
                          (0.711)           (0.691)             (0.631)              (0.585)           (0.620)               (0.574)                (3.302)               (0.639)            (0.378)
 GDP per capita            -0.000            -0.009              0.000                -0.001            -0.006                0.003                 -0.000                 0.002             -0.004*
                          (0.005)           (0.011)             (0.004)              (0.006)           (0.005)               (0.003)                (0.004)               (0.004)            (0.002)
Observations               3,242             3,446               3,446                 2,958             3,291                3,313                  3,291                 3,446               3,202

    Notes: The dependent variable is a 0-1 variable indicating if there is an episode (either surge, stop, flight or retrenchment). Variables are defined in Section 3.2. Estimates are obtained
    using the complementary logarithmic framework with seemingly unrelated estimation across the four episodes and robust standard errors clustered by country. ** is significant at the 5%
    level and * at the 10% level. (1) Drops the recent crisis from 2008Q2 through 2009Q2 from the sample. (2) Additional control variables are included in the regression; for ER regime the
    control is a dummy equal to 1 if the country has a pegged exchange rate as defined in Shambaugh (2004); for Moodys the control is a numerical value for Moody’s index, with a higher
    value indicating lower credit. (3) Global liquidity is measured as the growth in private credit by deposit money banks and other institutions to GDP. Financial system measures the
    soundness of the financial system as bank return on equity. Both variables are from Beck and Demirgüç-Kunt (2009). (4) Growth shock is measured as the deviation between actual
    growth and forecasted growth, as forecast in the IMF’s WEO in the previous spring. (5) Episodes are constructed by either including reserves in order to capture private and official flows
    instead of just private flows or by using an HP filter with a 30% boundary.


                                                                                                                                                                                              56
                                                           Appendix Table 3c: Sensitivity Tests—Flight Episodes
                                            Fixed              Add ER               Add                Global                                      Growth              Inc. Official           HP
                       DropCrisis1          Effects            Regime2             Moodys2             Credit3        Financial System3            Shock4                Flows5               Filter5
Global Factors
 Risk                    -0.038**            -0.036             -0.031*             -0.037**          -0.036**              -0.037**              -0.034**               -0.050**             -0.009
                          (0.016)           (0.023)             (0.017)              (0.018)           (0.016)               (0.015)               (0.017)                (0.019)            (0.011)
 Liquidity                 -3.797            -3.273              -4.360              -1.785              0.900               -4.934                -2.304                 -8.361             -2.596
                          (4.824)           (5.274)             (4.750)              (5.683)           (0.792)               (5.761)               (5.403)                (5.822)            (2.679)
 Interest Rates            -0.073            -0.096              -0.074               -0.089            -0.053                -0.049                -0.059               -0.125**             -0.024
                          (0.062)           (0.106)             (0.064)              (0.078)           (0.059)               (0.074)               (0.070)                (0.063)            (0.032)
 Growth                    7.724             1.844               4.737                 5.986             3.368                2.766                  4.026               16.456**              2.674
                          (5.565)           (6.813)             (5.665)              (6.272)           (5.444)               (5.135)               (5.333)                (7.878)            (6.766)
Contagion
 Regional                  0.456*          0.668**              0.479**                0.428             0.378                0.329                0.435*                   0.022             0.593
                          (0.255)          (0.259)              (0.238)              (0.266)           (0.231)               (0.218)               (0.237)                (0.246)            (0.366)
 Trade                     1.014            0.808                1.162                 1.071             1.330                1.282                  1.237                  0.583             0.450
                          (1.306)          (3.083)              (1.759)              (1.767)           (1.828)               (1.518)               (1.718)                (0.601)            (0.404)
 Financial                -0.566*           0.083                -0.314               -0.352            -0.429                -0.463                -0.365                 -0.723             0.472
                          (0.295)          (2.460)              (0.465)              (0.421)           (0.391)               (0.388)               (0.436)                (0.970)            (0.382)
Domestic Factors
 Financial System          -0.152           -0.346              -0.183               -0.277*            -0.184                0.626                 -0.196               -0.660**             0.029
                          (0.164)          (0.403)              (0.141)              (0.145)           (0.139)               (0.572)               (0.142)                (0.215)            (0.060)
 Capital controls         0.124*            0.216               0.120*               0.161**           0.162**               0.105*                0.135**                0.140**             0.038
                          (0.064)          (0.135)              (0.063)              (0.074)           (0.066)               (0.061)               (0.067)                (0.066)            (0.025)
 Debt to GDP             -0.006**          -0.010*             -0.005**             -0.007**          -0.005**              -0.004**              -0.005**                 -0.002             0.001
                          (0.002)          (0.006)              (0.002)              (0.003)           (0.002)               (0.002)               (0.002)                (0.003)            (0.001)
 Growth Shock              0.074            -0.148              -0.006                0.182              0.035               -0.100                  2.043                1.469**             0.225
                          (0.402)          (0.430)              (0.388)              (0.391)           (0.411)               (0.434)               (3.795)                (0.423)            (0.324)
 GDP per capita           0.012*            0.000                0.010                0.006              0.010                0.002                  0.009                0.019**            0.005*
                          (0.007)          (0.017)              (0.007)              (0.010)           (0.007)               (0.005)               (0.007)                (0.007)            (0.003)
Observations               3,242            3,446                3,446                2,958              3,291                3,313                  3,291                  3,446             3,202

    Notes: The dependent variable is a 0-1 variable indicating if there is an episode (either surge, stop, flight or retrenchment). Variables are defined in Section 3.2. Estimates are obtained
    using the complementary logarithmic framework with seemingly unrelated estimation across the four episodes and robust standard errors clustered by country. ** is significant at the 5%
    level and * at the 10% level. (1) Drops the recent crisis from 2008Q2 through 2009Q2 from the sample. (2) Additional control variables are included in the regression; for ER regime the
    control is a dummy equal to 1 if the country has a pegged exchange rate as defined in Shambaugh (2004); for Moodys the control is a numerical value for Moody’s index, with a higher
    value indicating lower credit. (3) Global liquidity is measured as the growth in private credit by deposit money banks and other institutions to GDP. Financial system measures the
    soundness of the financial system as bank return on equity. Both variables are from Beck and Demirgüç-Kunt (2009). (4) Growth shock is measured as the deviation between actual
    growth and forecasted growth, as forecast in the IMF’s WEO in the previous spring. (5) Episodes are constructed by either including reserves in order to capture private and official flows
    instead of just private flows or by using an HP filter with a 30% boundary.


                                                                                                                                                                                              57
                                                      Appendix Table 3d: Sensitivity Tests—Retrenchment Episodes
                                            Fixed              Add ER               Add                Global                                      Growth              Inc. Official           HP
                       DropCrisis1          Effects            Regime2             Moodys2             Credit3        Financial System3            Shock4                Flows5               Filter5
Global Factors
 Risk                    0.030**           0.015**              0.017**              0.017**           0.022**              0.018**                0.014**                0.016**            0.012**
                          (0.009)          (0.007)              (0.006)              (0.006)           (0.006)               (0.006)               (0.006)                (0.005)            (0.005)
 Liquidity                 1.042            1.848                3.848                5.375            2.255**                3.533                 4.708                  3.869              3.176
                          (4.747)          (5.011)              (4.722)              (5.648)           (0.855)               (4.701)               (4.847)                (5.133)            (2.033)
 Interest Rates          0.154**           0.153**              0.134**              0.136**           0.129**              0.119**                0.135**                 0.043             0.064**
                          (0.043)          (0.058)              (0.040)              (0.045)           (0.040)               (0.041)               (0.038)                (0.039)            (0.019)
 Growth                 -11.812**           -3.449             -9.371**             -7.930**          -9.417**             -10.741**              -8.859**                 1.582            -4.213**
                          (2.999)          (3.210)              (2.845)              (2.998)           (3.083)               (2.980)               (2.926)                (3.138)            (1.593)
Contagion
 Regional                  0.077            0.011                0.080                0.205             -0.042               0.063                  0.097                 0.649**             0.091
                          (0.154)          (0.191)              (0.159)             (0.154)            (0.154)              (0.167)                (0.156)                (0.130)            (0.149)
 Trade                    1.856**          4.287**              2.369**             2.150**            2.489**              2.434**                2.106**                1.338**            0.741**
                          (0.710)          (1.001)              (0.658)             (0.647)            (0.653)              (0.657)                (0.660)                (0.453)            (0.191)
 Financial                 0.112           0.628**               0.220*              0.243*              0.213               0.187                 0.254**                 0.538              0.036
                          (0.133)          (0.193)              (0.125)             (0.125)            (0.133)              (0.128)                (0.124)                (0.437)            (0.198)
Domestic Factors
 Financial System          0.007            0.349                -0.022               0.002             0.006               -0.773**                 0.041                0.168*               0.058
                          (0.135)          (0.244)              (0.134)             (0.143)            (0.136)               (0.393)                (0.136)               (0.090)            (0.064)
 Capital controls          0.033            -0.054               0.031                0.047             0.056                 0.027                  0.049                 -0.004            -0.030*
                          (0.053)          (0.108)              (0.053)             (0.063)            (0.053)               (0.050)                (0.052)               (0.054)            (0.018)
 Debt to GDP               -0.002          -0.008*               -0.001              -0.001             0.000                 0.001                 -0.000                -0.002              -0.000
                          (0.002)          (0.005)              (0.002)             (0.002)            (0.002)               (0.002)                (0.002)               (0.002)            (0.001)
 Growth Shock              0.399            0.186                0.263                0.135             0.282                 0.318               -12.798**              -1.087**             -0.147
                          (0.595)          (0.597)              (0.519)             (0.603)            (0.492)               (0.508)                (3.015)               (0.476)            (0.303)
 GDP per capita           0.013**           0.011               0.016**             0.018**            0.012**               0.013**               0.016**                0.008*              -0.003
                          (0.005)          (0.011)              (0.004)             (0.005)            (0.005)               (0.003)                (0.004)               (0.004)            (0.002)
Observations               3,242            3,446                3,446                2,958             3,291                 3,313                  3,291                  3,446              3,202

    Notes: The dependent variable is a 0-1 variable indicating if there is an episode (either surge, stop, flight or retrenchment). Variables are defined in Section 3.2. Estimates are obtained
    using the complementary logarithmic framework with seemingly unrelated estimation across the four episodes and robust standard errors clustered by country. ** is significant at the 5%
    level and * at the 10% level. (1) Drops the recent crisis from 2008Q2 through 2009Q2 from the sample. (2) Additional control variables are included in the regression; for ER regime the
    control is a dummy equal to 1 if the country has a pegged exchange rate as defined in Shambaugh (2004); for Moodys the control is a numerical value for Moody’s index, with a higher
    value indicating lower credit. (3) Global liquidity is measured as the growth in private credit by deposit money banks and other institutions to GDP. Financial system measures the
    soundness of the financial system as bank return on equity. Both variables are from Beck and Demirgüç-Kunt (2009). (4) Growth shock is measured as the deviation between actual
    growth and forecasted growth, as forecast in the IMF’s WEO in the previous spring. (5) Episodes are constructed by either including reserves in order to capture private and official flows
    instead of just private flows or by using an HP filter with a 30% boundary.


                                                                                                                                                                                              58
