                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    EXTERNAL ADJUSTMENT AND THE GLOBAL CRISIS

                                             Philip R. Lane
                                        Gian Maria Milesi Ferretti

                                          Working Paper 17352
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w17352


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2011




Revised version of paper prepared for the NBER-Sloan Global Financial Crisis Conference, Bretton
Woods, June 3-4 2011. We thank the discussant Richard Portes, the organizers and participants in
the conference and pre-conference for helpful feedback. Peter McQuade and Clemens Struck provided
helpful research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect those of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the IMF, or IMF policy.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Philip R. Lane and Gian Maria Milesi Ferretti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
External Adjustment and the Global Crisis
Philip R. Lane and Gian Maria Milesi Ferretti
NBER Working Paper No. 17352
August 2011
JEL No. F32,F34,F41,F42

                                             ABSTRACT

The period preceding the global financial crisis was characterized by a substantial widening of current
account imbalances across the world. Since the onset of the crisis, these imbalances have contracted
to a significant extent. In this paper, we analyze the ongoing process of external adjustment in advanced
economies and emerging markets. We find that countries whose pre-crisis current account balances
were in excess of what could be explained by standard economic fundamentals have experienced the
largest contractions in their external balance. We subsequently examine the contributions of real exchange
rates, domestic demand and domestic output to the adjustment process (allowing for differences across
exchange rate regimes) and find that external adjustment in deficit countries was achieved primarily
through demand compression, rather than expenditure switching. Finally, we show that changes in
other investment flows were the main channel of financial account adjustment, with official external
assistance and ECB liquidity cushioning the exit of private capital flows for some countries.


Philip R. Lane
The Sutherland Centre
Arts Block
Trinity College Dublin
Dublin 2 IRELAND
plane@tcd.ie

Gian Maria Milesi Ferretti
International Monetary Fund
Western Hemisphere Department, HQ1-10-120
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20431
gmilesiferretti@imf.org




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17352
                                          I. INTRODUCTION

The period preceding the global financial crisis that began in 2008 was characterized by widening

current account imbalances across the globe, reflecting a variety of factors: rising oil prices, credit

booms and asset price bubbles, and generally easy external financing conditions. The global crisis

was associated with a dramatic change in these conditions: sharp declines in asset prices and oil

prices, tightening credit, and a drying-up of external finance for several heavily indebted

countries, some of which turned to external assistance from the IMF and the European Union.

Evidence on the impact of the crisis on output and demand suggests that countries running large

current account deficits during the pre-crisis years were the most severely affected, with declines

in domestic demand being particularly dramatic (Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, 2011).



In this paper, we analyze the external adjustment process following the financial crisis. Our

hypothesis is that pre-crisis current account imbalances widened beyond levels consistent with

sustainable medium-term positions. The emergence of large imbalances was facilitated by a

benign global financial environment, with low risk aversion among lenders and borrowers

coupled with over-optimistic expectations about future growth in deficit countries and

amplification mechanisms associated with rising housing and financial asset prices in recipient

countries.1 As a result, a number of countries borrowed heavily, with net external liabilities

quickly expanding. For example, in 2000 average net external liabilities were around 36 percent

of GDP in Greece, Portugal, and Spain, and around 38 percent of GDP in the Baltics. By the

end of 2007, average net external liabilities amounted to 87 percent of GDP in the three euro

countries and close to 70 percent of GDP in the Baltics. After this rapid expansion in external

liabilities, external conditions changed drastically during the crisis, triggering a painful process of

current account adjustment.


1 On the relation between housing prices and current account balances see, for example, Aizenman and Jinjarak
(2008).
                                                   2




In our empirical analysis, we first seek to establish the extent to which current account balances

prior to the crisis exceeded levels consistent with underlying economic fundamentals. We next

ask whether the current account adjustment following the crisis was sharper in countries where

pre-crisis “excesses” were more evident. The answer to this question is a resounding yes—

countries whose current account balances were in excess of what could be explained by standard

economic fundamentals prior to the crisis also experienced the largest contractions in their

external balance.



We subsequently examine how external adjustment has taken place. Have real exchange rate

movements contributed through an expenditure-switching channel? Or has expenditure

reduction been the primary mechanism for the closing of excessive deficits? Has the adjustment

experience differed between countries with fixed versus flexible exchange rate regimes? The

evidence suggests that the adjustment in deficit countries took place primarily through a

compression of output and demand. In fact, real effective exchange rates moved in a

destabilizing direction among the group of pegging countries and were only weakly tied to the

current account among countries with an intermediate or floating regime. Finally, we turn to a

closer examination of the behavior of capital flows during this period. We ask two questions.

First, we investigate what types of flows were associated with changes in current account

balances. Second, we explore the role played by official flows (including automatic flows among

member central banks within the euro area) in the adjustment process.



Our contribution is linked to the literature on global imbalances (see, for example, Obstfeld and

Rogoff, 2010 and Blanchard and Milesi-Ferretti, 2010 for recent discussions). However, our

focus is on the evolution of the current account balances relative to domestic GDP across a wide

range of advanced economies and emerging markets, rather than on the absolute size of cross-
                                                            3

border borrowing and lending. Our paper is also related to the burgeoning empirical literature

seeking to explain medium-term current account behavior across countries (see, for example,

Chinn and Prasad, 2003, Gruber and Kamin, 2007, Chinn and Ito, 2007, Lee et al, 2008 and

Gagnon, 2011). While our empirical medium-term current account model is very related to the

ones used in those papers, our primary goal is exploit the model to construct a “fitted” current

account series that allows us to check whether current account movements after the crisis have

gone in the general direction of reducing divergences between actual and fitted current account

balances. Finally, our work is linked to the literature on current account reversals and sudden

stops (see Milesi-Ferretti and Razin 2000, Edwards 2003, Adalet and Eichengreen 2007 and

Freund and Warnock 2007, amongst others). While that literature largely focuses on country

episodes of large current account improvements drawn from different time periods, we analyze

the cross-section of current account adjustment for a specific time period, simultaneously

looking at both deficit and surplus countries.



The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents some stylized facts about

the behavior of current account balances during the crisis and also provides a brief review of the

theoretical literature on the external adjustment process in the event of a global financial shock.

We turn to empirical analysis of current account behavior and adjustment mechanisms in Section

III. Section IV concludes.



      II. THE COMPRESSION IN CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCES, 2008-2010



Figure 1 plots the standard deviation of the cross-country distribution of current account

balances (expressed as ratios to GDP) over the 1995 to 2010 period.2 The figure captures the


2 Our focus in this paper is on external balances vis-à-vis each country’s GDP, since we are interested in country-
level macroeconomic adjustment issues. For other purposes, it would be more appropriate to scale imbalances by
global GDP.
                                                               4

sustained increase in dispersion over 1997 to 2008, with an especially sharp increase from 2004

onwards, followed by a substantial compression since 2008. In Figure 2, we provide a selective

view of the size of current account adjustment in different countries and regions. In particular,

the figure shows the dramatic reduction in current account deficits in Central and Eastern

Europe, the sizable but much smaller reduction in deficits in the euro area periphery, as well as

the substantial decline in current account surpluses in China and oil exporters. The figure also

illustrates that changes in the “oil balance” did not play a central role in the adjustment, with the

rebound in oil prices in 2010 offsetting the decline in the early stages of the crisis.



We view the process of widening current account imbalances during the period preceding the

crisis (particularly during 2004-2008) as reflecting a variety of factors, among which asset price

booms and easy access to external finance are particularly crucial.3 The crisis was associated with

a sharp increase in risk aversion, declining asset prices, and significant downward revisions to

growth expectations for a variety of countries. Indicators such as the VIX on the S&P 500 or the

corporate bond spread between AAA-rated and BAA-rated bonds clearly point to tighter

financial conditions.



In terms of a conceptual framework, the body of work on ‘sudden stops’ (that is, rapid

narrowing of external imbalances) is clearly relevant for analyzing the experience of deficit

countries.4 In particular, models in which there is a global change in financial conditions are

helpful in thinking about the compression in the cross-country distribution of current account

imbalances. Furthermore, viewing the crisis as a global financial shock is desirable since such a

perspective is also capable of explaining the enormous decline in gross capital flows during the




3   See Blanchard and Milesi-Ferretti (2010) for a narrative of the different phases of global imbalances.
4   Mendoza (2010) is one prominent recent example.
                                                          5

most acute phase of the crisis (Forbes and Warnock, 2011, Milesi-Ferretti and Tille, 2011).5



Such a global financial shock might be captured by an increase in the risk premium charged on

external liabilities or by an increase in financial home bias. For instance, Blanchard et al (2010)

develop a model of a small, emerging economy in which these different types of shocks can be

analyzed, and show that both an increase in financial home bias and an increase in the risk

premium are associated with a narrowing of the external balance and a decline in domestic

output.6 Similarly, in the IMF’s Global Economic Model, which is a general-equilibrium

macroeconomic model of the world economy, an increase in the risk premium on external debt

can be shown to deliver a reduction in external imbalances and a decline in output in debtor

countries (see, amongst others, Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2007). The recessionary impact of a

sharp decline in net capital inflows is a function of the negative impact on domestic demand in

an environment with nominal rigidities. Furthermore, the negative impact on output can be

amplified in the presence of credit market frictions by which the associated declines in domestic

asset prices generate negative feedback loops through the collateral channel (see Mendoza 2010,

amongst others).



Finally, a common theme in this literature is that the impact of a sudden stop will differ across

exchange rate regimes (Obstfeld and Rogoff 2001, 2007a, 2007b; Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2007).

Under most configurations, if a country is unable to offset the domestic demand shock through

expansionary monetary policy and/or accomplish real exchange rate adjustment through

nominal devaluation, the recessionary impact will be larger than in the case of a flexible exchange

rate regime. However, this relies on exchange rates moving in a stabilizing direction, which may


5 A short cut is provided by Obstfeld and Rogoff (2001, 2007a, 2007b). These authors simply impose a sudden
reduction in current account imbalances and work out the implications for real exchange rate behavior. However,
since they focus on endowment economies, they cannot provide ancillary hypotheses concerning the behavior of
output during sudden stop episodes.
6 However, the exchange rate response differs across the different types of financial shock.
                                                    6

not hold if there are shocks in currency markets.



In summary, the main predictions from the research literature are that an adverse shift in global

financial conditions should deliver a narrowing in current account imbalances, with deficit

countries experiencing real exchange rate depreciation and a decline in relative output. Moreover,

the relative contributions of exchange rate adjustment and output adjustment should differ

across exchange rate regimes. We empirically investigate these questions in the next section.



      III. PRE-CRISIS FACTORS AND CURRENT ACCOUNT ADJUSTMENT



In this section, we ask whether pre-crisis variables help to explain the change in the current

account during the crisis. In particular, we investigate whether the current account adjustment

which occurred during the crisis can be viewed as stabilizing, in sense of correcting “excessive”

imbalances that may have emerged during the pre-crisis period. The prevailing narrative of the

2005-2008 period is that sharp increase in the dispersion of current account balances during this

period may in part be attributed to a financial environment characterized by low global interest

rates, increased risk tolerance among global investors and/or increased risk taking among deficit

countries. Under this view, current account imbalances had a non-sustainable component during

this period that was due for elimination once the froth in credit markets dissipated.



In order to investigate this question, it is necessary to have an estimate of the “equilibrium”

distribution of current account balances, since a zero balance is not the right benchmark for

most countries. As is attested by an extensive empirical literature, persistent differences in

current account balances can be linked to a set of macroeconomic fundamentals. Our strategy is

to capture the “excess” component as the deviation from the equilibrium value suggested by

these fundamentals. Accordingly, we proceed by estimating a standard empirical model of
                                                            7

medium-term current account determination. By now, this type of estimation is fairly standard

(such as Chinn and Prasad, 2003; Gruber and Kamin, 2007; Lee et al., 2008; Gagnon 2011).7

Subsequently, we use the model to construct a gap measure between current account balances

and their model-fitted values for the period 2005-08, and we then examine whether current

account adjustment during the crisis is related to the size of this gap measure.



The current account equation is estimated over the period 1969-2008, with the current account

and its explanatory variables measured as 4-year averages to smooth business-cycle fluctuations.

We consider the following empirical specification:



                                         CAit     j  j X itj   it




Where CAit is the current account (expressed as a ratio to GDP) and X itj are explanatory

variables. The selection of regressors largely follows the specifications reported in the previous

literature. In particular, this general approach is also employed by the IMF in assessing medium-

term current account equilibria (see Lee et al 2008). Where appropriate, variables are measured in

relative terms, since only idiosyncratic shifts in fundamentals should affect the current account.

The specific regressors are:



   The relative fiscal balance (expressed as a ratio to GDP and measured relative to a weighted-

    average of the fiscal balance of country i’s trading partners). Its inclusion is motivated by the

    many factors that can induce a departure from Ricardian Equivalence (see also Lane and

    Milesi-Ferretti 2002) and its expected sign is positive.




7 In some cases (such as Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2002), the focus is on equilibrium net foreign asset positions rather
that the equilibrium current account balance.
                                                       8


      The GDP growth rate (measured relative to a weighted-average of the growth rates of

       country i’s trading partners), included to capture the strength of convergence factors, and is

       expected to be negatively correlated with the current account balance.



      The relative level of PPP-adjusted GDP per capita (in logs, relative to a weighted-average of

       country i’s trading partners), included to capture the convergence process—to the extent that

       the income level is a proxy for the marginal product of capital. Its expected sign is positive.



      The old-age dependency ratio (defined as the ratio of the population aged 65 and older to the

       working-age population, and measured relative to a weighted-average of country i’s trading

       partners). This variable is expected to have a negative impact on the current account balance

       because retirees typically draw down their savings.



      The population growth rate (measured relative to a weighted-average of country i’s trading

       partners). This variable is expected to have a negative effect on the current account balance

       (as the very young do not save).



      The aging rate. This variable is new in the literature.8 It is defined as the expected change in

       the old-age dependency ratio in the future (constructed as the difference between the age

       dependency ratio in year t+20 and the ratio in year t, where the t+20 estimate is based on

       United Nations population projections). Ceteris paribus, we would expect countries where

       the population is getting old more rapidly to have higher saving.




8   See also Lane (2010).
                                                    9


   The net export position in oil (expressed as a ratio to GDP) as well as its interaction with a

    Norwegian country dummy. The oil balance is included to capture the impact of fluctuations

    in the oil price (given the different extent of “oil intensity” in production and relatively rigid

    demand in oil importers). We also allow the oil balance to play a different role for Norway,

    in view of the country-specific institutional arrangements that govern the management of its

    oil revenues.



   The lagged value of the net foreign asset position expressed as a ratio to GDP (say,

    NFA/GDP at end-2004 for the 2005-08 period). It is included since the steady-state current

    account balance should be proportional to the equilibrium net foreign asset position in a

    growing economy, and has a positive expected sign.



   A crisis dummy variable capturing whether a country is experiencing a major economic crisis

    in year t, included to capture the disruption in access to capital markets for countries

    undergoing a financial crisis. It is expected to have a positive coefficient.



   An Asian crisis dummy variable that takes the value 1 for 1997-2000 for those Asian

    economies at the center of the Asian financial crisis and 0 otherwise. It is included to capture

    the specific disruptions associated with the 1997-2000 period in Asia, and is expected to have

    a positive sign.



   A dummy variable capturing whether a country is a major center for international financial

    trade. The financial center dummy is relevant, in view of the possible measurement errors in

    tracking net capital flows for centers of international wholesale asset trade.
                                                              10


      The terms of trade, included to capture the effects of changes in world market prices for a

       country’s exports or imports (in addition to oil prices). It is expected to have a positive sign.



Our country sample includes 65 advanced economies and emerging markets (listed in the

Appendix). We exclude countries that are oil exporters as well as countries with per capita

income in 2007 below $1000 and very small countries (with GDP below $20 billion in 2007).

The rationale for excluding oil exporters is the extreme dependence of their current account

balance on the price of oil.9 The rationale for excluding low-income countries is two-fold: first,

the evolution of their current account balance is affected by specific factors such as external aid,

and second, many of these countries had periods of extreme current account deficits followed by

debt reduction and debt forgiveness agreements. In turn, this hinders the ability to conduct

meaningful inference on the impact of standard macroeconomic and structural fundamentals on

the current account. Finally, very small countries may have outsized current account volatility

because of factors such as lumpy imports.



The results are presented in Table 1. In column (1), we report results for the whole sample; in

column (2), we restrict the sample to the set of advanced economies; and we show results for the

emerging market subsample in column (3). Columns (4)-(6) repeat the analysis for a specification

that also includes the terms of trade (in addition to the oil balance).



In terms of the full-sample results, the specification explains 45 percent of the variation in the

current account balances. In terms of individually significant coefficients, the fiscal balance is

positive with an estimated coefficient of 0.24, such that an improvement in the fiscal balance of

four percentage points of GDP is associated with a one percentage point improvement in the

external balance. In addition, an increase in the relative level of output per capita is correlated

9   That said, results for a sample including oil exporters are remarkably similar to those presented in the paper.
                                                    11

with an improvement in the external position. In terms of demographic patterns, an increase in

the old-age dependency ratio is associated with a decline in the current account. The key role of

the commodities terms of trade is highlighted by the significant co-movement between the oil

balance and the current account. In terms of crisis episodes, the general crisis dummy is

significantly positive, with a further positive effect associated with the Asia crisis in particular.



The results in columns (2) and (3) show that many results are quite similar across the advanced

and emerging market subsamples. However, the overall explanatory power is twice as large for

the advanced group as for the emerging group. In addition, the relative level of GDP per capita

plays no role in explaining intra-group variation in external balances. There is also a striking

difference in demographic patterns. For the advanced economies, the main demographic effect

is that those countries that face a more rapidly ageing population run more positive current

account balances, while the current account negatively commoves with the old-age dependency

ratio and the rate of population growth for the emerging group. Finally, within this period,

financial crises are a significant influence on the current account balances of emerging economies

but not for advanced economies. The pattern of results is quite similar for the regressions in

columns (4)-(6); in addition, we find some evidence that stronger terms of trade are associated

with improvements in the current account balance for emerging markets.



Figure 3 illustrates the capacity of the model to explain the cross-country distribution of current

account balances by scattering the actual current account balances for the 2005-2008 cross-

section against the fitted values from equation (4) in Table 1. As is clear from the chart, the fit is

quite high, with a correlation of 0.74. Two factors contribute to the worse fit for emerging

markets, particularly for recent years. The first is the pattern of current account surpluses in

emerging Asia after the 1997 crisis. While the Asian crisis dummy captures the turnaround in the

current account during the period 1997-2000, the surpluses persisted in several countries in
                                                           12

subsequent years as well. The second factor is the very large current account deficits in a number

of emerging European economies, such as Bulgaria and the Baltics.10



                        III.1 “Excess” current account and post-crisis outcomes



Next, we construct a measure of the current account “gap” as the difference between the actual

average current account balance during 2005-2008 (the final four-year interval in our sample) and

the fitted value from the estimated regression



                                                            
                                     CAGAPi0508  CAi0508  CAi0508




We consider CAGAPi 0508 as a proxy for the extent of “excess” current account imbalances

during the immediate pre-crisis period, in sense that the gap measure reflects current account

positions that cannot be linked in a systematic fashion to the fundamentals included in our

benchmark specification. To the extent that the benchmark regression does a good job in

capturing the medium-term behavior in the current account, we should expect that those

countries with the largest negative gaps should experience the largest subsequent current account

improvement during the crisis period and/or should experience the greatest adjustment

pressures (as might be captured by real exchange rate and relative demand movements on the

real side and capital market pressures on the financial side). Conversely, the gap measure will not




10Gagnon (2011) obtains a much better “fit” for lower-income countries in his current account regression model.
The reason is the inclusion of official capital flows as an explanatory variable for current account balances—for
lower-income countries in particular these are the dominant form of flows. However, it is difficult to interpret an
equation in which capital flows are an independent driver of the current account balance, controlling for other
fundamentals.
                                                           13

be helpful in explaining the subsequent adjustment pattern if we have omitted key fundamental

drivers of medium-term current account behavior.11



We use the fitted values from column (1) in Table 1 to calculate the gap measure. This measure

is quite robust to alternative specifications to estimate equilibrium current account balances. For

example, using the fitted values from the sub-samples reported in columns (2) and (3) in Table 1

generates gap measures that have a correlation above 0.9 with our measure. There are similarly

high correlations if we use the expanded current account measure reported in columns (4)-(6) of

Table 1. Moreover, if we add extra variables to the current account equation (such as current or

capital transfers), this makes little difference to the cross-country variation in the gap term for

2005-2008. Figure 3 plots the change in the current account between 2008 and 2010 against

CAGAPi 0508 in Figure 3. The correlation is clearly negative and very strong, even if we omit the

most extreme cases of current account gaps and current account adjustment: the Baltics,

Bulgaria, and Iceland.



We next turn to the relation between the current account gap measure and current account

adjustment during the crisis period. As shown in Figure 4, the bivariate correlation between the

current account gap and the subsequent change in the current account balance is very strong. We

look at this link in a multivariate regression that also conditions on the outstanding stock of net

foreign assets at the onset of the crisis, since a global increase in risk aversion may have placed

pressure on those countries with the largest outstanding stock of net foreign liabilities, regardless

of the level of the current account balance relative to fundamental factors. Accordingly, our

baseline regression takes the following form



11 Although we have included a long list of variables in the panel estimation of equilibrium current account values,
there are surely other variables that may be helpful in explaining country-specific patterns. However, if our
estimated gap term is fully explained by such omitted variables, it will not be helpful in explaining the subsequent
adjustment dynamics.
                                                           14




                           CAi ,050810     CAGAPi ,0508   NFAi ,0407   i




Where NFAi ,0407 is the average ratio of NFA to GDP during the period 2004-07. We expect the

improvement in the current account balance between 2005-08 and 2010 to be greatest for those

countries with the largest negative current account gaps and—potentially—the largest net

foreign liability positions.



We run this regression on a variety of country samples.12 In addition to the full sample of 65

countries, we also split the sample between countries that adhere to de facto pegged exchange

rate regimes and non-pegging countries, using the classification in Ghosh et al., 2011. The

sample of peggers is dominated by EU countries—it includes all euro area countries plus

Bulgaria and the Baltics, in addition to a few others such as Hong Kong S.A.R.. Furthermore, we

also report variations within these sub-samples. Among the peggers, we drop the Baltic states

from some specifications, given the dramatic changes in their current account balances. Among

the non-peggers, we drop Iceland from some specifications, given the particularly large

depreciation associated with the effective shut-down of the ISK market during its crisis. Finally,

as an alternative to running separate sample splits, we also report full-sample results but with

interaction terms to allow for differential effects across exchange rate regimes.



The results are shown in Table 2. Column (1) shows the baseline full-sample estimates. We split

the sample between peggers and non-peggers in columns (2)-(3) and (4)-(5), with the latter two

12 We report OLS estimates, with robust standard errors. Although the lagged current account balance implicitly
shows up on both sides of the equation, the classical errors-in-variables problem relates to non-persistent errors in
the measurement of the current account. We do not consider these to be systematically important in cross-sectional
current account data, since the most important types of measurement errors in current account balances tend to be
chronic in nature. While the gap measure builds on a “generated” variable, the equilibrium current account variable
is generated from a panel estimation over 1969-2008 and it is not clear how estimation could be improved by jointly
estimating the 1969-2008 panel and the 2008-2010 cross-section.
                                                    15

columns excluding extreme observations (Iceland among floaters and the Baltics among pegs).

Columns (6) and (7) present regressions for the whole sample with regressors interacted with an

exchange regime dummy. Across the specifications, the gap measure is significant at the 1

percent level, with the exception of column (4) where it is significant at the 10 percent level. The

estimated coefficient of 0.57 in column (1) means that over half of the measured current account

gap was closed over the 2008 to 2010 period for the typical country in the sample. A comparison

of columns (2) and (3) suggests that, for a given current account gap, the size of the subsequent

current account adjustment was larger among countries with a pegged exchange rate regime, a

result confirmed in column (6). When extreme observations are dropped (columns (4), (5), and

(7)) the difference in adjustment across exchange rate regimes ceases to be statistically

significant—specifically, the dramatic current account adjustment in the Baltics is the main driver

of the difference in results across exchange rate regimes. Finally, there is some evidence in

columns (3) and (6) that for pegged exchange rate regimes the size of current account adjustment

was smaller in countries with large net foreign asset positions, for a given initial current account

gap. Again, the results are driven by the Baltics (compare with columns (5) and (7)), reflecting

the fact that these countries had large pre-crisis external liabilities and experienced very large

current account adjustment.



We next try to shed some light on the underlying mechanisms by which external adjustment

took place during this period. We focus on the cross-country variation in real exchange

movements, relative demand and relative output. As a preliminary step, Figures 5-7 show the

scatter plots of the real exchange rate, relative domestic demand and relative output against the

change in the current account balance between 2007 and 2010 (charts using an average for 2005-

08 as the pre-crisis period are similar). Figure 5 shows that the bivariate relation between changes

in current account balances and changes in the real exchange rate were quite different across

exchange rate regimes. For the non-peggers, the scatter shows a negative cross-sectional pattern
                                                       16

(the correlation is -0.3), with the Icelandic experience being particularly extreme. For the peggers,

the relation is instead positive (correlation is 0.5), with larger improvements in the current

account associated with real exchange rate appreciation. For example, the four currency-board

countries in the EU (the Baltics and Bulgaria) experienced dramatic current account corrections

without any real depreciation. Instead, Figures 6 and 7 show that changes in current account

balances are strongly correlated with changes in relative domestic demand and relative output

(correlations are -0.75 and -0.58, respectively), a relation that holds for both pegged and non-

pegged exchange rate regimes. Indeed, the compression of current account deficits was generally

associated with steep declines in domestic output and demand relative to the pre-crisis period.



Next, we ask whether changes in the real exchange rate, domestic demand and output can be

linked to the size of the pre-crisis current account gap measure. This is relevant, since potential

lags in the current account adjustment process mean that some of the adjustment pressure may

show up in these variables even if the current account itself is slow to adjust. Moreover, the

relation between the current account gap and these variables may be informative about the

nature of the adjustment process. Specifically, we estimate the relations between the estimated

current account gap for the period 2005-08 and the subsequent cross-country variation in real

exchange rate movements and relative demand and output movements. That is, we run

regressions of the form



                   RERi ,07 10   RER   RER CAGAPi ,0508   RER NFAi ,0407   iRER

                     DDi ,07 10   DD   DD CAGAPi ,0508   DD NFAi ,0407   iDD

                      Yi ,07 10   Y   Y CAGAPi ,0508   Y NFAi ,0407   iY




where RERi ,07 10 is the log change in the real exchange rate between 2007 and 2010, DDi ,07 10
                                                               17


is the log change in domestic demand between 2007 and 2010, and Yi ,07 10 is the log change in

relative output between 2007 and 2010. 13 We expect those countries with larger current account

gaps to be under greater pressure to undergo real depreciation and/or experience a relative

decline in domestic demand and output. As in the current account regressions, we also control

for the initial net foreign asset position.



The regression results for the real exchange rate are shown in Table 3. The current account gap

and the net foreign asset position have no explanatory power in the baseline full-sample

regression reported in column (1). For floating regimes, we find that the pre-crisis current

account gap and net foreign asset position are positively correlated with real exchange rate

movements over 2007-10 (column (2)). The link between the current account gap and real

appreciation disappears, however, if Iceland—an extreme observation, as shown previously in

Figure 3—is dropped (column (4)). For the group of countries with an exchange rate peg both

the pre-crisis current account gap and net foreign assets are statistically significant (column (3)),

but with the opposite sign. That is, within the pegging group the direction of observed real

exchange rate movements have been “destabilizing,” in the sense that those countries with large

negative current account gaps and large net foreign liabilities have experienced real exchange rate

appreciation.14



Overall, these results suggest that exchange rate adjustment played at most a very modest role in

the external adjustment process after the crisis. The pattern of real exchange rate adjustment for

peggers may be driven by several factors. First, trade-weighted real exchange rates also depend

on fluctuations between the anchor currency and other global currencies (Honohan and Lane

13 We use 2007 as the pre-crisis year for trending variables such as output and demand because it was the peak year
for both variables for many countries in our sample. Results using averages over 2005-08 are similar.
14 We also tried an expanded specification in which the terms of trade are an additional regressor. While the terms

of trade coefficient is itself significant, its inclusion did not alter the results for our variables of interest. Since the
line of causality between the contemporaneous terms of trade and the real exchange rate is complex, we opt to
retain our simpler specification in the reported tables.
                                                   18

2003, Chen et al 2010). For instance, the euro appreciated by about 10 percent against the dollar

during 2008-2010, causing an appreciation in the trade-weighted real exchange rates of the

periphery deficit countries (which had large negative current account gaps). Second, if there is

persistence in wage or price setting, inflationary momentum that built up in peggers running

current account deficits during the pre-crisis boom period may dissipate only slowly.



We turn to an examination of relative domestic demand and relative output dynamics in Table 4.

External adjustment for deficit countries requires a reduction in the level of domestic demand

relative to the level of domestic demand in trading partners. The full-sample estimates in column

(1) show that relative domestic demand grew more slowly, the more negative was the current

account gap measure, and the results carry through for both floating and pegged exchange rate

regimes (columns (2) and (3)). The main difference between the two groups relates to the role of

net foreign assets: for pegged regimes, demand grew more rapidly in countries with higher pre-

crisis net foreign assets, while for floating regimes the constant term is higher, but net foreign

assets are not associated with faster subsequent demand growth. Results are broadly similar for

output dynamics: the coefficient on the pre-crisis gap is somewhat smaller and not statistically

significant in the regression for pegged exchange rate regimes only. The smaller magnitudes are

consistent with part of the decline in domestic demand mapping into lower imports rather than

lower domestic production.



In summary, Tables 2-4 provide a multi-dimensional perspective on how the external imbalances

that expanded during 2005-2008 affected country experiences during the subsequent adjustment

phase. The regression analysis shows that there has been substantial closure of current account

gaps. By and large, current account adjustment in deficit countries has clearly relied more on

“expenditure reduction” than “expenditure switching.” However, the cross-section pattern in

real exchange rates shows a weak relation to the current account gap within the group of non-
                                                    19

peggers, while the direction of real exchange rate movements was destabilizing within the group

of peggers. Negative current account gaps were associated with sharp declines in relative

domestic demand and drops in relative output, with pegged exchange rate regimes with higher

net foreign liabilities experiencing larger output and demand declines and vice versa.

Accordingly, the distribution of current account gaps at the onset of the crisis is a good predictor

of the distribution of macroeconomic outcomes during the crisis period itself but with some

important differences across exchange rate regimes.



                              III.2 Extensions and robustness checks



We also examined whether the relation between pre-current account “gaps” and subsequent

outcomes documented in Tables 2-4 depends on whether the current account gap is negative or

positive. For example, a compression of current account deficits driven by sustainability

concerns could plausibly be related to excess deficits and high pre-crisis liabilities, but there is no

symmetric mechanism that would force a more significant adjustment for countries with larger

positive current account gaps (see also Blanchard and Milesi-Ferretti, 2011). To be sure, an

improvement in current account balances for countries with a negative gap will be accompanied

by a worsening in current accounts in countries with a positive gap in the aggregate, but such

compression may or may not be systematically related to the size of the positive gap on a

country-by-country basis.



Accordingly, we split the sample between countries with negative gaps and positive gaps to see if

adjustment pressures are different across these two groups. The results, presented in Table 5,

show that qualitatively the results presented in Tables 3 and 4 hold both for countries with

positive pre-crisis current account gaps and countries with negative pre-crisis gaps. However, the

magnitude of the co-movement between the current account gap and subsequent changes in the
                                                               20

current account balance is much stronger for countries whose current account gaps were

negative (that is, for countries whose pre-crisis current account balance was weaker than the level

predicted by fundamentals). Similarly, the evidence suggests that pre-crisis current account gaps

were more strongly associated with subsequent changes in demand in countries where such gaps

were negative. In contrast, the relation between the gap term and the behavior of output is

similar across both groups but it is not statistically significant in explaining differences within

these groups. Finally, for the negative gap countries, a large negative net foreign asset position is

associated with additional downward pressure on domestic demand and output.



Our specification relates current account adjustment during the crisis to the scale of pre-crisis

“excess” imbalances. A possible criticism of this approach is that there may be an omitted factor

correlated with initial imbalances which is the true underlying driver of current account

adjustment. One possible candidate variable is the scale of pre-crisis fiscal imbalances, since

initial fiscal imbalances may have triggered fiscal austerity during the crisis, leading to an

improvement in the current account. It is also possible that initial fiscal imbalances could have

led to a significant change in foreign investors’ assessment of domestic risks and hence a large

decline in capital inflows, forcing a current account correction. This second story is similar to the

one outlined in Section II, but sees fiscal imbalances, rather than external imbalances, as playing

a dominant role. 15



While it is clear that in a number of cases investor concerns about fiscal imbalances and/or pro-

cyclical fiscal adjustment played an important role in explaining the evolution of the current

account, output, and demand, we find no systematic evidence of a strong correlation between

pre-crisis fiscal positions and the behavior of the current account (and the related variables)

during the crisis period. One reason is that pre-crisis fiscal variables are not a good predictor of

15   We are grateful to Richard Portes for raising this issue in his discussion of our paper.
                                                           21

the scale of subsequent fiscal adjustment, since countries with apparently healthy pre-crisis fiscal

positions (such as Iceland or Ireland) saw dramatic fiscal deterioration during the crisis, with

fiscal austerity measures only partly offsetting the operation of automatic stabilizers and/or the

assumption of banking-sector liabilities.16 Indeed, a sudden stop in capital inflows was plausibly a

key driver of fiscal deterioration in some countries, through the adverse impact on domestic

output and, via domestic asset prices, the domestic banking sector. Moreover, in some countries,

the decline in capital inflows may have prompted activist counter-cyclical fiscal initiatives. In

related fashion, large pre-crisis current account deficits in many cases were driven by private-

sector external balances.



Table 6 presents the same regressions as in Tables 3 and 5, but adding the ratio of government

debt to GDP pre-crisis as an explanatory variable. In columns (1) and (2), where the dependent

variable is the change in the current account balance, the coefficient on government debt is

actually negative, implying that larger pre-crisis debt is associated with smaller subsequent

current account adjustment, after controlling for the current account gap and the pre-crisis

external position. Similar results (not presented here) hold if we use the pre-crisis fiscal balance.

This does not rule out an impact of pre-crisis fiscal variables on changes in the current account

during the crisis, but that impact would occur through the effect of fiscal variables on pre-crisis

external variables, rather than independently.



                            III.3 Current account adjustment and capital flows



In the preceding analysis, our primary focus has been on the real implications of the

compression in current account balances. In this subsection, we address some issues concerning



16In addition, the fiscal balance is one of the drivers of our equilibrium current account measure. See also Benetrix
and Lane (2010) on the drivers of fiscal positions during the crisis.
                                                   22

financial account behavior.



Table 7 relates the size of the current account gap in 2005-08 to the size of change in net capital

flows between 2007 and 2010. It partitions the sample between pegs and other exchange rate

regimes, and focuses on countries with large current account gaps (2 percent of GDP or above

in absolute terms). The first two rows of the table (upper and lower part) highlight the already-

documented compression in current account imbalances in countries with large gaps. Subsequent

rows indicate the importance of shifts in net other investment flows in financing the shift in

current account balances. They also highlight how this shift was particularly large in countries

with an exchange rate peg—net inflows declined by 9 percent of GDP on average in countries

with large negative current account gaps (“excess deficits”), and increased by over 6 percent of

GDP in countries with positive current account gaps. The corresponding changes for other

exchange rate regimes are much more modest.



These results are confirmed in simple regression analysis (Table 8). Specifically, we relate the

change in different categories of capital flows between 2007 and 2010 to the size of the current

account gap and pre-crisis net foreign assets. Our definition of net capital flows is such that a

positive value implies higher net capital inflows in the country. Columns (1)-(3) present results

for net other investment flows (capturing net flows in the form of loans, deposits, trade credit

etc). Changes in net inflows are strongly positively correlated with both the initial current

account gap and the net foreign asset position. This is consistent with the evidence on gross

capital flows reported by Milesi-Ferretti and Tille (2011), who show that bank flows have

experienced the greatest turnaround during the crisis. Columns (2) and (3) show that the current

account gap effect is driven by countries with a pegged exchange rate regime.



Columns (4) and (5) present evidence on net FDI and portfolio flows, respectively (for the full
                                                    23

sample only). For both types of net flows there is no systematic relation with the explanatory

variables, including for sample splits by exchange rate regime (not presented here). Finally,

columns (6)-(8) present results for net reserve flows. To interpret results, note that higher

accumulation of reserves in 2010 relative to 2007 would correspond to a negative value for the

dependent variable (since reserves are capital outflows). Results show that non-peg countries

with stronger initial net foreign asset position experienced faster reserve accumulation (a result

primarily driven by creditor countries such as Singapore and Switzerland), while there is no

significant relation of the change in reserve accumulation with the current account gap. For

pegged exchange rate regimes, we instead find some evidence of lower reserve accumulation in

countries with negative current account gaps. Holding constant other flows, lower reserve

accumulation would be associated with an increase in net capital inflows, and hence a worsening

of the current account. However, this effect is more than offset for pegged exchange rate

regimes by the very large swing in net other investment flows.



The process of external adjustment during the crisis was also characterized by sizable external

assistance from multilateral sources. Belarus, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Latvia, Romania, and

Serbia received loans from the International Monetary Fund exceeding 200 percent of their IMF

quota during the period 2008-2010, as well as loans from the European Union. In addition, some

deficit countries in the euro area (especially, Greece, Ireland, and Portugal) benefited from the

cross-border liquidity flows from the ECB that were channeled through the national central

bank. Accordingly, we also investigated whether countries that received official assistance

undertook more or less current account adjustment. Results are a priori ambiguous. On the one

side, access to official external finance clearly limits the need for an adjustment in net capital

flows. On the other side, access to external assistance is not random or exogenous—countries

that received external finance were likely among those where the turnaround in private flows was

more dramatic and hence where the current account adjustment may have been larger.
                                                             24




We proceeded by simply adding a dummy variable for countries that received external assistance

to the current account adjustment regressions presented in Table 2.17 The results, presented in

Table 9, are indeed mixed. For the non-pegger group, the relation between the current account

gap and subsequent current account adjustment is weaker, as was already documented in Table

2, and the coefficient on the official assistance dummy is positive (implying that these countries

undertook more adjustment for a given current account gap). For the pegger group, the link

between the current account gap and initial net foreign assets on the one hand, and subsequent

current account adjustment on the other hand is much stronger. However, the coefficient on the

official assistance dummy is instead significantly negative—this implies that these countries

undertook less current account adjustment, all else equal, once we control for the size of the

current account gap and the initial net external position.



One candidate explanation for the weaker pressure for current account adjustment in those

peggers inside the euro area is that liquidity financing from the ECB has cushioned the adverse

impact from the reversal in private capital flows. By way of contrast, there was no similar quasi-

automatic replacement of private flows elsewhere (including in other pegged regimes such as the

Baltic countries or Bulgaria), and hence the sudden stop may have induced more rapid closing of

the current account gap for these non-euro countries. Indeed, this is a key mechanism that

defines the difference between membership of a currency union with a common central bank

and membership of a currency board with no access to the liquidity operations of the anchor

central bank. Given the limited size of the sample of countries receiving external support, it is

difficult to test for the effects of liquidity support through the ECB separately from external

support through other sources. We instead provide some evidence on the quantitative



17Given differences in the timing of the provision of official external support it is difficult to devise an appropriate
variable capturing the impact of the overall size of support on the 2010 current account balance.
                                                  25

importance of the Eurosystem as a conduit for capital flows during the crisis in Table 10. The

table shows net capital flows via the central bank for each member of the euro area periphery,

where the national central bank is the intermediary for liquidity funding from the ECB. These

flows were trivial during the pre-crisis period but became very large for Greece, Portugal, and

especially for Ireland in 2010.



                                     IV. CONCLUSIONS



The large compression in the distribution of current account balances between the pre-crisis

period and 2010 provides a laboratory for studying the economics of external adjustment. In our

empirical work, we find that cross-country pattern in current account changes during this period

worked to correct “excesses” that had emerged during the pre-crisis period. In terms of

adjustment mechanisms, countries that experienced the largest improvements in current account

balances had sharper declines (or smaller increases) in output and especially in domestic demand.

The behavior of real exchange rates diverged across non-pegger and pegger groups, with the real

exchange rate moving in a destabilizing direction for the latter group. Overall, the main channel

of external adjustment for deficit countries between the pre-crisis period and 2010 has been

expenditure compression, rather than expenditure switching. The evidence also suggests a much

stronger link between pre-crisis current account gaps and subsequent current account changes

for countries that pre-crisis had negative current account gaps, a finding prima facie consistent

with the notion that the adjustment burden has fallen primarily on deficit countries.



In relation to the financial account, we find that in countries with exchange rate pegs the

turnaround in the current account is more strongly related to the initial current account gap than

in other countries, and that it took place primarily through a dramatic shift in other investment

flows, which include most banking flows. We also find some suggestive evidence that the scale
                                                   26

of current account adjustment in countries with a pegged exchange rate has been cushioned by

official capital flows—IMF and EU loans but importantly ECB liquidity funds compensated for

the exit of private capital flows from major deficit countries.



The high output costs that have been associated with rapidly correcting a large current account

deficit during this episode provide additional empirical support for research that assesses

whether current account deficits during good times might partly reflect distortions that fail to

internalize the risk of a subsequent sudden stop. In turn, the design of optimal policy

interventions in such cases is a further item for the future research agenda. A related issue is the

extent to which the correction in current account balances will be persistent. The crisis has led to

a significant downward revision in potential output in several deficit countries, suggesting that

pre-crisis imbalances in deficit countries may have reflected “overheating” at least to some

extent. Nevertheless, to the extent that the current account correction in deficit countries was

caused by an “undershooting” of output and demand (and therefore reflects negative output

gaps) some of the decline in “excess deficits” (and symmetrically of surpluses) could prove to be

temporary, unless exchange rate movements allow for more meaningful expenditure switching.

But another possibility is that countries with high external liabilities may face persistent external

financing constraints—in this case, if price and exchange rate rigidities prevent effective

expenditure switching, output may remain below potential for much longer.
                                                  27

                                        REFERENCES



Adalet, Muge and Barry Eichengreen (2007), “Current Account Reversals: Always a Problem?,”

       in G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, edited by Richard Clarida,

       University of Chicago Press for NBER, 205-246.



Aizenman, Joshua and Y. Jinjarak (2009), “Current Account Patterns and National Real Estate

       Markets,” Journal of Urban Economics 66, 75-89.



Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop (2010), “On the Global Spread of Risk Panics,”

       mimeo, Lausanne and Virginia.



Benetrix, Agustin and Philip R. Lane (2010), “International Differences in Fiscal Policy During

       the Global Crisis,” IIIS Discussion Paper No. 336.



Blanchard, Olivier and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2010), “Global Imbalances: In Midstream,” in

       Reconstructing the World Economy, edited by Il SaKong and Olivier Blanchard, Washington

       DC: International Monetary Fund.



Blanchard, Olivier and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2011), “(Why) Should Current Account

       Balances Be Reduced?” International Monetary Fund Staff Discussion Note 11/03.



Blanchard, Olivier, Mitali Das, and Hamid Faruqee (2010), “The Initial Impact of the Crisis on

       Emerging Market Countries,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Spring), 263-307.
                                                  28

Chen, Ruo, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, and Thierry Tressel (2010), “Euro Area Debtor

       Countries: External Imbalances in the Euro Area,” mimeo, International Monetary Fund.



Chinn, Menzie and Eswar Prasad (2003), “Medium-Term Determinants of Current Accounts in

       Industrial and Developing Countries: An Empirical Exploration,” Journal of International

       Economics 59, 47-76.



Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito (2007), "Current Account Balances, Financial Development and

       Institutions: Assaying the World 'Saving Glut'," Journal of International Money and Finance

       26(4), 546-569.



Chinn, Menzie and Shang-Jin Wei (2008), “A Faith-Based Initiative: Does a Flexible Exchange

       Rate Regime Really Facilitate Current Account Adjustment?,” NBER Working Paper No.

       14420.



Forbes, Kristin J. and Francis E. Warnock (2011), “Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight,

       and Retrenchment,” mimeo, MIT and Darden.



Freund, Caroline and Frank Warnock (2007), “Current Account Deficits in Industrial Countries:

       The Bigger They Are, The Harder They Fall?,” in G7 Current Account Imbalances:

       Sustainability and Adjustment, edited by Richard Clarida, University of Chicago Press for

       NBER, 133-168.



Gagnon, Joseph (2011), “Current Accounts Imbalances Coming Back,” PIIE Working Paper No.

       11-1.
                                                  29

Ghosh, Atish R., Jonathan D. Ostry, and Charalambos G. Tsangarides, 2011, “Exchange Rate

       Regimes and the Stability of the International Monetary System,” International Monetary

       Fund Occasional Paper No. 270, March.



Gruber, Joseph and Steven Kamin (2007), “Explaining the Global Pattern of Current Account

       Imbalances,” Journal of International Money and Finance 26, 500-522.



Honohan, Patrick and Philip R. Lane (2003), “Divergent Inflation Rates under EMU,” Economic

       Policy 37, 358-394.



Lane, Philip R. (2010), “International Financial Integration and Japanese Economic

       Performance,” in Japan's Bubble, Deflation and Long-Term Stagnation, edited by Anil

       Kashyap, Koichi Hamada and David Weinstein, MIT Press, 129-174.



Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2002), “Long-Term Capital Movements,” NBER

       Macroeconomics Annual 16, 73-116.



Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2007), “Europe and Global Imbalances,”

       Economic Policy 22(51), 519-573.



Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2011), “The Cross-Country Incidence of the

       Global Crisis,” IMF Economic Review 59(1), 77-110.



Lee, Jaewoo, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, Jonathan D. Ostry, Alessandro Prati and Lucca Ricci

       (2008), “Exchange Rate Assessments: CGER Methodologies,” IMF Occasional Paper No.

       261.
                                                  30




Mendoza, Enrique (2010), “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises and Leverage,” American Economic

       Review 100(5), 1941-1966.



Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria and Assaf Razin (2000), “Current Account Reversals and Currency

       Crises: Empirical Regularities,” in Currency Crises (Paul Krugman, ed.), University of

       Chicago Press for NBER.



Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff (2001), “Perspectives on OECD Capital Market

       Integration: Implications for US Current Account Adjustment,” in Global Economic

       Integration: Opportunities and Challenges, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 169-208.



Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff (2007a), “The Unsustainable US Current Account

       Position Revisited,” in G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment (Richard

       Clarida, ed.), NBER - University of Chicago Press, 339-376.



Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff (2007b), “Global Current Account Imbalances and

       Exchange Rate Adjustments,” in Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 67-146.



Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff (2010), “Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis:

       Products of Common Causes,” in Asia and the Global Financial Crisis (Reuven Glick and

       Mark Spiegel, eds.), Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 131-172.
                                                 31

                                   Appendix. Country sample

country                         Peg Advanced      country                      Peg Advanced
 Argentina                       0         0       Latvia                       1         0
 Australia                       0         1       Lithuania                    1         0
 Austria                         1         1       Luxembourg                   1         1
 Belarus                         1         0       Malaysia                     0         0
 Belgium                         1         1       Mexico                       0         0
 Brazil                          0         0       Morocco                      0         0
 Bulgaria                        1         0       Netherlands                  1         1
 Canada                          0         1       New Zealand                  0         1
 Chile                           0         0       Norway                       0         1
 China, P.R.: Mainland           0         0       Pakistan                     0         0
 China, P.R.: Hong Kong          1         1       Peru                         0         0
 Colombia                        0         0       Philippines                  0         0
 Costa Rica                      0         0       Poland                       0         0
 Croatia                         1         0       Portugal                     1         1
 Cyprus                          1         1       Romania                      0         0
 Czech Republic                  0         0       Russian Federation           0         0
 Denmark                         1         1       Serbia, Republic of          0         0
 Dominican Republic              0         0       Singapore                    0         1
 El Salvador                     1         0       Slovak Republic              1         0
 Estonia                         1         0       Slovenia                     1         0
 Finland                         1         1       South Africa                 0         0
 France                          1         1       Spain                        1         1
 Germany                         1         1       Sri Lanka                    0         0
 Greece                          1         1       Sweden                       0         1
 Guatemala                       0         0       Switzerland                  0         1
 Hungary                         0         0       Taiwan                       1         0
 Iceland                         0         1       Thailand                     0         0
 India                           0         0       Tunisia                      0         0
 Indonesia                       0         0       Turkey                       0         0
 Ireland                         1         1       Ukraine                      0         0
 Israel                          0         1       United Kingdom               0         1
 Italy                           1         1       United States                0         1
 Japan                           0         1       Uruguay                      0         0
 Korea, Republic of              0         0

Notes: “peg” refers to de facto exchange rate regime classification for the period 2005-08.
Source: Ghosh et al. (2011) extended by the authors.
                                                           32

                      Table 1. Drivers of Current Account Balance, 1969-2008

                                         (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)
                                        ALL          ADV            EM           ALL          ADV            EM

Fiscal balance                        0.243***     0.273***      0.266**       0.244***      0.274***      0.275**
                                        (0.06)       (0.04)        (0.11)        (0.06)        (0.07)        (0.11)
Growth differential                     -0.072        0.32        -0.183*         -0.08         0.31        -0.20**
                                        (0.09)       (0.27)        (0.09)        (0.09)        (0.27)        (0.09)
Dependency ratio                       -0.15**        0.12       -0.30***       -0.16**         0.13       -0.32***
                                        (0.06)       (0.14)        (0.10)        (0.07)        (0.15)        (0.10)
Population growth                        -0.74        0.30        -1.42**         -0.75         0.26       -1.51***
                                        (0.47)       (0.96)        (0.60)        (0.48)        (0.98)        (0.55)
Aging speed                             0.056      0.222**         -0.142         0.046       0.222*        -0.158*
                                        (0.06)       (0.11)        (0.09)        (0.06)        (0.12)        (0.09)
Relative GDP per capita                0.027*        0.013          0.043       0.028*        -0.005         0.041
                                        (0.01)       (0.03)        (0.03)        (0.02)        (0.03)        (0.03)
Lagged NFA                            0.049***     0.046***      0.050***      0.050***      0.047***      0.049***
                                        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)
Crisis dummy                          0.018**        0.004         0.015*      0.018**         0.002         0.014*
                                        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)
Financial center dummy                  0.014        0.022                        0.013        0.020
                                        (0.01)       (0.01)                      (0.01)        (0.01)
Asian crisis dummy                    0.037***        0.02        0.034**      0.035**         0.022       0.032**
                                        (0.01)       (0.02)        (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.02)       (0.01)
Oil balance                           0.239***     0.262***       0.214**      0.239***      0.280***      0.232**
                                        (0.06)       (0.08)        (0.10)        (0.06)        (0.09)       (0.09)
Oil balance Norway                        0.14        0.14                       0.171          0.21
                                        (0.11)       (0.14)                      (0.13)        (0.25)
Log terms of trade                                                              0.0107        0.0141       0.0161*
                                                                                 (0.01)        (0.04)       (0.01)
Constant                               0.007         0.002         0.004         -0.041       -0.067        -0.072
                                       (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.02)        (0.05)        (0.21)       (0.05)

Observations                            503           234           269           496          227           269
R 2                                    0.45           0.60          0.29          0.44         0.60          0.30
    Note: Panel estimation, 4-year averages. *,**, *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent levels
    respectively. OLS estimation with robust standard errors.
                                                              33



                                   Table 2. Current Account Adjustment, 2010 vs 2005-08

                             (1)          (2)        (3)            (4)       (5)         (6)           (7)


Sample→                      All        No Peg       Peg        No Peg      Peg excl      All        All excl
                                                               excl ICE      Baltics                  ICE,
                                                                                                     Baltics

CA gap                    -0.57***      -0.44***   -0.84***    -0.39***      -0.58*    -0.44***      -0.39***
                           [0.12]        [0.07]     [0.19]      [0.07]       [0.30]     [0.07]        [0.07]

CA gap*peg                                                                              -0.40**       -0.19
                                                                                         [0.20]       [0.30]

NFA/GDP 2004-07            -0.01          0.00      -0.03*          0.00     -0.02        0.00         0.00
                           [0.01]        [0.01]     [0.01]         [0.01]    [0.01]      [0.01]       [0.01]

NFA * peg                                                                               -0.03*        -0.02
                                                                                        [0.02]        [0.02]

Peg                                                                                       0.00        -0.00
                                                                                         [0.01]       [0.01]

constant                   0.01**        0.01**      0.01          0.01*      0.00      0.01**        0.01*
                           [0.01]        [0.00]     [0.01]         [0.00]    [0.01]     [0.00]        [0.00]

N                            65           42          23          41           20          65            61
R2                          0.42         0.44        0.49        0.31         0.38        0.51          0.36
      Note: The dependent variable is the change in the ratio of the current account to GDP between 2005-08
      and 2010. The sample in columns (4) and (7) exclude Iceland; the sample in columns (5) and (7) exclude
      Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. *,**, *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent levels respectively. OLS
      estimation with robust standard errors.
                                                               34



                              Table 3. Real Exchange Rate Adjustment, 2007-2010

                              (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)


Sample→                       All       No Peg        Peg            No Peg    Peg excl     All       All excl
                                                                    excl ICE    Baltics                ICE,
                                                                                                      Baltics

CA gap                       0.48        0.81*      -0.50***          0.28     -0.39**     0.81*        0.28
                            [0.38]       [0.47]      [0.12]          [0.30]     [0.15]     [0.48]      [0.31]

CA gap*peg                                                                                -1.31**      -0.66*
                                                                                           [0.49]      [0.34]

NFA/GDP 2004-07             -0.00        0.04*       -0.04*          0.03**     -0.03      0.04*       0.03**
                            [0.02]       [0.02]      [0.02]          [0.02]     [0.02]     [0.02]      [0.02]

NFA * peg                                                                                 -0.07**     -0.07**
                                                                                           [0.03]      [0.03]

Peg                                                                                        -0.04      -0.05**
                                                                                           [0.02]      [0.02]

constant                     0.02         0.03       -0.01           0.04**     -0.02       0.03       0.04**
                            [0.01]       [0.02]      [0.01]          [0.02]     [0.01]     [0.02]      [0.02]

N                             65           42          23              41        20         65           61
R2                           0.06         0.20        0.44            0.06      0.35       0.24         0.14

      Note: The dependent variable is the percentage change in the real effective exchange rate between 2007
      and 2010. The sample in columns (4) and (7) exclude Iceland; the sample in columns (5) and (7) exclude
      Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. *,**, *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent levels respectively. OLS
      estimation with robust standard errors.
                                                     35

                                Table 4. Demand and Output Adjustment, 2007-2010

                                (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
   Sample→                      All       No peg          Peg         All       No peg         Peg

   Dependent var. →                   Change in demand                      Change in output

   CA gap                     1.46***      1.35***     1.29**       0.77***      0.70***       0.55
                              [0.298]      [0.366]     [0.612]      [0.212]      [0.208]      [0.465]

   NFA/GDP 2004-07              0.02         0.00      0.06***        0.01         0.00      0.03***
                              [0.013]      [0.016]     [0.018]      [0.009]      [0.014]     [0.011]

   Constant                    0.02        0.05***      -0.02       0.04***     0.06***        0.00
                              [0.014]      [0.013]     [0.024]      [0.010]     [0.010]       [0.017]

   N                            65           40            25         65           40           25
   R2                          0.36         0.42          0.31       0.23         0.24         0.17

Note: Dependent variable is the change in total domestic demand between 2007 and 2010 in columns (1),
(2), and (3) and the change in real GDP between 2007 and 2010 in columns (4), (5), and (6). CA gap is the
difference between actual and fitted value for the CA to GDP ratio, 2005-08. *,**, *** denote significance
at 10, 5 and 1 percent levels respectively. OLS estimation with robust standard errors.
                                                       36

                      Table 5. Crisis outcomes and sign of current account gap

                              (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
                           Change in     Change in     Change in   Change in   Change in    Change in
   Dep. Var. →
                           curr. acct.   curr. acct.    demand      demand      output       output

  Sample →                 CA gap<0 CA gap>0 CA gap<0 CA gap>0 CA gap<0 CA gap>0

  CA gap                    -0.90***      -0.23**       1.87***     1.02**        0.66         0.65
                             [0.258]      [0.097]       [0.612]     [0.451]      [0.401]      [0.409]

  NFA/GDP 2004-07             -0.02        0.00         0.04**       -0.01       0.02**        0.00
                             [0.013]      [0.010]       [0.019]     [0.023]      [0.012]      [0.020]

  Constant                    -0.00        0.00           0.05       0.03         0.03        0.04**
                             [0.014]      [0.007]       [0.030]     [0.022]      [0.020]      [0.020]

  Observations                 28            37           28          37           28           37
  R2                          0.45          0.08         0.37        0.10         0.19         0.06

Note: Dependent variable is the change in the current account balance between 2005-08 and 2010 in
columns (1) and (2); the change in total domestic demand between 2007 and 2010 in columns (3) and (4);
and the change in real GDP between 2007 and 2010 in columns (5) and (6). The sample in columns (1),
(3), and (5) includes countries with a negative CA gap (the difference between actual and fitted value for
the CA to GDP ratio) for 2005-08. The sample in columns (2), (4), and (6) includes countries with a
positive CA gap for 2005-08. *,**, *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent levels respectively. OLS
estimation with robust standard errors.
                                                          37

                       Table 6. Pre-crisis fiscal variables and post-crisis outcomes

                           (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)
Dep. Var. →              Change     Change     Change      Change     Change     Change      Change     Change
                         in CA      in CA         in          in         in         in          in         in
                                               REER        REER       demand     demand      output     output

Sample                     All        Peg         All          Peg       All        Peg        All        Peg

CA gap                  -0.57***    -0.67***     0.39      -0.48***   1.48***      0.72      0.80***       0.22
                         [0.109]     [0.197]    [0.403]     [0.123]   [0.300]     [0.507]    [0.222]     [0.395]

NFA/GDP 2004-07           -0.01     -0.03**      0.00      -0.04*       0.02*     0.08***     0.01      0.05***
                         [0.012]    [0.013]     [0.016]    [0.021]     [0.013]    [0.020]    [0.009]    [0.016]

Gov. debt/GDP             -0.01      -0.06        0.00       0.00       -0.01      0.11       -0.02        0.03
                         [0.017]    [0.047]     [0.000]    [0.000]     [0.053]    [0.107]    [0.041]     [0.067]

Constant                  0.02       0.04        -0.01      -0.01       0.03       -0.09      0.04*       -0.03
                         [0.011]    [0.028]     [0.022]    [0.021]     [0.030]    [0.064]    [0.022]     [0.039]

Observations                 65        23         65           23          65        23          65         23
R2                         0.42       0.53       0.08         0.44        0.36      0.36        0.23       0.24
 Note: Dependent variable is the change in the current account balance between 2005-08 and 2010 in
 columns (1) and (2); the change in the real effective exchange rate between 2007 and 2010 in columns (3)
 and (4); the change in total domestic demand between 2007 and 2010 in columns (5) and (6); and the
 change in real GDP between 2007 and 2010 in columns (7) and (8). Sample for columns (1), (3), (5), and
 (7) includes all countries; sample for columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) include countries with a de facto peg.
 *,**, *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent levels respectively. OLS estimation with robust
 standard errors.
                                                         38



             Table 7. Current account gap and capital flow adjustment by exchange rate regime

                                              Large negative           Large         Large          Large
                                              CA gap 2005-          positive CA   negative CA    positive CA
Sample →                                      08 (< -2% of          gap 2005-08   gap 2005-08 gap 2005-08
                                                  GDP)               (> 2% of      (< -2% of      (> 2% of
                                                                       GDP)          GDP)          GDP)
exchange rate regime                                          Peg                           No peg

Current account gap 2005-08                        -5.0                 4.2          -4.5            5.2

Current account balance, 2010 vs 2005-08           5.2                  0.2           2.8           -1.4

Change in net other inv. flows, 2007-2010          -9.5                 6.1          -1.6           -0.1

Change in net direct inv. flows, 2007-2010         -2.2                -4.3          -1.6           -0.1

Change in net portf. inv. flows, 2007-2010         1.1                  0.9           0.5            0.5

Change in FX reserve flows, 2007-2010              2.6                 -2.0           0.8            0.0

Number of observations                              13                  5              9             20
    Source: authors’ calculations based on International Monetary Fund, Balance of Payments Statistics.
                                                       39

                      Table 8. Change in capital flows and current account gap

                         (1)        (2)        (3)  (4)     (5)      (6)       (7)    (8)
                                                 Change Change in
                      Change in other investment
Dep var →                                        in FDI portfolio Change in reserve flows
                                flows
                                                  flows   flows
Sample→                 All    No peg      Peg      All     All     All     No peg Peg

CA gap                 0.68**      0.18     1.27***      0.27         0.02       -0.07     0.20 -0.37**
                       [0.262]    [0.158]   [0.401]     [0.232]     [0.229]     [0.176]   [0.188] [0.169]

NFA 2004-07            0.06**     0.04***     0.08       0.00        -0.02       -0.04    -0.07** -0.01
                       [0.027]    [0.013]    [0.049]    [0.010]     [0.033]     [0.023]   [0.025] [0.016]

Constant                -0.01      0.00       -0.01     -0.01**       0.01       -0.01     -0.02* 0.00
                       [0.015]    [0.008]    [0.030]    [0.007]     [0.016]     [0.009]   [0.012] [0.009]

Observations              64        41         23            64       64          64        41       23
R2                       0.25      0.27       0.31          0.08     0.01        0.21      0.36     0.28
Note: change in net capital flows defined as the difference between net capital flows in 2010 and
2007 (as a ratio of 2007 GDP). Net capital flows are the difference between capital inflows and
capital outflows. *,**, *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent levels respectively. OLS estimation
with robust standard errors.
Source: International Monetary Fund, Balance of Payments Statistics.
                                                     40



         Table 9. Current account adjustment, external finance, and current account gap

                                             (1)          (2)      (3)        (4)         (5)
                                                                             Non-         Peg
                                                       Non-                peg excl.   excluding
        Sample→                             ALL        peg         Peg      Iceland      Latvia

        Current account gap, 2005-08      -0.59***   -0.33***   -1.00***    -0.31***   -0.83***
                                           [0.12]     [0.07]     [0.20]      [0.07]     [0.10]

        NFA to GDP, 2004-2007              -0.01        0.00    -0.03***      0.00     -0.03***
                                           [0.01]      [0.01]    [0.01]      [0.01]     [0.01]

        External finance dummy             -0.01      0.04**      -0.06*     0.04**     -0.08**
                                           [0.02]     [0.02]      [0.03]     [0.02]      [0.03]

        Constant                           0.01**       0.00     0.02**       0.00      0.02***
                                           [0.01]      [0.00]    [0.01]      [0.00]      [0.01]

        Observations                         65         42         23          41         22
        R2                                  0.42       0.56       0.61        0.45       0.68


Note: Dependent variable is the change in the current account balance/GDP ratio between 2005-08 and
2010. The current account gap is the difference between actual and fitted value for the CA to GDP ratio,
2005-08. The “external finance dummy” takes the value of 1 for countries receiving net external official
finance during the 2008-2010 period in the form of IMF loans, EU loans, or ECB liquidity provision to
banks. The countries are Belarus, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Latvia, Portugal, Serbia, Romania,
Spain, and Ukraine. *,**, *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent levels respectively. OLS
estimation with robust standard errors.
                                              41

               Table 10. Euro Periphery: Net Capital Flows Via Central Banks

                            Net Capital Flows Via Central Banks
                                     2005-2007             2010
              Greece                 -0.1                  22.0
              Portugal               -0.3                 16.9
              Spain                  -0.5                 2.3
              Ireland                -1.0                 53.6

Note: Ratios to GDP. Calculated from IMF’s Balance of Payments Statistics and External Debt
statistics for Ireland.
                                                            42



              Figure 1. Standard Deviation of Current Account Balances, 1990-2010
0.18


0.16


0.14


0.12


 0.1


0.08


0.06
                      Standard deviation CA/GDP

0.04                  Standard deviation CA/GDP excluding extreme observ.



0.02


  0
       1990    1992    1994       1996        1998        2000        2002   2004   2006   2008   2010


Note: Cross-country standard deviation of current account balances (ratios to GDP). Sample
excludes Timor Leste. Sample excluding extreme observations (blue line) also excludes Brunei
Darussalam, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, Nicaragua, and Qatar.
Source: International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics and World Economic
Outlook databases.
                                               43

                  Figure 2. Change in current account/GDP ratio, 2007-2010


              Baltics


     Other crisis CEE


  GRE, IRE, PRT, ESP


       United States


      Emerging Asia
                                                        Change in oil balance

               China
                                                        Change in current account balance

   GCC oil exporters

                        -10    -5          0        5         10       15       20          25

Note: country groups defined as follows:

GRE, IRE, PRT, ESP: Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain (simple average)
Other crisis CEE: Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania, Serbia, Ukraine (simple average)
Emerging Asia: Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan,
Thailand (simple average).
GCC oil exporters: Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia (simple
average)
                                                                    44



                       Figure 3. Actual Current Account Balance and Fitted Current Account Balance,
                                                       2005-2008

           .25




                                                                                                 SGP
           .15




                                                                                     HKG   NOR

                                                                             SWI
   fitted CA 2005-08
               .05




                                                                           TAI
                                                                            RUS
                                                                           NLD
                                                                 BEL
                                                                  CANDEN
                                                     SAF COL KOR       FIN     CHN
                                                                    CHLJPN                 MYS
                                                     USIRE
                                                     TURBLR
                                                      AUS  UK MEX AUT GER
                                                        SLV CZE
                                                              FRA            SWE
                                                           ITA MORIDN
                                                                 THA
                                                                BRA  ARG
                               ICE
                                 BLG         ROM ESPCRI
                                                     SVK POL    PER   ISR
                                              LITNZE
      -.05




                                                       GTMUKR
                                                     PAK     IND
                                                            URU       PHL
                                                  CRO  DR
                                                      SLK
                                     LVA SER  PRT      ELS  TUN
                                           EST
                                             GRE HUN
           -.15
           -.25




                       -.25         -.15            -.05        .05                  .15         .25
                                                       CA/GDP, 2005-08



Note: Scatter of actual current account balance against fitted current account balance (average
ratios to GDP, 2005-2008). Fitted values based on regression reported in column (1) of Table 1.
                                                                                       45

                                                 Figure 4. Change in Current Account Balance and Current Account Gap


                                                      BLG
                     .2
                                                                 LVA

                                                    ICE
   change in CA balance, 2010 vs 2005-08


                                                                           EST

                                                                          LIT
                             .1




                                                                                       HUN
                                                                           NZE
                                                                       SER
                                                                                CROSWI
                                                                       ROM ESP SVKPAK        THA
                                                                             IRE
                                                                         SAFUSSLV
                                                                              AUS KOR
                                                                                    GTM  TAI
                                                                                       ELS
                                                                              CRI BEL DEN URU        PHL
                                                                             PRT
                                                                                     SLKUKR
                                                                                     MEX
                                                                             GRE UK
               0




                                                                                       POL NLD
                                                                             TUR COL ITA      AUT
                                                                                              JPN GER
                                                                                             IDN
                                                                                      FRA
                                                                                    CZE                        MYS
                                                                                          CHLFIN
                                                                                           IND
                                                                                             PER
                                                                                              TUN  ISR
                                                                                                 ARG     SWE
                                                                                     DR RUS BRA SGP
                                                                                HKG       NOR LBN CHN
                                                                                          MOR
                                                                                     CAN
                     -.1




                                                                                 BLR

                                           -.2                 -.1                 0                 .1              .2
                                                                         residual CA 2005-08

Note: Scatter of changes in the current account balance between 2005-08 and 2010 against the
2005-08 residual from the current account balance regression reported in column (1) of Table 1.
                                                                                                    46

Figure 5. Change in current account/GDP and change in real exchange rates, 2007-2010

                                                                                              A. No peg

                                                                                                       SER

                          .1
          change in CA/GDP ratio, 2007-2010                                                          ROM             HUN




                                                               ICE
                                 .05




                                                                                                                                    SAFSWI
                                                                                                               NZE
                                                                                                                                  AUS
                                                                                                                            GTM
                                                                                                                                             CRI
                                                                                                                US POL              SVK

                                                                                   KOR                                       URU
                                                                                              TAI        MEX
                                                                                                                                    ISR
                  0




                                                                                                                                   COL
                                                                                                                                 CZE
                                                                                      UK                                  PHL
                                                                                                                          TUR
                                                                                                                             RUS             JPN
                                                                                                                        THA
                                                                                                                      NOR               IDN
                                                                                                                TUN                        BRA
                                                                                                              SWE
                                                                                                                         CHL   PERIND
                                                                                                                              SGP
                                                                                                                     DR
                                                                                                                  MOR
                                                                                                                   CAN MYS
                          -.05




                                                                                                                                    CHN

                                                        -.4                              -.2                   0                              .2
                                                                                          change in REER, 2007-10

                                                                                                B. Peg
                                              .3




                                                                                                                     LVA
                                                                                                                      BLG
                           change in CA/GDP ratio, 2007-2010
                                                      .2




                                                                                                             EST

                                                                                                                     LIT
                                          .1




                                                                         IRE                  ESP PAKCRO
                                                                                             SLV
                                                                                              ELS
                                                                                                DEN    GRE
                                                                             UKR                                                                   SLK
                                                                                       PRTNLD                  CYP
                               0




                                                                                          ITA BEL
                                                                                        FRA
                                                                                         AUT
                                                                 ARG               GERFIN     LUX

                                                                                   HKG
                                                                       BLR
                                              -.1




                                                               -.1                         0                     .1                                 .2
                                                                                           change in REER, 2007-10

Note: “change in REER 2007-10” is the log change in the CPI-based real effective exchange rate index between
2007 and 2010. “Change in CA/GDP ratio 2007-10” is the difference between the CA/GDP ratio in 2010 and
2007. Source: authors’ calculations based on International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics, Balance
of Payments Statistics, World Economic Outlook.
                                                                                     47

Figure 6. Change in current account/GDP and change in relative domestic demand, 2007-2010



                   .3                  LVA                               BLG
   change in CA/GDP ratio, 2007-2010
                              .2


                                                   EST

                                                            LIT



                                                                               SER
                  .1




                                                                         HUN ROM

                                                   ICE       IRE          CRO
                                                                            ESP                  PAK
                                                                           GRESLV NZESWI SAF
                                                                            ELS
                                                                              DEN            AUS
                                                                                          GTMCRI
                                                                        UKR      USSVK         POL     SLK
                                                                                     NLD
                                                                                   MEX
                                                                                   PRT    KOR
                                                                                        CYP
                                                                                         TAI ISR          URU
                                                                                                  COLPHL
       0




                                                                                UK CZE
                                                                                     BEL TUR
                                                                                 FINFRA
                                                                                ITA
                                                                                JPN  AUT
                                                                                      RUS
                                                                                       GER
                                                                                       NOR    THA      IDN
                                                                                                       ARG
                                                                                    LUX              BRA
                                                                                                    TUN
                                                                                                      CHL
                                                                                      SWE
                                                                                           CAN
                                                                                                    SGPDR PERIND
                                                                                                     MOR
                                                                                                     MYS
                                                                                                                      CHN
                                                                                              HKG
                                                                                                                BLR
                   -.1




                                       -.4                   -.2              0               .2                            .4
                                                          Change in real domestic demand, 2007-10

Figure 7. Change in current account/GDP and change in relative output, 2007-2010
                   .3




                                       LVA                                     BLG
   change in CA/GDP ratio, 2007-2010
                              .2




                                                    EST

                                                           LIT



                                                                                     SER
                  .1




                                                                        HUN ROM

                                                               ICE
                                                             IRE       CROESP              PAK
                                                                      GRE
                                                                        DEN   ELS SWISAFGTM
                                                                         SLV NZE        AUS
                                                                                      CRI
                                                                                     SVK
                                                                  UKR        US               POL    SLK
                                                                            PRTMEX CYP
                                                                               NLD        KOR
                                                                                           TAI
                                                                                            ISR PHL     URU
                                                                                           COL
       0




                                                                      ITAUK FRA CZE TUR
                                                                               BEL
                                                                               AUT
                                                                        FIN
                                                                         JPN NOR
                                                                             GERRUS      THA BRA ARGIDN
                                                                                 LUX    CHL TUN SGP
                                                                              SWE                   DR PER IND
                                                                                 CAN         MYS MOR
                                                                                                                            CHN
                                                                                       HKG
                                                                                                         BLR
                   -.1




                                             -.2            -.1             0            .1                .2               .3
                                                                   Change in real GDP, 2007-10

Note to Figures 6-7: “change in real domestic demand 2007-10” is the log change in real domestic demand between
2007 and 2010. The change in real GDP, 2007-10 is defined analogously. “Change in CA/GDP ratio 2007-10” is
the difference between the CA/GDP ratio in 2010 and 2007. Source: authors’ calculations based on International
Monetary Fund, Balance of Payments Statistics and World Economic Outlook.
