                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN THE
                 AUTOMOBILE INDUSTRY, 1970-1980:
                  A COMPARISON OF CANADA, JAPAN
                      AND THE UNITED STATES




                           Melvyn Fuss


                         Leonard Waverman




                      Working Paper No. ?35




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 1985




An earlier version of this paper was presented at the NBER
Conference on Productivty Growth in Japan and the United States,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, August 25-28, 1985. Financial support
from the Ontario Economic Council and the National Science
Foundation (Grant No. SES-8420937) is gratefully acknowledged. We
are indebted to Jeremy Rud-in and Richard Knabl for invaluable
research assistance. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Productivity and project in Productivity
and Change in the World Economy. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                      NBER Vrking Paper #1735
                                                      October 1985




          Productivity Growth in the Autarobile Industry, 1970—1980:
             A Conparison of Canada, Japan and the United States



                                  ABSTR7CT




      In this paper we calculate and analyze the autorrobile industries
 cost and productivity experience during the 1970 's in Canada, the U.S.
 and Japan. Utilizing an econonetric cost function methodology, we are
 able to isolate the major source of short-run disequilibrium in this industry -
 variations 'in capacity utilization -and analyze its effects on cost and total
 factor productivity (TFP) gross. This is achieved through a novel application
 of the Viner-Wng envelope threm, which allows us to track short-rui
 behavior utilizing what is essentially a long-run cost function.
       To striking empirical results energe. First, TFP grew much faster in the
 Japanese autorrobile industry (4.3% annum) than in the Canadian (1.4%) and U. S.
 (1.6%) industries. Second, the imrortance in analyzing variations in capacity
 utilization is confinned by the fact that failure to correct for this source
 of productivity change would have led to a 31% underestimate of long-run
 'FFP growth in Canada arid a 37% underestimate for the United States.




lvin A. F\iss                                        Leonard Waverman
Departnent of Economics                              Departhent of Economics
University of Toronto                                University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada                                      Toronto, Canada
M5S 1A1                                              M5S lkL
                                      1

1.   Introduction

     The automobile industry is perhaps the most outstanding example of

the Japanese competitive threat to North American manufacturing. The

Japanese production cost advantage has been estimated to be as high as

$2,000 per vehicle (Abernathy and Harbour (1981), Abernathy, Clark and

Kantrow (1983), Federal Trade Commission (1983)). These studies

attribute a substantial proportion of the cost advantage to superior

productivity performance by Japanese automobile manufacturers.

     This paper differs from the earlier studies cited above in a number

of ways. First, we will be estimating comparative growth rates of unit

costs and productivity rather than comparing levels at a point in time.'

Second, previous studies of U.S.-Japanese automobile costs have been

essentially accounting studies, and have not employed more rigorous

analytical methods. In this study, we utilize an econometric cost

function and the decomposition analysis proposed by Denny and Fuss (1983)

to measure the growth in unit cost and productivity and to determine

the sources of growth. This methodology permits us to overcome two major

shortcomings of previous studies —   the inability to adequately

disentangle factor price effects from efficiency effects, and the

inability to account correctly for short-run disequilibrium. The source

of disequilibrium that we are concerned with in this paper is due to

variations in capacity utilization. Variations in capacity utilization

affect both unit costs and total factor productivity. Accounting for

capacity utilization effects is particularly crucial in the automobile

industry, an industry characterized by quasi—fixed factors (capital

and part of labour) and product-specific manufacturing facilities. Hence
                                    2


swings in consumer tastes among different products can lead to variations

in capacity utilization which may greatly affect measured unit cost and

productivity growth. In fact, the empirical results presented below

indicate that long—run total factor productivity growth during the 1970's

would have been underestimated by 37% in the United States and 31% in

Canada had capacity utilization effects not been accounted for. This is

due primarily to the very low rates of capacity utilization in the North

American automobile industry in 1980, the last year of our sample.

     Even after correcting for capacity utilization differences, the

Japanese productivity "miracle" is evident from our results for

automobile production. During the 1970's total factor productivity in

the Japanese automobile industry grew at an average rate of 4.3% per

annum. By way of contrast, the Canadian and U.S. automobile industries

experienced average per annum TFP growth rates of only 1.4% and 1.6%

respectively, about 1/3 of the Japanese rates. The large difference

between the TFP growth rates of the U.S. and Japanese automobile

industries is in sharp contrast to Norsworthy and Malmqvists (1983)

results for total manufacturing, where the Japanese advantage was much

less pronounced. The comparatively more rapid efficiency gain in Japan

is a major reason why long-run average cost, as measured in each

country's own currency, grew at only a 2.9% annual rate for Japanese

automobile production, whereas long-run average cost increased at a 7.6%

rate in Canada and at a 7.8% rate in the U.S.

     As noted previously, these empirical results are obtained from an

estimated econometric cost function and a decomposition analysis.

Sections 2 and 3 present the formal model underlying the empirical
                                    3

results. Included in Section 3 is a discussion of the way in which

capacity utilization effects are captured through a somewhat novel

application of the Viner—Wong envelope result. The specific empirical

results are contained in Sections 4 and 5.   In Section 6 we conclude the

paper with some summary remarks.
                                       4

2.   The Cost Function Approach to the Analysis of Cost and Total

     Factor Productivity Differences



2.1 Cost Comparisons - A Decomposition Analysis

      Utilizing the duality between cost and production under the

assumption of cost-minimizing behaviour, we specify that the automobile

production process can be represented indirectly by the cost function



                  C1t =                                                (2.1)
                          G1t(w1t, 2it' 'it


where Ct is the total cost of production in country      i   at time t,

it is a vector of factor prices, 2it is a vector of outputs and 'it

is a vector of technological conditions which could be viewed as the

"characteristics" of the production process. Examples of characteristics

to be used in this study are an index of Research and Development

expenditures (a proxy for technical change) and capacity utilization.

The use of this characteristics approach was proposed by McFadden (1978)

and has been applied to telecommunications [Denny, et al. (1981a, b)],

trucking [Spady and Friedlaender (1978), Kim (1984)] and U.S. automobile

production [Friedlaender, Winston and Wang (1983)]. The logarithm of the

cost function (2.1) will be appproximated by a quadratic function in the

logarithms of it'          'it and D; i.e.,



        log Ct = G(log fit' log it' log Ii )                           (2.2)




where G is a quadratic function and D is a vector of country-specific
                                                    5

dummy variables. Applying the Quadratic Lemma2 to (2.2) yields

log C = log            -
                            log C0

-       [_l
        2 L   3D1Ii        aD1lOj
                                        [D 1   -D]
                                                 0



                  +V1aG
                   2
                                    I           +                              1
                       [alog WkIWk=Wkis                  3log Wk Wk=WkOtj

                                                [log Wkis -         log   WkOtJ


                                                +                              1
                   2                                     alog
                       [alog Q                                  Q
                                                [log            -
                                                                    log



              +    I2 1aG                       +        aG

                           [alog T TT1                  alog T1 T=T10t


                                                .[log Tlis -        log       To]   (2.3)

where     I       indexes the country

        t,s index the time period

          k indexes the factors of production

          j       indexes outputs
          1       indexes characteristics

        = 1       if the observation is in country i                      0

        = 0       otherwise

and country 0 is the "reference" or "base" country. Assuming

price-taking behaviour in factor markets and utilizing Shephard's Lemma,

(2.3) can be written as
                                                              6


    1og C                 [Skis + S0][log Wkjs - log WkOt]


                          [ECQJ + ECQ0][lo Q15 - log
                +



                +
                          [ECT1 + ECT10][log T15 - log Tlot

                + e0                                                                         (2.4)

where

                      =                      +                            -
                e10
                                                              .
                                                                  [D1         D]             (2.5)




        ECQ =    elasticity           of cost with respect to output

        ECT =    elasticity           of cost with respect to the

                 technological characteristic



Denny et al. (1981b) have shown that the appropriate definition of the

difference in the logarithm of "average" cost for a multiple output

technology3 is


    ilog "average" cost
               =      C - log                slog   QC                                       (2.6)



                              1                          + ECQJOt
where                                                                         1
           slog QC =                         (rQiis
                                  j
                                              L(ECQ + ECQJOt) ]

                                                                                   -
                                                                  .[log                log

                      =
                          [       (ECQ + ECQ0)]1

                                      lv                  +
                                        L.
                                             [ECQJ            ECQJOt]
                                                    7

                                          -
                         [log                     log

and ECQ1 =
              ECQJ

Equation (2.4) becomes


                                              +                                  log WkOt]
       1og (C/QC) =              [Skis             S0].[log            Wkis -


                    +
                               (ECQ
                                      +
                                          ECQ0
                                                        -
                                                            2)   .
                                                                     ilog   QC


                    +   lv [ECT1
                          /.
                                              +
                                                   ECT10].[log              1115 —   log   T10t]


                    +                                                                              (2.7)
                        0i0
     For any specific country, i0 and e10=O; thus the index of

average cost difference between time t and time s is given by



    slog (C/Qc) =   2
                                  +
                                      S].[lo Wks                     - log   wkt]


                                               -
                +
                        [ECQ5
                                 +
                                      ECQt         2].Mog            Qc


               +    lv                +
                     L [ECT               ECT1].[log T1 - log Tlt                                  (2.8)




where the country index is suppressed for simplicity. If st+l,

equation (2.8) is just the formula for the decomposition of yearly

proportionate changes in average cost. The rate of total factor

productivity growth between time periods t and s is given by



   TFPtS -log (C/QC) -                             ks        +
                                                                 5kt
                                                            .[log Wks - log wkt}                   (2.9)
                                              8



If st+l, equation (2.9) is just the Tornqvist formula for calculating

the annual TFP growth rate from factor price data.

     Rearranging equation (2.9), we obtain an alternative equation for

log (C/Qc):


slog (C/Qc) =          [S + S].[iog WkS -              log wk] - TFPtS   (2.10)



Combining (2.8) and (2.9) we obtain an epxression for TFP in terms of

efficiency sources:


 TFPt5 =   - [ (ECQ      +
                              ECQt
                                     -
                                         2).log   QC


           +   lvL            +               lit -    log
                     (ECT15       ECT1)(log                              (2.11)




Equations (2.8), (2.10) and (2.11) provide the formulae for decomposing

average (unit) cost differences and total factor productivity differences

into their various sources.

     Consider equation (2.8). The left hand side is the average cost

difference. This difference is due to differences in factor prices (the

first row on the right hand side), the effects of scale economies (the

second row), and the effects of technological characteristics (the third

row). Now consider equation (2.10). The average cost difference between

two points in time is due to differences in factor prices (the first

term), and total factor productivity growth between the two periods

(the second term). Finally, consider equation (2.11). Total factor

productivity growth over time within a country is due to output growth in

the presence of scale economies (the first row), and changes in
                                           9

technological conditions (the second row).




2.2 Estimation of the Cost Function

    The cost function (2.1) is approximated by a quadratic function of

the form (2.2). Writing out (2.2) in detail for the i-th country yields



                               V
  log C. =          + Oi°i +
                                       + c.D.)log Wkjt

                (, + ..D.)log


         +
                      + G1D)log Tlit


         + [ 6(log wkit)                  + p(log )2

                        + L
                              11(log   T1it

         +
                    km log Wkit log Wmit
             k<m


         +              log        log Qft
             j <n


         +
             cv
             L lp log Tlit log Tpit
             1 <p


             cv
         + L
             L Akj log Wkit log


                    Akl log Wkit log Tlit
                                                         10



            +                                                                              (2.12)
                     L          log             log Tit
                jl

Utilizing    Shephard's Lemma results in the cost share equations



  Skit =    k + ki0i + kk log Wkit + mk km log Wit
       +                 log              +            log Tlit
                                                                          k =   1,... ,K   (2.13)




Estimates of the parameters of the system are obtained by estimating

simultaneously (using maximum likelihood techiniques) the cost function

(2.12) and K-i equations from (2.13), imposing the constraints



   V                     V                      V
   L
   k
     k         1,        L ctki
                         k
                                  =       0,    L
                                                m
                                                    mk
                                                         =
                                                             o mk     =
                                                                          km'


       Akj =    0,                    -
                                                    ki        o   jn = nj'
                                                                                           (2.14)
                                                              ip pl


2.3 Production Characteristics Obtained from the Cost Function



(1) Factor Substitution

       The own factor price elasticity of demand (outputs held constant) is

given by


           Ekk =               kk -        Sk   + s]                                        (2.15)
                         Sk
                                              11

The Allan—Uzawa elasticity of substitution is given by

                              +
        Lkm =    s km
                km                SkS]                                  (2.16)



(ii) Scale Economies

     The scale elasticity is given by




        SE =   CE'   =
                         [   ECQJI1                                     (2.17)

where CE = the overall cost elasticity, and

                _____ =                   + jiDi       +      log
      ECQJ =                                                        n
                                  +          log Wk


                                  +          log   T                    (2.18)




(iii) Technological Conditions

    The elasticity of cost with respect to the technological condition

11 can be obtained as




               alo C =                V            V
           =
    ECT1       alog T1       01 + L eD1 + L lp             log T

                             V
                         + L Akl log


                                  l
                                             wk


                         +                                              (2.19)
                                          log Q
                                   12

3. Incorporating Capacity Utilization Effects into the Cost Function -

   An Application of the Viner-Wong Envelope Theorem

    As noted in the introduction, the automobile industry is

characterized by quasi-fixed factors and yearly fluctuations in demand

for its products. These features result in variations in capacity

utilization which cannot be captured by a long-run equilibrium model.

There are two possible approaches to this problem. First, a variable

cost function with exogenous quasi-fixed factors could be specified and

capacity utilization rates determined endogenously. An example of such

an approach is Berndt and Fuss (1982). Second, capacity utilization,

rather than the quasi—fixed factors, could be treated as exogenous. In

this case the demands for quasi-fixed factors are determined

endogenously.5 An example of this second approach is Cowing and

Stevenson (1981). While we intend to pursue the first approach in

subsequent research, in this paper we adopt the second approach. This

particular approach is likely to be successful when plants are designed,

ex ante, to produce a normal flow of output which can be relatively

easily measured. The major components of the automobile industry—vehicle

assembly and the manufacture of engines, transmissions and transaxles

satisfy this requirement.6 Specifying capacity utilization rather than

the levels of quasi-fixed factors as exogenous has two advantages. One,

the identity of the quasi-fixed factors does not need to be determined a

priori. Two, the analysis can proceed without the assumption that the

quasi-fixed factors are fixed in the short run.7

     The existence of capacity utilization as an argument of the cost

function implies that the output argument should be capacity output.
                                        13

Capacity output should be thought of as that flow of output per unit time

which is viewed as "normal" by the firm, in the sense that if the output

flow is sustained over time the firm has no incentive in the long run to

adjust the level of its quasi-fixed factors. Normal capacity utilization

then occurs when actual and designed (normal) output flows per unit time

are equal. Hence it is natural to index capacity utilization so that

it is unity when the actual output flow is at its normal rate.

     Output increases which affect costs can occur in two ways. Existing

capacity can be utilized more intensively, or capacity can be increased,

utilization held constant. In this setting the Viner-Wong envelope

result between short—run and long—run average costs (Viner (1952))

implies a set of constraints on the parameters of the translog cost

function which are developed below.

     Before proceeding to a detailed analysis of the envelope theorem, it

is convenient to specify the actual arguments of the cost function used

in the empirical analysis. The exogenous variables were specified as

foil ows:




       input prices (K=3) —   capital   (1); materials (2); labour (3)

       outputs (J=1) -   single   output, constant dollar capacity

                         (normal or designed) production of vehicles

                         and parts

       technological conditions (L=3) —      capacity   utilization (1);

                         technological change proxy index—index of

                         real stock of R & 0 expenditures (2);
                                                    8
                         index of product mix (3)
                                     14

    The envelope theorem is satisfied if the cost-normal output and

cost-capacity utilization elasticities satisfy the following

relationships:



            ECQ1, normal capacity utilization
     ECT1
     ECT1 < ECQ1, below normal capacity utilization                  (3.1)

     ECT1 > ECQ1, above normal capacity utilization



where ECT1 is the cost—capacity utilization elasticity and ECQ1 is

the cost-capacity output elasticity.

     The relationship (3.1) is obvious for the case of long-run constant

returns to scale, once it is recognized that Ed1 is just the output

elasticity of the short-run average cost curve9 and ECQ1 is the output

elasticity of the long-run curve (equal to unity). For the case of

increasing returns to scale, consider Figure 3.1. At the normal capacity

utilization rate (output level OA), short-run marginal cost (SRMC) equals

long-run marginal cost (LRMC) and short—run average cost (SRAC) equals
                                                 LRMC
long-run average cost (LRAC). Since                     and
                                          ECQ1   LRAC

ECT1 =           ECQ1 =          Now suppose output is expanded to OB. If
             ;
                          Ed1.
output expansion occurs with designed (normal) output QN constant,

movement is along the SRAC curve (actual output QA increasing) and

capacity utilization is above normal. If output expansion occurs with

capacity utilization T constant at the normal rate, then the

movement is along the LRAC curve (as QN increases). From Figure 3.1 it

can be seen that for output expansion beyond OA, SRAC is falling
                                       15

                                  FIGURE 3.1




Ave rage
  Cost
                                                               S RMC



                                                                       RAC




                                                                               L RAC




                                                                                L RMC




           0                       A           B                             Output




               The Envelope Theorem and Capacity Utilization
                                                   16

less rapidly than LRAC, so


           3SRAC      aLRAC



         3SRAC      &LRAC
(where                          < 0)


Inequality (3.2) can be manipulated into the form

                                                    -
           (ECT1 - 1) >                .
                                           (ECQ1        1)10             (3.3)



where SRTC and LRTC are short and long-run total costs respectively.

Since SRTC > LRTC it follows that ECT1 > ECQ1.

       Similarly, for output contraction below OA, it is the case

         RAC       3LRAC
that                        ,    which implies that ECT1 < ECQ1. Hence

relationship (3.1) has been demonstrated for the case of increasing

returns to scale. An analogous argument exists for the case of

decreasing returns to scale.

       In order to develop the parameter constraints implied by the

envelope theorem, recall that the capacity utilization rate was indexed

so that it equals unity at the normal utilization rate. When capacity

utilization is at the normal rate, the elasticities can be written as




  Ed1 = 01+        01D1 +       12   log 12 +       13    log T3



                                +
                                     A1     log Wk +      T11 log   Q    (3.4)
                                                              17


                          V                               N
  ECQ1 =             + L 31D +                     log   Q1
                                                              +
                                                                   A<1 log Wk

                                       +                                                           (3.5)
                                            12 log 12 + 13 log T3
since log T 0; and where QN1 = capacity output.
For the left hand sides of (3.4) and (3.5) to be equal for all values of

the exogenous variables, the following parameter constraints must be

imposed:

            =


                                 i =       1,2
      01i         li
      12 = T12                                                                                     (3.6)


      Akl       = Akl            k =       1,2,3

      Tll
                = 'll

When the equalities (3.6) are imposed, ECT1 -
                                                                            ECQ1
       -
            T11). log T. Hence for the envelope inequalities in (3.1) to
hold, it must be the case that                                >

       Unfortunately,                imposition of the envelope theorem renders the second

order translog function less flexible than is desired. Since
                                            aS
3Sk
alog 11
                 =
                     kl    =
                               Xkl
                                     =
                                            alog Q        ,   factor   cost shares change to the

same extent when output increases, independent of whether the output

increase is due to increased capacity utilization or increased capacity.

Given the quasi-fixed nature of capital, capital cost shares will

increase more (and other input shares less) when capacity utilization

increases compared to capacity increases. To permit this possibility,

third order terms must be added to the cost function. A parsimonious,

sufficiently flexible specification is obtained by adding terms of the
                                                     18

form


   1
          L
                cv
                L L ki                  log Wk       log T log 1.
       k=1,2,3 i=1 j=l


                    =
                               k=1,2,3
                                                kll       log Wk (log T1)2              (3.7)



to the cost function.11 As a result of (3.7), a term of the form

                                                                                        (3.8)
               2 kll (log 11)2

is added to the k—th cost share equation.

       The addition of (3.7) to the cost function implies that the

allocation formulas of section 2 must also be altered. By applying the

theoretical framework developed by Denny and Fuss (1983), it can be shown

that an interaction term of the form



              k11 [log Wks -           log w][log T15 - log                 lit]2       (3.9)


must be added to the right hand side of the decomposition formulas (2.8)

and (2.11). Equation (2.8) becomes



1og (C/Qc) =                   +                     Wks -       log Wkt]
                        [Sks        Skt].[log
               +
                    (ECQ5
                              +
                                   ECQt
                                           -
                                                2].ilog     Qc



               +   lv
                    L [ECT.15
                                   +
                                       ECT1t].[log          Tls -    log    Tit]


                                                                                    2
               +
                        kll         [log       Wks
                                                     - log w].[lo Tls - log
                                                                                        (3.10)

and equation (2.11) becomes
                                                   19



TFPSt =        (ECQ5
                       +
                           ECQt
                                  -
                                      2).log        QC




        +                   +                 (log       Tls -    log
                (ECT5           ECT1t)
                                         .

                                                                        Ift)                   (3.11)



        +
               kll         (log Wks -        log   wkt) .        (log   T15 -   log
                                                                                      Tlt)2]




Finally, the condition required for the envelope inequalities in (3.1) to

hold becomes



      11 +       kll       log Wk > Til                                                        (3.12)
                                      20

4. Empirical Results: Cost Function Estimation

    The cost function was estimated using annual pooled three digit

automobile production data from Canada (1961-80), United States (1961—80)

and Japan (1968—80). A more detailed description of the data is

contained in the Data Appendix.

     Equations (2.12 +   3.7)   and (2.13 +   3.8)   were estimated, with

constraints (2.14) and (3.6) imposed, using the Zeilner iterative

technique to obtain maximum likelihood estimates. Initial estimation

results implied that the regularity conditions for the cost functions

were not satisfied at a number of data points. The cost function was not

concave for Canada (16 observations) and non-monotone in the technical

change index (Canada (9 observations) and U.S. (4 observations)). The

minimal parameter constraints necessary to ensure local regularity over

the sample were imposed.12 In the case of the concavity constraints,

this implied different second order parameters ällc 33,c' 12,c'
                   for Canada. Since the regularity constraints are not
13,c and 23,c
nested in the basic specification, no formal testing was undertaken.

However, the imposition of the constraints led to only a moderate decline

in the log-likelihood function (from 545.17 to 536.29).

     One additional set of constraints was imposed on the parameters. As

described in more detail in Fuss and Waverman (1985), the product mix

variable (13) was computed as an index where typical weights are assigned

to different classes of automobiles (sub—compact, compact, intermediate,

etc.) and an average weight for actual production is computed. This

variable fluctuated fairly tightly around 2500 for Japan and 3500 for

Canada and U.S. Hence it almost served as a dichotomous dummy variable
                                   21

for Japan versus North America. From initial estimation results it

became clear that second order parameters involving 13 could not be

estimated and were set to zero. This had the effect of constraining the

cost-product mix elasticity to be a constant over time for each country,

although the elasticity could differ among countries.

     The imposition of the above parameter constraints is reflected in

the parameter estimates presented in Table 1. Table 2 presents the

corresponding summary statistics. Own factor price elasticities and

elasticities of substitution are contained in Table 3. Table 4 presents

cost, scale, and technological conditions elasticities. The numbers in

Tables 3 and Tables 4 are calculated at each individual countrys mean

data point.

     Using the parameter estimates found in Table 1, we verified that the

inequality condition (3.12) required by the envelope theorem is satisfied

at each data point in the sample. The importance of including the third

order capacity utilization terms is readily evident from the empirical

results. Each of the parameters   p1<11 k1,2,3 is statistically

significant, and the ones relating to capital and labour substantially

so. The signs of the parameters are the correct ones, indicating that as

underutilized capacity is utilized more intensively, the cost share of

capital declines and the cost shares of labour and materials increase.

     Table 2 indicates that the model fits the data rather closely. The

Durbin—Watson statistics are in the inconclusive region, so there is no

obvious problem of serial correlation.13 Table 3 shows that factor

demand is inelastic.
                                   22

     Table 4 demonstrates that production in all three countries is

subject to increasing returns to scale at the mean data point.

Surprisingly, Canada has the lowest scale elasticity. The capacity

utilization elasticity shows that costs increase proportionately less

than actual output, (potential output held constant) so that there are

short-run economies of fill. Any increase in research and development

expenditures appears to have more of a cost-reducing impact in Japan than

in Canada or the U.S., although since the elasticities vary with the

data, this cannot be determined for certain from the mean elasticities.

     The cost-product mix elasticities are very small. This is not

surprising since the output variable has been claculated from value and

price data so that it is denominated in standar& units (see Fuss and

Waverman (1985) for details concerning the construction).   If the

long-run marginal cost of producing a vehicle is proportional to category

weights,14 then the cost-product mix elasticity would be zero. If there

are economies of scale (i.e., non—proportionality) in producing larger

(heavier) automobiles then the elasticity would be negative.
                                     23

5.   Empirical Results: Rates of Growth of Cost, Productivity and

     their Decomposition

      Tables 5—9 present the empirical results on cost and productivity

which are the focus of this paper. Table 5 contains our analysis of

actual unit production costs over the 1970-80 period. The actual

percentage cost increase in a common currency (Canadian dollars) is

contained in column 1.     This figure is calculated as the average of the

increases over three 8-year periods: 1970-78, 1971-79 and 1972—80. The

three year averaging process was used in all calculations of growth rates

to smooth out somewhat the year-to—year fluctuations. In Canadian

dollars, unit costs increased by 85.6% in Canada, 117.6% in the U.S. and

116.7% in Japan. Relative to the U.S., Canada improved its competitive

position by a substantial amount and Japan did so by a small amount. The

pattern of cost increases in each country's own currency tells a

dramatically different story. The Japanese cost increase is only 22.7%,

compared with 90.3% for the U.S. and 85.6% for Canada. The difference in

the results is due to a substantial appreciation of the Japanese yen and

a smaller appreciation of the U.S. dollar, relative to the Canadian

dollar. Table 11 contains the time path of the relevant exchange rates

which had such a large impact on inter—country differences in cost growth

rates.

      Table 5 also contains the decomposition of the unit cost increases.

The decomposition in Table 5 and subsequent tables is with respect to

unit costs as measured in the country's own currency. The bottom half of

the table presents the conventional "sources of growth" percentages

obtained from ratios of logarithmic differences (using equation 3.10).
                                   24

The top half of the table presents an unconventional accounting which is,

for some purposes, more informative. The number 10.8 under the column

"price of labour" in the first row of Table 5 has the following

interpretation. If all variables affecting cost other than the price of

labour were constant over time at the geometric average of their values

in the years 1970, 71, 72, 78, 79 and 80, unit production cost in Canada

would have increased by 10.8% because of the actual increases in the

price of labour. Similarly, the number —9.3 under the column "technical

change" in the first row of Table 5 implies that if all variables except

the technical change variable 12 had been constant, Canadian unit

production cost would have fallen by 9.3% over the period. There is a

blank under the column "Interaction" since when only one variable is

allowed to differ between time periods, the interaction term is

identically equal to zero. From the above description, it can be seen

that what we have calculated in the upper half of Tables 5—9 is a set of

discrete comparative statics results for variations in the exogenous

variables affecting unit production costs and total factor productivity.

For a similar comparative statics analysis see Diewert and Morrison

(1985).

     The major determinant of cost increases in all three countries has

been increases in materials prices. Technical change has been the major

source of cost reduction, especially in Japan.

     As noted in the introduction, capacity utilization rates have varied

considerably from year—to-year in the North American automobile industry.

Utilization rates for the relevant years of our sample are presented in

Table 11. For the U.S., capacity utilization has varied from a high of
                                   25

0.95 in 1972 to a low of 0.58 in 1980. This variation accounts for 6.7%

of the U.S. unit cost increase (from Table 5).   In order to analyse cost

increases on a long—run basis, we present in Table 6 the long-run

equilibrium results, assuming capacity utilization rates are constant at

the normal rate (unity) for all years for all three countries. As

expected, Canadian and U.S. cost growth rates decline. The slight

increase in the Japanese rate is not due to capacity utilization effects,

but rather to the replacement of actual cost with cost estimated from the

econometric model. The negative estimation residual (Table 5) implies

that the estimated cost increase exceeds the actual cost increase.

     Table 7 presents the long—run equilibrium decomposition in a

slightly different way. The components of total factor productivity

(TFP) growth are aggregated (using equation 3.11) and compared with the

factor price effects. This table portrays in a graphic way the fact that

the Japanese auto industry has used productivity growth to keep unit

production cost increases to a minimal compared with North American

producers.

     Tables 8 and 9 examine changes in total factor productivity in the

three countries over the averaged 8 year period. Actual TFP grew only

7.7% in Canada and 8.3% in the U.S. compared with a 43.1% increase in

Japan. The substantial decline in capacity utilization in the North

American automobile industry between the early 1970's and the late 19701s

had a much more significant impact on TFP growth than on unit cost

increases. When capacity utilization effects are removed (Table 9), TFP

growth during the period increases to 11.3% in Canada and 13.4% in the

U.S., substantially higher than actual TFP growth, but still dwarfed
                                   26

by the Japanese growth of 39.8%. The contributions of the various

sources of TFP growth are very similar in the three countries:

approximately 80% is due to technical change and 20% to scale economies.

     Table 10 contains average annual rates of growth of unit cost and

total factory productivity corresponding to the total period

proportionate growth contained in Tables 5—9. Among the more interesting

figures in Table 10 is the U.S. automobile industrys yearly rate of

long-run productivity growth. A growth rate of 1.6% is high relative to

the total manufacturing rate of less than l%15, but pales beside the

Japanese auto industry's TFP growth rate of 4.3%. Similarly, while the

Canadian rate of 1.4% is higher than average for manufacturing, it is

well below the Japanese growth rate.
                                   27

6. Conclusions

     In this paper we have calculated and analysed the automobile

industry's cost and productivity experience during the 1970's in Canada,

United States and Japan. Percentage cost increases in a common currency

(Canadian dollars) differed less significantly than the increases in each

country's own currency due to currency realignments. The appreciation of

the Japanese yen during the 1970's masked the superior performance of the

Japanese auto industry relative to the North American industry during

that period. Of course rates of growth analysis cannot determine whether

Japan was just catching up to North American productivity levels or

pulling ahead. A levels analysis is required to answer that important

question. Our preliminary analysis of cost and productivity levels (Fuss

and Waverman (1985)) suggests that the catch-up story is essentially

correct, with the Japanese industry slightly more productive (1-2%) than

the U.S. industry by 1980, at normal capacity utilization rates.

     Finally, we have emphasized the importance of taking account of

variations in capacity utilization when analysing TFP growth rates for an

industry such as the automobile industry. Failure to do so would have

led to a 31% underestimate of TFP growth in Canada during the 1970's and

a 37% underestimate for the United States.
                                   28

                                FOOTNOTES




1.   We are also in the process of making level comparisons. See Fuss

     and Waverman (1985).

2.   For a description of the Quadratic Lemma see Diewert (1976) and

     Denny and Fuss (1983). The specific decomposition formula (2.3) can

     be found in Denny and Fuss (1980) and Denny, May and Fuss (1981).

3.   The empirical results specified below assume a single output

     technology and use a uproduct mix characteristic variable to

     account for the effect of a different output composition on costs.

     Since a logical alternative specification (given sufficient data) is

     the multiple output cost function, we will provide the decomposition

     analysis for this case.

4.   If the producer engages in marginal cost pricing and constant

     returns to scale exist, then slog Qc is just the change in the

     Tornqvist approximation to the Divisia aggregate index.

5.   Of course neither quasi—fixed factors nor utilization rates are

     truly exogenous to the firm's decision process. What is meant by

     11exogenous" in this context is that the observed variables are not

     in long-run equilibrium; i.e., the levels of quasi-fixed factors are

     not necessarily chosen to equate the marginal rate of factor

     substitution to the current ratio of factor prices, and the rate of

     actual output flow is not necessarily equal to the designed (or

     normal) rate of flow.

6.   See Miller (1985) for a discussion of the case of vehicle assembly.
                                                    29

7.   The main disadvantage of the approach taken in this paper is that

     the only disequilibrium feature which can be captured is the

     deviation of actual from designed output. While this is by far the

     most important source of disequilibrium in the automobile industry,

     disequilibrium due to fluctuations in factor prices can be captured

     by the variable cost function model.

8.   Detailed definitions of the variables and sources of data are

     contained in the Data Appendix

9.   Let QN = designed (normal) output and QA =                            actual   output

     in the short run. Then



     ECT —-       alog C            alog C
        1         slog  T           alog (QA/QN)IQN constant


            —-    (QA/QN)      3C
                    C
                               3(QA/QN)QN constant


              =    (QA/QN)              3C
                      C        QN                   C
                                        aQA                  3QA

              =    alog C
                            AN
                   alog Q Q constant

                             aSRAC      =        e(C/QA)     =
10. For example,
                                                                       Q        Q

                                             -     a(C/T1)
                                                   aT1

                                             =                     -
                                                   SRTC1[ECT1          1]


11. The specification adopted is still not sufficiently flexible to

     deal with the case of overutilization of capacity since when
                                    30

    T1 > 1, an increase in       will lead to an increase in the cost

    share of capital, which is counterintuitive. This does not create a

    problem for the current application since only 6 of the 53

    observations have T > 1 and the maximum value of T1 in the

    sample is 1.04.   In cases where this problem is more significant,

    one possible solution is to replace the coefficients k11 with

     Pkll.SV where SV, a switch variable, equals +1 when

    T < 1 and equals —1 when T1 > 1.

12. The constraints were minimal in the sense that the concavity

    condition was satisfied over the complete sample with only one data

    point (Canada, 1974) being subject to a binding constraint.

     Similarly, the monotonicity conditions were satisfied with only two

     binding constraints (Canada, 1961 and U.S., 1961). To some extent

     this result was fortuitous since no formal inequality restrictions

     algorithm was attempted. For an example of the use of such a formal

     procedure, see Hazilla and Kopp (1985).

13. The inconclusive region is quite wide, given the large number of

    parameters and relatively small number of data points. A first

    order serial correlation adjustment was attempted but resulted in

     implausibly high estimates of scale elasticities, especially for

    Japan. This result suggests that the first order filtering process

     is a misspecification and thus the non-filtered results are

    presented.

14. This is a fact widely believed in the industry.

15. Compare estimates by Berndt and Fuss (1982) and Norsworthy and

    Malmqvist (1983) for example.
                                        31

                                  DATA APPENDIX



        In this Data Appendix we provide a brief description of the sources

and construction of data used in the empirical analysis. Greater detail

can be found in Fuss and Waverman (1985). The general data sources were

the Annual Surveys (or Census) of Manufacturers in each country. One

problem with these data is the omission of a number of automotive-related

production statistics from these annual surveys undertaken by the

specific country's statistical office. Several relevant 4 digit SIC

codes are not classified to the Motor Vehicles Industries in the USA and

Canada (for example, automotive products foundries are classified to SIC

294 -    foundries   in Canada; in the USA, automotive stampings is included

in All Metal Stampings prior to 1972). These omissions affect our

results to the extent that some bias is imparted if the omitted

sub—industries are significantly different from those included.

        Nominal gross output data were taken from the central statistical

surveys and converted to real output in constant dollars by applying the

appropriate price deflators (available in Canada from Statistics Canada,

in the USA, from the Bureau of Industrial Economics (B.I.E.) and in Japan

from the Bank of Japan).

        The output price deflators are indices which are normalized to be

unity in a particular year for each country. The same normalization

occurs for materials and capital services prices. Because the cost

function contains only zero and first order country—specific

coefficients, except for very small differences in some factor price

related second order terms, the estimated characterization of the
                                     32

production process in terms of elasticities is essentially invariant to

the choice of the benchmark data set which is used to bridge the

inter-country price indices to obtain absolute level comparisons. This

is also true for country-specific rates of growth of cost and total

factor productivity, which are the topics of this paper. However, the

data are also being used to make inter-country cost and productivity

level comparisons, and so great care was exercised in calculating the

benchmark data. The interested reader can find the details in Fuss and

Waverman (1985). Of course the country-specific zero and first order

regression coefficients contained in Table 1 do depend on the specific

benchmark data set used to bridge the country-specific data.

     Three inputs are used —   materials,   labour and capital. Materials

price deflators were available for all three countries. The total

compensation (rather than just the money wage) of labour has been

calculated and hours worked estimated for production and non-production

workers (except in Japan where the total number of workers has not been

disaggregted). Real capital stock data were available for Canada

(Garston, 1983) and the USA (Norsworthy and Malmquist (1983), Levy and

Jondrow (1983)), but had to be estimated for Japan using data from the

Annual Census and the perpetual inventory method.

     The appropriate price of capital for our purposes is the ex ante

user cost of capital services. Appropriate series at the 3 digit level

were not available. For Canada we used a series for the 2 digit

industry, transportation equipment, constructed by Michael Denny. The

automotive industry-specific capital service price series which were

avilable for the U.S. had been estimated by the residual method, which is
                                   33

an inappropriate ex ante measure for such a highly cyclical industry. We

have instead utilized a user cost of capital series for U.S. total

manufacturing (which would not be subject to such cyclical variations)

presented in Norsworthy and Malmqvist (1983). This series is available

only to 1977 and was updated to 1980 using internal U.S. Bureau of the

Census capital service price data. The capital service price for Japan

is an extrapolation of the series for Japanese total manufacturing also

presented in Norsworthy and Malmqvist (1983). That series was available

through 1978. Our extrapolation involved using the change in the

Japanese prime interest rate beyond 1978 (DRI Japan Survey) and the

changes in the price deflator for plant and equipment for the Japanese

transportation equipment industry (Source: Price Indexes Annual).

     Capacity utilization rates were calculated from data for vehicle

assembly. We began by constructing a series for maximum output. Maximum

(potential) output was measured in the USA and Canada as the maximum

weekly nameplate output and in Japan as the maximum monthly output.

Capacity utilization was initially measured as the ratio of actual

production to maximum production. The "normal", or designed, capacity

utilization rate was defined as the average utilization rate for Japan

over the period 1969—80. Actual capacity utilization rates were

normalized so that this average rate was equal to unity. Capacity

(normal) output was defined as the actual output divided by the

normalized capacity utilization rate.

     We have estimated a technological change indicator -   the   capital

stock' of Research and Development. This stock is constructed from

annual R &D expenditures by converting them to a real capital stock
                                   34

utilizing the perpetual inventory method, the country—specific CPI and a

depreciation rate of 15%. For Canada and the USA, we aggregated the two

capital stocks into one series, assuming that the same technology was

available to the producers in both countries. Our data on R & 0

expenditures for Japan began in 1966. Therefore, we needed a benchmark R

& 0 stock. We assumed that in 1966 the technology available to Japan

could be represented by the R & 0 stock per automobile produced in North

America. We multiplied this value by the automobile production in Japan

in 1966 to arrive at our benchmark. Since automobile production in Japan

in 1966 was quite small relative to North America, the above procedure

assigns a small value of the technical change index to Japan in 1966.

Because of the way in which the R & D index was constructed, it has only

a tentative link to the effect of R & 0 expenditures on costs. We believe

it is more properly viewed as a method of tracking the country-specific

unexplained technical change. From this point of view the variable is

similar to a time trend and was utilzied because it consistently

outperformed a time trend in the regression analysis.
                                      35

                               REFERENCES



Abernathy, W.J., Clark, K.8. and Kantrow, A.M., (1983), Industrial

     Renaissance, Basic Books, New York.

Abernathy, W.J. and Harbour, J.B., (1981), Productivity and Comparative

     Cost Advantages: Some Estimates for Major Automotive

     Producers, Draft Report to the Department of Transportation,

     Transportation Systems Center.

Berndt, E. and M. Fuss (1982), "Productivity Measurement Using Capital

     Asset Valuation to Adjust for Variations in Utilization",

     National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 895,

     Cambridge, Massachusetts, forthcoming Journal of Econometrics.

Cowing, T., J. Small and R. Stevenson (1981), "Comparative

     Measures of Total Factor Productivity in the Regulated Sector: The

     Electric Utility Industry" Ch. 7 in: 1. Cowing and R. Stevenson,

     eds., Productivity Measurement in Regulated Industries (Academic

     Press, New York) pp. 162—177.

Denny, M. and M. Fuss, (1980), "Intertemporal and Interspatial

     Comparisons of Cost Efficiency and Productivity", Institute for

     Policy Analysis Working Paper No 8018, Dec. (University of Toronto,

     Toronto).

Denny, N. and M. Fuss (1983), "A General Approach Tolntertemporal and

     Interspatial Productivity Comparisons", Journal of

     Econometrics, December, pp. 315-330.

Denny, M., M. Fuss and J.D. May (1981), "Intertemporal Changes in

     Regional Productivity in Canadian Manufacturing", Canadian Journal
                                   36

     of Economics, Aug. pp. 390-408.

Denny, M., M. Fuss, C. Everson and L. Waverman (1981a),

     "Estiriiating the Effects of Diffusion of Technological Innovations in

     Telecommunications: The Production Structure of Bell Canada",

     Canadian Journal of Economics, vol. 14, pp. 24-43.

Denny, M. M. Fuss and L. Waverman, (1981b), "The Measurement and

     Interpretation of Total Factor Productivity in Regulated Industries,

     with an Application to Canadian Telecommunications", Ch. 8 in: T.

     Cowing and R. Stevenson, eds., Productivity Measurement in Regulated

     Industries (Academic Press, New York) pp. 179-218.

Diewert, W. Erwin (1974), "Exact and Superlative Index Numbers", Journal

     of Econometrics 4, pp. 115—145.

Diewert, W.E. and C. Morrison (1985), 'Assessing the Effects of

     Changes in the Terms of Trade on Productivity Growth: A Comparison

     of Japan and the U.S.", presented at the NBER U.S.—Japan

     Productivity Conference, Cambridge, Mass., Aug. 26-28.

Federal Trade Commission (1983), Report of the Bureaus of

     Competition and Economics Concerning the General Motors/Toyota Joint

     Venture, Washington, D.C., (3 volumes), mimeo.

Friedlaender, A., C. Winston and K. Wang (1983), "Costs,

     Technology and Productivity in the U.S. Automobile Industry", Bell

     Journal of Economics, Spring, pp. 1—20.

Fuss,M. and L. Waverman (1985), "The Productivity Dilemma in the

     Automobile Industry: A Cost Function Analysis of Production in the

     U.S.A., Canada, Japan and Germany", Ontario Economic Council,

     Toronto, Canada.
                                      37

Garston, G. (1983), "Canada's Capital Stock", Discussion Paper

     No. 226, Economic Council of Canada, Ottawa, Canada, February.

Hazilla, M. and R. Kopp (1985), "Testing for Separable Functional

     Structures in the Presence of Disequilibrium", Resources for the

     Future, Washington, D.C., July, mimeo.

Kim, N. (1984), "The Beneficiaries of Trucking Regulation Revisited",

     Journal of Law and Economics, April, pp. 227-241.

Levy R. and J. Jondrow (1983), "The Adjustment of Employment to

     Technical Change in the Steel and Auto Industries", Professional

     Paper No. 382, The Public Research Institute, Alexandria, Virginia,

     May.

Miller, S. and S. Bereiter (1985), "Modernizing to

     Computer-Integrated Production Technologies in a Vehicle Assembly

     Plant: Lessons for Analysts and Managers of Technological Change",

     presented at the NBER U.S.-Japan Productivity Conference, Cambridge,

     Mass., Aug. 26-28, 1985.

Norsworthy, J.R. and D.H. Malmqvist, "Input Measurement and Productivity

     Growth in Japanese and U.S. Manufacturing", American Economic

     Review, December, pp. 947-967.

Spady, R. and A. Friedlaender (1978), "Hedonic Cost Functions for the

     Regulated Trucking Industry", Bell Journal of Economics,

     Spring, pp. 159—79.

Viner, J. (1952), "Cost Curves and Supply Curves", in A.E.A.

     Readings in Price Theory, ed. by G.J. Stigler and K.E. Boulding,

     Homewood, Il., Irwin.
                   38

                 TABLE 1

            Estimation Results

Parameter        Estimate        Standard Error

                  14.327              0.008
cLO

                   0.063              0.117
aOus
                   0.212              0.168
aOJ
                   0.091              0.002

                   0.782              0.002

                   0.127              0.002

                   0.079              0.017

                  -0.305              0.020
a2US
                   0.227              0.016
'3,US
                   0.106              0.008

                  -0.219              0.018
cL2j
                   0.113              0.015
O3J
                   0.957              0.044

                  -0.029              0.154
l,US
                  —0.149              0.102

                   0.957              0.044
81
                   0.216              0.072
82
                  —0.091              0.065
83
                   0.029              0.154
8i,us
                  —0.189              0.187

                   0.113              0.094
83US
                  -0.149              0.102
°i,j
                   0.033              0.149
82J
          39

63J      0.069   0.319

611      0.085   0.008

611,c    0.070   0*

622      0.111   0.018

633      0.053   0.011

633,c    0.061   0.018
         0.013   0.059
         0.970   0.184

22      —0.429   0.072

612     —0.071   0.008

612,c   -0.060   0*

613      0.014   0.005

613,c    0.010   0

623     -0.040   0.013

623,c   —0.051   0.018

12       0.065   0.065
A11     —0.012   0.008
A21      0.098   0.010
A31     -0.086   0.008
A11     -0.012   0.008

A21      0.098   0.010
A31     -0.086   0.008
12      -0.032   0.013
A22     -0.044   0.014

A32     0.076    0.010
        0.013    0.059
                                      40

                                     0.065                         0.065
T12
                                     0.444                         0.056
p111
                                    -0.123                         0.060
p211
                                    -0.321                         0.021
3ll



*   constrained   to be a constant due to the imposition of the concavity

restrictions
                          41

                        TABLE 2

                  Summary Statistics


Equation                               Durbin-Watson Statistic



cost                 0.9998                      1.33

capital share        0.9816                      1.10

materials share      0.9830                      1.00
                                    42

                                  TABLE 3a

                        Factor Own Price Elasticities

                      (computed at the mean data point)




Input                    Canada       United States       Japan



Capital                  -0.16           —0.33            -0.40

Materials                —0.09           —0.17            —0.17

Labour                   —0.43           -0.53            —0.42




                                  TABLE 3b

                 Elasticities of Substitution (Allen—Uzawa)

                      (computed at the mean data point)



Inputs                  Canada        United States       Japan



Capital—Materials        0.17             0.35            0.52

Capital-Labour           0.22             0.58            0.47

Labour-Materials         0.53             0.67            0.48
                                       43

                                  TABLE 4




           Cost-Output Elasticities, Scale Elasticities, Capacity
        Utilization Elasticities, Technical Change Elasticities, and
                         Product Mix Elasticities

                      (computed at the mean data point)




Elasticity                    Canada        United States   Japan



Cost-Output                    0.96             0.93         0.92

Scale                           1.04            1.07         1.09

Cost-Capacity Utilization      0.79             0.82         0.92

Cost-Technical Change          -0.21           —0.24        -0.35

Cost-Product Mix               -0.09            0.02        —0.02
                                                                              44

                                                                            Table   5


                                                  Unit Production Cost Increase     (1918—80    versus 1970—72)




               Unit Production
              Cost Increase (%)                                                          Sources of Increase
Country
          Canadian    U.S.
                               —         Price of    Price of   Price of     Product        Scale        Technical     Capacity                   Estimation
                                                                Materials      Mix        Economies                   Utilization   Interaction   Residual
          Dollars    Dollars      Yen     Labour     Capital                                              Change
Canada      85.6                           10.8        7.0         68.5       -0.3             -2.3        -9.3         3.4           —              0.6

                                           17.5      12.5          55.9       —0.3             —2.4       —11.1         4.2           —              0.6
U.S.       117.6      90.3

                                                       3.4         49.1       —0.2             -7.2       -30.2        -0.2            —            -2.2
Japan      116.7                  22.7     13.9




                                                                              Percentage Contributions       to   Increase


Canada      85.6                           16.6       11.0         84.4        -0.6            —3.6       —14.3         5.6           —0.0           LO

U.S.       117.6      90.3                 25.1       18.3         69.0        -0.4            —3.6       -16.3         6.7           -0.2           1.0

           116.7                  22.7     63.6       16.4        195.1        —1.0        -33.8         -128.7        -0.8            0.0          -10.8
Japan
                                                     45




                                                    Table 6

                      Unit Production Cost Increase (1978-80 versus 1970—72)
                                      (Long-Run Equilibrium)


               Unit Production
              Cost Increase (%)                                      Sources of Increase
Country
          Canadian    U.S.               Price of     Price of     Price of    Product       Scale      Technical
          Dollars    Dollars      Yen     Labour      Capital      Materials     Mix       Economies     Change
Canada      79.1                           10.0           5.4         71.9      -0.3         -2.1        -8.7

U.s.       107.7      81.7                 16.9        10.7           59.2      -0.3         -2.3       -10.6


Japan      121.9                  25.7     14.0           3.4         49.1      -0.2         -7.2       -30.2




                                                            Percentage Contributions to Increase


Canada      79.1                          16.3            9.1        93.0      -0.6         -3.5        -14.3


U.S.       107.7     81.7                 26.2        17.0           77.9      —0.5         —3.8        -16.9


Japan     121.9                25.7       57.1        14.7          174.7      -0.9        —30.3       -115.3
                                       46


                                      Table    7

              Unit Production Cost Increase (1978—80 versus 1970—72)
                              (Long—Run Equilibrium)


               Unit Production
              Cost Increase (%)                    Sources of Increase
Country
          Canadian     U.S.           Price of     Price of   Price of      TFP
          Dollars    Dollars   Yen     Labour      Capital    Materials    Growth


Canada      79.1                        10.0         5.4         71.9      -11.3

U.S.                  81.7             16.9         10.7         59.2      -13.4


Japan                          25.7     14.0         3.4        49.1       -39.8




                                        Percentage Contributions to Increase

Canada     79.1                        16.3          9.1        93.0       -18.4

U.S.                  81.7             26.2         17.0        77.9       -21.2


Japan                          25.7    57.1         14.7       174.7      —146.5
                                                     47



                                                  Table    8

                    Total    Factor Productivity Growth (1978-1980 versus 1970-1972)




          Total Factor
                                                          Sources of Growth
Country   Productivity
           Growth (%)       Product     Scale       Capacity       Technical                 Estimation
                              Mix     Economies   Utilization       Change     Interaction    Residual


Canada        7.7   =        0.3        2.3          -3.4             9.3         —             -0.6

U.S.          8.3            0.2        2.4          -4.2            11.1         —             -0.6

Japan       43.1             0.2        7.2           0.2           30.2          —             2.2




                                              Percentage Contributions to Growth

Canada        7.7            4.7       30.3         -46.9          120.0          0.0          -8.2

U.S.         8.3             2.2       28.4         -54.1          131.2          1.1          -8.1

Japan       43.1             0.5       19.3           0.5           73.5          0.0           6.2
                                       48


                                     Table 9
          Total Factor Productivity Growth (1978-80 versus 1970-72)
                           (Long-Run Equilibrium)



            Total Factor                       Sources of Growth
Country     Productivity
                           —
             Growth (%)    Product Mix      Scale Economies     Technical Change

Canada          11.3           0.3                  2.1              8.7

U.S.            13.4           0.3                  2.3              10.6

Japan           39.8           0.2                 7.2              30.2




                                     Percentage Contributions to Growth

Canada          11.3           3.2                19.0              77.8

U.S.            13.4           2.2                17.7              80.1

Japan           39.8           0.6                20.7              78.7
                                             49



                                          Table 10

                              Average Yearly Rates of Increase
                                   1970-72 versus 1978-80



                                              Rates of Increase (%)

                              Unit Production Cost                       Total   Factor Productivity
Country
                     Actual                Long-Run Equilibrium        Actual    Long-Run Equilibrium
          Canadian      U.S.             Canadian     U.S.
          Dollars      Dollars     Yen   Dollars     Dollars     Yen

Canada      8.0                             7.6                         0.9              1.4

U.S.       10.2         8.4                 9.6       7.8               1.0              1.6

Japan      10.2                    2.6     10.5                  2.9    4.6              4.3
                                 50




                              Table 11

        Exchange Rates and Capacity Utilization Rates



             Exchange Rates              Capacity Utilization Rates
Year                                                --

          U.S.            Japan            Canada        U.S.   Japan
       ($U.S./$CAN.)   (YEN/sCAN.)

1970      0.96            343              0.75          0.74    0.99
1971      0.99            344              0.84          0.93    1.00
1972      1.01            306              0.88          0.95   0.99




1978      0.88            182              0.86          0.95   1.02
1979      0.85            186              0.76          0.83   1.00
1980      0.86            193              0.62          0.58   1.02
