NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LIQUIDITY MANAGEMENT OF U.S. GLOBAL BANKS:
INTERNAL CAPITAL MARKETS IN THE GREAT RECESSION
Nicola Cetorelli
Linda S. Goldberg
Working Paper 17355
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17355

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2011

The views expressed in this paper are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect
the position of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
or the Federal Reserve System. We appreciate the thoughtful comments of Beatrice Weber, Kristin
Forbes, Jeffrey Frankel, and participants at the NBER Sloan conference at Bretton Woods New Hampshire.
Address correspondences to Linda S. Goldberg, Federal Reserve Bank of NY, Research Department,
33 Liberty St, New York, N.Y. 10045. email: Linda.Goldberg@ny.frb.org or Nicola.Cetorelli@ny.frb.org
. We thank Leslie Shen and Benjamin Mandel for excellent research assistance.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Nicola Cetorelli and Linda S. Goldberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity management of U.S. global banks: Internal capital markets in the great recession
Nicola Cetorelli and Linda S. Goldberg
NBER Working Paper No. 17355
August 2011
JEL No. F3,G15,G21
ABSTRACT
The recent crisis highlighted the importance of globally active banks in linking markets. One channel
for this linkage is through how these banks manage liquidity across their entire banking organization.
We document that funds regularly flow between parent banks and their affiliates in diverse foreign
markets. We use the Great Recession as an opportunity to identify the balance sheet shocks to parent
banks in the United States, and then explore which foreign affiliate features are associated with those
businesses being protected, for example their status as important locations in sourcing funding or as
destinations for foreign investment activity. We show that distance from the parent organization lays
a significant role in this allocation, where distance is bank-affiliate specific and depends on the ex
ante relative importance of such locations as local funding pools and in their overall foreign investment
strategies. These flows are a form of global interdependence previously unexplored in the literature
on international shock transmission.
Nicola Cetorelli
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
nicola.cetorelli@ny.frb.org
Linda S. Goldberg
Research Department, 3rd Floor
Federal Reserve Bank-New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org

I. Introduction
The Great Recession clearly focused attention on the importance and international
interconnectedness of global banks. Individual banks experienced unprecedented balance sheet
disruptions, and pursued various strategies for dealing with these shocks. Those banks with
networks of foreign affiliates had, as one potential margin of adjustment, a possibility of
reallocating liquidity across the organization. We explore this pattern of activation of “internal
capital markets” within global banks using detailed, and so far unexplored, confidential
regulatory data on all U.S. banks with foreign branches and subsidiaries. Using methodological
advances along the lines of Khwaja and Mian (2008) and bank-specific shocks to parent bank
balance sheets as in Acharya and Schnabl (2010), we show that reallocations of internal liquidity
are not evenly spread across all foreign affiliates when a parent bank is hit with a funding shock.
International transmission is, on some level, a bank-specific phenomenon influenced by its
prioritization of operations in terms of a range of “core” and “periphery” considerations.
Despite the potential importance of this form of international capital flows, there is very
little direct evidence or analysis of how such internal capital market transfers work within
banking organizations. The first direct evidence, provided in Cetorelli and Goldberg
(forthcoming), used bank-specific data and demonstrated that these flows transmit policyinduced liquidity changes across markets even during “normal” times. As a result, these banks
exhibit behaviors that can impinge on the effectiveness of monetary policy, impairing the bank
lending channel at home. Related work, Cetorelli and Goldberg (2011), uses data aggregated
over banks for a range of individual industrialized countries. During the Great Recession, bank
balance sheet shocks were transmitted to emerging markets through a range of channels: cross
border flows, lending by affiliates in the foreign markets in which they operate, and those
unaffiliated banks in foreign markets that rely on interbank market funding channels.
To some degree, such evidence provides fuel for concerns of many smaller countries that
foreign banks might restrict participation in local markets during a crisis, draining funds that
otherwise would be available for local businesses. Larger countries also expressed concerns that
their banks might go abroad and target the needs of affiliates in other markets, exasperating
conditions at home. Indeed, during the Great Recession there was an initial surge in the outflows
of funds from many foreign-owned bank branches in the United States to their affiliate
organizations outside of U.S. borders. In part to avoid sharp contractions in U.S. and
1

international business activity, various emergency lending facilities in the United States provided
extensive dollar liquidity to foreign banking organizations, also serving to stabilize activity in the
United States.1
There also were significant changes in the flows between U.S. owned banks and their
affiliates abroad. In the very early stages of the crisis, the foreign affiliates of U.S. owned banks
also became, in aggregate, net recipients of funds from their parents, as shown in Figure 1. After
the Lehman failure and during the peak of the crisis, and again later in 2009, the foreign affiliates
were conduits for inflows of funds back to their parent organizations in the United States. This
directional inflow into the United States through internal capital markets for this same group of
banks was reversed in 2010, when foreign affiliates relied much more extensively on borrowing
from their banking organizations compared with what previously had been the case. It also is
noteworthy that regional patterns of aggregate changes differed sharply from the aggregate story,
and banks also differed from each other in their allocation patterns.
None of the prior studies have explored the features of countries and banks that make the
branches or subsidiaries more likely to be buffeted by or protected from changes induced by
shocks to parent bank balance sheets. In this paper we econometrically conduct this type of
assessment, thus getting into the “decision rule” governing the operations of global banks and
their overall management of funding and investment strategies. Such analysis would significantly
advance our understanding of international banking and more broadly of the channels of
transmissions in a financially integrated world. It also provides important insights into the
normative discussion on rules and regulations affecting global banking and international capital
movements. We use bank-specific data from confidential regulatory reports filed by all U.S.
global banks that allow the complete mapping, by bank, of cross-border investments and of local
investment and funding, and the tracing of internal capital flows between parent banks and their
affiliates across the globe. To our knowledge, this data has never been explored for research

1

See blog discussion on this topic by Linda Goldberg and David Skeie “Why did US Branches of foreign banks
borrow at the discount window during the crisis? http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2011/04/why-did-usbranches-of-foreign-banks-borrow-at-the-discount-window-during-the-crisis.html On the Term Auction Facility
(TAF), see Olivier Armantier, Sandy Krieger, and Jamie McAndrews. 2008. On the central bank dollar swap
facilities, see Linda Goldberg, Craig Kennedy, and Jason Miu. 2011. One factor in the need for funding in foreign
markets during the crisis was the prior build-up of maturity and currency mismatches within and across currencies
on the balance sheets of banks (BIS CGFS March 2010).

2

purposes.2 Given the bank-specific balance sheet shocks at the onset of the Great Recession and
the claim that their impact is related to asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) exposure, we
examine which features of parent banks and foreign affiliates were associated with greater
adjustments in internal flows within the global banking organizations. We demonstrate that bank
business models and country and institutional features play clear roles in international
transmission and contagion through internal capital markets of banks. Some foreign markets are,
for particular parent banks, “core investment markets” that remain as destinations for funding.
Other foreign locations serve as “core funding markets” that would send even larger net flows to
parent banks in times of parent balance sheet disturbances. In general, a range of policy and
institutional “distance” measures also influence the magnitudes of these flows. This channel is
shown to be economically important to both the parent banks and the foreign markets in which
their affiliates are located.
This research directly relates to three rich literatures. First, the literature on international
transmission and contagion during crisis events, as in Forbes and Rigobon (2002) and Edwards
(2002), concentrates on refining the concept of contagion, or, as in Forbes and Chinn (2004),
addresses whether this arises through international trade linkages, exposure to common
competitors in trade, reliance on the international interbank market, or through foreign direct
investment. Using data on stock and bond market returns, this work found that from the late
1990s bilateral bank lending between countries became a sometimes significant determinant of
international linkages, although this channel was still dominated by direct trade linkages.3 For
the recent crisis, (Acharya and Schnabl 2010) show that the use of asset-backed commercial
paper (ABCP) conduits by banks led the crisis transmission around the globe.
Second, we deepen an understanding of the role of banks in international transmission,
building on insights from early studies by Peek and Rosengren (1997, 2000) and van Rijckeghem
and Weder (2003). In line with some of these papers, theoretical work by Devereux and Yetman
(2010) argues that the recent crisis differs from earlier contagion episodes in that transmission
recently was through the balance sheet constraints on global banks. De Haas and Lleyveld
(2010), Popov and Udell (2010), Puri, Rocholl, and Steffen (2010), Cetorelli and Goldberg
2

Goldberg (2002) and Cetorelli and Goldberg (2006) use this data to describe bank international exposures and
related risks.
3
A related literature addresses the sources of business cycle co-movement. Imbs (2004) finds stronger business
cycle linkages between countries with larger financial ties. Prasad et al. (2007) surveys an extensive literature that
explores the role of global financial linkages in economic volatility.

3

(2011) and Buch, Koch, and Kotter (2011) demonstrate that international retail and syndicated
lending reflected stresses on parent banks during the global financial crisis.
Third, we add to an evolving literature on internal capital markets. Conceptually, internal
capital market flows are viewed as leading to a more efficient allocation of resources (see Stein
(1997), Gertner, Scharfstein, and Stein (1994), and Stein (2002)), or as a managerial tool to
mediate agency frictions within a firm, across separate divisions, (e.g., Rajan, Servaes, and
Zingales (2000), Scharfstein and Stein (2000)).4 Cetorelli and Goldberg (forthcoming) provided
the first direct evidence in the context of banks and monetary policy transmission across
countries. That work complements other studies that provided indirect tests of internal capital
markets in domestic or global banking organizations, such as de Haas and Lleyveld (2010),
Cetorelli and Goldberg (2011).5
Overall, the present paper provides direct evidence of patterns of liquidity management in
global banking organizations. In particular, we present an econometric evaluation of the features
of parent banks and overseas affiliates that influence the allocation of organizational liquidity.
The results, that there are features that define “core” and “periphery” business functions, are
clearly important for understanding potentials for international contagion through banks. We
conclude that the insights are valuable for properly constructing liquidity and lender-of-lastresort responses by official agencies in the event of market disruption.

II. U.S. banks and their foreign affiliates
Banks can engage in international activities in many ways. Historically, banks from
developed economies were involved in cross-border lending to sovereign borrowers, and later to
private bank and non-bank counterparties. Over time, a broader array of financial services also
was offered to overseas clientele. In some cases, the parent bank would set up a branch office in a
4

Another relevant literature argues that countries that are more remote suffer from more international financial
volatility, as in Rose and Spiegel (2009).
5
That banks – as other business organizations – have active internal capital markets is not new, and evidence has
been reported, among others and large for banks in the United States, in Houston, James and Marcus (1997),
Campello (2002), Ashcraft (2006, 2008), and Ashcraft and Campello (2007). Recent contributions are by Schnabl
2009 and Khwaja and Mian 2008. This focus on internal capital markets of global banks is complementary to
analysis of the entry decisions of foreign banks into specific destination markets (Claessens and van Horen 2008;
Cerutti, Dell'Ariccia, and Martinez Peria 2007; Buch 2005). Much of that literature considers linkages between
industrialized with emerging markets with most emphasis on lending activity. Our treatment subsumes these
markets, but also considers the results of entry into markets where affiliates may draw funding, such as is the case in
many industrialized countries.

4

particular location in order to better serve those markets and interact with customers.
Alternatively, banks could set up foreign subsidiaries, which are separate legal entities. Many
factors influence this choice, including taxes, regulatory restrictions on entry and branching,
preferences for retail operations, and economic and political risks.6 Substantively, this choice has
implications for the location of banking regulation, with home country supervisors having
primary responsibility for bank branches and host country supervisors having responsibility for
subsidiaries. The choice also matters for the degree to which liquidity can flow unimpeded within
the banking organization. To a first approximation, intra-bank transactions are restricted to a
small share of the balance sheet for subsidiaries, but are closer to unrestricted between parent
banks and their overseas branches.7
From the perspective of the United States, the total number of globally active banks has
declined considerably over time, from nearly 200 in the late 1980s to closer to 75 in the early
2000s.8 This trend broadly reflected the widely documented pattern of industry consolidation that
occurred over the same time period. These banks can be exclusively engaged in cross-border
transactions, or could have a combination of activities that includes having local affiliates in
foreign markets. For our analysis, we begin with the full sample of internationally active United
States banks, which are those institutions that file the Federal Financial Institutions Examinations
Council (FFIEC) Country Exposure Report (FFIEC 009).9 In this quarterly filing, each bank
itemizes their claims, assets, and liabilities by foreign country. The FFIEC 009 report is strictly
confidential and therefore micro details cannot be made public. However, with its information, by
bank and by foreign country, on intra-organization borrowing and lending, it is precisely the type
of data needed to further our understanding of liquidity management strategies of globally active
banks. To the best of our knowledge this dataset has never been used before for such research
purposes.
6

Cerutti, Dell’Ariccia, and Martinez Peria (2007) provided econometric analysis of such choices for entry into Latin
America and Eastern Europe. From the vantage point of countries choosing an optimal structure of foreign entry in
their own markets, Fiechter et al. (2011) argues that there is no one-size-fits-all conclusion.
7
Within the United States, regulatory restrictions are provided in Sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act.
8
Goldberg (2006) and Cetorelli and Goldberg (2006) provide a broader description of this evolution over the last 20
years.
9
This report must be filed by every U.S. chartered, insured, commercial bank in the United States, including the
District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and US territories and possessions, or it’s holding company, provided that the
bank (or holding company) has, on a fully consolidated bank basis, total outstanding claims on residents of foreign
countries exceeding $30 million in aggregate. The reporters can be U.S. owned banks or foreign bank subsidiaries in
the United States.

5

Since our analytical focus is on liquidity management across the global internal capital
markets and their role in international transmission of shocks, we apply screens to the full dataset
to restrict the sample of banks to those that actually have foreign affiliates. Our screens for this
purpose are, by bank and by foreign location, for the existence of either positive “local liabilities”
in foreign countries or affiliate support by the parent.10 Starting with 2006Q1 and continuing
through 2010Q1, this set of screens reduces the number of banks in our sample to more than 50
over the full interval, although closer to 42 at any single date (Table 1). As the table shows, this
group of banks is split between U.S.-owned and those with foreign parent organizations.
Given this unique data source, we are able to consider the details of this global presence
by banks. The data show that many of these banks maintain overseas affiliate(s) in offshore
financial centers.11 Also, many foreign-owned banks have an affiliate in their parent country. In
every quarter, at least 30 banks have affiliates in at least two foreign countries.12 Across all
banks, the foreign affiliates are broadly dispersed around the globe and span a total of 121
countries.
Visualizations of the geographic distribution of the foreign affiliates of U.S. banks13 are
provided in Figures 1 and 2. Figure 2 shows counts of how many U.S. banks had affiliates in
any foreign country at 2007Q2 (the raw data is in Appendix Table 1). Figure 3 shows the
relative dollar value of total U.S. bank positions in these countries, with the value capturing the
sum of the total of local liabilities (in both local and foreign currency) and net inflows from the
parent organization (without adjustment if there are net outflows).14 A large number of U.S.
banks have affiliates in Canada, Hong Kong, Ireland, Taiwan, and the United Kingdom, in
addition to the Cayman Islands. However, a large number of countries, fully half of the sample,
10

The existence of local lending in a country is a sufficient condition for a foreign affiliate, but is not used as a
screen since not all affiliate offices engage in lending activity. We include the country-affiliate pair if local
liabilities, such as derived from accepting local deposits, or net due flows are observed in any of the observations
periods of all sample.
11
According to the International Monetary Fund, there are 46 countries that meet the definition of offshore financial
center. See Zerome (2007) for a discussion of alternative approaches to identifying OFCs.
12
Note: for the purpose of this table and the econometric analysis which follows, we exclude the large institutions
that became banks or had a change in entity status late in 2008Q4 and in 2009Q1/Q2. Examples of such excluded
banks are Goldman, Morgan, GMAC, CIT, and American Express.
13
By “U.S. banks” we are referring to all legal entities in the United States as indicated in Table 1, regardless of
whether these are U.S. owned or foreign owned.
14
We do not address the issue of determinants of bank entry in specific foreign markets. As shown by Claessens
and Van Horen (2008), foreign entry tends to be associated with common language, similar legal systems and
banking regulations, and geographic proximity. These are measures of physical and institutional distance that are
sometimes related to information costs.

6

have affiliates of only two or three U.S. banks operating in the local markets. There is a wide
variance in the total value of the U.S. bank liabilities across all of these countries. The median
country in our sample had about $5 billion in U.S. bank liabilities, while the largest countries had
over $100 billion, and liabilities in the United Kingdom were even an order of magnitude larger.
What are some of the characteristics of these global banks? Drawing on a broader set of
regulatory reports filed by individual banks or bank holding companies, e.g. the Federal
Financial Institutions Examinations Council (FFIEC) 031 “Call Report” and the Y9-C,15 we
collect parent bank information, including information pertaining to their size (total assets),
solvency and liquidity, and foreign lending. Foreign lending is conducted through cross-border
flows and through local claims, which are extended by a bank’s affiliated offices outside its
borders. The upper panel of Table 2 presents summary statistics for the U.S. banks, with the
average 2006Q1-2007Q2 data taken as a pre-crisis reference point, and comparable statistics for
2009Q2 and 2010Q2 to reflect post-crisis evolution.
The median global bank starts out as moderately sized, at over $50 billion in assets.
However, the size distribution is very broad across all banks. The mean asset size is about $200
billion, reflecting the presence of some very large banks in the sample. Across all the banks,
liquid asset shares are typically under 3 percent of total assets, although some banks had liquidity
over 5 percent prior to the onset of the Great Recession. Bank equity or solvency ratios were
generally close to 9 to 10 percent of bank total assets. For the banks in our sample, foreign
“external” lending typically ranges from 2.5 to 5 percent of total bank assets. International intrabank flows are captured by reporting of “total net due from,” which is total internal lending (if
positive) or borrowing (if negative) of the bank with its full spectrum of their foreign affiliates. A
gross metric16 indicates that the pre-crisis internal capital market balances were typically in the
range of 2 to 8 percent of assets. Some parent banks were net lenders to their foreign affiliates,
while others were net borrowers.
15

Through the FFIEC 031 report, we used the following variables: total assets (RCFD2170), total loans
(RCFD2122), total foreign loans (RCFN2122), equity (RCFD3210), and liquid assets constructed as the sum of
securities, trading assets, and (RCFD1754+RCFD3545+RCFD1350). From the FFIEC 009, we have for the bank
(or holding company), on a fully consolidated bank basis, the following variables: total cross border claims
constructed as the sum of cross border claims by banks, public, and other (C915+C916+C917), total foreign office
claims on local residents in non-local and local currency constructed as the sum of foreign office claims by banks,
public, and other, and foreign office claims in local currency (C918+C919+C920+C922), net due to (or due from)
own related offices in other countries (8595), and foreign office liabilities constructed as the sum of foreign office
liabilities in non-local currency and in local currency (C938+C939).
16
The absolute value of net due in relation to total bank assets.

7

An even starker illustration of the absolute scale of internal capital flows of these banks is
provide in Figure 3, which shows gross intra-bank flows17 on the same axes as gross interbank
flows. These flows are of a similar order of magnitude. Similar observation on scale can be
made on the basis of Treasury International Capital System data, which show that over half of
total U.S. bank claims and liabilities internationally are vis-à-vis their own affiliates.18
As the crisis progressed and then abated, some of the balance sheet characteristics of
these banks evolved substantially. The contraction in the foreign loan share is noteworthy, an
observation consistent with a more inward focus on lending.19 Also, the use of internal capital
markets by banks changed. Some banks reduced reliance on this channel, while others expanded
intra-bank flows. Figure 4 shows the totals across banks on net related borrowing over the full
time frame of the crisis.
The lower panel of Table 2 provides details for the foreign affiliates of the U.S. reporting
banks, with each “affiliate” observation really an amalgam of all affiliates of a given bank within
a given foreign country. The information presented emphasizes dimensions along which each
affiliate market might be assessed as “core” or “periphery” from the vantage point of the parent
organization. Two types of information are highlighted: the financing of the affiliates, and their
relative importance in the total foreign lending of the parent. These respectively are viewed as
indicative of the degree to which a specific affiliate market, from the vantage point of a parent
bank, is a core or periphery location from the vantage point of sourcing “funding” or directing
resources for “investment” or lending activity.20 In terms of funding, we are interested in whether
local deposits from a particular affiliate are large relative to the range of deposits accepted
internationally. For investment strategy, we examine alternative variables include lending defined
as a) that exclusively done by the affiliates, b) the sum of cross border and local lending to a
particular foreign market, or c) the long maturity share for a particular economy. We posit that the
17

Absolute values of net due to and net due from US banks with all affiliates as reported in FFIEC009
Thanks to Gian Maria Milesi Ferretti for the relevant computations based on TIC bank claims and liabilities.
These data are not exactly comparable to our underlying data. The bank flows that are captured are vis-à-vis all
affiliates, not purely bank affiliates in foreign markets.
19
Rose and Wieladek (2011) argue that inward reorientation by British banks amounted to financial protectionism.
20
The data used for this analysis is collected by bank and by affiliate country, capturing, for each country in which
the reporter has an office or offices, the net liabilities (or claims) of that office or those offices on all other offices of
the respondent that are located in other countries. If the offices in a given country taken together have a net “due to”
position with all related offices in all other countries combined, a positive figure should be reported and indicates
that the affiliate is borrowing from the rest of the banking organization; a net “due from” position should be
indicated by a negative sign and indicates that the affiliate is lending to the rest of the banking organization.
http://www.ffiec.gov/PDF/FFIEC_forms/FFIEC009_201103_i.pdf Schedule 1.a memorandum item reporting.
18

8

larger the affiliate share in the total funding and lending activity of a given bank, the greater the
chance that this is a protected or core affiliate. The commitment may be even more secure if a
larger share of loans is of longer maturity. Finally, we allow for the possibility that significant
differences in claims flows may arise when claims are measured on an immediate counterparty
basis versus adjusted for outward risk in the event there is an external guarantor of some claims.
The lower panel of Table 2 shows that there are approximately 550 bank-affiliate market
observations at any point in our sample.21 There is a bi-modal distribution of affiliates per bank.
Some banks have affiliates only in one or two foreign countries; many other U.S. global banks
have affiliates in over twenty countries, with some in excess of 50 countries. The funding models
of banks also appear bi-modal. For some bank affiliates about 75 percent of financing is raised
locally. In others, almost no local funding is collected. There also is a broad distribution of
importance across affiliate markets to the overall international lending activity of each parent
bank. Indeed, one interesting observation is that about 40 percent of bank-affiliate locations had
no local lending. Funds collected domestically apparently are used for other purposes or flow to
counterparties outside of the local markets. An interesting implication is that, while internal
capital market flows may spillover to local market lending by some bank affiliates, this need not
be the case. Such observations provide a useful nuance to the literature on bank lending channel
effects from internal capital market transfers. The type of evidence we present here shows that
such transmission will likely not occur uniformly from all foreign banks within specific affiliate
locations.22

III. Econometric Analysis of Transmission through Internal Capital Markets
We now turn to the internal capital market flows across bank affiliates in response to the
specific shocks hitting parent banks in the recent crisis. Our dependent variable will be the
change in internal capital market borrowing (or lending) of an affiliate in a foreign location with
21

The units of observation are allocations across by-country affiliates by individual banks, instead of at the level of
individual foreign branches or subsidiaries which we do not directly observe.
22
Looking at a range of home countries and a range of host markets, Cetorelli and Goldberg (2011) provided
indirect evidence that shocks to parent banks were transmitted to emerging markets through cross-border lending
and that there was a smaller contraction in lending done directly by the affiliates. Kamil and Rai (2010) confirm this
pattern for Latin American countries, and also show that the local lending activities by the foreign banks – especially
when heavily funded by local deposits instead of parent bank’s resources or wholesale markets – reduced the
amount of contagion from the international liquidity squeeze. Claessens, Dell’Ariccia, Igan and Laeven (2010)
provide cross-country evidence on the spreading of the crisis into macroeconomic and financial performance
metrics, also finding that bank dependency on wholesale funding markets played a significant role in amplification.

9

the rest of the parent banking organization. The unit of observation is dimensioned by bank,
country, and time. The econometric methodology recognizes that these flows could be influenced
by features of countries in which affiliates are established, features of parent banks, and features
that are specific to affiliate locations by bank.
Among country characteristics, we consider the importance of distance from the U.S.
parent – in geography, institutions and policy, the degree of capital account openness of each
location, the prevalent exchange rate regime, and affiliate market status as an offshore financial
center.23 Among parent bank characteristics, we focus on size, solvency, liquidity, and
investment diversification among foreign locations. Our initial OLS specifications include the
country and bank-level characteristics, thereby adding a first extra dimension of insights to the
international transmission literature.
Yet, establishing the causes of transfers, whether due to a shock to the parent bank’s
balance sheet or a shock to the foreign market in which the affiliate resides, requires separating
potential contamination of each by concomitant changes in the other. This identification issue is
long recognized in the literature on international contagion as difficult to address, as summarized
by Rose and Spiegel (2010) and earlier addressed by Forbes and Rigobon (2002).
The multiple dimensionality of the dataset allows us to raise the bar in handling this
problem. We adopt a difference-in-difference identification strategy similar to that employed in
Khwaja and Mian (2008) and Cetorelli and Goldberg (2011). This approach relies on two points:
1) the initial liquidity shock is not felt homogeneously across the individual parent banks that
have foreign affiliates, and 2) more than one parent bank has affiliates in a particular foreign
location. On the first point, and following Acharya, Schnabl and Suarez (2009), Acharya and
Schnabl (2010) and Kacperczyk and Schnabl (2010), we posit that the initial shock that hit banks
in the United States was proportional to their ex ante reliance on ABCP conduits. Later, we
assume that some of this balance sheet pressure was reversed by the range of liquidity facilities
introduced after the Lehman bankruptcy. On the second point, we obtain identification by
observing the differential response by the affiliates of separate parent banks in a given country,
thus allowing us to control for common factors affecting market conditions in a particular foreign
23

While the legal form of the affiliate -- as a branch or a subsidiary-- could matter for effective activation of the
internal capital market channel, data do not identify the mix of branches or subsidiaries in any affiliate location.
Moreover, the decision on branch or subsidiary form is likely determined by similar sets of country characteristics
included as controls in our regressions.

10

location. By applying this difference-in-difference approach we isolate the role of bank-specific
business models versus affiliate market effects in international transmission through internal
capital markets. We provide a range of OLS results and also conduct fixed effects specifications,
along with robustness checks.
We use this approach to explore our two key conjectures that transmission through
internal capital markets depends on how each bank classifies each affiliate location as “core”
versus “periphery” according to: 1) affiliate funding strategies and, 2) importance as an
“investment” market in the parent bank’s “portfolio”. On the first point, regarding finding
strategies, (parent) banks differ from one another in their reliance on local liabilities to fund local
investments. Moreover, each bank individually follows heterogeneous strategies in local funding
reliance across their own foreign affiliate locations.24 The econometric analysis exploits both
these inter- and intra-bank heterogeneities in funding strategies, and we conjecture that in the
event of a shock to the parent, internal funds are more likely to be drawn from affiliate locations
that are more reliant on local funding pools. On the second point, we exploit the fact that banks
differ in their global investment strategies as reflected by the amounts of lending extended in
each foreign location. Heterogeneity across banks along this second dimension captures, among
other things, differential strategies of business expansion and market penetration. Heterogeneity
within banks instead captures the relative importance for each bank of its investments in a
particular market. We conjecture that, in response to a shock to the parent, funds are drawn more
intensely from “distant” or “periphery” investment locations – those representing a smaller share
of total foreign claims - than from “core” locations.
Overall, by focusing on these two specific dimensions of global banks’ business model,
we go beyond the observation of internal capital markets in aggregate, between parent and its
foreign affiliates as a whole, and we are able instead to track the direction and the intensity of
internal borrowing and lending in and out of each global bank’s own entire set of foreign
locations. Thus, we provide direct evidence on a specific channel of international transmission
by banks, nuanced by the international expansion and funding strategies of those same banks.
Through this evidence we add to the understanding of contagion and transmission that have been
explored in more “macroeconomic” studies.

24

In the context of this paper, local always refers to the location of the foreign affiliates of a U.S. parent bank.
Hence, local is synonym with foreign country.

11

III.1 The econometric methodology
The basic supply schedule for bank i internal lending with its’ affiliates in country j at
time t, Lij , is expressed in terms of (log) changes from before to after the shock as

1

Lij  0  1  Di   j   ij

is a constant term, Δ

is the indicator of the funding shock sustained by parent bank i, and

is an unobservable term capturing simultaneous market shocks to affiliates of all banks in located
in country j. The term ∆

captures the change in internal lending from before to after the event,

and banks that were hit more by an adverse liquidity shock should be those that rely more on
changes in internal lending with affiliates.
In this particular estimating framework, as shown by Khwaja and Mian (2008), basic
OLS could generate biased estimates of the internal capital market supply effect

if there is a

correlation of supply with any simultaneous liquidity demand shocks embedded in the
unobservable term

. Country fixed effects on model specification (1) can absorb any liquidity

demand driven contamination thus resolving the bias problem affecting the OLS estimation. The
resulting model specification is

 2
with

Lij   1  Di   j  FE j   ij
now unbiased and

being a vector of country fixed effect coefficients. In essence, this

alternative model specification achieves identification by comparing the impact on internal
lending of separate banks i to their own affiliates in the same country j. Any common shock to
funding demand factors in country j would be absorbed by its own country indicator variable,
thus leaving the coefficient

as an unbiased estimator of changes affecting the net supply of

funding of each parent.
This basic methodology can be refined in a number of directions. As said earlier, our
dataset allows us to push further the identification strategy, having for the first time an in-depth
look at from where exactly global banks may be may be drawing funds and to which location
they may be directing funds in times of positive or negative shocks. As noted, we are particularly
interested in testing whether these flows are related to the importance of local funding pools and

12

“investment” locations, with potential different consequences for respective core and periphery
locations for each global bank.
While the fixed effects specification improves on OLS by facilitating identification of
internal capital supply versus demand, it may be that both country and parent bank
characteristics can be important determinants of specific internal funding dynamics. We expand
on the basic methodology by allowing the parameter 1 to incorporate i and j features that may
contribute to international transmission. Hence, we conduct the empirical exercise using the
broader model specification

 3

Lij   0  i   j  1  Di   ij

where 1 to broadly defined as

 4

1  0  i X i   j X j  ij X ij ,

and vectors of characteristics of parent banks ( X i ), affiliate countries ( X j ), and affiliate bank
pairs ( X ij ) can be introduced.

III.2. Identifying the funding shock timing and incidence
As it has been widely described, the initial stage of the financial crisis materialized in the
second half of 2007 in the form of a broad shortage of U.S. dollar funding. Banks and other
financial institutions, both in the U.S. and abroad, had been accumulating substantial dollar
denominated assets, mainly long-term securities derived from real estate activity and had funded
such positions mainly through short-term dollar liabilities. The asset-backed commercial paper
(ABCP) market had been a crucial component in such dollar funding activities.25 Commercial
paper had grown to be the largest instrument in total U.S. short-term funding, with the ABCP
component representing the lion share. While ABCP is issued by entities (conduits) distinct from
the financial institutions in our sample, those entities can operate with the direct backing of such
institutions, through the existence of liquidity or credit enhancements. Large commercial banks,
both U.S. and foreign (mainly European) were among the largest providers of such
enhancements.
25

Details are provided in Acharya and Schnabl (2010), Acharya, Schnabl and Suarez (2009), and Kacperczyk and
Schnabl (2010).

13

Many ABCP entities were unable to continue issuing new paper in the second half of
2007, once investors became concerned about the overall quality of the assets backing
commercial paper issuance. As argued in Acharya, Schnabl and Suarez (2009), off-balance sheet
commitments by banks resulted in their massive absorptions of the assets of the conduits they
sponsored. Consequently, the ex-ante large off-balance sheet exposures to the ABCP market
materialized as a severe funding shock on many banks’ balance sheet, and many of these banks
experienced larger drops in stock prices in subsequent months. We use their data as a measure of
individual banks’ pre-crisis exposure to ABCP (January 2007).26 This ex-ante indicator is used in
our basic model specification to proxy the degree of parent bank balance sheet disruption Di .
We examine two “shock” dates. For the purpose of our analysis, we take the pre-crisis
period as beginning in 2006Q1 and continuing to 2007Q2. Indeed, short-term dollar funding
markets exhibited no sign of turmoil throughout the end of July and early August as shown in
Figure 4. We then define the period 2007Q3 to 2007Q4 as a “first shock” period, as the dollar
funding pressure resulting from the events described above became more acute. We conjecture
that the global banks that had been more highly exposed in the ABCP market would face larger
funding imbalances. These same banks would therefore have larger needs to activate internal
borrowing and lending with their foreign affiliates. Thus, for each bank-affiliate observation we
construct the initial Lij as the pre-crisis average borrowing of affiliates in each foreign location
from the rest of the banking organization (over the 2006Q1-2007Q2 period) and the average over
2007Q3 and 2007Q4.
We end the first shock period at 2007Q4 to coincide with the subsequent Federal Reserve
institution of the Term Auction Facility in late December 2007, which provided emergency
funding to banking institutions. This intervention was unprecedented and large in size. Hence,
we define the period 2008Q1 through 2008Q2 as a “second shock” period. We treat this policy
intervention event as a positive liquidity shock on parent banks’ balance sheet. We then look for
any subsequent change in behavior by the same sets of banks, as differentiated according to their

26

We thank Viral Acharya and Philipp Schnabl for sharing this data. The conduit group comes from Moody’s
Investor Service reports. Acharya and Schnabl match conduits to sponsoring organizations and then match the
sponsor to the consolidated financial company. We match these consolidated financial companies to the U.S filers
of regulatory report FFIEC 009. If there are U.S. filers without Moody’s rated conduits, we treat the ABCP value as
zero. For each filer, the conduit value is scaled relative to 2007Q2 bank equity.

14

same pre-crisis ABCP exposure. The second  for estimation defines the “pre” period as
2007Q3-2007Q4 and compares this interval with data averages over the first half of 2008.27
We purposefully end our empirical exercise before the events associated with the failure
of Lehman in September 2008. First, our identification strategy relies upon banks’ pre-crisis
exposure to the ABCP market. Observing behavior based on balance sheet characteristics more
than twelve months apart would probably introduce noise that would be hard to control. Second,
the Lehman event effectively marks a separate stage of the crisis, both in magnitude and
pervasive repercussions across the globe, that would probably require a separate study altogether.
The earlier events clearly provide cleaner econometric opportunities to explore the liquidity
management of global banks and their roles in international transmission, which are the central
subjects of this study.

III.3 Regression variables
The dependent variable in the regressions is the change in the borrowing by the foreign
affiliates of bank i in location j from the rest of the banking organization (change in “net due”)
over the time periods indicated above. A positive value reflects either an increase in borrowing
by those affiliates or a reduction in affiliate lending to the rest of the banking organization. The
bank-specific ex ante exposure to dollar funding shocks is assumed proportional to Exposurei ,
the bank’s ratio of ABCP to its equity in early 2007.
There are a set of country specific and parent bank specific variables that enter the
specifications. We expect that affiliates in countries more distant from the United States along a
range of dimensions will tend to have a larger response of internal capital markets in the event of
a shock to the parent organization. For this purpose, distance might reduce the commitment of

27

The facilities fall under the heading of liquidity facilities versus lending facilities. The more traditional provision
of short-term liquidity to banks and other depository institutions occurred through the traditional discount window,
the Term Auction Facility and through the bilateral currency swap agreements approved and in some cases later
expanded with 14 foreign central banks. The Federal Reserve’s Section 12(3) Lending Families were introduced in
two waves, First, in March 2008 the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) and Primary Dealer Credit Facility
(PDCF) were introduced. In the Period from September through November 2009, the Asset-Backed Commercial
Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (AMLF), Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF), Money
Market Fund Liquidity Facility (MMIFF), and Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) were
introduced. See “The Federal Reserve’s Section 13(3) Lending Facilities to Support Overall Market Liquidity:
Function, Status, and Risk Management, Office of Inspector General (November 2010).
http://www.federalreserve.gov/oig/files/FRS_Lending_Facilities_Report_final-proof_Nov16_10.pdf.

15

the parent organization to a stable net supply of funds to the affiliate and leads to larger changes
in net due flows. Our metrics for distance are:


Physical distance ( Ldistnyc j ). (Log) physical distance is the great circle distance of the
affiliate country from New York City, from Rose and Spiegel (2009).28



Institutional Distance ( Polity j ). Under the assumption that institutional comparisons with
the United States provide a metric of effective distance, we use a scalar ratings variable
that ranges from strongly democratic (+10) to strongly autocratic (-10).29



Monetary policy distance ( Exrate j ). For monetary policy distance, we consider whether
the country has a de facto exchange rate peg with the U.S. dollar. If there is no peg to the
dollar, the monetary policy distance is assumed larger. We start with the coarse metrics in
Ilzetski, Reinhart and Rogoff (2009, 2011), in which a country with a de facto peg or
crawling peg has a rating 1 or 2, plus we include whether the central currency of the peg
as the U.S. dollar. For countries missing from that classification, we take observed recent
exchange rate movements for comparable guidance. Exrate j =1 if a de facto dollar peg or
crawl, 0 otherwise.



Financial frictions ( KAopen j ). Bank internal capital market flows may be managed
differently for countries with stricter capital controls in place. To capture the extent of
this financial friction we use the Chinn and Ito (2008) capital control measure.30



Offshore financial center status ( OFC j ). We use the International Monetary Fund
definition of offshore financial centers which encompasses locations that primarily orient
business toward non-residents, have favorable regulatory environments andlow or zero
taxation schemes, are disproportion in size of financial sector and domestic financing
needs, and primarily deals in non-local currencies and entrepot business (Zerome 2007,
Table 1).

28

http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/arose/MIMIC2.pdf
Produced by the Center for Systemic Peace, Polity IV Project. The data source and related discussion of
construction are available at: http://www.systemicpeace.org/inscr/inscr.htm and
http://www.systemicpeace.org/inscr/p4manualv2009.pdf
30
For some offshore financial centers with missing Chinn-Ito observations, and after discussions we Chinn and Ito,
we assign high values of openness to these countries.
29

16

Parent bank characteristics also can influence the use of internal capital markets in
response to a balance sheet shock. Activation of this channel given an adverse shock can
potentially be larger for parent banks that ex ante have weaker liquidity positions, lower
solvency values, less focus on foreign markets in lending, more focus on using foreign affiliates
as funding sources, and more geographically diversified foreign affiliates. All parent bank
metrics are constructed using data as of 2007Q2, which we take as the end of the pre-crisis
period. These variables are defined as:


Size ( Totalassetsi ). Total parent assets.



Solvency ( Solvi ). Constructed as the ratio of bank equity to total assets.



Parent bank liquidity ( Liquidityi ). Liquidity is measured as the sum of bank liquid assets
relative to its total assets.



External diversification ( Herfi ). The parent bank’s diversification of foreign affiliates
around the globe is constructed as a Herfindahl index over total liabilities of affiliates
across all countries in which such liabilities exist.



Foreign owner ( Fowneri ). We distinguish between immediate owners from the United
States or a foreign country using a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if foreign. It
would be expected that these are subsidiaries in the United States (branches are measured
through alternative reporting) that have a primary focus on U.S. operations.

Finally, we introduce the variables that capture heterogeneity intra-bank in addition to
inter-bank. As bank-country specific measures, we construct:


Localfinanceij . This variable is the local liability share in total local funding, and is

intended to capture affiliate reliance on local deposits and other funding sources.


Loanshareij . This variable captures the importance of each particular affiliate market to

the total foreign lending of a parent bank. It is constructed as the ratio of total claims of
bank i in location j to total claims over all locations.
In further refinements, we also construct two additional investment variables:


Shortmaturityij . This variable captures the ratio of maturities of claims less than one year

relative to total claims. This is taken as one proxy for bank “commitment” to a market,
17

with the possibility that mostly short maturity claims is indicative of a bank that is less
invested in an affiliate market for the long haul.


Outriskij . Exploiting information contained in the regulatory data, we construct a variable

capturing the fraction of total claims in a given location that are in fact guaranteed by
entities in other foreign locations. For instance, a bank may finance a firm in a certain
location, but this firm is a foreign subsidiary backed by the parent somewhere else, or it is
a firm that is able to obtain a guarantee provided by a bank in another country. Either
way, differentiating between claims in a given location that are truly local in nature as
opposed to those that may be more “international”, may also give information regarding
the bank’s own commitment to that local market.

In all regression specifications, residuals are clustered by parent bank identity. Some
regressions contain various groupings of explanatory variables or fixed effects. The relative
importance of groups of variables are tested and interpreted.31

III.4 Estimation Results
The econometric results are provided in Tables 3 through 10. Before turning to these
results, it is useful to briefly place our methodology in the context of the prior literature. In
general, studies of international transmission or country have a heavy emphasis on the countrylevel features that inform the channels and magnitudes of spillovers. Our approach includes
some such variables X j but these had very little explanatory power when introduced as freestanding determinants of changes in bank internal capital markets with affiliates. Building on the
literature by adding groups of variables, we find there is some limited gain in explanatory power
achieved when bank specific shocks are introduced in the OLS regressions and also interacted
with the country variables. There was no incremental gain in the explanatory power of the
regression by just adding in characteristics of parent banks X i . Throughout, the most significant

31

If a latter period including a preponderance of government supports to individual banks were to be examined,
other potential variables for inclusion could be the magnitude of the liquidity crunch and/or economic slowdown in
each counterpart country and the amount of government support provided for the banking system during the crisis.

18

power in the regressions arose from specifications that also contain the affiliate bank features

X ij that are the focus of our study (appendix Table 3). These bank variables are key for
identifying the internal credit market supply consequences of a shock to parent banks.32
Tables 3 through 6 contain specifications associated with Shock1, in which the allocation
of borrowing of bank affiliates in the pre-crisis period is compared with borrowing in the second
half of 2007. The first two tables (3 and 4) contain the full cohort of reporting banks, regardless
of whether these banks are U.S. owned or foreign owned. The next two tables (5 and 6) instead
include only the U.S. owned reporting banks. Econometric results for the Shock2 period are
provided in Tables 7 through 10, in which we compare the affiliate bank borrowing average
quarterly patterns of the second half of 2007 with their average quarterly patterns in the first half
of 2008. Below, we discuss the interpretation of the first set of tables and respective columns
and then summarize findings from the remaining tables.
Beginning with Table 3 column (1), this most basic OLS regression specification
considers whether the change in lending of banks affiliated with a parent with some degree of
ABCP exposure was proportionate to that exposure after the dollar funding shock hit markets in
the second half of 2007. The constant term is negative, suggesting that, on average, affiliates
reduced net borrowing from the parent organization or increased net lending to the parent
organization. The coefficient on Exposure suggests that this effect was smaller if banks had
higher ex ante ABCP exposure.

Recognizing that the OLS results may be biased due to

correlated shocks within affiliate markets, column (2) provides the ABCP exposure coefficient
under a regression specification that includes country fixed effects. The difference in this
coefficient across specifications indicates that bias from the OLS specifications may be prevalent
but is not large. We next consider whether the pattern of significance is instead better explained
by introducing a range of variables capturing features of each bank in their respective affiliate
markets. Columns (3) and (4) introduce the share of local liabilities in total liabilities by affiliate
bank and the importance of that affiliate market in the total foreign lending of each parent bank.
Column (4) provides the unbiased coefficients from specifications including affiliate market
fixed effects. Note that the sample size is smaller in the fixed effect regressions. This occurs
32

It is also the case that our identification strategy is geared toward exploiting fully the multi-dimensionality of the
dataset. While the more aggregate country- or bank-specific variables are also more exposed to the issues of misidentification mentioned earlier, the dimensionality is possibly an important reason for their relatively small
contribution to explaining the internal funding dynamics subject of our study.

19

because the controls require us to drop any affiliate country in which there is only one U.S.
parent bank in operation.
The key results of this table are robust across specifications. In response to the initial
funding shock that hit parent banks, 1) on average all affiliates of U.S. banks reduced borrowing
from the parent organization or increased lending to the parent organization; 2) the internal
capital market response had differentiation across banks related to the size of the parent balance
sheet shock; 3) more net outflows of funds came from those affiliates that relied more on locally
raised liabilities (“core” funding markets); and 4) net outflows from affiliates were mitigated or
even reversed for the affiliate markets that were larger in the overall foreign lending of U.S.
global banks (“core” investment markets). The next table, Table 4, explores this net internal
borrowing activity further, but now with the additional variables that permit the parent bank
funding shock to interact with the country characteristics and the parent bank characteristics.
The OLS specifications are provided in columns (1) to (3), and (5). Column (4) includes country
fixed effects. Specification (5) introduces all of the same country and bank variables in levels, as
well as interacting with the ABCP exposure term. The coefficients of the variables in levels (not
interacted with Exposure) are not shown. These full specifications are presented in Appendix
Table 4.
First, we observe that the combination of country and bank interactions provide little
overall additional explanatory power to the entire regression. The main additional and robust
insight is that the net borrowing of the affiliates were more protected or declined by less when
the parent banking organizations were larger.
Tables 5 and 6 are results based on specifications excluding those U.S.-chartered banks
that are subsidiaries of a foreign “higher holder” or parent. This exclusion allows for the
possibility that the foreign-owned banks are different in that they could have access to a broader
group of affiliates and internal capital market transfers that are beyond the scope of U.S.
regulatory reporting requirements. All else equal, we might expect stronger results on the U.S.owned reporters for which we can observe the entire network of foreign banking affiliates. Table
5 shows a similar pattern of results to those in Table 3. As before, the average change in net
borrowing by affiliates was (statistically) unchanged in the aftermath of the shock and
differences across affiliates were similarly driven by the characteristics of the banks within the
respective locations where they operated. The more liquid, ex ante, was the parent bank balance
20

sheet, the more supported was the borrowing of the affiliates after the initial dollar funding
shock. Table 6 also confirms the basic patterns observed in the previous tables. A comparison of
the estimated coefficients seems to indicate slightly larger internal funding movements for the
restricted set of U.S.-owned reporters.
What is the economic significance of the differences arising from the local finance and
loan share variables? For this calculation, we use the results of column 4, Table 5 as a baseline.
Starting with the local finance coefficient, we calculated the additional change in internal
borrowing/lending for a bank at the 75th percentile of the ABCP exposure distribution (a high exante ABCP exposure bank), between a location at the 75th percentile of the local finance
distribution (a “core” local funding location for the banking organization) and a location at the
25th percentile (a “periphery” funding location). The average Net Due value prior to the crisis for
banks of high ex-ante Exposure, in relatively important local funding pool locations, was -$1,094
million. In other words, the average high local funding pool location for such banks would carry
a net claim vis-à-vis the rest of the banking organization of about one billion dollars. Performing
the above mentioned exercise, we calculate that the location at the 75th percentile of local finance
expands its claim position by an additional $ 345 million relative to the location at the 25th
percentile. Given the pre-crisis average position for such locations, relatively important local
funding locations expanded their support to the rest of the organization by about 30 percent, a
non-negligible contribution.
Likewise, we calculate the differential change in internal capital market flows for
locations at the 75th percentile of the loan share distribution (a core investment location) relative
to locations at the 25th percentile (a “periphery” location). The average Net Due value for core
locations in pre-crisis quarters was +$1,902 million, thus indicating that such locations would
normally carry a net liability position vis-à-vis the rest of their organization. The computation
indicates that during the first phase of the crisis, the core investment locations contribute about
$168 million less to the internal funding reallocation toward the rest of the organization, or about
9% of their pre-crisis position. Note that the positive sign for the loan share interaction may not
imply an actual increase in internal borrowing for the core locations in response to the shock to
the parent, but rather a contribution of lower degree by these locations to the overall support to
the parent.

21

The remaining tables consider the Shock2, which we interpret as a positive funding shock
to parent banking organizations that followed the introduction of the Term Auction Facility.
Indeed and consistent with this reversed direction of shock to parents, the response of net
borrowing by affiliates was in the opposite direction than observed with Shock1. The pattern of
effects on internal capital market reallocated was related to the very same bank and affiliate
features: the initial “outflows” from affiliates were reversed in response to the innovation in
funding availability for the parent through the Federal Reserve facilities (Table 7). One
difference across the two shocks and evident in Table 8 is that parent bank solvency features
played a more prominent role in the second shock. The higher the solvency of the parent, the
more the affiliate continued to have access to net borrowing from the rest of the organization (or
did not increase net lending to the rest of the organization). Additionally, this access was
especially supported for parent banks with global lending operations that were more concentrated
internationally (as indicated by the coefficients on the herfindahl index). In the U.S.-owned only
sample, the results continue to suggest slightly larger effects (Table 9) and that better parent bank
liquidity and solvency helped internal capital market flows vis-a-vis the foreign affiliates (Table
10).
We gauged the economic magnitude of the local finance and loan share variables for the
second shock using the results in column 4, Table 9 as a baseline. On local finance, we calculate
that in response to the positive funding shock to the parent during the first half of 2008, the
location at the 75th percentile of local finance received about $654 million more funding than a
location at the 25th percentile (or it decreased its previous claim position by that amount). Given
that the average Net Due value in the second half of 2007 for banks of high ex-ante exposure, in
relatively important local funding pool locations, was -$2,534 million, this differential effect
amounts to about 25% of its previous position.
Similarly, in response to the second shock, core investment locations decreased their
liability position by about $142 million more than periphery locations. Given the average
position by such locations in the second half of 2007 was about +$4,731 million, the change
corresponds to about 3% of their previous position.
As a final note, we have performed various robustness checks to determine the sensitivity
of these broad results to alternative measures of affiliate market importance in the parent bank’s
investment portfolio across foreign markets (not reported). Our results are robust to use of local
22

claims, as opposed to local plus cross border claims, in the affiliate importance to the parent
portfolio. Our results also are robust to adjustments for just the long maturity component of
these loan portfolios and to adjustments for claims in a given foreign locations but that are
backed by entities in other countries (hence a more “international” lending pool).

IV. Concluding remarks
In the very early stages of the crisis, on balance and in aggregate, the foreign affiliates
became net recipients of funds from their U.S.-based parents, as shown in Figure 5. After the
Lehman failure and during the peak of the crisis, and again later in 2009, the foreign affiliates
were conduits for inflows of funds to their parent organizations in the United States. This
directional inflow into the United States through internal capital markets was reversed in 2010,
when foreign affiliates relied more extensively on borrowing from their banking organizations.
Our empirical results shed light on the pattern of core and periphery affiliate markets that
influence their relative roles in funding flows vis-à-vis the parents. This is important for
understanding international shock transmission. Overall, given either a positive or a negative
funding shock to the parent bank, funds are not reallocated to the same degree across all foreign
affiliate markets. Among the core and periphery features of affiliate operations that we have
identified are whether the affiliate operation relies on a local funding base and whether total
cross-border and local lending to the affiliate market is substantial within the parent bank’s
portfolio. From the perspective of an overall affiliate market, macroeconomic transmission may
be a function of the particular distribution of foreign banks engaged in their economy, the
balance sheets of those foreign banks, and the ex ante features of the operations within the
affiliate economy. Intra-bank funding flows can be a similar order of magnitude as the more
frequently studies inter-bank funding markets, and we identify bank business models as
important drivers of this intra-bank funding.
These types of considerations and issues related to global liquidity management by
banking institutions are at the forefront of policy discourse. The need for global banks to enhance
internal practices for the management of liquidity risk is one of the pillars enunciated by the
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision in its renewed “Principles for Sound Liquidity Risk
Management and Supervision” (BCBS, June 2008 and BCBS, December 2009). For instance:

23

“Cross-entity funding channels are a mechanism through which liquidity pressures can
spread through the group. An entity that provides regular funding to other entities of the
group may be unable to continue providing this funding when it faces its own liquidity
strain or when another entity is in need of extraordinary funding. For example, to mitigate
the risk of contagion, a bank may establish internal limits on intragroup liquidity risk. A
bank may also have limits at the subsidiary and branch level to restrict the reliance of
related entities on funding from elsewhere in the bank. Internal limits also may be set for
each currency used by a bank. The limits should be stricter where ready conversion
between currencies is uncertain, particularly in stress situations.” (BCBS, December
2009, p. 23).
Increased emphasis on macro-prudential supervision and regulation can have direct
repercussions on liquidity management practices by global banks and may lead to the
introduction of possible guidelines and constraints to such practices. Changes in such practices
may have the effect of altering the transmission of liquidity shocks across markets in ways that
are not well-understood. Our analysis points to key bank and country features that have
influenced transmission to date, with those features including the extent of local funding of
affiliates and the importance of that affiliate market to the business of the banking organization.
The results thus point at a significant management of liquidity on a global scale by banks with
global operations, and at important idiosyncrasies, based on individual banks’ choices in their
global business model. These results have immediate normative implications, suggesting, for
instance, that the patterns of international shock transmissions (through a global bank lending
channel) would seem more the result of specific banks’ operations and less due to common
country factors. Of course, all of our results are drawn from a sample of banks that already have
chosen to operate globally, and already have made decisions about the foreign markets in which
they will operate. It is at that first stage of entry that the common country factors could be even
more of a consideration. While our analysis does not speak to whether this global liquidity
management potential that is being invoked has influenced the entry decision, presumably it has
played some role. If global regulation changes, an open question is how the location and scope
of internationalization of global banks likewise would adjust.

24

References:
Acharya, Viral and Philipp Schnabl. 2010. “Do Global Banks Spread Global Imbalances? The
Case of Asset-Backed Commercial Paper During the Financial Crisis of 2007-09.” IMF
Economic Review vol. 58 (1) pp .37-73 (August).
Ashcraft, Adam, 2008. “Are Bank Holding Companies a Source of Strength to Their Banking
Subsidiaries?” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Blackwell Publishing, vol. 40(2-3), pages
273-294, 03.
Armantier, Olivier, Sandy Krieger, and Jamie McAndrews, 2008. “The Federal Reserve’s Term
Auction Facility”. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and
Finance, July vol.14 (5).
Bank for International Settlements, Committee on the Global Financial System, 2010. “The
functioning and resilience of cross-border funding markets,” CGFS Publications no. 37 (March).
Barth, James, Gerard Caprio Jr., and Ross Levine, 2001. “The regulation and supervision of
banks around the world – a new database,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series
no.
2588
(April).
2008
database
update
and
prior
data
at:
http://econ.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/EXTRESEARCH/0,,contentMDK:2
0345037~pagePK:64214825~piPK:64214943~theSitePK:469382,00.html
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision in its renewed “Principles for Sound Liquidity Risk
Management and Supervision” (BCBS, June 2008 and BCBS, December 2009).
Berger, A., DeYoung, R., Genay, H., Udell, G., 2000. Globalization of financial institutions:
Evidence from cross-border banking performance. Brookings-Wharton Papers on Financial
Services, 23-120.
Buch, Claudia, 2005. "Distance and International Banking," Review of International Economics,
Blackwell Publishing, vol. 13(4), pages 787-804, 09.
Buch, Claudia, Catherine Tahmee Koch, and Michael Kotter. 2011. “Crises, Rescues, and Policy
Transmission Through International Banks.” Manuscript (April).
Campello, Murillo, 2002. “Internal Capital Markets in Financial Conglomerates: Evidence from
Small Bank Responses to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Finance, vol. 57(6), pages 2773-2805.
Cerutti, Eugenio, Giovanni Dell-Ariccia, and Maria Soledad Martinez Peria, 2007. “How Banks
Go Abroad: Branches or Subsidiaries?” Journal of Banking and Finance, vol. 31(6), pages 16691692.
Cetorelli, Nicola and Linda Goldberg, “Banking Globalization, Monetary Transmission, and the
Lending Channel,” forthcoming in the Journal of Finance.

25

Cetorelli, Nicola and Linda Goldberg, 2011. “Global Banks and International Shock
Transmission: Evidence from the Crisis,” International Monetary Fund Economic Review, vol.
59, pages 41-76.
Cetorelli, Nicola and Linda Goldberg. 2006. “Risks in U.S. Bank International Exposures,” in ed.
Jerry Caprio, Douglas Evanoff and George Kaufman, Cross Border Banking: Regulatory
Challenges (Singapore: World Scientific Publishing Company, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
and World Bank).
Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito, 2008. “A New Measure of Financial Openness,” Journal of
Comparative Policy Analysis, vol. 10(3), pages 307-320. Data: Chinn-Ito (2006) Financial
Openness measure (data extending to 2008, updated July 2010).
Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito, 2006. “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls,
Institutions, and Interactions,” Journal of Development Economics, vol. 81(1), pages 163-192.
Claessens, Stijn and Neeltje van Horen, 2008. “Location Decisions of Foreign Banks and
Institutional Competitive Advantage,” DNB Working Papers no. 172, Netherlands Central Bank.
Claessens, Stijn, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, Deniz Igan, and Luc Laeven, 2010. “Cross-Country
Experiences and Policy Implications from the Global Financial Crisis,” Economic Policy, vol.
25(62), pages 267-293.
De Haas, Ralph and Iman Lelyveld, 2009. “Internal Capital Markets and Lending by
Multinational Bank Subsidiaries,” forthcoming in the Journal of Financial Intermediations.
Devereux, Michael and James Yetman. 2010. “Leverage constraints and the international
transmission of shocks.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking vol. 42 pages 71-105.
Edwards, Sebastian, 2000. “Contagion,” The World Economy, vol. 23(7), pages 873-900.
Eichengreen, Barry, Ashoka Mody, Milan Nedeljkovic, and Lucio Sarno, 2009. “How the
Subprime Crisis Went Global: Evidence from Bank Credit Default Swap Spreads.” NBER
Working Paper no. 14904.
Fiechter, Jonathan, Inci Otker-Robe, Anna Ilyina, Michael Hsu, Andre Santos, and Jay Surti,
2011. “Subsidiaries or Branches: Does One Size Fit All?” IMF Staff Discussion Note SDN/11/04
(March).
Focarelli, Dario and Alberto Pozzolo, 2005. “Where Do Banks Expand Abroad? An Empirical
Analysis,” Journal of Business, vol. 78(6), pages 2435-2464.
Forbes, Kristin and Menzie Chinn. 2004. “A decomposition of global linkages in financial
markets over time.” The Review of Economics and Statistics vol 86 (3): 705-722 (August).

26

Forbes, Kristin and Roberto Rigobon, 2002. “No Contagion, Only Interdependence: Measuring
Stock Market Co-movements,” Journal of Finance, vol. 57(5), pages 2223-2261.
Giannetti, Mariassunta and Luc Laeven, 2011. “The Flight Home Effect: Evidence from the
Syndicated Loan Market during Financial Crises,” Manuscript.
Goldberg, Linda, 2009. “Understanding Banking Sector Globalization,” International Monetary
Fund Staff Papers, vol. 56, pages 171-197.
Goldberg, Linda, 2006. “The International Exposure of U.S. Banks: Europe and Latin America
Compared,” in International Capital Flows, Ed. Sebastian Edwards, NBER and University of
Chicago Press.
Goldberg, Linda. 2002. “When is U.S. Bank Lending to Emerging Markets Volatile?”
Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, eds. Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey Frankel.
(2002, NBER and University of Chicago Press.) NBER Working Paper #8209 April 2001.
Goldberg, Linda, Craig Kennedy, and Jason Miu. 2011. Central Bank Dollar Swap Lines and
Overseas Dollar Funding Costs” Economic Policy Review (May).
Goldberg, Linda and David Skeie “Why did US Branches of foreign banks borrow at the
discount window during the crisis? http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2011/04/whydid-us-branches-of-foreign-banks-borrow-at-the-discount-window-during-the-crisis.html
Houston, Joel, Christopher James, and David Marcus, 1997. “Capital market frictions and the
role of internal capital markets in banking,” Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 46(2), pages
135-164.
Imbs, Jean. 2004. “Trade, Finance, Specialization, and Synchronization.” The Review of
Economics and Statistics vol. 86 (3) pages 723-734 (August).
Ilzetski, Ethan, Carmen Reinhart, and Kenneth Rogoff (2009, 2011). “The country chronologies
and background material to Exchange Rate Arrangements into the 21st Century: Will the Anchor
Currency Hold?”
International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook, April 2009.
Kamil, Herman and Kulwant Rai, 2010. “The Global Credit Crunch and Foreign Banks’ Lending
to Emerging Markets: Why Did Latin America Fare Better?” IMF Working Paper WP/10/102.
Kashyap, Anil and Jeremy Stein, 2000. “What Do A Million Observations on Banks Say About
the Transmission of Monetary Policy?” American Economic Review, vol. 90(3), pages 407-428.
Khwaja, Asim and Atif Mian, 2008. “Tracing the Impact of Bank Liquidity Shocks: Evidence
from an Emerging Market,” American Economic Review, vol. 98(4), pages 1413-1442.

27

Kose, Ayhan and Eswar Prasad, 2010. “Emerging Markets: Resilience and Growth Amid Global
Turmoil,” Brookings Institution Press.
McGuire, Patrick and Goetz von Peter, "The US dollar shortage in global banking", BIS
Quarterly Review, March 2009, 47-63.
Mian, Atif, 2006. “Distance Constraints: The Limits of Foreign Lending in Poor Economies,”
The Journal of Finance, vol. 61(3), pages 1465-1505.
Mishkin, Frederic, 2009. “Why We Shouldn’t Turn Our Backs on Financial Globalization,”
International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, vol. 56(1), pages 139-170.
Parlour, Christine and Guillaume Plantin, 2008. “Loan Sales and Relationship Banking,” Journal
of Finance, vol. 63(3), pages 1291-1314.
Peek, Joe and Eric Rosengren, 1997. “The International Transmission of Financial Shocks: The
Case of Japan,” American Economic Review, vol. 87(4), pages 495-505.
Peek, Joe and Eric Rosengren, 1997. "Collateral Damage: Effects of the Japanese Bank Crisis on
Real Activity in the United States", The American Economic Review, March 2000, 30-45.
Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose, 2003. “Effects of Financial
Globalization on Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence,” IMF Occasional Paper no.
220.
Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose, 2007. “Financial
Globalization, Growth, and Volatility in Developing Countries,” in editor Ann Harrison
Globalization and Poverty (NBER and University of Chicago Press).
Rose, Andrew and Mark Spiegel, 2011. “Cross-Country Causes and Consequences of the Crisis:
An Update,” European Economic Review, vol. 55(3), pages 309-324.
Rose, Andrew and Mark Spiegel, 2009. “International Financial Remoteness and
Macroeconomic Volatility,” Journal of Development Economics, vol. 89(2), pages 250-257.
Rose, Andrew and Tomasz Wieladek. 2011. “Financial Protectionism”. NBER working paper
17073.
Santor, Eric, 2004. “Contagion and the Composition of Canadian Banks’ Foreign Asset
Portfolios: Do Crises Matter?” Manuscript, Bank of Canada.
Schnabl, Philipp, 2009. “Financial Globalization and the Transmission of Credit Supply Shocks:
Evidence from an Emerging Market,” New York University Working Paper no. FIN-08-088.
Stein, Jeremy, 1997. “Internal Capital Markets and the Competition for Corporate Resources,”
Journal of Finance, vol. 52(1), pages 111-133.
28

Stein, Jeremy, 2002. “Information Production and Capital Allocation: Decentralized versus
Hierarchical Firms,” Journal of Finance, vol. 57(5), pages 1891-1921.
Van Rijckeghem, Caroline and Beatrice Weder, 2001. “Sources of Contagion: Is it Finance or
Trade,” Journal of International Economics, vol. 54(2), pages 293-308.
Van Rijckeghem, Caroline and Beatrice Weder, 2003. “Spillovers through Banking Centers: A
Panel Data Analysis of Bank Flows,” Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 22(4),
pages 483-509.
Zorome, Ahmed, 2007. “Concept of Offshore Financial Centers: In Search of an Operational
Definition,” IMF Working Paper WP/07/87.

29

Table 1 Counts of U.S. banks that have foreign affiliates
2006q1
ALL banks
Total
US-owned
foreign-owned

42
27
15

2007q1 2008q1 2009q1
41
26
15

39
26
13

43
25
18

2010q1
44
25
19

Source: Authors’ computations based on FFIEC 009 reporting by quarter.

30

Table 2: Basic Balance Sheet Information of U.S. Banks with Foreign Affiliates
2006Q1-2007Q2
(Avg)
Statistics on U.S. Banking Organization
1

Bank asset size (billions USD)
Bank solvency ratio (%)

2
3

Foreign loans / Assets (%)

4

Bank liquid assets / Total assets (%)

Absolute value of Total Net Due / Assets (%)

5

2009Q2

2010Q2

median

mean

median

mean

me dian

mean

53.4

198.5

64.6

253.9

66.2

262.5

8.8

10.0

9.4

10.5

9.9

11.0

2.0

3.7

1.4

3.5

0.9

3.0

2.3

5.0

2.5

4.4

2.6

4.9

2.3

7.3

1.3

9.9

1.4

6.8

2

13

2

13

2

12

81.2

63.3

68.2

56.7

74.5

60.1

0.06

4.9

0.05

4.9

0.05

5.5

11.9

27.7

16.2

30.8

11.7

27.5

Statistics computed by Bank, across Foreign Affiliate s:
Compared across all bank-affiliate observations
Number of affiliates per parent bank
Affiliate Liabilities:
6

Locally raised / Total within country (%)
Affiliate Assets:

Local claims in country / Total local claims across all countries (%)
Long-term total claims in country / All total claims in country (%)

8

7

9

6.5
19.8
4.9
19.4
3.6
17.5
Outward risk transfer / All total claims in country (%)
Number of parent banks or bank holding companies
44
43
44
Number of bank-affiliate country observations
566
540
540
Source: Quarterly Call Report forms, FR Y-9C, and FFIEC 009.
Note: 1Bank asset size is constructed from series RCFD2170 of the call reports and BHCK2170 of FRY-9C. 2Solvency is the ratio of equity (RCFD3210, BHDM3210) to
bank asset size. 3Foreign loans are from series RCFN2122 of the call reports. (Note that no equivalents series are available for BHCs, which make up approximately 35%
of the sample.) 4Liquid assets are the sum of total held-to maturity securities (RCFD1754, BHCK1754), total trading asset (RCFD3545, BHCK3545), and federal funds
sold and securities purchased under agreements to resell (RCFD1350, BHCK1350). 5Net due figures are from Column 4 of FFIEC009 Schedule1a. 6Local liabilities
figures are the sum of foreign-office liability in non-local currency and in local currency (Column 1 and 2 of FFIEC009 Schedule1a). Total liabilities are the sum of local
liabilities plus net due inflows (positive values of Column 4 of FFIEC009 Schedule1a). 7All claims reported in the table are on immediate counterparty basis. Local claims
are the sum of foreign-office claims on local residents in non-local currency by sectors and in local currency (Columns 4, 5, 6, 8 of FFIEC009 Schedule1), and cross border
claims are the sum of cross-border claims by sectors (Columns 1-3 of FFIEC009 Schedule1). 8Long-term claims are computed as the difference of total local/cross-border
claims and claims of remaining maturity up to and including 1 year (Column 7 of FFIEC009 Schedule1). 9Outward risk transfer (Columns 9-11 of FFIEC009 Schedule1)
shows all claims subject to risk transfers from immediate counterparty basis to ultimate risk basis.

31

Table 3
Net Internal Borrowing Dynamics During the Crisis - Shock1
All U.S. Reporting Banks
(1)
OLS

(2)
Country FEs

(3)
OLS

(4)
Country FEs

168.2***
(27.10)

193.5***
(49.40)

-8.134
(65.48)

-23.52
(56.92)

Expi*Local financeij

-400.6***
(82.09)

-465.1***
(68.71)

Expi*Loan shareij

8,955***
(1,282)

9,405***
(1,308)

Exposurei

Constant

-68.15*
(34.34)

Observations
R-squared

546
0.014

-7.915
(45.16)
512
0.159

546
0.174

512
0.298

The dependent variable is the change in internal borrowing of foreign affiliates of bank i in country j between 2007q3-q4 and
2006q1-2007q2. ABCP exposure is the ratio of total ABCP outstanding of conduits sponsored by each bank i divided by total
equity. Local finance is the ratio of locally raised funds to total liabilities of affiliates of bank i in country j. Loan share is the
ratio of total claims of bank i in country j divided by total claims of bank i aggregated over all countries. Column 2 and 4 report
fixed effect specifications. Country indicator variables are included but the coefficients are not reported. In the FE specifications
we drop country records if there is only one bank in that country. In this table all U.S. reporting banks are included. Standard
errors are clustered by banks. *** indicate significance at the 1% level.

32

Table 4 Net Internal Borrowing Dynamics During the Crisis - Shock1
All U.S. Reporting Banks, Country and Bank Controls
(1)
OLS

(2)
OLS

(3)
OLS

(4)
Country FE

(5)
OLS

Country controls

Bank controls

Country and Bank
controls

Country and Bank
controls

Level controls
included

-535.0
(796.2)

-406.2
(466.3)

-1,615
(1,488)

-1,392
(1,485)

-4,223*
(2,219)

Expi*Local financeij

-313.6**
(132.4)

-849.2***
(270.7)

-890.3***
(305.3)

-811.6***
(263.2)

-908.4***
(322.0)

Expi*Loan shareij

8,865***
(1,458)

10,603***
(1,167)

10,863***
(1,317)

10,483***
(1,276)

10,866***
(1,328)

Exposurei

Country variables
Expi*OFCj

-92.80
(115.4)

20.27
(66.98)

59.38
(55.32)

88.08**
(42.75)

Expi*kaopenj

-6.343
(33.51)

-0.0642
(38.80)

20.51
(42.17)

5.486
(20.21)

Expi*ldistnycj

62.21
(90.07)

158.2
(127.7)

100.7
(115.3)

108.6
(94.25)

Expi*exratej

80.73*
(42.31)

-80.40
(131.1)

34.24
(157.8)

-39.86
(134.4)

Bank variables
Expi*Total asseti

0.304**
(0.128)

0.457***
(0.160)

0.376*
(0.203)

0.0791
(0.296)

Expi*Liquidityi

1,171
(1,379)

762.5
(1,576)

1,114
(2,464)

13,844
(8,342)

Expi*Solvencyi

5,344
(4,287)

3,567
(4,592)

5,476
(7,503)

32,642*
(17,610)

Expi* Herfindhali

-709.4
(627.4)

-680.4
(822.8)

-185.5
(1,274)

-391.7
(1,393)

-89.85*
(53.33)
546
0.202

-90.88
(54.79)
500
0.234

475
0.332

-381.6
(829.0)
500
0.244

Constant
Observations
R-squared

-6.103
(44.65)
500
0.193

The dependent variable is the change in internal borrowing of foreign affiliates of bank i in country j between 2007q3-q4 and
2006q1-2007q2. ABCP exposure is the ratio of total ABCP outstanding of conduits sponsored by each bank i divided by total
equity. Local finance is the ratio of locally raised funds to total liabilities of affiliates of bank i in country j. Loan share is the ratio of
total claims of bank i in country j divided by total claims of bank i aggregated over all countries. Column 4 reports fixed effect
specifications. Country indicator variables are included but the coefficients are not reported. In the FE specifications we drop
country records if there is only one bank in that country. Column 5 reports results of a specification where all country and bank
variables were included in levels (non interacted) as well, but the coefficients are not reported. Full set of results from such
specifications are reported in Appendix Table 1. In this table all U.S. reporting banks are included. Standard errors are clustered by
banks. *** indicate significance at the 1% level.

33

Table 5 Net Internal Borrowing Dynamics During the Crisis - Shock1
Only U.S. Owned Banks
(1)
OLS

(2)
Country FEs

(3)
OLS

(4)
Country FEs

184.8***
(18.98)

209.7***
(34.25)

-18.90
(64.97)

-35.91
(55.34)

Expi*Local financeij

-425.4***
(90.09)

-520.3***
(85.45)

Expi*Loan shareij

9,918***
(578.6)

10,279***
(515.2)

Exposurei

Constant

-77.64*
(39.31)

Observations
R-squared

464
0.017

5.187
(52.64)
430
0.252

464
0.192

430
0.400

The dependent variable is the change in internal borrowing of foreign affiliates of bank i in country j between 2007q3-q4 and
2006q1-2007q2. ABCP exposure is the ratio of total ABCP outstanding of conduits sponsored by each bank i divided by total
equity. Local finance is the ratio of locally raised funds to total liabilities of affiliates of bank i in country j. Loan share is the
ratio of total claims of bank i in country j divided by total claims of bank i aggregated over all countries. Column 2 and 4 report
fixed effect specifications. Country indicator variables are included but the coefficients are not reported. In the FE specifications
we drop country records if there is only one bank in that country. In this table regressions were run on the subset of U.S.-owned
banks. Standard errors are clustered by banks. *** indicate significance at the 1% level.

34

Table 6 Net Internal Borrowing Dynamics During the Crisis - Shock1
Only U.S. Owned Banks, Country and Bank Controls
(1)
OLS

(2)
OLS

(3)
OLS

(4)
Country FE

(5)
OLS

Country controls

Bank controls

Country and Bank
controls

Country and Bank
controls

Level controls
included

-599.8
(1,037)

-3,660
(3,807)

-5,603
(4,445)

-2,562
(2,902)

-7,307**
(3,291)

Expi*Local financeij

-337.5**
(144.1)

-1,014***
(357.1)

-1,128**
(433.6)

-1,062**
(385.5)

-1,100**
(422.1)

Expi*Loan shareij

9,857***
(785.9)

12,032***
(1,223)

12,540***
(1,351)

11,993***
(1,067)

12,454***
(1,315)

Exposurei

Country variables
Expi*OFCj

-100.5
(133.6)

6.630
(70.64)

91.49**
(41.77)

92.43**
(42.52)

Expi*kaopenj

-6.983
(39.07)

14.86
(40.24)

21.90
(36.59)

4.144
(22.17)

Expi*ldistnycj

68.26
(117.6)

255.8*
(147.5)

118.9**
(44.20)

139.0*
(76.66)

Expi*exratej

95.47**
(37.09)

-112.6
(159.9)

39.43
(188.8)

-13.79
(132.4)

Bank variables
Expi*Total asseti

1.563
(1.289)

1.772
(1.308)

1.126
(1.031)

-0.0172
(1.394)

Expi*Liquidityi

3,477*
(1,723)

2,942*
(1,712)

1,283
(1,101)

25,215*
(14,491)

Expi*Solvencyi

-6,564
(5,674)

-10,061*
(5,782)

-6,972
(5,633)

37,974
(35,644)

Expi* Herfindhali

24,071
(25,006)

24,135
(24,804)

11,467
(19,510)

10,227
(22,422)

-81.06
(52.19)
464
0.234

-78.43
(52.01)
423
0.277

398
0.451

-891.3
(1,199)
423
0.291

Constant
Observations
R-squared

7.221
(51.30)
423
0.215

The dependent variable is the change in internal borrowing of foreign affiliates of bank i in country j between 2007q3-q4 and
2006q1-2007q2. ABCP exposure is the ratio of total ABCP outstanding of conduits sponsored by each bank i divided by total
equity. Local finance is the ratio of locally raised funds to total liabilities of affiliates of bank i in country j. Loan share is the
ratio of total claims of bank i in country j divided by total claims of bank i aggregated over all countries. Column 4 reports fixed
effect specifications. Country indicator variables are included but the coefficients are not reported. In the FE specifications we
drop country records if there is only one bank in that country. Column 5 reports results of a specification where all country and
bank variables were included in levels (non interacted) as well, but the coefficients are not reported. Full set of results from such
specifications are reported in Appendix Table 1. In this table regressions were run on the subset of U.S.-owned banks. Standard
errors are clustered by banks. *** indicate significance at the 1% level.

35

Table 7 Net Internal Borrowing Dynamics During the Crisis – Shock 2
All U.S. Reporting Banks
(1)
OLS

(2)
Country FEs

(3)
OLS

(4)
Country FEs

-14.09
(26.66)

8.306
(40.63)

-13.74
(46.77)

59.21
(40.44)

Expi*Local financeij

780.0**
(289.5)

872.4***
(247.3)

Expi*Loan shareij

-6,333***
(1,574)

-7,912***
(1,252)

Exposurei

Constant

92.73**
(37.21)

Observations
R-squared

559
0.000

14.07
(55.03)
525
0.075

559
0.118

525
0.218

The dependent variable is the change in internal borrowing of foreign affiliates of bank i in country j between 2008q1-q2 and
2007q3-q4. ABCP exposure is the ratio of total ABCP outstanding of conduits sponsored by each bank i divided by total equity.
Local finance is the ratio of locally raised funds to total liabilities of affiliates of bank i in country j. Loan share is the ratio of
total claims of bank i in country j divided by total claims of bank i aggregated over all countries. Column 2 and 4 report fixed
effect specifications. Country indicator variables are included but the coefficients are not reported. In the FE specifications we
drop country records if there is only one bank in that country. In this table all U.S. reporting banks are included. Standard errors
are clustered by banks. *** indicate significance at the 1% level.

36

Table 8 Net Internal Borrowing Dynamics During the Crisis – Shock 2
All U.S. Reporting Bank, Country and Bank Controls

Exposurei
Expi*Local financeij
Expi*Loan shareij

(1)
OLS

(2)
OLS

(3)
OLS

(4)
Country FE

(5)
OLS

Country controls

Bank controls

Country and Bank
controls

Country and Bank
controls

Level controls

3,757***
(1,349)

-1,384***
(427.2)

2,895*
(1,527)

3,269*
(1,798)

4,827***
(1,544)

646.4*
(356.0)

1,122***
(194.3)

1,104***
(278.4)

1,072***
(273.0)

1,123***
(275.2)

-6,275***
(1,717)

-7,096***
(1,550)

-7,279***
(1,751)

-8,283***
(1,450)

-7,310***
(1,734)

Country variables
Expi*OFCj

337.2
(291.8)

187.0
(231.7)

157.5
(249.7)

164.1
(208.8)

Expi*kaopenj

-71.98
(75.32)

-85.16
(71.64)

-117.3
(90.87)

-94.13
(65.33)

Expi*ldistnycj

-432.9***
(146.4)

-502.4***
(168.6)

-553.8***
(174.3)

-472.7***
(143.7)

-9.296
(232.6)

79.07
(171.3)

181.3
(213.9)

144.3
(144.1)

-0.229**
(0.103)

-0.287**
(0.109)

-0.242**
(0.118)

-0.693***
(0.110)

Expi*Liquidityi

2,545*
(1,397)

2,483
(1,546)

2,945
(2,128)

-3,194
(3,054)

Expi*Solvencyi

9,922***
(3,048)

11,540***
(3,639)

14,074**
(5,331)

-3,435
(5,532)

Expi* Herfindhali

1,677***
(577.0)

1,642***
(598.7)

1,003
(778.7)

-30.68
(929.2)

73.33*
(38.83)
559
0.140

68.03*
(37.43)
513
0.186

488
0.267

120.9
(376.5)
513
0.195

Expi*exratej
Bank variables
Expi*Total asseti

Constant
Observations
R-squared

0.456
(65.18)
513
0.154

The dependent variable is the change in internal borrowing of foreign affiliates of bank i in country j between 2008q1-q2 and
2007q3-q4. ABCP exposure is the ratio of total ABCP outstanding of conduits sponsored by each bank i divided by total equity.
Local finance is the ratio of locally raised funds to total liabilities of affiliates of bank i in country j. Loan share is the ratio of
total claims of bank i in country j divided by total claims of bank i aggregated over all countries. Column 4 reports fixed effect
specifications. Country indicator variables are included but the coefficients are not reported. In the FE specifications we drop
country records if there is only one bank in that country. Column 5 reports results of a specification where all country and bank
variables were included in levels (non interacted) as well, but the coefficients are not reported. Full set of results from such
specifications are reported in Appendix Table 1. In this table all U.S. reporting banks are included. Standard errors are clustered
by banks. *** indicate significance at the 1% level.

37

Table 9 Net Internal Borrowing Dynamics During the Crisis – Shock 2
Only U.S. Owned Banks
(1)
OLS

(2)
Country FEs

(3)
OLS

(4)
Country FEs

-19.12
(27.65)

0.0694
(38.57)

0.826
(42.27)

76.33**
(35.98)

Expi*Local financeij

832.0**
(311.3)

923.6***
(284.5)

Expi*Loan shareij

-7,188***
(947.8)

-8,681***
(662.8)

Exposurei

Constant

103.6**
(43.13)

Observations
R-squared

479
0.000

1.379
(65.64)
445
0.134

479
0.133

445
0.286

The dependent variable is the change in internal borrowing of foreign affiliates of bank i in country j between 2008q1-q2 and
2007q3-q4. ABCP exposure is the ratio of total ABCP outstanding of conduits sponsored by each bank i divided by total equity.
Local finance is the ratio of locally raised funds to total liabilities of affiliates of bank i in country j. Loan share is the ratio of
total claims of bank i in country j divided by total claims of bank i aggregated over all countries. Column 2 and 4 report fixed
effect specifications. Country indicator variables are included but the coefficients are not reported. In the FE specifications we
drop country records if there is only one bank in that country. In this table regressions were run on the subset of U.S.-owned
banks. *** indicate significance at the 1% level.

38

Table 10 Net Internal Borrowing Dynamics During the Crisis – Shock 2
Only U.S. Owned Banks, Country and Bank Controls

Exposurei
Expi*Local financeij
Expi*Loan shareij

(1)
OLS

(2)
OLS

(3)
OLS

(4)
Country FE

(5)
OLS

Country controls

Bank controls

Country and Bank
controls

Country and Bank
controls

Level controls

4,706***
(1,132)

-2,565*
(1,486)

1,508
(1,850)

-1,643
(2,104)

2,273
(1,572)

713.9*
(381.2)

1,261***
(116.9)

1,307***
(144.1)

1,282***
(131.1)

1,310***
(148.3)

-7,170***
(1,077)

-8,151***
(816.1)

-8,479***
(863.5)

-9,490***
(520.4)

-8,471***
(884.1)

Country variables
Expi*OFCj

406.2
(332.5)

225.1
(260.1)

72.19
(199.1)

135.9
(224.0)

Expi*kaopenj

-96.68
(74.62)

-118.3
(71.16)

-120.5*
(59.33)

-108.1
(66.26)

Expi*ldistnycj

-538.0***
(122.4)

-629.2***
(164.8)

-597.1***
(101.7)

-591.7***
(149.1)

-36.68
(246.4)

74.83
(161.9)

200.0
(225.4)

176.8
(125.4)

Expi*exratej
Bank variables
Expi*Total asseti

-0.0193
(0.305)

0.138
(0.250)

0.661
(0.494)

-0.272
(0.308)

Expi*Liquidityi

1,489
(1,197)

2,601**
(961.9)

6,030***
(1,850)

3,229
(2,983)

Expi*Solvencyi

28,687***
(4,602)

33,900***
(3,642)

43,845***
(6,080)

32,702***
(7,465)

-405.0
(4,939)

4,061
(3,917)

12,629
(8,607)

-791.4
(4,879)

20.89
(32.12)
479
0.169

33.48
(30.10)
438
0.230

413
0.353

310.8
(578.5)
438
0.233

Expi* Herfindhali
Constant
Observations
R-squared

-13.41
(74.54)
438
0.180

The dependent variable is the change in internal borrowing of foreign affiliates of bank i in country j between 2008q1-q2 and
2007q3-q4. ABCP exposure is the ratio of total ABCP outstanding of conduits sponsored by each bank i divided by total equity.
Local finance is the ratio of locally raised funds to total liabilities of affiliates of bank i in country j. Loan share is the ratio of
total claims of bank i in country j divided by total claims of bank i aggregated over all countries. Column 4 reports fixed effect
specifications. Country indicator variables are included but the coefficients are not reported. In the FE specifications we drop
country records if there is only one bank in that country. Column 5 reports results of a specification where all country and bank
variables were included in levels (non interacted) as well, but the coefficients are not reported. Full set of results from such
specifications are reported in Appendix Table 1. In this table regressions were run on the subset of U.S.-owned banks. ***
indicate significance at the 1% level.

39

40

41

Figure 3 Intra-bank and Interbank Flows of U.S. Banks
Billions USD
2000

Billions USD
2000

1800

1800

1600

Interbank flows

1600

1400

1400

1200

1200

1000

Intra-bank flows

800

800
600

Crisis starts

400

TAF begins

200

Bear Sterns event

0

1000

Lehman failure
expanded CB dollar swaps

600
400
200
0

Source: FFIEC 009 and BIS Consolidated Banking Statistics
Note: Intra-bank flows are computed as the sum of net due to (from) of affiliates (in absolute value), from FFIEC 009. Interbank
flows are computed as the sum of foreign claims of the U.S. vis-a-vis rest of world and of rest of world vis-a-vis the U.S., from BIS.

42

Figure 4 Benchmark dollar funding rates Relative to Overnight Indexed Swaps
Spread of One Month Rates to OIS

2.0

1.5

%

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5
Jan-07

Mar-07

May-07
FHLB NY

Jul-07

Sep-07
LIBOR

Nov-07

Jan-08
ABCP AA

Mar-08

May-08

Jul-08

DW

43

Figure 5 Net Related Borrowing by Overseas Affiliates of U.S. Banks
Billions USD

Billions USD
300

300
Lehman failure

250

200

Crisis starts

150

TAF begins

100

Bear Sterns event

expanded CB
dollar swaps

250

200

150

100

50

50

0

0

-50

-50

-100

-100

-150

-150

-200

-200

Source: Authors’ construction using FFIEC 009 data across U.S. reporting banks.
Sample of banks excludes new reporters as of 2008Q1 and 2009Q1 and banks that entered the sample only for a single period.

44

Appendix Table 1 Countries (of 121) and Affiliates of U.S. Banks in Sample, By Country
Affiliate country
Albania
Algeria
Argentina
Australia
Austria
British West Indies
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belgium
Belize
Bermuda
Bolivia
Bosnia And Herzegovina
Brazil
Brunei
Bulgaria
Cameroon
Canada
Cayman Islands
Channel Islands & Isle Of Man
Chile
China
Colombia
Congo, Democratic Rep.
Costa Rica
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Finland
France
French Guiana
French West Indies
Gabon
Germany
Gibraltar
Greece

Counts
(avg)

Affiliate country

1
1
9
11
4
8
11
4
2
5
8
1
9
1
1
8
1
2
1
21
30
8
7
11
5
1
3
2
6
4
4
2
2
2
4
1
8
1
1
12
2
4

Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea
Kuwait
Latvia
Lebanon
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macau
Malaysia
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Monaco
Morocco
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
Netherlands Antilles
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan

Counts
(avg)
1
2
1
2
14
4
1
8
4
12
4
9
1
2
11
2
2
1
10
3
1
3
1
12
2
5
1
1
5
10
2
1
1
1
11
5
5
2
1
5
1
3

Affiliate country

Counts
(avg)
1
8
1
2
2
5
6
4
2
3
4
4
1
1
1
12
2
4
10
1
5
7
10
1
6
2
3
1
5
1
2
6
18
8
4
2
1

Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia And Montenegro
Seychelles
Singapore
Slovakia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Tanzania
Thailand
Trinidad
Trinidad And Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
Uruguay
Venezuela
Vietnam
Zambia

45

Appendix Table 2 Country Features of Top 20 Countries By Total Claims Size in 2007Q2

Affiliate country
United Kingdom
Japan
Canada
Germany
Mexico
Cayman Islands
Korea
Netherlands
Australia
France
India
Spain
Brazil
Italy
Singapore
Ireland
Luxembourg
China
Hong Kong
Switzerland

Total
Claims1
(Billions
USD)
396.2
141.5
136.2
104.6
89.8
83.5
78.9
70.9
64.7
60.5
44.6
39.8
36.6
35.8
35.4
34.1
32.0
29.6
25.6
23.8

Log
Physical
distance
from NYC2

Capital
Account
Openness3

Polity
Index4

8.1
8.8
7.4
8.3
7.6
7.8
8.8
8.2
9.3
8.2
9.0
8.2
8.2
8.4
9.2
8.0
8.2
8.9
9.0
8.3

2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
1.1
2.5
-0.1
2.5
1.1
2.5
-1.1
2.5
0.4
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
-1.1
2.5
2.5

10
10
10
10
8
1
10
10
9
9
10
8
10
-2
10
-7
10

OFC5

0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
0

$Peg6

0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0

1

Total claims is the sum local claims and cross border claims, from authors’ computations based on FFIEC 009
reporting by quarter.
2
Log physical distance is the great circle distance of the affiliate country from New York City, from Rose and
Spiegel (2009).
3
Index ranges in value from −1.8 in the case of full control to 2.5 in the case of complete liberalization, from
Chinn and Ito (2008).
4
Country ratings on a scale ranging from strongly democratic (+10) to strongly autocratic (-10), from Center for
Systemic Peace, Polity IV Project.
5
Variable takes the value 1 if affiliate country is an offshore financial center, 0 otherwise, from International
Monetary Fund.
6
Variable takes the value 1 if currency of affiliate country is de facto dollar peg or crawl, 0 otherwise, from
Ilzetski, Reinhart and Rogoff (2009).

46

Appendix Table 3 Net Internal Borrowing Dynamics During the Crisis – Shock 1
(1)
OLS
-159.0
(105.3)

(2)
OLS
-146.1
(103.7)

(3)
OLS
-92.8
(110.0)

(4)
OLS
-103.7
(112.2)

(5)
OLS
-81.5
(109.2)

kaopenj

22.4
(48.3)

22.3
(48.1)

-12.6
(50.6)

-6.9
(54.4)

-4.7
(53.8)

ldistnycj

68.9
(83.6)

42.8
(87.0)

88.0
(87.8)

82.1
(89.4)

54.7
(83.0)

exratej

-52.3
(50.0)

-36.5
(53.6)
179.6***
(20.5)

-49.3
(66.6)
842.9*
(495.4)

-50.3
(69.4)
-2303.3
(2390.9)

-61.0
(73.3)
-4313.8*
(2315.0)

-120.0***
(34.3)

-107.3***
(38.3)

74.8*
(38.3)

80.5***
(29.1)
-91.9
(61.5)

80.2***
(27.6)
-86.1
(78.5)

-2.5
(30.5)
99.5
(94.4)

38.5
(96.9)

23.2
(120.4)

-22. 9
(153.0)

-0.028
(0.173)
-3087.1
(2257.0)

-0.105
(0.170)
-3499.3
(2175.3)

Solvencyi

-743.7
(1711.9)

-220.8
(2071.1)

Herfindhali

385.2
(264.6)
-0.353
(0.319)

347.9
(296.8)
0.106
(0.310)

Exposurei*Liquidityi

12498.4
(9396.0)

14574.2
(8810.0)

Exposurei*Solvencyi

31100.7
(20701.5)
347.0
(1464.6)

33644. 4*
(19048.0)
-336.9
(1469.9)
-688.3**
(256.0)

OFCj

ABCP exposurei
Exposurei*OFCj
Exposurei*kaopenj
Exposurei*ldistnycj
Exposurei*exratej
Total asseti
Liquidityi

Exposurei*Total
asseti

Exposurei*
Herfindhali
Local financeij

10739.3***
(1149.8)
-287.6*
(154.9)

Loan shareij
Expi*Local financeij
Expi*Loan shareij
Constant
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

-514.2
(750.9)
500
0.003

-387.6
(770.6)
500
0.017

-719.2
(781.5)
500
0.017

-641.3
(880.3)
500
0.011

-141.2
(427.7)
-335.8
(824.6)
500
0.220

47

Appendix Table 4 Net Internal Borrowing Dynamics During the Crisis
Full specifications with level and interaction controls
All reporter
Shock 1
ABCP exposurei
Expi*Local financeij
Expi*Loan shareij
Exposurei*OFCj
Exposurei*kaopenj
Exposurei*ldistnycj
Exposurei*exratej
Exposurei*Total asseti
Exposurei*Liquidityi
Exposurei*Solvencyi
Exposurei* Herfindhali
OFCj
kaopenj
ldistnycj
exratej
Total asseti
Liquidityi
Solvencyi
Herfindhali
Local financeij
Loan shareij
Constant

Observations
R-squared

All reporter
Shock 2

-4,357*
(2,319)
-690.8***
(253.2)
10,744***
(1,154)
80.02**
(35.54)
-2.408
(23.10)
102.2
(95.41)
-36.30
(138.1)
0.105
(0.307)
14,658
(8,767)
33,771*
(18,940)
-292.2
(1,448)
-84.68
(101.6)
-1.953
(50.63)
52.47
(83.04)
-51.85
(65.32)
-0.104
(0.169)
-3,522
(2,162)
-218.7
(2,061)
337.4
(295.6)
-286.4*
(154.8)
-142.7
(427.7)

U.S.-owned
only
Shock 1
-8,208**
(3,413)
-790.2**
(313.6)
11,944***
(992.7)
66.25**
(26.52)
-9.258
(27.77)
112.5
(71.38)
-2.147
(133.0)
-0.390
(1.392)
31,183**
(14,654)
56,784
(34,738)
6,192
(22,618)
-79.24
(114.6)
19.91
(71.14)
127.2
(117.2)
-127.5*
(68.49)
0.117
(0.234)
-7,395*
(3,593)
-2,098
(2,579)
275.2
(212.6)
-419.0*
(208.2)
273.2
(571.2)

5,370***
(1,573)
1,100***
(307.0)
-8,258***
(1,429)
122.5
(200.9)
-83.82
(62.43)
-507.0***
(145.9)
126.2
(147.6)
-0.744***
(0.133)
-4,029
(3,082)
-6,125
(5,589)
514.2
(1,100)
82.34
(94.66)
-2.348
(30.68)
11.16
(54.73)
-56.30
(95.51)
0.440***
(0.0885)
713.1
(640.1)
982.0
(912.9)
-83.05
(235.4)
43.76
(161.2)
1,647**
(812.1)

U.S.-owned
only
Shock 2
4,505**
(1,987)
1,264***
(157.5)
-9,264***
(720.5)
132.5
(226.6)
-103.6
(64.73)
-616.0***
(157.9)
129.2
(145.1)
-0.745*
(0.431)
1,707
(2,631)
13,568
(12,884)
-1,250
(5,312)
147.6
(113.8)
-17.57
(42.22)
-8.939
(80.67)
-66.27
(118.1)
0.335*
(0.171)
-532.6
(736.4)
1,581
(1,943)
-56.02
(348.4)
64.84
(166.7)
1,929
(1,232)

-324.1
(822.2)

-805.7
(1,144)

-387.9
(496.1)

-237.5
(755.8)

500
0.253

423
0.305

513
0.213

438
0.250

48

