                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL CRISES AND THE MULTILATERAL RESPONSE:
                 WHAT THE HISTORICAL RECORD SHOWS

                                          Bergljot Barkbu
                                         Barry Eichengreen
                                           Ashoka Mody

                                        Working Paper 17361
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17361


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




The authors are with the International Monetary Fund, the University of California, Berkeley, and
the International Monetary Fund, respectively. This paper was prepared for the NBER-Sloan project
on the Global Financial Crisis. We thank Kristen Forbes for helpful comments and Ajai Chopra, Jeromin
Zettelmeyer and several colleagues at the IMF for generous feedback. Barry Eichengreen acknowledges
having periodically done consulting for financial institutions, law firms and multilateral organizations
on issues related to debt and debt restructuring. He has no material and relevant ongoing financial
relationships with such entities at the time of writing. The standard disclaimer applies with special
force: the views expressed are the authors’ and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF’s
management, its Board of Directors, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Bergljot Barkbu, Barry Eichengreen, and Ashoka Mody. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
International Financial Crises and the Multilateral Response: What the Historical Record Shows
Bergljot Barkbu, Barry Eichengreen, and Ashoka Mody
NBER Working Paper No. 17361
August 2011
JEL No. F0,F4

                                              ABSTRACT

We review the modern history of financial crises, providing a context for analyses of the world’s recent
bout of financial instability. Along with indicators of economic performance in the subject countries,
we present a comprehensive description of multilateral rescue efforts spanning the last 30 years. We
show that while emergency lending has grown, reliance on debt restructuring has declined. This leads
us to ask what can be done to rebalance the management of debt problems toward a better mix of emergency
lending and private sector burden sharing. Building on the literature on collective action clauses, we
explore the idea of sovereign cocos, contingent debt securities that automatically reduce payment obligations
in the event of debt-sustainability problems.


Bergljot Barkbu                                       Ashoka Mody
European Department                                   European Department
International Monetary Fund                           International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW                                   700 19th Street, NW
Washington DC 20431                                   Washington DC 20431
bbarkbu@imf.org                                       amody@imf.org

Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu
                International Financial Crises and the Multilateral Response:
                             What the Historical Record Shows

                    Bergljot Barkbu, Barry Eichengreen and Ashoka Mody1




I. INTRODUCTION

         In the three decades ending in 1980, serious crises implicating financial systems and
sovereign creditworthiness were few.2 Since then, however, crises have proliferated. The
debt crisis of the 1980s, centering on syndicated bank loans, engulfed a large number of
Latin-American countries, most prominently Mexico, Argentina, and Brazil, but extended
also to Asia, Africa, and Eastern Europe.3 The Tequila crisis of 1994-95 affecting Mexico
and Argentina was the first since the 1930s to center on international bond markets.4 The
Asian crisis in 1997-98, felt most acutely in Thailand, Indonesia, South Korea and
Philippines but with wider repercussions, brought to the fore other international financial
contracts, including currency forwards and futures and interbank credits.5 The crisis in
Russia and the succeeding events spanning the period 1998-2002 threatened financial
stability in Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay, and Turkey. Finally, the most recent set of crises—in
Ukraine, Hungary, Iceland, Latvia, Romania, Greece, Ireland and Portugal—highlights even
more prominently than before the connections between financial-sector and sovereign-credit
risks.

        Just as the frequency and nature of crises have changed, so have multilateral rescue
efforts. The IMF has been at the center of the multilateral response, although the role of
        6

other official bilateral and multilateral lenders has grown over time. The number of IMF-
supported programs (“IMF programs” or “programs”) has been predictably bunched: up in
the early 1980s, up again in the mid -1990s, up more modestly around 2000, and up again
starting in 2008 (see Figure 1, left panel). IMF credit in billions of U.S. dollars shows a
similar bunching superimposed on a rising trend (Figure 1, right panel). As documented
below, cofinancing from other official sources has further increased program financing



1
  The authors are with the International Monetary Fund, the University of California, Berkeley, and the
International Monetary Fund, respectively. This paper was prepared for the NBER-Sloan project on the Global
Financial Crisis. We thank Kristen Forbes for helpful comments and Ajai Chopra, Jeromin Zettelmeyer, Lee
Buchheit and several colleagues at the IMF for generous feedback. The standard disclaimer applies with special
force: the views expressed are the authors’ and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF’s management
or Board of Directors.
2
  For tabulations see Eichengreen and Bordo (2003) and Reinhart and Rogoff (2008).
3
  See Kahler (1986).
4
  An introduction to which can be found in Cline (1995).
5
  The literature on the Asian financial crisis is immense. An early overview that shaped much of the subsequent
literature is Goldstein (1998). An accessible introduction to the subsequent controversies is Blustein (2003).
6
  A compendium of IMF staff research on these trends is Mody and Rebucci (2006).
                                                            2

commitments.7 IMF commitments since 2009 also include those granted under the Flexible
Credit Line arrangements to Mexico, Poland, and Colombia, which are also substantial
although less likely to be drawn, and a Precautionary Credit Line arrangement for Macedonia
which was partly drawn in March 2011.8

          An extensive literature addresses these financial crises and multilateral rescue
efforts. One strand asks why crises have grown more frequent and disruptive.9 Another asks
whether IMF programs have helped with the restoration of macroeconomic stability or only
aggravated output losses by requiring additional austerity of the borrower but without
restoring investor and consumer confidence. It asks, moreover, whether the international
policy response, even when it provides immediate relief, contributes to the growing incidence
of crises by creating moral hazard.10 Encompassing these concerns is a broader debate on the
appropriate balance between official financing, adjustment or austerity, and private sector
burden sharing.


                                     Figure 1: IMF programs 1980-2011 (June)
                                        emerging and advanced economies

    20                                                          160
            Number of IMF programs approved                              IMF credit committed annually,
                                                                         in billions of U.S. dollars


    15                                                          120




    10                                                          80




    5                                                           40




    0                                                            0
         1980   1985   1990   1995    2000    2005   2010             1980   1985    1990    1995     2000   2005   2010

     Source: IMF.                                                Source: IMF.



      The controversial nature of this literature reflects the difficulties these issues pose for
measurement and analysis. Measurement of a country’s adjustment effort requires

7
  Although this funding is projected to be drawn down only over time.
8
  A description of these new facilities is Goretti and Joshi (2010).
9
  See inter alia Bordo, Eichengreen, Klingebiel and Martinez Peria (2001).
10
   Some would argue that these moral hazard concerns are overdone, observing that equity investors among
others incur serious losses in crises (e.g. Mussa 2002). Rogoff (2010, pp. 16-17) is representative of the
opposing view which sees the moral hazard issue a serious one, with current crises laying “the seeds of future
ones.”
                                                        3

considerable judgment as to the country’s initial conditions.11 For analysis of the effects of
IMF programs, there is also the problem—most clearly evident in econometric treatments—
that both crises and programs have changed over time. The structural relationship that the
econometrician is seeking to estimate is not stable, in other words.12 A related problem is
that analyses attempting to determine how IMF programs affect the frequency, incidence and
magnitude of crises often fail to acknowledge that programs are not randomly assigned.13

        Some would argue that crises and the multilateral response are, in fact, not just
coevolutionary but codependent: that they have developed a reactive pattern of coexistence
and problem solving over time.14 As countries have become more integrated into global
financial markets, financial crises have become more intense and official financing has
grown larger; and as programs have grown larger, the next set of crises has proved more
virulent. Some have argued that the availability of official finance from multilateral and
national sources has rendered international investors more sanguine with the respect to the
risks they assume. In turn this has permitted countries to postpone necessary adjustments,
rendering the latter more costly and difficult when they can no longer be delayed. No one
would question the desirability of more effective crisis prevention measures. But at the same
time there would be considerable value to creating a more stable and predictable framework
for crisis resolution.15

        This last issue will be familiar to followers of the crisis literature. Commentators
have been making the case for alternatives to emergency financial assistance for more than
15 years.16 Proposals for doing so range from abolishing the IMF in the extreme to placing
new restrictions on its lending, creating a statutory mechanism for sovereign debt
restructuring, and introducing restructuring-friendly collective action and representation
clauses into bond contracts.17 Still others would say that such institutional changes are
unnecessary. It is already possible, they argue, to restructure problem debts under current
arrangements. In this view, policy makers only need to better appreciate the case for this
market-based alternative.18

11
   There are at least two facets of adjustment: correcting immediate macroeconomic imbalances with medium-
term structural considerations related to raising potential growth rates, and reducing financial sector
vulnerability. A full assessment then requires tracking a program over time to assess how much of the initially-
proposed adjustment was actually undertaken.
12
   One can think of crises and rescues as locked in a process of coevolution—as two interdependent species
each adapting to changes in the other. One is reminded of how biologists have turned to game theory to model
the evolution of competing species.
13
   And analyses that adopt clever econometric fixes—using the frequency with which a country votes with the
United States in the UN General Assembly as an instrument for the likelihood of shareholder support for a
program, for example—are less than convincing. We ourselves (Eichengreen and Mody) have committed this
sin on at least one occasion: see Eichengreen, Gupta and Mody (2006).
14
   The phrase after the colon is the Merriam Webster definition of codependence.
15
   For a critique of IMF surveillance in the run up the most recent crisis, see the report of the Fund’s Internal
Evaluation Office (IEO 2011).
16
   An early statement, in a report to the G-10, was Eichengreen and Portes (1995). The definitive summary of
the first generation of literature on this question was Roubini and Setser (2004).
17
   For examples see Hanke (2000), Meltzer Commission (2000), Krueger (2001) and Eichengreen (2003).
18
   This is essentially the conclusion of the Roubini and Setser volume cited above.
                                                       4



        The challenge can be described as a problem of time consistency. Once a crisis has
broken out, the concern among decision makers is that private-sector burden sharing, while
desirable in principle, risks further destabilizing an already volatile situation; hence they
draw back from their original insistence on burden sharing. Such time inconsistency is
understandable, but if not addressed could result in an unmanageable problem of ever larger
crises leading to ever larger official financing.

        In this paper we describe once again the state of play, providing a broader context for
the other papers at this conference focusing on the most recent crisis. Along with indicators
of economic performance in the crisis countries, we present a comprehensive description of
major multilateral rescue efforts spanning the last 30 years.19 We employ analytic narrative
rather than econometrics.20 Not only do the connections between financial circumstances and
policy responses run both ways, but those connections are complex and evolve over time, as
emphasized above. The Lucas Critique applies with a vengeance, in other words. And even
true believers in econometric modeling will acknowledge that the first step toward a proper
structural analysis is careful data construction and description.21

        We start in Section 2 by painting the picture of crisis incidence and response. We
identify crisis dates on the basis of the behavior of exchange rates and sovereign spreads.
We provide preliminary comparisons across episodes of causes, consequences and correlates
as a way of introducing non-specialist readers to the lay of the land and reminding specialists
of the terrain.

        Section 3 considers the multilateral response, focusing on the size of official rescue
packages. We marshal data on cofinancing to analyze changes in the shares of multilateral
and bilateral contributions over time and to more accurately gauge the magnitude of
assistance. The resulting picture is one of official financial assistance packages that are
growing larger over time. Section 4 complements this picture by showing that while
emergency lending has grown, debt restructuring has become less frequent, and is being used
only as a last resort, as in the case of Greece.22

        We ask in Section 5 what can be done to rebalance the management of debt problems
toward a better mix of emergency lending and private sector burden sharing. Building on the
literature on collective action clauses, we explore the idea of “sovereign cocos,” contingent
debt securities that automatically reduce payment obligations in the event of debt-
sustainability problems. As with all such ideas, the devil is in the details. We would be the


19
   Thus, we do not consider programs for low-income countries and countries that were not viewed as of
broader relevance during the key crisis episodes.
20
   On analytic narrative as a research methodology see Bates et al. (1998) and Rodrik (2007).
21
   And since the data and experience we consider cover an extended period, we are able to use historical events
as predetermined variables that drive the dynamics of the system over time—that provide the identifying
variation.
22
   See Sturzenegger and Zettlemeyer (2007) for similar conclusions.
                                                        5

first to acknowledge that we don’t have all the details worked out. But we offer our thoughts
if only to provoke discussion.


II. CRISIS EPISODES

        We distinguish five major clusters of crises: the Latin American debt crisis of the
1980s (what is sometimes called the commercial debt crisis in honor of the commercial banks
that engaged in much of the international financial intermediation of the preceding period);
the Tequila Crisis of the mid-1990s; the Asian financial crisis of 1997; the Russian crisis of
1998 and the emerging market crises that occurred in its wake; and the crisis in emerging and
advanced economies in Europe that erupted in the wake of the subprime mortgage debacle.
In the case of the Tequila crisis we consider not just Mexico but also Argentina. In the case
of Asia we include Thailand, Indonesia, South Korea and the Philippines, all of which had
IMF-supported programs. In the case of what we refer to as the Russian crisis we consider
not just Russia but also other countries that experienced sharp increases in currency volatility
and sovereign spreads in the months and years following Russia’s default: Argentina, Brazil,
Uruguay and Turkey. In the case of the post-subprime crisis we consider not just Greece,
Ireland and Portugal but also Ukraine, Iceland, Hungary, Latvia and Romania; we consider
more than just the euro crisis, per se, in other words.

       We consider only crisis countries that ultimately were in an IMF-supported program.
Presumably, no program is also a multilateral response.23 In general, however, the more
severe a crisis, the greater is the likelihood of a program.24

        Any taxonomy of crisis episodes is controversial. A case in point is our grouping the
Russian crisis with subsequent crises in Latin America and Turkey. While this is defensible
on chronological grounds, it may be not as defensible analytically, as the Russian crisis is
often seen as sui generis.25 Fortunately, most distinctions we highlight in this section carry
over when we drop this one observation from our fourth cluster.

        We identify crises using data on currency market turbulence and sovereign spreads.
In the manner of Eichengreen, Rose and Wyplosz (1995), currency market turbulence is
measured by a weighted average of the rate of change of the exchange rate change and the

23
   No doubt there are lessons from Brazil during the Tequila crisis and Malaysia during the Asian crisis, as these
countries undertook their own significant adjustment so as to render multilateral support unnecessary.
24
   Thus, we put aside the 1992-3 EMS (European Monetary System) episode on the grounds that none of the
affected countries faced the same crisis severity as the episodes we do study, and, as such, did not require IMF
or other official financing and none were forced to restructure their debts. In fact this sixth cluster shares some
features in common with our five episodes, but not others. Using our measure of exchange market pressure,
Italy, the UK, Sweden, Finland and Norway had currency crises, but in no case do sovereign spreads rise to the
threshold we use to distinguish sovereign debt crises. In addition, drops in output and rises in government
deficit and debt ratios were smaller than in our other five clusters. There were capital inflows in the run-up to
the crisis (this being one of the telltale signs of impending crisis that we distinguish below), but looking at the
financial account exclusive of reserves we do not see inflows on the same scale observed in the other episodes.
25
   See Gilman (2010). We return to this point below.
                                                        6

rate of change of reserves, where the two components are weighted by their respective
standard deviations.26 Values of the index at least three standard deviations above the mean
are identified as crises. In addition, in the manner of Celasun, Debrun and Ostry (2006) we
pinpoint crises on the basis of sovereign spreads; here spreads that are at least one standard
deviation above the mean are identified as crises.27




26
   We also considered the rate of change of the reserve/GDP ratio in lieu of the rate of change of reserves;
nothing of substance changes with this substitution.
27
   For the commercial debt crisis, crises and peaks of sovereign spreads are based on Edwards (1986) and
Folkerts-Landau (1985).
                                                      7

                             Table 1: Timing and peak of crisis, and IMF-supported programs
                    Timing of crisis           Peak of crisis                           IMF program
                Currency Sovereign         Currency Sovereign         Date                              IMF commitment
                crisis      crisis         pressure   spread          (augmentation)                    (percent of GDP)
Commercial debt crisis
Mexico          Feb. 82     Aug.82         Dec. 82                    Jan.83 – Dec.85                         5.2
                                                                      Nov.86 – Apr.88
                                                                      May.89 – May.93(Jan.90/May.92)
Argentina         Dec.83    Sep.82         Dec.83                     Jan.83 – Jan.84                         5.4
                  Apr.89                   Apr.89                     Dec.84 – Jun. 86
                                                                      Jul.87 – Sep.88
                                                                      Nov.89 – Mar.91
                                                                      Jul.91– Mar.92
Brazil            Jan.90    Aug.82         Feb.90                     Mar.83 – Feb.86                         3.7
                                                                      Aug.88 – Feb.90
                                                                      Jan.92 – Aug.93
Tequila crisis
Mexico            Dec.94    Jan,95         Dec. 94    Mar.95          Feb.95 – Feb.97                         5.5
Argentina                   Jan.95         Mar.95     Feb.95          Mar.92 – Mar.96(Dec. 92/Apr.95)         2.5
                                                                      Apr.96 – Jan.98
Asian crisis
Thailand          Jul.97    Nov.97         Jan. 98    Sep.98          Aug.97 – Jun.00                         2.6
Indonesia         Dec.97                   Jan. 98                    Nov.97 – Aug.98 (Jul.98)                4.8
                                                                      Aug.98 – Feb.00 (Mar.99)
Korea             Nov.97    Dec.97         Dec. 97    Sep.98          Dec.97 – Dec.00                         4.0
Philippines       Dec.97    Aug.98         Dec. 97    Sep.98          Jun.94 – Mar.98 (Jul.97)                3.8
                                                                      Apr.98 – Dec.00
Russian crisis and aftermath
Russia            Aug.98     Sep.98        Sep.98     Mar.99          Mar.96 – Mar.99 (Jul-98)                7.2
                                                                      Jul.99 – Dec.00
Brazil            Jan.99    Oct.01         Jan.99     Oct.02          Dec.98 – Sep.01                         11.6
                                                                      Sep.01 – Sep.02
                                                                      Sep.02 – Mar.05 (Dec.03)
Argentina                   Dec.01         May.02     Jul.02          Feb.98-Mar.00                           20.9
                                                                      Mar.00 – Jan.03 (Jan./Sep.01)
                                                                      Jan.03 – Aug.03
                                                                      Sep.03 – Jan.06
Uruguay           Jul.02    Jul.02         Jul.02     Oct.02          Apr.02 – Mar.05(Jun./Aug.02)            25.7
                                                                      Jun.05 – Dec.06
Turkey            Feb.01    Dec.00         Feb.01     Jul.01          Dec.99 – Feb.02(Dec.00./May.01)         17.4
                                                                      Feb.02 – Feb.05
                                                                      May.05 – May.08
European crisis
Ukraine                     Oct.08         Oct.08     Mar.09          Nov.08 – Jul.10                         20.8
                                                                      Jul.10 – Dec.12
Hungary           Oct.08    Oct.08         Jan.09     Apr.09          Nov.08 – Oct.10                         10.6
Iceland           Sep.08    Oct.08         Sep.08     Dec.08          Nov.08 – Aug.11                         13.1
Latvia            Oct.08    Oct.08         Oct.08     Mar.09          Dec.08 – Dec.11                          7.1
Romania                     Oct.08         Jan.09     Feb.09          May.09 – Mar.11                         13.6
                                                                      Mar.11 – Mar.13
Greece            Oct.08    Apr.10         Oct.08     Jul.11          May.10 – May.13                         13.2
Ireland           Oct. 08   Sep.10         Jan.09     Jul. 11         Dec.10 – Dec.13                         14.5
Portugal          Oct. 08   Sep.10         Oct.08     Jul.11          May.11 – May.14                         15.9
                                                         8

        Table 1 shows the resulting crisis dates, the timing of the first IMF intervention, the
number of IMF-supported programs associated with the episode, and the cumulative IMF
financial commitment. Several differences across episodes are notable.28 For example, the
debt crisis of the 1980s displays an especially large increase in exchange market pressure,
reflecting high rates of inflation in the crisis countries. Sovereign spreads, on the other hand,
rose more modestly in that episode, in part because much of the debt in question was
borrowing from commercial bank syndicates.29

        Risk premia on sovereign bonds came to the fore in the Tequila crisis, when Mexican
spreads rose by 1,500 basis points. For Mexico, the crisis was resolved with a single
program; but program size was substantially larger than in the 1980s. In contrast, private
sector imbalances were the proximate source of the Asian crisis, with sovereign spreads
rising only with subsequent worries that governments would socialize the losses of banks and
large corporations.

        Exchange market pressure then rose sharply with the Russian crisis, albeit to lower
levels than in the commercial debt crisis. Some countries obtained multiple IMF-supported
programs, raising cumulative average program financing size considerably above levels
reached in prior crises episodes.

        Finally, exchange market pressure has been no greater in the recent European crisis
than in preceding ones. (In the case of the three euro zone economies, of course, this index
has limited significance, since they are small parts of the euro area economically and their
difficulties thus have only limited impact on the euro exchange rate.) Spreads on sovereign
bonds are high by historical standards for Greece and are high everywhere by the prior
standards of the countries themselves. Those spreads reflect limited access to international
capital markets, a reduction notable because of the particularly easy access prior to the crisis.

        In three episodes (the 1980s, Asian, and current crises), GDP growth had been
unsustainably high for some time before the crisis. But growth had begun to decelerate
before the crisis crystallized in the 1980s and in Asia (Figure 2, left panel). 30 The Tequila
and Russian crises, in contrast, were preceded by slow growth despite the exceptional
measures taken in Mexico to sustain growth in 1994, a presidential election year.31 More
often than not, it would appear, weakening growth due to accumulated macroeconomic
imbalances is a precursor to crises. In the commercial debt crisis, the existence of
imbalances was evident in the acceleration in inflation during the run-up (Figure 2, right
panel). Of our subsequent crises, in contrast, significant inflation was evident only in the
run-up to the Russian crisis.32

28
   There have been some similar comparisons before (see e.g. Reinhart, Goldstein and Kaminsky 2000, Sheng
2009 and Claessens et al. 2011 for illustrations of alternative approaches). Our analysis is differs in its focus on
as many as five separate episodes and in the countries considered.
29
   The commercial debt was only extensively securitized starting in 1989.
30
   t denotes the year of the currency or sovereign crisis, whichever occurs first.
31
   As emphasized in Gil-Diaz (1998).
32
   And even then it seemingly rang no warning bells.
                                                                        9




                                                         Figure 2: Growth and inflation

 10
            Real GDP growth (annual, in percent)                                  CPI inflation                       Commercial debt crisis
     8                                                                            (annual, in percent)                Tequila crisis
                                                                            320                                       Asian crisis
                                                                                                                      Russian crisis
     6                                                                                                                European crisis

     4                                                                      300

     2
                                                                            80
     0
                                                                            60
     -2

     -4                                                                     40

     -6              Commercial debt crisis
                     Tequila crisis                                         20
     -8              Asian crisis
                     Russian crisis
                     European crisis                                         0
-10
              t-3     t-2      t-1       t         t+1      t+2   t+3             t-3       t-2       t-1        t        t+1    t+2      t+3
          Source: World Economic Outlook.                                     Source: International Financial Statistics.



        The behavior of public debt and deficits also differs across episodes (Figure 3).33
Consistent with the contrasting behavior of inflation noted above, lax public finances played
a major role in Latin America in the late 1970s and early 1980s and in the countries
experiencing difficulties in the wake of Russia’s default. But the same was not true in Asia
or Latin America in the 1990s. Some argue that Mexico in 1994 had public spending hidden
in the accounts of its development bank and that governments of the Asian crisis countries
had significant implicit liabilities to banks and industrial conglomerates that did not show up
in the budgetary accounts.34 But the comparative statement remains valid: public sector
deficits were more of a problem in the run-up to the 1980s and Russian debt crises, while
private sector deficits were more of a problem in the run-up to the Tequila and Asian crises.

         Interpreting the state of European public finances is particularly challenging.35 With
the exception of Greece, the state of the public finances did not obviously indicate a looming
crisis. Assessments prior to the crisis also showed low “structural” deficits because potential
growth rates were regarded as high and hence the cyclical component of the growth was not
seen as large. As shown in Figure 3, the dramatic deterioration of European budget balances
following the onset of the crisis then led to significant reassessment of the pre-crisis state of

33
   Ideally one would want to include cyclically adjusted deficits as a measure of the pre-crisis fiscal stance and
post-crisis response. But estimates of cyclically adjusted deficits exist for only a very small subset of our crisis
countries. Moreover, there is considerable dispute about how the cycle affected the deficit (and therefore about
how to do the cyclical adjustment), as we describe in the paragraph following this one.
34
   For discussion see GAO (1996).
35
   The general government deficit is greatly affected by the 2010 budget deficit in Ireland, which due to banking
sector outlays that reached more than 32 percent of GDP. Excluding Ireland, the deterioration is still substantial,
to about 7½ percent of GDP in (t+2).
                                                                                  10

public finances. Potential growth rates during the pre-crisis period were revised downward.
Key revenue sources—notably those related to real-estate transactions—were belatedly
acknowledged to have been temporary.36 With benefit of hindsight it is now clear that
unsustainable consumption booms and housing bubbles contributed to the appearance of
healthy public finances while hiding sizeable structural deficits. Together with the failure to
provision for implicit liabilities to the banking system, this meant that the strength of
European budgets prior to 2008 was overstated.

                                                                 Figure 3: Public finances

     4                                                                                 120
           General government balance (in percent of                                         General government debt (in percent of GDP)
           GDP)
     2
                                                                                                     Commercial debt crisis
                                                                                       100
                                                                                                     Tequila crisis
     0
                                                                                                     Asian crisis
                                                                                                     Russian crisis
     -2                                                                                80
                                                                                                     European crisis

     -4
                                                                                       60
     -6

     -8                                                                                40

 -10              Commercial debt crisis
                  Tequila crisis                                                       20
                  Asian crisis
 -12              Russian crisis
                  European crisis
 -14                                                                                    0
            t-3        t-2        t-1         t            t+1   t+2       t+3                t-3     t-2      t-1       t       t+1       t+2   t+3
      Source: World Economic Outlook.                                                    Source: World Economic Outlook and IMF staff.
     0
           Structural balanc es in European crisis cases
           (in percent of potential GDP)


     -2




     -4




     -6
                      April 2008 WEO/2008 staff reports

                      April 2011 WEO

     -8
           2004       2005       2006       2007       2008      2009      2010
      Source: World Economic Outlook and 2008 staff reports for Hungary,
      Romania ,and Ukraine. No estimates are available for Latvia.




       External positions also varied widely across episodes. Current account deficits in the
run-up to the current crisis were unusually large, but sizeable deficits were also present in all
instances except the Russian crisis (Figure 4). There is an apparent tendency for current

36
 Systematic accounts of this phenomenon do not yet exist to allow cross-country comparisons. For Ireland, see
Kanda (2010).
                                                      11

accounts to strengthen already in the period immediately preceding the crisis.37 This
presumably reflects the declining availability of private external finance and capital flight as
problems began to become evident. There is also a tendency for real exchange rates to
appreciate (it is tempting to say “to become overvalued”) prior to crises and to collapse
subsequently; the Russian and current crises stand out for the unusually early and late dates
of their real rate collapses, respectively. Reserve coverage measured as a share of short-term
debt shows a tendency to decline in the run-up and to recover subsequently, with countries in
the Russian crisis starting in a relatively secure position but seeing their coverage ratios then
deteriorate particularly rapidly.

        These external imbalances were largest in the run-up to the recent European crisis.
The presumption was that monetary integration would guarantee stability and facilitate catch-
up growth, which led to massive amounts of borrowing and lending by the private (primarily
financial) sectors within Europe.38 As in past crises, the European external imbalances
narrowed mildly just prior to the crisis, as the impending problems become more evident and
the availability of private external finance declined (in the Russian case, the current account
had actually moved into a surplus before the onset of the crisis). Yet, even in the year before
the crisis, the average current account deficit in the European crisis was 9 percent of GDP,
matched by equivalent private capital inflows. In contrast, the size of the real exchange rates
appreciation prior to European crisis was relatively moderate in the sense that it was no
greater than in past crises (and smaller, in fact, relative to the commercial debt crisis).

         Leaving aside the Russian crisis, which saw a private capital outflow even before the
event, the larger was the capital inflow prior to the crisis, the larger is the subsequent capital-
flow reversal. This phenomenon is also the distinguishing characteristic of the European
crisis, where private capital inflows reached unprecedented heights and then collapsed with
special ferocity.39 Importantly, though, the accompanying decline in the real exchange rate
during this crisis was significantly smaller and more gradual than in past crises. Similarly, the
fall in reserve ratios in Europe was limited.

        These comparisons point to important respects in which Europe’s crisis is different.
Inflation was subdued before the crisis, reflecting the disciplines of the single currency in
Greece, Ireland and Portugal, of a currency board in Latvia, and, more generally, a relatively
widespread anchoring of inflation expectations. The real exchange rate had gradually
become overvalued but to a much lesser extent than may have been expected from the
magnitude of the foreign capital inflows. Government budgets were closer to balance than in
earlier crises, the exceptional case of Greece notwithstanding. These are not unrelated
observations: it was this very appearance of monetary and fiscal stability that allowed the
now crisis countries to import capital in the amounts they did.


37
   Actually moving into surplus in the Asian and Russian cases.
38
   See Blanchard and Giavazzi (2002). For a critical ex post assessment of this process see Eichengreen (2010).
Two earlier analyses that viewed these capital flows are relatively benign are Abiad, Mody, and Leigh (2009),
Ahearne, Schmitz and von Hagen (2009), and Berger and Nitsch (2009).
39
   See also Section 3 below.
                                                                                 12

                                                          Figure 4: External position

10                                                                                    20
         Current account balance (in percent of GDP)                                        Real effective exchange rate
 8                                                                                          (annual percentage change)

                 Commercial debt crisis
 6                                                                                    10
                 Tequila crisis
 4               Asian crisis
                 Russian crisis
 2               European crisis
                                                                                       0
 0

 -2
                                                                                  -10
 -4
                                                                                                   Commercial debt crisis
 -6
                                                                                                   Tequila crisis
                                                                                  -20
 -8                                                                                                Asian crisis
                                                                                                   Russian crisis
-10
                                                                                                   European crisis
-12                                                                               -30
         t-3      t-2      t-1        t            t+1        t+2          t+3               t-3      t-2         t-1       t       t+1     t+2      t+3
      Source: World Economic Outlook.
                                                                                        Source: IMF database.

150                                                                                   20
          International reserve coverage (in percent of short-term debt)                     Private capital flows
                                                                                             (in percent of GDP)                    Commercial debt crisis
                                                  Commercial debt crisis              15                                            Tequila crisis
120                                               Tequila crisis                                                                    Asian crisis
                                                  Asian crisis                                                                      Russian crisis
                                                                                      10
                                                  Russian crisis                                                                    European crisis
 90                                               European crisis
                                                                                       5


                                                                                       0
 60


                                                                                       -5
 30
                                                                                      -10


  0                                                                                   -15
           t-3      t-2        t-1        t        t+1       t+2           t+3               t-3       t-2          t-1         t   t+1     t+2      t+3
      Source: World Economic Outlook and International Financial
      Statistics. 1/ Excluding Greece, Ireland, and Portugal.                          Source: World Economic Outlook.
                                                       13



        Instead, foreign capital inflows into European economies facilitated the buildup of a
very high degree of leverage. These countries’ serious internal imbalances had their roots in
the resulting credit booms. From around 2002, household credit grew significantly faster in
Ireland, Greece, Portugal, and emerging European markets than in Germany and the other
countries of the euro-area “core.”40 Credit to non-financial corporations displayed a similar
pattern. The private sector borrowed from their banks, which in turn borrowed from banks
elsewhere in Europe.41 For Latvia and Romania, EU funds following accession in 2004
contributed further to inflows. Despite rapid wage increases, household debt-to-income ratios
rose in 2002-07 by more than five-times in Latvia, and by 270 percent in Hungary, 180
percent in Ireland and 130 percent in Portugal. Housing prices rose dramatically in Greece,
Ireland, Iceland, and Latvia.42 Equity prices continued to rise right up to the eve of the crisis,
in contrast to the situation in Asia some ten years before, when they started falling well
before the crisis.

        The kind of fast recovery that followed the Asian crisis does not appear to be in the
cards in Europe. The Asian crisis had a greater pure liquidity-crisis component: in Asia, the
ratio of foreign exchange reserves to short-term debt had fallen to low levels, inviting
speculative attacks on currencies; the subsequent build up in reserves was therefore sufficient
to ease financial tensions. In Europe, in contrast, reserves were, on average, at healthier
levels. More importantly, European crisis economies require a precipitous fall in domestic
demand to achieve the necessary deleveraging. Without the option of exchange rate
depreciation, this adjustment has had to rely largely on internal devaluation. 43

         However, the rate of real depreciation following the crisis has been limited, as noted
above. In the current episode, then, less post-crisis adjustment has taken the form of prices as
opposed to quantities. The greater difficulty of engineering a real depreciation has meant
that it has been more difficult to substitute external for internal demand. The implication is
that absent growth and with continued deflationary tendencies, public debt ratios would be
difficult to bring down. In this sense, the European crisis already resembles the more
protracted commercial debt and Russian crises. That is to say, the current crop of post-crisis

40
   Average annual growth rates of household credit over 2003-07 were: Ireland (23 percent), Greece
(26 percent), Portugal (7 percent), compared to euro area (8 percent) and Germany (0.4 percent), based on ECB
data. According to Eurostat, the annual growth rates of household credit were even higher in Hungary
(27 percent) and Latvia (67 percent) during 2004-07, and Romania (88 percent) during 2005-07.
41
   In other words, banks in the problem countries funded their loans not just by taking deposits from residents
but in addition by borrowing on the interbank wholesale money market.
42
   Unfortunately, comparable house price developments across this long span of time are not available. Even
stock prices are available only from the Tequila crisis onwards. What data are available, however, point to clear
difference between the Asian and European crises on the one hand and the Tequila and Russian crises on the
other, as we are about to describe.
43
   Again, the exchange rate regime probably has a lot to do with this, it having been possible to unpeg pegged
exchange rates in the wake of the Asian crisis but members of the euro area do not have such latitude. Also, the
Asian crisis occurred in a period of high growth in much of the rest of the world, while the post-subprime crisis
occurred in a period when trade and output were collapsing worldwide. The scope for recovering by, inter alia,
depreciating one’s currency and replacing domestic demand with external demand was, obviously, much greater
in the former than the latter instance.
                                                        14

recessions has been unusually severe by historical standards, and it is far from clear at the
time of writing that this has run its course.

        Finally, there is the fact that some of these crises were global in scope while others
were not. For example, the Asian crisis occurred during a period of high growth in much of
the rest of the world, while the post-subprime crisis occurred in a period when trade and
output were collapsing worldwide. Scope for recovering by, inter alia, depreciating one’s
currency and replacing domestic demand with external demand was, obviously, much greater
in the former than the latter instance.

        In sum, crises come in different flavors. The Russian crisis of the late 1990s most
closely resembles the debt crisis of the 1980s: weakness in domestic public finances was
mirrored in inflationary trends, and both crises required large corrections of the real exchange
rate. The Asian and European crises also seem to have been cut from similar cloth. Both
heavily involved private-sector imbalances. In both cases pre-crisis growth rested on the fast
growth of credit and rapid rise of leverage. Both saw large initial output drops, reflecting
heavily compromised banking systems and the important roles played by pegged exchange
rates or their monetary-union equivalent. Given the existence of deep-rooted problems, it is
likely that the European crisis will be persistent in the manner of the commercial debt and
Russian crises. The Tequila episode, in contrast, stands alone.

III. THE SIZE OF FINANCING PACKAGES

       We now analyze trends in program financing. Since we are interested not only in
averages but also variations around them, we club the Tequila crisis (which led to only two
programs) together with the Asian crisis. While, as discussed above, there are differences
between the Tequila and Asian crises, for the purpose at hand—namely, the progression of
program financing size—we would argue that they are part of the same evolutionary trend.
That they occurred close together in time warrants treating them as a pair for present
purposes.

        The magnitude of financing can be measured per program or by the cumulative sum
of the financing through repeated programs during the course of a crisis episode. In addition,
cofinancing with the IMF by official bilateral and multilateral creditors became increasingly
important starting with the Tequila crisis.44 Hence both IMF financing and the overall official
financing are discussed below.

       The size of financing packages can also be normalized in different ways. The
country’s quota is the metric used in the IMF’s assessment of access levels.45 But since

44
   Official financing in this section does not include financing through debt rescheduling or restructuring.
45
   It is therefore the Fund’s practice to report the financing as a percent of the country’s quota. “Each member is
assigned a quota, based broadly on its relative size in the world economy. A member’s quota determines its
maximum financial commitment to the IMF, its voting power, and has a bearing on its access to IMF
financing.” http://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/facts/quotas.htm. The actual level of IMF access is based on the
IMF’s policies on access limits and access under each facility or instrument.
                                                     15

quotas have not always kept pace with global economic developments, we normalize
program financing by the country’s nominal GDP.46 Yet another alternative would be to
deflate the dollar value of the program by an appropriate dollar price index. Fortunately,
these alternative normalizations all lead to the same basic conclusion.

        Consider first the size of IMF financing per program (Figure 5, upper left panel).
There is a steady increase in the median program size and an increase in the 75th percentile of
the size distribution. The program with the largest financing also rose from the 1980s, but the
largest ever program, at 19 percent of GDP, was that for Uruguay in the aftermath of the
Russian crisis.47 While peak program size then came down in the European crisis to 15
percent of GDP for Ireland, this was far above the 3 and 6 percent of GDP levels in the
commercial debt and the Tequila/Asian crises. When official cofinancing is included (as in
Figure 5, upper right panel), the rise in the median and 75th percentile program sizes over
time is once again evident, with a small dip in the Russian crisis (though Uruguay boosts the
largest program even in that episode.

        The growing size of financing packages is clearest when cumulating multiple
programs per country in each crisis episode (Figure 5, lower left panel) and considering total
official financing (Figure 5, lower right panel). Financing packages rise sharply in size
between the commercial debt and Tequila/Asian crises mainly because of extensive official
cofinancing. Aggregate financing jumps for the largest program in the episode in question,
from about 10 percent of GDP in the commercial debt crisis to 20 percent of GDP for the
largest program in the Tequila/Asian crisis (Mexico in 1995). The further increase in the
Russian crisis reflects multiple programs (as in the commercial debt crisis). And the latest
step up in program size in the European crisis arises from both larger IMF financing and the
substantial co-financing. Over the entire period, the largest cumulative official financing
package has grown ten-fold. The program at the 75th percentile has grown six-fold, and the
median program in the European crisis is five times as large as the median in the commercial
debt crisis.48




46
   Increases in quotas take place through regular and ad-hoc reviews. The 14th General Review of Quotas, once
it becomes effective, will double quotas to catch up with global economic developments and realign quota
shares to fast-growing emerging market and developing countries that have become underrepresented.
47
   Access to IMF financing under the arrangement for Uruguay was augmented in June and August 2002,
bringing it to 19 percent of GDP – we discuss this case at greater length below. Note that the full amount was
drawn. Note also that the IMF’s decision-making process does not take into account a country’s nominal GDP.
48
   If there are repeated programs in the European crisis, the observed increase would be even greater. Among
the sample countries in the European crisis, only Ukraine and Romania have had successor programs so far. The
programs for Iceland, Latvia, Greece, Ireland and Portugal are still active at the time of writing, while
Hungary’s has expired.
                                                                    16

                                         Figure 5: IMF and total official financing
                                                    (in percent of GDP)

    25                                                                    70
           IMF financing (per program)                                            Official financing (per program)
                                                                          60
    20              Median                                                                 Median
                    75th percentile                                       50               75th percentile
                    Maximum                                                                Maximum
    15
                                                                          40

                                                                          30
    10

                                                                          20
     5
                                                                          10

     0                                                                      0
         Commercial      Tequila and Russian crisis    European                 Commercial      Tequila and Russian crisis      European
          debt crisis    Asian crises                    crisis                  debt crisis    Asian crises                      crisis
  Source: IMF staff reports.                                             Source: IMF staff reports.


    30                                                                     70
            Cumulative IMF financing per country during crisis                    Cumulative official financing per country during crisis

    25                                                                     60
                    Median                                                                  Median
                    75th percentile                                                         75th percentile
                                                                           50
    20              Maximum                                                                 Maximum
                                                                           40
    15
                                                                           30
    10
                                                                           20

     5                                                                     10

     0                                                                      0
          Commercial      Tequila and Russian crisis     European                Commercial     Tequila and Russian crisis        European
           debt crisis    Asian crises                     crisis                 debt crisis   Asian crises                        crisis
  Source: IMF staff reports.                                             Source: IMF staff reports.

Note: The upper panel depicts averages for each crisis of IMF and total official financing per program,
respectively. The lower panel shows the average cumulative IMF and total official fianncing, respectively, that
were committed to countries during a crisis.
                                                                      17

        The rapid response and large                            Figure 6. Sovereign external debt to private creditors,
financing extended to support the                               emerging market countries (in trillions of dollars)
Mexican program reflected the Fund’s                                700
                                                                           Bond
new view of itself as “crisis manager”
                                                                    600    Commercial bank
Boughton (2000). The commercial
debt crisis emphasized the systemic                                 500
implications of crises, encouraging the
Fund to focus on containing the crisis                              400

as a principal objective, rather than
                                                                    300
merely facilitating stabilization and
structural adjustment in the originating                            200
country in the hope that this would
also resolve the broader crisis.                                    100


                                                  0
         Thus, not only was the                    1980         1987         1994      2001 2008
Mexican program during the Tequila                 Source: Global Development Finance.
crisis larger than its predecessors, but
the shift toward more official financing proved permanent, though with variations in the
extent of participation by bilateral and other multilateral lenders varying somewhat over time
(Figure 7, left panel). This reflected, in part, the new dependence of sovereigns on bond
rather than on bank financing (Figure 6) and the difficulty then perceived of mobilizing
bondholders to negotiate a restructuring. It reflected also fears of contagion—that other
countries would be adversely affected if investors began to fear restructuring-related losses.


 Figure 7: Official financing (in percent of GDP), capital flows, and exchange rate pressure

      40                                                                    40                                                                 300
             Cumulative official financing                                                 Official financing (in percent of GDP)
      35     (in percent of GDP)
                                                                                           Peak-to-trough capital outflow (in
                Bilateral                                                                  percent of GDP)
      30                                                                    30             Peak exchange rate pressure (rhs)
                Other multilateral
                                                                                                                                               200
      25        IMF

      20                                                                    20

      15
                                                                                                                                               100
      10                                                                    10

        5

        0                                                                    0                                                                 0
            Commercial      Tequila and Russian crisis   European                 Commercial     Tequila and Russian crisis         European
             debt crisis    Asian crisis                   crisis                  debt crisis   Asian crisis                         crisis

     Source: IMF staff reports.                                            Source: IMF staff reports and Worl d Economic Outlook.




       Does the increase in program financing reflect the greater severity of crises? Our
answer is “yes and no.”49 The peak-to-trough capital flow reversal was larger in the
49
     Two handed economists that we are.
                                                       18

Tequila/Asian crises than the commercial debt crisis (see Figure 7, right panel), but peak
exchange market pressure was less. In the crises following Russia, capital outflows were
modest. While peak exchange market pressure was greater than in the Tequila/Asian crises,
it was again less than in the commercial debt crisis. By both metrics, then, the Russian crisis
was less severe than the commercial debt crisis, although the financing was considerably
larger. The European crisis was characterized by little exchange market pressure but a huge
capital flow reversal and large financing, as we have seen.

        It would appear, ex-post, that the size of the capital flow reversal has been a key
correlate of the magnitude of official financing.50 If so, the rise in official financing over time
primarily reflects the spread of financial globalization and, with it, the scope for capital flow
reversals. By this metric, the Russian crisis cases were outliers, where the large financing
was nevertheless provided, perhaps, because fear of contagion was palpable in the wake of
preceding events in Asia. This suggests that, along with the financing needs arising from
capital flow reversals, perceived risk of contagion has been the other driver of growing
program size.

        These hypotheses can be tested using regression analysis, with total cumulative
official financing as a share of GDP as the dependent variable.51 The results, in Table 2,
show that when all programs are pooled, capital flow reversals appear as the main factor
associated with program financing size, with little role for the exchange market pressure.
When episode fixed effects are included, the capital reversal variable remains, which implies
that even within each episode the extent of capital flow reversals continues to influence
program financing.52 The fixed effects suggest that, controlling for capital flow reversals and
exchange market pressure, program size did not rise between the commercial debt crisis and
the Tequila/Asian crisis, but there was a jump in program financing in the Russian episode
and a further modest rise in the European crises. Thus, other crisis-specific factors, such as
differences in the perceived risk of contagion, also influenced program size.




50
   IMF financing is determined based on a country’s balance of payments need, not on the basis of capital
reversals. Notably IMF financing cannot substitute for private capital shortfalls in the medium term. This is,
inter alia, reflected in the IMF’s Exceptional Access Criteria, requiring prospects of gaining or regaining access
to private capital markets during the period when IMF resources are outstanding.
51
   Not just IMF financial assistance.
52
   These regressions should be taken with the obvious caveats. In particular, there is the possibility that the
extent of the capital flow reversal reflects the magnitude, actual or anticipated, of multilateral financial
assistance. Here the capital flow reversal is measured between periods t-2 to t (where t is where exchange
market pressure and/or sovereign spreads spike), whereas program financing becomes available in t or t+1, so
simultaneity would have to be due largely to anticipations.
                                                      19




             Table 2: Correlates of official financing
             Variable                                  Coefficients      Coefficients

             Capital reversal, in percent of GDP           0.37**        0.27**
                                                           [3.22]        [2.92]
             Exchange market pressure index, peak          -0.05*        -0.02
                                                           [-1.78]       [-0.62]
             Constant                                      22.14 ***
                                                           [6.08]
             Commercial debt crisis                                      10.86
                                                                         [1.27]
             Tequila/Asian crisis dummy                                  10.53**
                                                                         [2.49]
             Russian crisis dummy                                        22.25***
                                                                         [4.50]
             European crisis dummy                                       31.65 ***
                                                                         [7.51]

             R-squared                                     0.46          0.73

Note: columns report the coefficients in an Ordinary Least Square regression with cumulative official financing
by country (in percent of GDP) during a crisis episode as dependent variable. t statistics are in brackets. ***
represents significance at 1 percent, ** at 5 percent, and * at 10 percent levels.

       We conclude that although crises have come in different flavors, the one predictable
trend has been a rise in program financing. In retrospect, the rise in program size in the
second half of the 1990s, during the Tequila and Asian crises arose primarily because there
was a perceived need to dampen the consequences of large capital reversals. The continued
growth in program financing through the Russian crisis and its aftermath reflects broader
systemic considerations, and the European crisis brought these two themes of capital-account
reversals and systemic risk together.53

        The conditions attached to IMF financial assistance are an important part of the
official response, insofar as the domestic adjustment required by these conditions can, in
principle, substitute for program financing.54 Adjustment can be thought of as (i)
macroeconomic adjustment through fiscal consolidation, exchange rate devaluation, or
monetary contraction to fight inflation; this is largely captured through the quantitative
targets of the IMF programs or (ii) structural reforms, as defined by structural conditionality.
The scope and use of quantitative macroeconomic targets have remained similar over time,
although tailored to different exchange rate, monetary and fiscal policy regimes.55 The

53
   Which are tempting to interpret in terms of contagion.
54
   See IMF (2001), IMF (2005), and Independent Evaluation Office (2007) for more comprehensive studies and
IMF (2009) for a description of recent reforms to modernize IMF conditionality.
55
   Since 1979, all upper credit tranche Fund-supported programs have quantitative performance criteria. The
arrangements under the Flexible Credit Line and the Precautionary Credit Line that were approved in 2009 have
ex-ante policy conditionality in the form of qualification criteria.
                                                     20

macroeconomic programs of Mexico, Brazil and Argentina during the commercial debt crisis
aimed at reducing budget deficits and public external debt, bringing down inflation by
containing the growth of monetary aggregates, building reserves, and, later on, eliminating
external payment arrears as part of the debt strategy. Mexico and Argentina had similar
program targets during the Tequila crisis, but with substantially larger financing.
Macroeconomic programs in the Asian crisis focused on restoring confidence, including
through reconstituting net international reserves, combined with fiscal policies to support the
external adjustment. The programs for Brazil (in 1999) and Turkey (in 2006) incorporated
“inflation consultation clauses” tailored to inflation targeting countries. The recent programs
for European countries have emphasized fiscal targets, especially for euro area countries with
no national monetary and exchange rate policies.

        Trends in the scope of conditions related to structural reforms are harder to identify.
The only metric of these conditions is their number, which is at best imperfectly correlated
with the extent of the reforms agreed and completed. Moreover, the degree to which
structural reforms have been formal conditions, as distinct from informal commitments that
were nevertheless viewed as part of the overall program, has varied over time. Despite
increasing awareness of the role of structural policies in the course of the 1980s, there was
much resistance against linking them to performance criteria.56 Instead, the understanding
was that overall progress on structural reforms would be discussed at program reviews.57

        Thus, structural reforms were rarely formal program conditions during the
commercial and the Tequila crises.58 Structural conditionality became more of a focus as a
result of the structural deficiencies unveiled in the Asian crisis. The Asian programs
incorporated a large number of structural conditions, initially focused on financial sector
reform. While these lists of reform measures quickly developed into a broader reform
agenda, they were not part of the program’s formal conditionality but were rather were
commitments by the authorities (Figure 8). Early programs in the Russian crisis cases had an
even larger number of conditions.59

        Structural conditionality evoked considerable criticism for being intrusive,
undermining national ownership, lacking priority, overwhelming implementation capacity,
and being in areas outside the core expertise of the IMF. In response, initiatives were taken
starting in 2000 to streamline structural conditionality, and emphasize the need for ownership
and macroeconomic relevance.60


56
   The IMF’s conditionality was constrained by the 1979 Conditionality Guidelines, which stated that
performance criteria “will normally be confined to (i) macroeconomic variables, and (ii) those necessary to
implement specific provision of the Article [of Agreement] or policies adopted under them.”
57
   For low-income countries, structural policies occupied a central role in Fund programs starting with the
Structural Adjustment Facility and later the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility in the 1980s.
58
   An exception is Argentina (1984), which had performance criteria on interest rates and making foreign
exchange available.
59
   Although partly offset by less non-formal structural commitments.
60
   In September 2000, an Interim Guidance Note was issued for this purposed, followed by the Guidelines on
Conditionality adopted by the IMF Executive Board in 2002.
                                                        21

        Thus, conditionality has been
                                                 Figure 8. Structural conditionality in IMF-supported
streamlined in the most recent set of                                         programs
programs. It is more focused on macro                Average conditions per program year, by crisis
relevant reforms, the majority of
measures being related to financial                         Prior actions
sector, the fiscal balance, and                    25
                                                            Structural benchmarks
                                                            Structural performance criteria
monetary/exchange rate policies.
Following the March 2009 overhaul of               20

the IMF’s lending framework,
implementation of structural policies is           15


monitored in the context of program                10
reviews rather than through the use of
structural performance criteria, which              5

have been discontinued in IMF-supported
                                                    0
programs. While structural reforms                         Asian crisis        Russian crisis European crisis

continue to be integral to IMF programs,         Source: IMF staff reports and MONA.

countries no longer need formal waivers
if they fail to implement a structural reform by a particular date.

IV. PRIVATE SECTOR BURDEN SHARING
       Characterizing trends in private sector burden sharing is not easy. Doing so
systematically would require a quantitative assessment of the extent of haircuts, which in turn
requires the cumulative reduction over multiple bail-in efforts, an analysis that to our
knowledge has not been undertaken.

        That said, overall tendencies are clear (see Table 3 for an overview of private sector
involvement in the crisis cases in the sample). As we read the evidence, there has been
declining reliance on private sector burden sharing over time, albeit with significant
oscillations around that trend. Thus, all the countries centrally involved in the 1980s’
commercial debt episode ultimately underwent debt restructuring. Payment relief was seen as
an alternative and important supplement to official financing in an era when financing
packages were typically small. Restructuring negotiations, while not always brought to a
quick conclusion, were ongoing. In contrast, the current European crisis has seen only one
restructuring proposal as of the time of writing, in Greece, and the estimated prospective
reduction in the net present value (NPV) of the debt or haircut, at 21 percent, is relatively
limited by historical standards.61 In the intervening episodes, the picture is similarly nuanced,
but there is an overall a tendency for official financing to increase and emphasis on
restructuring to fall.

        How do we explain the trend away from private-sector burden sharing? We argue
that burden-sharing agreements have become more difficult with the shift from bank to

61
     And even that estimate is controversial (Allen, Eichengreen and Evans 2011).
                                                       22

securitized finance. More difficult is not the same as impossible, to be sure, but there are
more players involved than in the 1980s, when developing country debt was in the hands of
illiquid loans extended mainly by a handful of money-center banks. In the case of the recent
Greek debt restructuring proposal (more on which below), the financial institutions
represented by the Institute of International Finance agreed to an exchange designed to
produce a 21 percent reduction in the net present value of the Greek government bonds. That
21 percent figure assumed, however, a 90 percent participation rate, and it is not known to
what extent the banks in question had already sold their Greek government bonds to other
investors less inclined to participate in the exchange. An “involuntary” exchange in which
those other holders were required to accept new bonds in exchange for their own ones,
through inter alia a change in the Greek law governing the securities in question, would have
presumably constituted a credit event that would have triggered credit default swaps on the
debt, with uncertain consequences for the issuers of that insurance. This further illustrates the
difficulties of arranging burden-sharing agreements in the era of securitized finance.

        In addition, the resolution of the debt overhang in the commercial debt crisis required
the Fund to relax its lending-into-arrears policy, giving itself latitude to lend even when a
sovereign was in arrears to private creditors. In principle, this strengthened the sovereign
debtors’ bargaining position and created greater scope for burden sharing with creditors. In
practice, however, two countervailing tendencies operated. In the commercial debt crisis,
absent the ability to lend into arrears, the Fund had actively engaged in rolling over and
restructuring private debt while requiring private financing as a substitute to Fund
financing.62 Once lending into arrears became possible, the Fund and other official creditors
created greater distance between themselves and private creditors while rapidly increasing
the official financing package.63 As Panizza et al. (2009) report, this distance reflected greater
need for impartiality once the lending-into-arrears policy was lifted and the fact that
substantial financing had made the Fund a major creditor, creating potential conflicts of
interests. The greater leverage that the debtors had acquired did lead to more unilateral debt
exchanges in the Russian crisis; however, as Sturzenegger and Zettlemeyer (2006) show, the
haircuts on these unilateral initiatives were less than through the coordinated process
previously operative, with the exception of Argentina in 2001-5. Sturzenegger and
Zettlemeyer (2006, p. 10) conclude that “…international official creditors, led by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), played a more aggressive role in preventing debt
restructurings in the 1990s than in the 1980s, through large lending packages to countries
such as Mexico, Brazil, and Turkey. Without these lending packages and the fiscal
adjustment programs they supported, these countries probably would have had to restructure
their public debts in the late 1990s.” An IMF staff account of the capital account crises of the
1990s offers the same assessment. “In contrast to the provision of official financing, attempts

62
   Boughton, 2000, p. 286 reports that at a meeting with bankers in mid-November 1982, the Managing Director
of the Fund informed bankers that “he would recommend to the IMF’s Executive Board that the Fund lend
Mexico around $3.8 billion over three years, only if received written assurances from the banks within six
weeks that they would increase their exposure to Mexico by $5 billion.” This initiated the practice of “concerted
lending,” which “succeeded in filling the financing gap.”
63
   As we have documented.
                                                      23

at coordinated private sector involvement, broadly construed, were quite limited, particularly
in the earlier crises….” (Ghosh et al. 2002, p. 16).

        These quotations suggest that the present characterization of broad trends in crisis
resolution, toward more extensive financing and less present value reduction, is not ours
alone. That said, this part of our analysis will be particularly controversial. We therefore
consider private sector participation in the individual episodes in more detail.

A. The Commercial Debt Crisis

         The commercial debt crisis eventually led private and official foreign creditors to
extend substantial debt reduction. In 1982-83, Mexico, Argentina and Brazil re-negotiated
debts to their commercial bank creditors, although the resulting settlements were limited to a
mix of new financing and rescheduling of principal in the short term. When it became clear
that this was unlikely to be enough, governments and their creditors shifted in 1984 to
negotiating multi-year rescheduling arrangements with modest net present value reductions
designed not to do too much damage to bank balance sheets. As it became apparent once
again that this would not be enough to jump-start growth and restore creditworthiness in the
crisis countries, the Baker Plan was introduced in 1985, combining structural reforms with a
putative commitment by the creditors to provide new financing.

        Unfortunately, neither the resumption of growth nor significant new financing
materialized. Brazil responded in 1987 with a unilateral debt moratorium, and it became
increasingly clear that the commercial banks would have to take more losses. In 1987-8,
Mexico, Argentina, Brazil negotiated new debt restructuring agreements, exchanging debt for
exit bonds with lower face value and engaging in debt buy backs at depressed market prices.
Finally, in 1989 the Brady Plan was introduced, combining significant NPV reduction with
collateralization of principal using U.S. Treasury zero-coupon bonds and reserves placed in
escrow account to pay interest payments, creating a template through which the debts of a
range of problem countries were then restructured.

        The IMF played an important role in the Brady deals. IMF financing was set aside
for debt reduction operations of the debtor countries to make the deals possible.64 There was


64
   Some of the resources made available under the IMF arrangements were set aside to help the member country
restructure its commercial debt, and the Fund indicated its readiness to consider an augmentation under certain
conditions once the borrower had reached a settlement with its commercial bank creditors. For Mexico, the
Board approved in May 1989 a three-year extended arrangement for SDR 2.9 billion (240 percent of quota), 30
percent of which was set aside for debt-reduction operations. The Board also expressed its readiness “to
consider a possible request by Mexico for augmentation of the arrangement for up to 40 percent of quota in the
event that arrangements for the financing of Mexico’s program provide for appropriate debt-service reduction
and upon determination by the Fund that such arrangements are consistent with objectives of the program and
with the guidelines on Fund support for debt and debt service reduction operations.” For Argentina, the set-
aside was 25 percent of access in the 1991 arrangements. Another 25 percent of access was set aside at the
subsequent arrangement in 1992. Brazil initially had similar provisions in its 1992 program (25 percent of total
access set aside), but the negotiations on the Brady deal with the banks was extended and the program went off
track. Brazil therefore concluded its Brady agreement without having an IMF arrangement in place, and the
                                                                                                  (continued)
                                                         24

also a commitment to augment existing programs once the Brady deals became effective.65
As noted above, the Fund’s policy of not tolerating sovereign arrears was modified to help
bring the banks to the negotiating table. Previously, the banks knew that official credit
would not be available until a strategy for dealing with arrears was agreed. This effectively
gave the banks a veto over IMF arrangements. In 1989 the Fund therefore modified its
arrears policy to permit Fund financing to lend into sovereign arrears to private external
creditors (the so-called lending-into-arrears policy) if two conditions were met. First, prompt
IMF support is considered essential for the successful implementation of the member
country’s adjustment program. Second, the member country is pursuing appropriate policies
and is making a good faith effort to reach a collaborative agreement with its creditors. The
new policy would then tolerate accumulation of arrears to commercial banks pending the
negotiation of voluntary market restructuring agreement.66

B. The Tequila/Asian Crises

        In a departure from this previous approach combining official financing with NPV
reduction, the Mexican-Tequila crisis was met with unprecedented official financing but no
NPV reduction. Official financing was provided to support amortization of the tesobonos
(short-term sovereign obligations) and to help the commercial banks meet their external
obligations. The tesobonos had diverse ownership and lacked well defined legal and
operational rules for restructuring. Given the scope for them to roll off as they matured, it
was considered impossible to coercively retain credit lines from foreign commercial banks,
since doing so would imply differential treatment of bondholders and banks. The approach
succeeded in the end, helped in no small part by the fact that Mexico had milder structural
problems in 1994 than in its previous crisis.

         Similarly, there was no renegotiation of sovereign debt to private creditors in the
Asian crisis.67 Commitments were obtained from international banks to keep open their
credit lines to the private sector, but foreign creditors did not incur significant NPV losses.68
Instead, large financing packages again provided the cover needed to deal with problems that
proved to be temporary in nature. The Fund again adopted a more arms-length approach to
the restructuring process than in Brady-Plan days.

C. The Russian Crisis and its Aftermath

        Since macroeconomic imbalances were greater in the Russian crisis and its aftermath,
resolving them required more time, multiple programs, and greater recourse to debt

commercial banks waived the requirement of having a Fund program. All this information is from publicly-
available sources.
65
   The implication is that while the bait of additional financing helped bail in private creditors, absent that bail
in, the size of official financing needed would have been even greater.
66
   This policy was extended from commercial banks to all private creditors in 1998. See IMF (1989) and IMF
(1998).
67
   Indonesia rescheduled debt with Paris Club creditors during 1998-2000. Another small rescheduling of
sovereign bond maturities occurred in 2000 during a successor program.
68
   However, comprehensive strategies for bank and corporate restructuring were implemented under the Asian
crisis programs.
                                                      25

restructuring. While creditors incurred NPV losses, the IMF again maintained an arms-
length posture toward restructuring negotiations, the relevant documents limiting themselves
to describing the requirements for debt sustainability and emphasizing the voluntary nature of
the debt exchanges.69

       An exceptional case in the aftermath of the Russian crisis was Uruguay, which
combined an unprecedented level of financing with a voluntary debt exchange. The Uruguay
program started out large (at 6 percent of GDP) and was then was augmented twice in June-
August 2002 amidst deposit outflows and reserve losses (as a result of which it reached 19
percent of GDP, an enormous number by IMF standards).

       While the program did not call on Uruguay to restructure, it referred to “daunting
challenges” to debt sustainability, difficulties in meeting debt service obligations, and the
need to engage in dialogue with market participants.70 The Fund left the design of the
exchange to the authorities and their advisers while providing assurances that financing gaps
would be addressed. The resulting deal extended the average maturity of virtually all market
debt by about five years while maintaining the low interest rates contracted when Uruguay
had enjoyed investment grade ratings. A high participation on the part of creditors
(93 percent) led to a successful debt exchange, which helped reduce short-term financing
needs while reducing the debt burden by about 5 percent of GDP.71

         Why was Uruguay able to integrate debt restructuring into its crisis resolution plans at
a relatively early stage? One answer is that there was not much concern about contagion,
reflecting the country’s small size. Another is that the actual extent of the restructuring, in
terms of NPV reduction, was modest. In this sense, particularly given the size of its official
financing package, Uruguay is not a notable exception to the general trend we have been
describing.

D. Europe

        Private sector involvement in the current European crisis was initially limited to
foreign creditors’ exposure to commercial banks. At the time of writing, only in Iceland and,
to a lesser extent Ireland and Greece, have foreign bank creditors had to accept haircuts on
their bonds. In Eastern Europe, foreign parent banks have committed to rolling over their
interbank credit lines and maintain capital adequacy in their subsidiaries, including in
Hungary, Latvia, and Romania, through the European Bank Coordination Initiative. The
European Bank Coordination Initiative (formerly the Vienna Initiative) created in 2009
helped ensure that foreign banks remain engaged and that overall commitments remain
intact. The group brings together the IMF, the European Bank for Reconstruction and

69
   A few cases required official debt restructuring through the Paris Club and had an associated standard
requirement of “comparability of treatment” to private creditors.
70
   The phrase in quotes is from the staff report for the Augmentation and the First Review of the Stand-By
Arrangement (August 2002), as published.
71
   This combination of substantial official financing and limited NPV reduction was successful in the sense that
the debt/GDP ratio then fell quickly as growth resumed and the government ran substantial primary surpluses
(averaging 3.4 percent of GDP in 2003-07).
                                                     26

Development, the European Investment Bank, the World Bank Group, EU institutions
(European Commission with the ECB as observer), home and host country central banks,
regulatory and fiscal authorities as well as the largest western banking groups active in
emerging Europe.72

        In the summer of 2011, the European Union agreed that further financial assistance
for the Greek government should be combined with private-sector involvement in the form of
a commitment by foreign banks to roll over a portion of their holdings of Greek debt as it
matured. There was, however, a reluctance to contemplate significant net present value
reductions in principal and interest, consistent with our characterization of broad secular
trends.

        Finally, in July 2011 a proposal by the Institute of International Finance (representing
banks holding Greek debt) on a menu-based approach to restructuring the sovereign’s debt
was endorsed by the European Commission. That proposal, which is now to be negotiated
between the Greek authorities and the creditors, envisages a nominal 21 percent reduction in
the net present value of the bonds, as noted above, and this is to be achieved by the exchange
of 90 percent of the government’s outstanding bonds into three new securities: a “par” bond
with a 30 year maturity and an average interest rate of 4.5 percent, and a pair of “discount”
bonds, with 15 and 30 year durations and interest rates of, respectively, 5.9 and (roughly) 6.5
percent. The proposal was combined with an EU commitment to improve the terms of its
financial assistance to Greece, as well as additional fiscal adjustment efforts by the Greek
government.

        Whether this represents a break with the broad trend away from substantial private-
sector burden sharing only time will tell. What is already clear from this Greek tragedy,
however, is that policy makers continue to resist and delay the decision to turn to debt
restructuring – as they again did in this recent case.



V. A NEW APPROACH

        Debt restructuring has up-front political and economic costs but deferred benefits.
Politicians with finite political lives and higher discount rates than society as a whole may
therefore be reluctant to contemplate it or put it off excessively. There is a reluctance to
proceed in the hope that good news that removes the need may miraculously turn up. Fears
of contagion are also very real in the midst of a crisis.


72
  Outside the European crisis, there are two recent precedents of debt exchanges within Fund programs. In
Jamaica, the February 2010 debt exchange on domestic debt (including foreign-currency-denominated debt)
was a prior action for the approval of the standby arrangement. A large amount of IMF financing was provided
upfront to finance a fund for financial institutions holding the government debt. In Seychelles, the December
2008 program was based on a comprehensive restructuring of sovereign debt to private and official creditors.
But these programs are relatively small by today’s standards (300 and 200 percent of quota, respectively) and
the countries in question are not systemic.
                                                     27

        In recognition of this fact, a series of efforts has sought to encourage institutional and
contractual innovations designed to modestly tip the balance toward earlier restructuring and
making the restructuring process more efficient. Earlier schemes for an international-
bankruptcy-court-type mechanism to determine the need for a restructuring and cram down
terms culminated in Krueger’s (2001) Sovereign Debt Restructuring Mechanism proposal.73
Responding to international pressure, over 90 per cent of bonds issued by emerging markets
in recent years have included collective action clauses in an effort to signal that, if things
went wrong, restructuring those debts would be easier (Gulati and Gelpern 2009). Similarly,
European leaders have agreed that collective action clauses should be included in all new
sovereign bonds starting in 2013, and emergency lending would be preceded by a “rigorous
debt sustainability analysis.”74

        There are reasons to skeptical of this approach. It is difficult to make politically-
difficult decisions while a crisis is ongoing (as emphasized in Eichengreen, Kletzer and
Mody 2001). And if there is sufficiently strong political resistance to proceeding with a
“potentially disruptive” restructuring, adding collective-action clauses will not be enough to
tip the balance. There will always be incentives to take extraordinary action to avoid having
to invoke them.

          One way of addressing this would be for future bond covenants to include
provisions that trigger restructurings automatically. These would be “sovereign cocos,”
contingent debt securities that automatically convert in the event of pre-specified debt-
sustainability problems. The idea is that if adequate incentive to restructure is not present
once a crisis starts, it should be built in ex ante.

       The concept is taken from the debate over bank reform, where there is a similar
problem of bail-ins and bail-outs. Because of the difficulty of putting banks through a
bankruptcy-like procedure, which among other things can create difficulties for bank
counterparties, there is an incentive, analogous to that which arises in the context of
sovereign debt, to provide a bailout and hope that good news will turn up rather than
proceeding with the delicate process of bailing in the bondholders. Contingent convertible
bonds (cocos) have been suggested as a solution to this problem. When Tier 1 capital falls
below a pre-specified limit, the bonds in question automatically convert to equity, bailing in
the bondholders and helping to recapitalize the bank.75



73
   A comprehensive survey of proposals for an international bankruptcy-type mechanism is Rogoff and
Zettelmeyer (2002) provide a comprehensive survey of proposals for an international-bankruptcy-type
mechanism.
74
   The quotation is from Eurogroup (2010).
75
   This is similar in some respects to a proposal from the German government (Weber, Ulbricht and Wendorff
2011) that new euro-area bonds be required to include a contractual provision providing for a three-year
maturity extension at the volition of the European Stability Mechanism when the latter provides an emergency
loan for the government of a member state. The two differences from our proposal is that Weber et al. consider
maturity extension only and that the provision would not be automatically when a pre-specified debt threshold
was reached; rather, it would be at the volition of the ESM.
                                                         28

        There has been some progress in issuing these instruments. In 2010 Lloyds Banking
Group Plc exchanged some of its subordinated bonds for enhanced capital notes that become
equity if the lender’s core Tier 1 ratio falls below 5 per cent of assets. Rabobank Groep NV
sold senior notes that will be written down to a quarter of their face value if its capital ratio
slips below 7 per cent.76 Credit Suisse issued more than $2 billion of cocos in February 2011.
At the time of writing other banks (the Bank of Cyprus, for example) have indicated their
intention to follow.

         Extending this idea to the sovereign-debt domain, government bond contracts could
provide that if a sovereign’s debt/GDP ratio exceeds a specified threshold, there will be an
automatic reduction in principal and interest payments when the trigger is reached.77 One
could also imagine making the trigger a function of the debt service/government revenue
ratio, or of a convex combination of these two ratios.78

        This approach also has the specific advantage that activation of this contractual
provision would not constitute a “credit event” that would trigger credit default swaps (CDS)
written on the government debt instruments in question. The existence of large quantities of
CDS in the market, together with uncertainty about precisely which financial institutions are
responsible for issuing them, has fed the reluctance to proceed with restructuring (reluctance
grounded in a fear of creating “an AIG-like event”). This specific obstacle to restructuring
the obligations of a borderline-insolvent sovereign would be relaxed by the introduction of
instruments with these provisions into the market.

         Objections to this idea are obvious – starting with whether sovereigns would have an
incentive to include such provisions in their bond contracts and whether, even if an
international agreement was reached to mandate their inclusion, the incentive would be to
place the threshold so high as to render it meaningless.

        Concretely there is the objection that this kind of provision would increase
sovereigns’ borrowing costs, since investors would be wary of being bailed in and require
compensation. In strong form, the argument would be that investors would be unwilling to
hold such securities at any price. Note, however, that while the same argument has been
made about bank cocos, adequately capitalized banks have not found it difficult to find
willing buyers of such instruments. This is evident from the example of Credit Suisse in
February 2011, when its issue of cocos was favorably priced and 11 times oversubscribed.79

76
   The experience with banks’ cocos thus suggests that the threshold specified in the bond contract can be
specific to the issuer—and, indeed, if there are multiple issues, the threshold will likely be specific to the issue.
We return to this below.
77
   More modestly there could be an automatic extension of maturities, although it is hard to see how maturity
extension alone would address the sources of policy bias noted above or be appropriate if breaching a specified
debt-GDP ratio is taken as prima facie evidence of unsustainability
78
   Specific triggers could be tailored to country circumstances. As with collective action clauses (and bank
cocos, for that matter), there is no reason why different countries with different characteristics should have to
adopt a one-size-fits-all provision.
79
   The rating agency Standard & Poor’s estimates that banks will raise about a trillion dollars in contingent
convertible bonds in the next 5 to 10 years.
                                                       29



        Moreover, there is reason to think that borrowing costs would not rise across the
board. They would only rise for sovereigns whose debts were within hailing distance of the
trigger. Empirical work on collective-action clauses shows that their inclusion in bond
covenants increases borrowing costs for risky sovereigns with potential sustainability
problems and not for others far from the “strike price” (Eichengreen and Mody 2004).80 It
seems plausible that the pattern would carry over.

       That borrowing costs would rise for risky borrowers as the trigger is approached is by
no means undesirable. Experience suggests that credit spreads do not always widen
gradually as debt burdens grow; rather, investors tend to remain sanguine for extended
periods before awakening abruptly to the existence of sustainability problems. If coco-like
clauses serve to focus the attention of investors, adding them to bond covenants might
enhance the regularity of market discipline.

         Another objection to cocos is uncertainty about the trigger: in the case of commercial
banks, regulators in different countries value Tier 1 capital in different ways, making it
difficult for investors to assess when conversion might be triggered. There might be similar
uncertainty about how to value and what to count as debt and about the level of GDP. To
address these concerns, bond covenants could specify that the trigger would be based on debt
statistics constructed by an independent party. Candidates would be rating agencies,
Eurostat, and the IMF, and the regional development banks, which publish such numbers as
part of their normal reporting but are not parties to the agreement. To further reduce the risk
of reporting bias, the agreement could specify the trigger as the higher or lower of two
independent estimates.81

        As with the Tier 1 capital ratio, data on sovereign debt ratios are published by these
entities only a few times a year. But the banks’ use of Tier 1 ratios suggests that this is not a
problem.82

       For banks, the academic literature has also suggested an equity price as the trigger
(Flannery, 2009). Concerns have been expressed about this idea, however. Bondholders may

80
   For other countries with low debts and impeccably good credit, where the provision can be seen simply as an
insurance policy against exogenous risks (a Japan-like earthquake, for example), it can be argued, in parallel
with the results for CACs, that they might end up able to borrow more. These responses should presumably be
taken into account when setting trigger levels ex ante (see below).
81
   The efforts of Eurostat, the European Union’s statistical agency, to construct comprehensive estimates of the
debts of the member states suggest that this task will not be intractable. But the problems it has experienced in
constructing tractable estimates for, inter alia, Greece suggests that neither will it be easy.
82
   Many of the same points arise in the context of GDP-indexed bonds: the possibility that GDP statistics might
be manipulated, the difficulties of pricing, and the illiquidity of the IPO market. However, where in the case of
GDP-indexed bonds it is presumably obvious in which direction a government would seek to manipulate the
statistics – it would want to understate growth in order to reduce its debt burden – the direction in which an
issuer of sovereign cocos would wish to manipulate the statistics is less clear. While understating GDP would
get it a maturity extension, in practice governments actively seek to avoid having to restructure, and such
governments would wish to overstate GDP. Our suggestions for addressing the problem of data manipulation
might usefully be taken up by issuers of GDP-indexed bonds and sovereign cocos alike.
                                                     30

have an incentive to drive down the price to the threshold level and thereby gain preemptive
access to the bank’s stock at a “cheap” price (Sunderesan and Wang, 2010). Because of this
possibility, there may be multiple equilibria in the stock price (Pennacchi et al 2010). For
sovereign cocos, the corresponding trigger would be the sovereign bond spread over a proxy
for the risk-free rate. The spread is then a measure of the risk of default, and the restructuring
trigger could be a value of the spread above which a mandatory restructuring occurs.
Concerns about manipulation would arise also in this case. Authorities could “talk up” the
spread by irresponsible statements, especially as it nears the threshold. Equally, large
investors might seek to drive down the price of debt. Again, the risk would occur closer to
the threshold where gains from such strategies are realistic. One partial solution to this
problem might be for the contract to institute a “cooling off” period, by requiring the spread
to persist above the threshold for some months before the trigger event is established.83

        A further objection is the argument that triggering a country’s sovereign cocos would
prevent the government from issuing new bonds with similar provisions to fund itself.
Assuming as seems plausible that the government in question had gone into the episode
running large deficits, the country would therefore experience a draconian compression of
public spending and a sharp recession. Absent official support, this is likely to be correct.
Even through triggering these provisions on outstanding bonds will have reduced the
country’s debt/income ratio, possibly substantially, re-accessing financial markets is likely to
also require a multi-quarter or multi-year process of reestablishing policy credibility.84 But
this problem of market access in the immediate aftermath of a restructuring holds for all
restructurings, to a greater or lesser extent, whether the restructuring is automatic or
discretionary. Limited amounts of official finance may thus be called for to help bridge the
gap.

        Then there is the danger of contagion if a government’s cocos are triggered. There
could be negative spillovers to banks and other institutional investors at home and abroad
that hold the government bonds in question. There could be negative spillovers, both via the
banking system and direct confidence channels, to bond markets in other countries.

        But is there reason to think that the risks of contagion will be greater than under
prevailing contractual arrangements? Working in the other direction is the argument that if a
predictable process of debt restructuring is in place, as in our proposal, the risk of contagion
will be lower since all parties will be forewarned of its imminence and will, therefore, have
adequate time to prepare. Even in instances of sharp changes in market sentiment, triggering
default and restructuring, the market would have a well-defined probabilistic basis for
anticipating the event in contrast to the current fuzziness on this matter that tends to create
sharp swings in market sentiment.


83
   Haldane (2011) considers these concerns about the consequences of market speculative behavior and suggests
similar safeguards. He concludes, “So while CoCos are susceptible to market aberrations, these can in my view
be managed.”
84
   Although experience in previous crises (viz. Argentina) suggests that the necessary period of reputation
rebuilding may be shorter than sometimes supposed.
                                                31

         A key issue will be setting the conversion trigger. The trigger needs to be placed high
enough that it is unlikely to be reached as the result of a garden-variety recession but low
enough that it kicks in when serious issues of debt sustainability arise. It is unlikely that the
same debt-to-GDP ratio will be appropriate for different countries with different growth
rates, real interest rates, and revenue-raising capacities. In other words, attempts to
incorporate workable provisions of this sort into sovereign bond covenants would confront
policy makers with all the same analytical problems of standard debt sustainability exercises
– which is not to say that they should be relieved of trying to solve them.

        That said, there is no reason why the trigger could not be set at different levels in
different countries. The Tier 1 capital threshold for bank cocos is set at different levels (see
above). The thresholds for bondholder participation specified in collective action clauses
differ across countries (Eichengreen 2003, Gulati and Gelpern 2009). The same could be
true for sovereign cocos, in other words. Similarly, the specified degree of restructuring
would be different—from maturity extension to outright write downs.

       As in the case of collective action clauses, there is likely to be a first-mover problem.
There will be fears by potential first movers of sending adverse signals about their
creditworthiness. The first mover would pay a novelty and liquidity premium. This creates
arguments for countries to move together through coordinated multilateral action.


VI. CONCLUSION

        Our review of the modern history of financial crises highlights the heterogeneity of
experience—to paraphrase Anna Karenina, every unhappy crisis is unhappy in its own way.
But it has also revealed some common trends. The violence of financial reversals has tended
to grow, mirroring the progress of financial liberalization such as it is and the growth of
international capital movements. One consequence has been that the financial requirements
of international intervention have increased.

         An explanation for this last trend is the absence of viable alternatives. Private lenders
have an obvious interest in holding out for full payment, whether directly from the sovereign
or indirectly through resources provided by international financial institutions. National
officials have an interest in pushing into the future a difficult and politically embarrassing
restructuring in the hope that good news will somehow turn up. Multilaterals find it hard to
go against the wishes of those national officials and, being risk averse, fear restructuring as
one of those “unknown unknowns.” Recognizing that restructuring is difficult during a
crisis, private investors have an incentive to lend at rates that are, in retrospect, too low. This
implies that the next crisis has a larger capital outflow, increasing the size of the official
financing needed to limit the damage.

        We have therefore explored ways of automating the restructuring decision as a way of
countering this bias. Automating the process has key advantages: it preserves the integrity of
the contract (which avoids the uncertainties involved in triggering CDS); it is predictable;
and it can be priced. To this end, we explore the idea of adding to future government bond
issues so-called sovereign cocos, contractual provisions that automatically lengthen
                                             32

maturities or reduce interest and amortization payments when a pre-specified debt/GDP ratio
is reached.

        At this point, sovereign cocos are an idea in search of a proposal. Adding them to
future bond issues will require solving difficult technical issues. It would also require
solving coordination problems—getting governments to move together. But, equally, not
addressing the occurrence of ever-larger crises due to large inflows and subsequent large
outflows of underpriced international capital is a story that cannot end well.
                                                           33


               Table 3: Private Sector Involvement and Debt Restructuring in IMF Programs
                                                                      Sovereign Debt 1/
                      Private Sector Involvement            Default      Restructuring                IMF program
                                                            2/
Commercial debt crisis
Mexico              Repeated rescheduling of debt           Aug.82       Eight restructuring      Jan.83 – Dec.85
                    with commercial banks,                               agreements with          Nov.86 – Apr.88
                    combined with assurances to                          commercial and Paris     May.89 – May.93
                    provide new money. Also                              Club creditors during
                    concerted rollover of interbank                      1983-89, followed by a
                    credit lines. One of the first Brady                 Brady deal in April
                    agreements to be finalized, in                       1990.
                    1990, leading to substantial debt
                    reduction.
Argentina           Bridge loan with private creditors      Sep.82       Six restructuring        Jan.83 – Jan.84
                    to eliminate arrears, and unilateral                 agreements with          Dec. 84- Jun. 86
                    rescheduling of domestic loans in                    commercial and Paris     Jul 87- Sep.88
                    1982. Unsuccessful negotiations                      Club creditors during    Nov.89- Mar.91
                    of rescheduling commercial loans                     1985-92, followed by a   Jul. 91 – Mar. 92
                    during 1983-84, then agreement                       Brady deal in July       Mar.92-Mar. 96
                    on official package combined                         1993.
                    with rescheduling/new money
                    from commercial creditors in
                    1985, but new arrears appeared.
                    Brady agreement in 1993,
                    including down-payment of
                    overdue amounts by Argentina.
Brazil              In 1983, agreement with                 Jan.83       Nine restructuring       Mar.83 – Feb.86
                    commercial banks to rollover                         agreements with          Aug.88 – Feb.90
                    short-term financing into                            commercial and Paris     Jan. 92- Aug. 93
                    medium-term financing, and                           Club creditors during
                    provide new money through                            1983-89, followed by a
                    syndicated loans. Delays in                          Brady deal in April
                    completing multi-year                                1994.
                    rescheduling agreements and
                    unilateral stop in interest
                    payments on bank debt in
                    February 1987, followed by new
                    restructuring agreements. Final
                    Brady agreement in 1994, re-
                    establishing orderly relations with
                    creditors.
Tequila crisis
Mexico                                                                                            Feb.95 – Feb.97
Argentina                                                                                         Mar.92 – Mar.96
                                                                                                  Apr.96 – Jan.98
Asian crisis
Thailand            Japanese banks gave informal                                                  Aug.97 – Jun.00
                    assurances that credit lines to
                    Thai banks would be maintained.
Indonesia           Agreement in 1998 with foreign          Mar.99       Two Paris Club           Nov.97 – Aug.98
                    banks to reschedule interbank                        rescheduling             Aug.98 – Feb.00
                                                         34

                    debt, and maintain trade credit to             agreements during
                    corporations.                                  1998-2000.
                                                                   Rescheduling of
                                                                   sovereign bond
                                                                   principal payments in
                                                                   1999-2000.
Korea               Agreement with foreign                                                    Dec.97 – Dec..00
                    commercial banks to convert
                    short-term of loans to Korean
                    banks into longer-maturity
                    sovereign-guaranteed bonds.
Philippines                                                                                   Jun.94 – Mar.98
                                                                                              Apr.98 – Dec.00
Russian crisis and aftermath
Russia             Restructuring of treasury bills,       Aug.98   Three restructuring        Mar.96 – Mar.99
                   bonds, and commercial bank                      operations of debt with    Jul.99 – Dec.00
                   loans, with NPV reduction.                      commercial creditors
                   Foreign investors’ claims on                    during 1997-2000, and
                   Russian banks were settled in                   a Paris Club
                   bilateral negotiations.                         rescheduling in 1999.
                                                                   Final London Club
                                                                   restructuring with
                                                                   commercial creditors in
                                                                   August 2000.
Brazil              Monitoring of foreign banks’                                              Dec.98 – Sep.01
                    credit lines to banks operating in                                        Sep.01 – Sep.02
                    Brazil and indications of                                                 Sep.02 – Mar.05
                    commitments to maintain or
                    rebuild exposures (1999).
                    Joint statement of long-term
                    commitment and intention to
                    maintain exposure to banks
                    operating in Brazil at meetings
                    with leading banks in 2002.
Argentina           The June 2001 megaswap                Nov.01   Two rounds of debt         Feb.98-Mar.00
                    increased the debt stock                       treatment in 2001, prior   Mar.00 – Jan.03
                    marginally, but the Phase 1                    to default. In April       Jan.03 – Aug.03
                    restructuring in November                      2005, a global bond        Sep.03 – Jan.06
                    implied an NPV reduction. The                  exchange was offered.
                    2005 global debt exchange led to               Rescheduling of official
                    a large NPV reduction.                         bilateral debt has not
                    Repeated intervention in bank                  been completed.
                    balance sheet led to losses for
                    banks’ creditors.
Uruguay             Sovereign debt exchange with          May.03   A single global bond       Apr.02 – Mar.05
                    NPV reduction in 2003. Creditors               exchange in May 2003.      Jun.05 – Dec.06
                    of commercial banks also haircut.
Turkey              General commitment in 2000 by                                             Dec.99 – Feb.02
                    foreign commercial banks to                                               Feb.02 – Feb.05
                    maintain exposure to Turkish                                              May.05 – May.08
                    banks, monitored weekly.
                    Voluntary domestic debt swap to
                    lengthen maturities in June 2001.
                    Voluntary agreement in 2002
                    with foreign banks to maintain
                                                          35

                    exposure to Turkish banks and
                    companies.
European crisis
Ukraine                                                                                                 Nov.08 – Nov.10
                                                                                                        Jul.10 – Dec.12
Hungary             Foreign banks agreed to maintain                                                    Nov.08 – Oct.10
                    exposure to their subsidiaries in
                    Hungary.
Iceland             Losses imposed/agreed with                                                          Nov.08 – Aug.11
                    creditors of failed Icelandic
                    banks.
Latvia              Foreign banks agreed to maintain                                                    Dec.08 – Dec.11
                    exposure to their subsidiaries in
                    Latvia.
Romania             Foreign banks agreed to maintain                                                    May.09 – May.11
                    exposure to their subsidiaries in
                    Romania.
Greece                                                                   Voluntary program of           May.10 – May.13
                                                                         debt exchange and a
                                                                         buyback plan for Greek
                                                                         government debt
Ireland             Haircuts on subordinated debt of                                                    Dec.10 – Dec.13
                    government-guaranteed Irish
                    banks.
Portugal                                                                                                May.11 – May.14

1/ Includes operations on sovereign bonds, commercial and official loans.
2/ A default is defined in the month in which the government misses its first payment beyond the grace period or there is a
public announcement to restructure a sovereign debt instrument. Prior to 1995, default is based on IMF staff reports. From
1995 onward, the classification of sovereign default by credit rating agencies is applied, using the default month provided by
at least two of the agencies.
                                            36


                                        References

Abiad, Abdul, Ashoka Mody, and Daniel Leigh (2009), “Financial integration, capital
mobility, and income convergence,” Economic Policy 24, pp. 241-305.

Ahearne, Brian, Birgit Schmitz and Juergen von Hagen (2009), “Current Account Imbalances
and Financial Integration in the Euro Area,” unpublished manuscript, Bruegel and University
of Bonn.

Allen, Peter, Barry Eichengreen and Gary Evans (2011), “European Debt Deal won’t Reduce
Greece’s Debt,” www.bloomberg.com (4 August).

Bates, Robert, Avner Greif, Margaret Levy, Jean-Laurent Rosenthal and Barry Weingast
(1998), Analytic Narratives, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Berger, Helge and Volker Nitsch (2010), “The Euro’s Effect on Trade Imbalances,” IMF
Working Paper no. 10/226 (October).

Blanchard, Olivier and Francesco Giavazzi (2002), “Current Account Deficits in the Euro
Area: The End of the Feldstein-Horioka Puzzle,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2,
pp.148-186.

Blustein, Paul (2003), The Chastening: Inside the Crisis that Rocked the Global Financial
System and Humbled the IMF, New York: Public Affairs Books.

Bordo, Michael, Barry Eichengreen, Daniela Kingebiel and Maria Soledad Martinez-Peria
(2001), “Is the Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?” Economic Policy 16, pp.53-82

Boughton, James M. (2000), “From Suez to Tequila: The IMF as Crisis Manager,” The
Economic Journal, 110, pp. 273-291.

Boughton, James M. (2001), Silent Revolution, the International Monetary Fund, 1979-89,
Washington, D.C.: IMF (July).

Celasun, Oya, Xavier Debrun and Jonathan Ostry (2006), “Primary Surplus Behavior and
Risks to Financial Sustainability in Emerging Market Countries: A ‘Fan-Chart’ Approach,”
in Ashoka Mody and Alessandro Rebucci eds, IMF Supported Programs: Recent Staff
Research, Washington, D.C.: IMF, pp.401-425.

Claessens, Stijn, Ceyla Pazarbasioglu, Luc Laeven, Marc Dobler, Fabian Valencia, Oana
Nedelescu and Katharine Seal (2011), “Crisis Management and Resolution: Early Lessons
from the Financial Crisis,” IMF Staff Discussion Note 11/05 (March).

Cline, William (1995), International Debt Reexamined, Washington, D.C.: Institute for
International Economics.
                                            37

Das, Udaibir, Michael Papioannou and Christoph Trebesch (2011), “Sovereign Debt
Restructurings: A Survey and New Database,” unpublished manuscript, International
Monetary Fund.

Edwards, Sebastian (1986), “The Pricing of Bonds and Bank Loans in International
Markets,” European Economic Review 30 (1986), pp. 565-589.

Eichengreen, Barry (2003), “Restructuring Sovereign Debt,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 17, pp.79-98.

Eichengreen, Barry (2010), “Imbalances in the Euro Area,” paper presented to the Annual
Research Conference of DG ECFIN, Brussels (November).

Eichengreen, Barry, Kenneth Kletzer and Ashoka Mody (2003), “Crisis Resolution: Next
Steps,” IMF Working Paper no.03/196 (October).

Eichengreen, Barry and Ashoka Mody (2003), “Do Collective Action Clauses Raise
Borrowing Costs?” Economic Journal 114, pp.247-264.

Eichengreen, Barry, Andrew Rose and Charles Wyplosz (1995), “Exchange Market
Mayhem: The Antecedents and Aftermath of Speculative Attacks,” Economic Policy 21,
pp.249-312.

Eichengreen, Barry and Michael Bordo (2003), “Crises Now and Then: What Lessons from
the Last Era of Financial Globalization?” in Paul Mizen (ed.), Monetary History, Exchange
Rates and Financial Markets: Essays in Honor of Charles Goodhart, Cheltenham: Edward
Elgar, vol. 2, pp.52-91.

Eichengreen, Barry, Poonam Gupta and Ashoka Mody (2006), “Sudden Stops and IMF-
Supported Programs,” IMF Working Paper WP/06/101 (April).

Eichengreen, Barry and Richard Portes (1995), Crisis, What Crisis? Orderly Workouts for
Sovereign Debtors, London: CEPR.

Eurogroup (2010), “Statement by the Eurogroup,” Brussels: Eurogroup (28 November).

Fitch (2011), Fitch Ratings Sovereign 2010 Transition and Default Study, New York: Fitch.

Flannery, Mark (2009), “Market Value Triggers will Work for Contingent Capital
Investments,” Working Paper, University of Florida.

Folkerts-Landau, David (1985), “The Changing Role of International Bank Lending in
Development Finance,” International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 32, pp. 317-363.

General Accounting Office (1996), “Mexico’s Financial Crisis: Origins, Awareness,
Assistance and Initial Efforts to Recover,” Washington, D.C.: GAO.
                                             38

Gil-Diaz, Francisco (1998), “The Origin of Mexico’s 1994 Financial Crisis,” Cato Journal
17, pp.303-313.

Gilman, Martin (2010), No Precedent, No Plan: Inside Russia’s 1998 Default, Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.

Ghosh, Atish, et al. (2002) IMF-Supported Programs in Capital Account Crises, IMF
Occasional Paper 210, Washington D.C.: The International Monetary Fund.

Goldstein, Morris (1998), The Asian Financial Crisis: Causes, Cures and Systemic
Implications, Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics.

Goretti, Manuela and Bikas Joshi (2010), “A Step Closer to a Stronger Global Financial
Safegy Net,” IMF Survey Magazine (30 August), www.imf.org.

Gulati, Mitu and Anna Gelpern (2009), “Innovation after the Revolution: Foreign Sovereign
Bond Contracts Since 2003,” Capital Markets Law Journal 4, pp.85-103.

Haldane, Andrew (2011), “Capital Discipline,” Speech given at the American Economic
Association, Denver, 9 January.

Hanke, Steven (2000), “Abolish the IMF,” Forbes (13 April).

Independent Evaluation Office (2007), “Structural Conditionality in IMF-Supported
Programs,” Report by the Independent Evaluation Office of the IMF.

Institute for International Finance (2001), Survey of Debt Restructuring by Private Creditors,
Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Finance.

International Monetary Fund (1989), “The Fund’s Policy on Financing Assurances,”
Washington, D.C.: IMF.

International Monetary Fund (1993), “Restructuring of Commercial Bank Debt by
Developing Countries: Lessons from Recent Experience,” Washington, D.C.: IMF.

International Monetary Fund (1998), “Fund Policy on Sovereign Arrears to Private
Creditors,” Washington, D.C.: IMF.

International Monetary Fund (2001), “Conditionality in Fund-Supported
Programs―Overview,” Washington, D.C.: IMF.

International Monetary Fund (2005), “The Design of Fund-Supported Programs,”
Washington, D.C.: IMF.

International Monetary Fund (2006), “Cross-Country Experience with Restructuring of
Sovereign Debt and Restoring Debt Sustainability,” Washington, D.C.: IMF.
                                              39

International Monetary Fund (2009), “GRA Lending Toolkit and Conditionality: Reform
Proposals,” Washington, D.C.: IMF.

International Monetary Fund (2009), “Review of Recent Crisis Programs,” Washington,
D.C.: IMF.

Kahler, Miles ed. (1986), The Politics of International Debt, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Kanda, Daniel (2010), “Asset Booms and Structural Fiscal Positions: The Case of Ireland,“
IMF Working Paper No. 10/57, Washington, D.C.: IMF.

Krueger, Anne (2001), “A New Approach to Sovereign Debt Restructuring,” Washington,
D.C.: IMF.

Lane, Timothy and Steven Phillips (2000), “Does IMF Financing Result in Moral Hazard?”
Working Paper no. 00/168, Washington, D.C.: IMF (October).

Meltzer Commission [International Financial Institutions Advisory Commission] (2000),
Report, Washington, D.C.: GPO.

Mody, Ashoka and Alessandro Rebucci eds. (2006), IMF Supported Programs: Recent Staff
Research, Washington, D.C.: IMF.

Moody’s (2008), Sovereign Default and Recovery Rates, 1983-2007, New York: Moody’s.

Mussa, Michael (2002), “Reflections on Moral Hazard and Private Sector Involvement in the
Resolution of Emerging Market Financial Crises,” unpublished manuscript, Institute for
International Economics (July).

Panizza, Ugo, Federico Sturzenegger and Jeromin Zettelmeyer (2009), “The Economics of
Sovereign Debt and Default,” Journal of Economic Literature 47, pp.651-698.

Pennacchi, George, Theo Vermaelen, and Christian C.P. Wolff (2010), “Contingent Capital:
The Case for COERCs,” Faculty and Research Working Paper, INSEAD.

Reinhart, Carmen, Morris Goldstein and Graciela Kaminsky (2000), Assessing Financial
Vulnerability, Washington, D.C.: Institute of International Economics.

Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoff (2008), This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of
Financial Folly, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Rodrik, Dani ed. (2007), In Search of Prosperity: Analytic Narratives on Economic Growth,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Rogoff, Kenneth (2010). “Austerity and the IMF,” Fifth Annual Richard H. Sabot Lecture,
Washington, D.C.: Center for Global Development (April).
                                            40

Rogoff, Kenneth (2011), “History will Rue US and Europe Debt Woes,” Financial Times,
April 4. http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/1399efba-5eea-11e0-a2d7-
00144feab49a.html#ixzz1K5qmdJlB.

Rogoff, Kenneth and Jeromin Zettelmeyer (2002), “Bankruptcy Procedures for Sovereigns:
A History of Ideas, 1976-2001,” IMF Staff Papers 49, pp.470-507.

Roubini, Nouriel and Brad Setser (2004), Bailouts or Bail-ins? Responding to Financial
Crises in Emerging Markets, Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics.

Sheng, Andrew (2009), From Asian Crisis to Global Financial Crisis, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Squam Lake Group (2009), “An Expedited Resolution Mechanism for Distressed Financial
Firms: Regulatory Hybrid Securities,” New York: Council on Foreign Relations Center for
Geoeconomic Studies (April).

Standard & Poor’s (2010), Sovereign Defaults and Rating Transition Data, 2009 Update,
New York: Standard & Poor’s.

Sturzenegger, Federico and Jeromin Zettelmeyer (2006), Debt Defaults and Lessons from a
Decade of Crises, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Sundaresan, Suresh and Zhenya Wang (2010), “Design of Contingent Capital with a Stock
Price Trigger for Mandatory Conversion,” Working Paper, Columbia University.

Weber, Axel, Jens Ulbricht and Karsen Wendorff (2011), “Finanzmarktstabilität sichern,
Investorenverantwortung stärken, Steuerzahler schonen Ein Vorschlag zur Stärkung des
Europäischen Stabilitätsmechanismus durch diegeeignete Ausgestaltung künftiger
Anleihekonditionen,” Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (3 March).
