                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            MANAGERIAL ATTRIBUTES AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION

                                           John R. Graham
                                                Si Li
                                             Jiaping Qiu

                                        Working Paper 17368
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17368


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




We thank editor Michael Weisbach, two anonymous referees, Jonathan Berk (the Utah Winter Finance
Conference discussant), Alon Brav, Alex Edmans, Carola Frydman (the AFA discussant), Michael
Roberts, Ko-Chia Yu, and seminar participants at Bank of Canada, Brock University, University of
Toronto, University of Waterloo, Wilfrid Laurier University, York University, the 2009 Utah Winter
Finance Conference, and the American Finance Association 2010 Annual Meeting for helpful comments.
Li and Qiu acknowledge financial support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council
of Canada. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by John R. Graham, Si Li, and Jiaping Qiu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Managerial Attributes and Executive Compensation
John R. Graham, Si Li, and Jiaping Qiu
NBER Working Paper No. 17368
August 2011
JEL No. C23,G22,G3,J24,J31,J33

                                            ABSTRACT

We study the role of firm- and manager-specific heterogeneities in executive compensation. We decompose
the variation in executive compensation and find that time invariant firm and especially manager fixed
effects explain a majority of the variation in executive pay. We then show that in many settings, it
is important to include fixed effects to mitigate potential omitted variable bias. Furthermore, we find
that compensation fixed effects are significantly correlated with management styles (i.e., manager
fixed effects in corporate policies). Finally, the method used in the paper has a number of potential
applications in financial economics.


John R. Graham                                     Jiaping Qiu
Duke University                                    DeGroote School of Business
Fuqua School of Business                           McMaster University
100 Fuqua Drive                                    Hamilton, ON
Durham, NC 27708-0120                              L8S 4M4, Canada
and NBER                                           qiu@mcmaster.ca
john.graham@duke.edu

Si Li
School of Business and Economics
Wilfrid Laurier University
Waterloo, ON
N2L 3C5, Canada
sli@wlu.ca
1.      Introduction

Executive compensation is of considerable interest to the business and academic communities,

as well as to policymakers. The existing literature documents that observable firm

characteristics (e.g., firm size and performance) and managerial characteristics (e.g., job tenure

and gender) partially explain the variation in executive pay. However, little is known about the

impact on compensation from unobservable firm and managerial characteristics, such as latent

managerial skills. 1 In this paper, we study the direct influence of firm and manager fixed

effects on executive compensation, as well as how the inclusion of fixed effects impacts the

interpretation and contribution of traditional explanatory variables.

        In terms of the direct influence of fixed effects, it is well known that observationally

equivalent individuals often earn markedly different levels of compensation. This could occur

because of unobservable firm characteristics, such as corporate culture, or it could be due to

unobserved personal characteristics, such as innate ability or personality. This suggests that it

is important to directly examine whether unobservable firm and manager characteristics could

explain a significant portion of the variation in executive compensation. 2 In terms of the

impact on the significance and interpretation of other explanatory variables, to the extent that

excluded person or firm effects are correlated with observable characteristics, empirical

analysis of the latter could produce biased coefficient estimates. For example, highly skilled

managers are more likely to be paid higher wages; such managers could also tend to work in




1
  Consistent with the statistics and economics literatures, we use the word “unobservable” to indicate information
that is difficult to quantify or unavailable to the econometrician—hence it is “unobservable” from the perspective
of the econometrician. We do not exclude the possibility that such “unobservable” information may be observed
by other parties such as employers.
2
  As discussed later, we use fixed effects to capture the time-invariant dimension of unobserved heterogeneity. It
is possible that some unobserved heterogeneities can change over time; the fixed effects model cannot capture
such time-variant unobserved heterogeneity.


                                                                                                                1
larger firms. In models that do not account for manager fixed effects, the estimated effect of

firm size on executive pay could be inflated.

        Several approaches could be used to address the primary goal of this paper, which is to

investigate the role of unobservable time-invariant firm and manager heterogeneities (or,

loosely speaking, firm and manager fixed effects) in determining executive pay. 3 The simplest

approach combines firm and manager fixed effects by including a dummy variable for each

unique firm-manager combination (which is called a “spell”) in the full universe of

compensation data. This “spell fixed effects” approach controls for the combined influence of

firm and manager fixed effects, and mitigates possible concerns about estimation bias.

However, the spell approach does not separately identify firm and manager fixed effects and

thus does not reveal their relative importance. Therefore, the spell approach is not adequate to

address an additional goal of our paper, which is to isolate and quantify how much of the

variation in executive pay is attributable to observable time variant firm effects (e.g., firm size,

market to book ratio, firm performance), observable time variant manager effects (e.g., job

tenure), time invariant firm fixed effects, time invariant manager fixed effects, and year effects.

        One way to separately identify these various effects is to study a panel of compensation

data composed only of managers who have changed firms and to include manager, firm, and

year dummies in the specification. For example, Bertrand and Schoar (2003) use this approach

to study how manager fixed effects are related to various corporate activities. We refer to the

approach of studying a sample of managers who have changed firms as the MDV (mover

dummy variable) method. The sample that can be studied using the MDV approach, however,

3
  Time-invariant or slow moving manager heterogeneity, such as latent managerial ability, will be captured by
manager fixed effects. For example, Abowd et al. (1999, 2003) and Iranzo et al. (2008) use person fixed effects to
proxy for employee human capital. However, it is also possible that managers may develop their abilities over
time. We attempt to capture time changing managerial ability by including job tenure in our empirical
specifications.


                                                                                                                2
is necessarily small due to the relatively small number of executive job changes in most

samples. Because of this limitation, we introduce to the finance literature an alternative method

to estimate manager and firm fixed effects separately. This alternative method is based on

Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999; AKM henceforth). The AKM method can lever the

potentially small number of mover observations (i.e., managers who move across companies)

to deduce information about non-movers who work in firms that have employed at least one

mover. This allows us to separate firm and manager fixed effects not only for movers but also

for some non-movers, increasing the sample size and power.

         The key economic implications from our paper are similar regardless of whether we use

the spell method, the MDV method or the AKM method. We consistently find that firm and

manager fixed effects explain a significant proportion of the variation in executive

compensation. When separating manager fixed effects from firm fixed effects using either the

MDV or the AKM method, we find that manager fixed effects are more important than firm

fixed effects in explaining the level of executive pay. We also demonstrate that ignoring fixed

effects could yield biased coefficient estimates for other variables. For example, we find that

the magnitude of the firm size coefficient decreases by approximately 40% when manager

fixed effects are included in the specification. Our results suggest that in many settings it may

be important to control for manager and firm fixed effects to mitigate missing variable bias. 4

         We also link our estimates of manager fixed compensation effects to management

“styles” in corporate policies. We study whether managers with different styles or traits are

remunerated accordingly. According to Bertrand and Schoar (2003), managers vary in style


4
 Our analysis does not imply that every empirical specification should include firm and manager fixed effects.
The decision of whether or not to employ a fixed effects model is predicated on the goal of the research. It is
worth noting that the fixed effects model is not without limitations. We discuss caveats and interpretation issues in
detail at the end of Section 4.1.3.


                                                                                                                   3
and differ in the aggressiveness of their investment and financing choices. Our finding that

links policy fixed effects and compensation fixed effects indicates that more aggressive

managers appear to be remunerated for the additional risk they take.

        The primary contributions of this paper are threefold. First, the paper adds to the

executive compensation literature by providing the first empirical study of the role of

unobserved firm and managerial heterogeneities in determining executive pay. The literature

on executive compensation (Core, Holthausen, and Larcker, 1999, Core, Guay, and Larcker,

2008, Frydman and Saks, 2010, Gabaix and Landier, 2008, Rose and Shepard, 1997, among

others) has focused on how observable firm and manager characteristics affect the level of pay.

Many of these studies do not include any fixed effects, some include firm fixed effects, very

few include manager fixed effects, and none include both. 5 Given the importance of latent

factors such as innate ability, preferences, risk aversion, personality, firm culture, etc. in

shaping corporate outcomes, we view incorporating both firm and manager heterogeneities into

the determinants of executive pay as a significant step. When quantifying the explanatory

power of the time-invariant dimension of these heterogeneities, our results suggest that firm

fixed effects and particularly manager fixed effects are important factors in explaining

executive pay.

        Second, to the extent that the omitted relevant variables are time invariant, including

both firm and manager fixed effects produces estimated parameters on observable firm and

managerial characteristics that are less likely to be contaminated by omitted variable bias. Most

prior research focuses on the observed characteristics in order to address particular theories.
5
 When regressing the level of executive pay on explanatory variables, some papers control for firm fixed effects
(Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2001, Chhaochharia and Grinstein, 2009, Frydman and Saks, 2010, Gabaix and
Landier, 2008, Hubbard and Palia, 1995, Joskow et al., 1996, Kraft and Niederprum, 1999, Perry and Zenner,
2001), a few papers control for manager fixed effects (Aggarwal and Samwick, 1999, Garvey and Milbourn, 2003,
Perry and Zenner, 2001), and none control for both at the same time. All these prior studies focus on observable
determinants.


                                                                                                             4
We point out that to interpret the evidence in the context of theories, it is important to control

for fixed effects if doing so helps mitigate potential omitted variable bias. For example, the

significant relation between firm size and pay is well established in executive compensation.

We show that the effect of firm size on executive pay level is likely overstated if the omitted

variables are not properly controlled. Our paper also documents the economic effects of

manager fixed effects by showing that they are significantly related to corporate policies.

         Our third contribution is the introduction of the AKM method into finance, in the

context of the growing attention being paid to manager-specific effects. Bertrand and Schoar

(2003) examine managerial fixed effects in corporate activities such as return on assets,

investment, leverage, and cash holdings. 6 However, their MDV method is only used on a

relatively small dataset, while the AKM method can separately identify manager fixed effects

from firm fixed effects for a much larger set of executives. The typically used spell method

also has limitations. Frank and Goyal (2007) find that adding manager fixed effects to a

regression analysis of the determinants of leverage significantly increases the model fit. 7

However, the spell fixed effects method cannot disentangle manager from firm fixed effects.

As a result, the exact power of manager fixed effects in explaining leverage variation is unclear.

         The AKM method avoids the shortcomings of the other two methods and has broad

potential in many finance and accounting research areas where capturing firm- and manager-

specific effects is desirable. For example, one could examine manager and firm fixed effects in

various corporate activities, which include but are not limited to corporate investment and

financial policies, and earnings management, among others (Coles and Li, 2011a, 2011b). Or


6
  Bertrand and Schoar (2003) do not investigate managerial fixed effects in compensation, though they do find
that managers with higher return on assets manager fixed effects have greater excess compensation.
7
  Lemmon et al. (2008) study the role of firm fixed effects (not manager fixed effects) in determining leverage and
find that firm fixed effects are an important factor in explaining leverage.


                                                                                                                 5
one may be interested in separately investigating mutual fund manager fixed effects and fund

company fixed effects in mutual fund performance, or analyst fixed effects and brokerage firm

fixed effects in earnings forecasts.

       Our results should be interpreted with two points in mind. First, fixed effects may lead

to over-controlling if some determinants of executive pay move slowly through time. That is, if

the explanatory variable of interest mainly varies cross-sectionally, then fixed effects could

absorb the variation of interest. The fixed effects approach is more suitable when the

explanatory variables of interest present sufficient time series variation. Second, the fixed

effects model provides a simple method to address the omitted variable bias issue if omitted

variables or unobserved factors are time constant or slow moving. However, fixed effects are

unable to solve the omitted variable problem or the selection problem caused by time-variant

unobserved factors.

       The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section discusses the empirical

methodology; the Appendix B explores related statistical issues in greater detail. Section 3

describes the data, variables, and summary statistics. Results, implications, and robustness tests

are given in Section 4. The last section concludes.



2.     Empirical Methodology

2.1    A Three-Way Fixed Effects Model of Compensation

       To motivate the empirical specification, first consider a simple model of human capital

in the spirit of Becker (1993) and Mincer (1974). Let HCit denote manager i’s stock of human

capital at time t, while Ut denotes the time t rental rate of human capital. Hence, the

individual’s expected wage rate yit can be determined as



                                                                                                6
                                     y it = U t × HCit .                                                        (1)

Assume that human capital is reflected in the observable firm and manager characteristics, Wjt

and Xit, and the latent firm and person specific inputs, φj and θi. Then the exponential form of

production function gives
                                        X it β +W jt γ +ϕ j +θ i
                            HC it = e                              .                                            (2)

Combining equations (1) and (2) and taking the logarithms yields the standard human capital

log wage function as

                           Ln(yit) = Xit β + Wjt γ + φj + θi + μt ,                                             (3)

where μt = Ln(Ut). Adding an error term εit to the theoretical equation (3) gives the empirically

estimable equation

                           Ln(yit)= Xit β + Wjt γ + φj + θi + μt + εit .                                        (4)

         Equation (4) indicates that an executive’s expected compensation is the sum of the

market valuation of his or her personal characteristics Xitβ+θi (observable and unobservable),

the specific compensation policies Wjtγ+φj chosen by the executive’s employer (observable and

unobservable), and time effects in compensation μt. Residual εit reflects a manager’s residual

compensation, which captures the compensation that is not priced in the labor market given a

manager’s observable and unobservable human capital. This model assumes that for any given

manager i, θi is constant over time, whether the manager stays in the same firm or moves to a

new employer. Consistent with Frydman (2007) and Murphy and Zabojnik (2004, 2007),

managers’ general skills that are transferable across companies can be captured by θi. 8 The

time-invariant component φj of firm-specific compensation policies could reflect the time-



8
  Managerial ability is just one interpretation of manager fixed effects θi. θi could capture managerial traits other
than ability as long as these traits are time invariant or slow moving.


                                                                                                                   7
invariant dimension of corporate monitoring or incentive considerations or the compensation

premia in firms with persistently abnormal profit (Abowd et al., 2003).

       In model (4), there are three fixed effects: manager fixed effect θi, firm fixed effect φj,

and year fixed effect μt. This three-way fixed effects model is our main specification

throughout the paper. The model provides a way to mitigate the omitted variable bias common

in our applications if the relevant omitted variables are primarily time invariant. For example,

firm size, an explanatory variable frequently used in finance, is likely correlated with manager-

specific innate ability and firm-specific corporate policies. In a model that does not capture

both manager and firm fixed effects, the unobserved person and firm heterogeneities are

absorbed into the error term ε, causing correlations between the error term and explanatory

variables. Such correlations violate the exogeneity condition and lead to inconsistent and

biased estimates of β and γ. The fixed effects model, by separating unobserved time invariant

heterogeneities from the error term, provides consistent, unbiased, and generally efficient

estimates of β and γ, as long as the error in (4) is uncorrelated with observable characteristics

(X and W) and fixed effects (θ, φ, and μ). Model (4) also allows fixed effects themselves to be

arbitrarily correlated with explanatory variables X and W (Wooldridge, 2001).

2.2    Estimation Methods

2.2.1 Spell Fixed Effects Method

       The spell method creates a dummy variable, Vs, for each unique combination of

manager i and firm j (i.e., for each spell). The spell level heterogeneity Vs is equal to φj + θi,

and Equation (4) can be rewritten as Ln(yit)= Xit β + Wjt γ + Vs+ μt + εit . The model is thus

reduced to a two-way fixed effects model and can be estimated on the full sample using

standard fixed effects approaches, which include the within approach and the least square



                                                                                                8
dummy variable (LSDV) approach. The spell approach has been used in the literature (Abowd

et al., 1999, Munch and Skaksen, 2008, and Schank et al., 2007) to control the influence of

manager and firm fixed effects in a manner that addresses possible omitted variable bias.

However, using this approach, one can only estimate the joint manager-firm fixed effects Vs

and cannot separately identify φj and θi. To separate the firm from manager fixed effects, one

should use the MDV method or the AKM method, which are discussed below.

2.2.2 The Mover Dummy Variable (MDV) Method

       We are interested in not only controlling for unobserved manager θi and firm φj fixed

effects but, in some parts of the analysis, we are also interested in estimating the magnitudes of

each fixed effect separately. Intuitively, if a company has no managerial turnover during the

sample period, the firm’s fixed effect cannot be disentangled from the fixed effects of its

managers because the two effects are perfectly collinear. Therefore, the separation of manager

fixed effects from firm fixed effects is only possible when the firm has at least one mover (i.e.,

a manager who switches companies). The mover dummy variable (MDV) method used in

Bertrand and Schoar (2003) restricts the sample to movers, includes dummy variables for each

manager and each firm, and then estimates Equation (4) using the least square dummy variable

(LSDV) approach.

       One disadvantage of the MDV approach is that managers who have moved could be

different from managers who never change firms, and the resulting sample selection bias could

limit the generalizability of the results. Another disadvantage is that this method may face

computer limitations related to inverting a matrix with many dummy variables in very large

samples (see Appendix B.1 for details). This second disadvantage is less significant unless the




                                                                                                9
dataset is quite large. Due to these limitations, in the next section we introduce an alternative

method to separate the fixed effects.

2.2.3 The Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (AKM) Method

       The alternative method we use to separate firm from manager fixed effects is based on

Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999). The AKM method, by identifying manager and firm

fixed effects through group connection, allows us to separate firm and manager fixed effects

not only for movers but also for non-moving executives, as long as the non-movers work in

firms that have hired at least one mover. Group connection is defined as follows. Start with an

arbitrary individual and include all the companies for which he or she has ever worked. Next,

add all the individuals who have ever worked in any of those companies. Continue adding all

additional firms for which any of these individuals has ever worked and all additional

individuals in any of those firms until no more individuals or firms can be added to the current

group. Repeat for the next group and continue until all data are exhausted. Hence, every person

and firm belongs to exactly one group and within every group all the persons and firms are

connected somehow. The detailed algorithm of forming groups can be found in Abowd et al.

(2002). We discuss the technical details of the AKM method in Appendix B.

       Connectedness is related to, but is not identical to, mobility. A manager who has never

moved can be connected to another company as long as at least one other manager in his or her

firm has worked at the other company. Therefore, a small amount of mobility can generate a

large amount of connectedness. Within each group, there is person mobility, which connects

persons and firms in this group. Between groups, there is no mobility. Abowd et al. (1999)

formally prove that connectedness is necessary and sufficient for the separate identification of




                                                                                              10
person and firm fixed effects. Mobility, a requirement of the MDV method, is sufficient but is

not a necessary condition.

       Although only a moderate proportion of managers have changed firms in our sample,

these turnovers allow us to separate a large number of manager and firm fixed effects through

group connection. We refer to this larger sample retained by the AKM method as the

connectedness sample, while the sample used in the MDV method that includes only movers is

called the mobility sample. Note that these two samples contain the same firms. The mobility

sample includes only movers from these firms, while the connectedness sample includes both

movers and non-movers in these firms. One benefit of the larger connectedness sample is the

increased precision of the model estimates (see Appendix B.2 for details).

       Abowd et al. (2004) and Andrews et al. (2008) show that when worker mobility is

limited, there may be estimation bias that causes the person and firm effects to be estimated

imprecisely. The intuition is that we use the mover information to figure out the firm fixed

effects. When the number of movers goes up, we have more information and thus the firm

fixed effects (and then the manager fixed effects) can be estimated more precisely. The limited

mobility bias is present in both the MDV and the AKM methods because both methods depend

on the mover information to identify the fixed effects. Consequently, the results for both MDV

and AKM need to be interpreted with this limitation in mind.

       Below, we start by using the spell method in the full sample, then use AKM as our

primary method to disentangle manager and firm fixed effects in the connectedness sample.

We use MDV on the mobility sample to test the robustness of the results.



3.     Data and Summary Statistics



                                                                                            11
3.1     Sample Selection

        Our sample consists of a matched ExecuComp-Compustat panel dataset from 1992 to

2006. This dataset allows us to track through time the highest paid executives in firms covered

by ExecuComp. We merge the manager-level ExecuComp data with firm-level annual

accounting variables from Compustat and firm-level stock returns from CRSP. We then

remove observations with incomplete data. Our full sample includes 25,586 managers who

have worked for 2,344 firms. When we use the spell method to control for the influence of

unobserved firm and manager heterogeneities, we estimate based on this full sample.

        Because managerial mobility or connectedness is necessary to permit the separation of

manager fixed effects from firm fixed effects, Table 1 presents information on the movers and

stayers in our sample. Panel A shows that during the sample period from 1992 through 2006,

4.9% or 1,256 managers are movers who worked as top executives in more than one company

in the sample, while the rest (95.1%) are non-movers who worked in a single sample firm. 9

                                               [Table 1 about here]

        Panel B provides information on the proportion of companies that have a given number

of top managers who move during the sample period. About 45% of the sample firms do not

have any managers who move across companies, while the remaining 55% (1,272 firms) have

manager switchers. We are able to identify fixed effects for all the managers who are or were

in these 1,272 firms, irrelevant of whether they move or not. When we want to separately

identify manager fixed effects from firm fixed effects using the AKM method, we perform our

analysis on the subsample of the firms (i.e., 55% of the full sample) in which there are movers.

This “someone at the firm moved” sample (i.e., connectedness sample) includes 15,352

9
  Note that we are only able to capture managers’ movements within ExecuComp firms. It is possible for a
manager to move to or from a firm that is not in the sample; we are unable to trace such activity due to data
limitations.


                                                                                                          12
managers who have worked for 1,272 firms. The mobility sample (analyzed with the MDV

method) includes 1,256 movers and the 1,272 firms at which they were employed.

3.2        Sample Description

           In Table 2, we follow the methodology in Brav et al. (2005) and investigate whether the

connectedness sample is representative of the original full sample. Panel A summarizes the

representativeness of the continuous variables used in the study. 10 We first compare the overall

averages and medians of each variable for the connectedness sample to the full ExecuComp

sample (i.e., the universe of ExecuComp firms with valid data). We then sort the full sample

into quintiles and report the quintile mean for each variable. We also report the mean and the

percentage of the connectedness sample firms that fall into each quintile, based on the full

sample quintile breakpoints for each variable. The reported percentages can be compared with

the benchmark 20%. In Panel B, we compare the summary statistics of indicator variables for

the connectedness sample and the full sample. These analyses allow us to infer whether our

connectedness sample is representative of the universe of ExecuComp firms and, if so, in

which dimensions.

                                                     [Table 2 about here]

           The analyses show that the connectedness sample is fairly representative of the full

sample, except that the connectedness sample firms are somewhat larger and executives in

such firms are somewhat better paid. In unreported analysis, we compare the connectedness

sample firms to the top four size quintiles of the full sample (i.e., we remove the bottom

quintile of ExecuComp firms in terms of total assets). We find that controlling for firm size in

this manner, the connectedness sample firms are representative in all remaining dimensions,



10
     The definitions of the variables used in our analysis are reported in the data appendix.


                                                                                                13
and thus we conclude that the difference in pay for the two samples is related to firm size. We,

therefore, control for firm size in all our regression analysis.

       Table 2 also provides summary statistics for both the full sample and the connectedness

sample (we focus our discussion on the latter). The managers in the connectedness sample

receive average compensation of $2.2 million and median compensation of $1.1 million. This

implies a large positive skewness in the level of executive pay. The average (median) cash-

based compensation (i.e., salary plus bonus) paid to the managers is $0.7 ($0.5) million,

accounting for about 55% of total compensation, and the average (median) equity-based

compensation is $1.2 ($0.3) million, accounting for 35% of total compensation. The average

(median) managerial tenure is around 10 (8) years and 17% of sample managers are CEOs.



4.     Empirical Results

4.1    The Economic Importance of Unobserved Firm and Manager

Heterogeneities

4.1.1 Determinants of Executive Compensation

       In this section, we analyze how unobserved firm and manager effects are related to

compensation. We follow prior research in selecting the observable characteristics that

determine the level of executive pay (see, for example, Core et al., 2008, Core et al., 1999,

Murphy, 1999, and Rose and Shepard, 1997). Specifically, we regress the logarithm of total

compensation on firm-level variables such as firm size, growth, stock returns, accounting

returns, and return volatility, and on manager-level variables such as managerial tenure and

whether the manager is a CEO. Year fixed effects are included to capture the impact of




                                                                                             14
economic conditions as well as other potential year differences on pay level. 11 Our main

dependent variable is log(total compensation), where total compensation is ExecuComp data

item TDC1 (measured in $thousands) and is comprised of salary, bonus, other annual, total

value of restricted stock granted, total value of stock options granted (using Black-Scholes),

long-term incentive payouts, and all other total. Our main results and implications remain

similar when we separately analyze log(salary plus bonus), log(stock plus option

compensation), cash compensation as a proportion of total pay, and stock plus option

compensation as a proportion of total pay as dependent variables.

                                              [Table 3 about here]

        Table 3 reports our analysis of the determinants of log(total compensation) using the

spell method in the full sample. Regression (1) is a pooled OLS regression without firm or

manager fixed effects. The adjusted R-squared for this regression is 49%, which is similar to

the adjusted R-squared found in previous studies, such as Core et al. (1999). In regression (2),

we add firm fixed effects to account for unobservable differences across firms. The adjusted R-

squared in this specification increases to 66%. This indicates that unobservable firm

heterogeneity (such as firm quality, firm culture about compensation practice, etc.) plays a

significant role in explaining executive pay. In regression (3), we add manager fixed effects

instead of firm fixed effects. The adjusted R-squared is 76%, a 27% absolute increase

compared with the pooled OLS specification, and a 10% increase over the firm fixed effects

specification. This suggests that unobservable managerial traits (such as leadership styles,

personalities, abilities, etc.) have substantial explanatory power in determining managerial

compensation. In regression (4), we control for both unobservable firm-level and manager-

11
  Executive pay could be abnormally high (due to a signing bonus, severance pay, etc.) during the years when
managers join or leave a company. When we add a dummy variable which equals one for the year that a manager
joined or left a company, the results are essentially the same.


                                                                                                         15
level differences and the adjusted R-squared increases to 77%. Finally, in specifications (2)

through (4), F tests suggest that these firm/manager fixed effects are jointly significantly

different from zero.

        The significant improvement in the adjusted R-square in the three-way fixed effects

regression indicates that firm and manager fixed effects play an important role in explaining

executive pay. Nevertheless, we note that the goal of empirical research is not to increase the

R-square per se. Ultimately, one of our objectives is to understand the implications that the

inclusion (or exclusion) of unobservable firm and managerial characteristics has on empirical

executive compensation research. We explore this issue in detail in Section 4.1.3.

4.1.2 Relative          Importance          of     Different        Factors        in     Determining

Compensation

        In this section, we explore the relative economic importance of time-invariant firm and

managerial heterogeneities and other factors. Such analysis requires separate identification of

firm and manager fixed effects and thus we perform the AKM regression on the connectedness

sample. The results reported in Panel A of Table 4 show that all the implications we obtain

from the full sample regressions in Table 3 also hold for the connectedness sample.

        We next use the coefficient estimates from the AKM three-way fixed effects regression

(4) in Panel A of Table 4 to separate out the following components: observable time-variant

firm characteristics ( W jt γˆ ), observable time-variant manager characteristics ( X it β̂ ), firm fixed

effects ( ϕ̂ j ), manager fixed effects ( θˆi ), year effects ( μ̂t ), and residuals ( εˆit ). 12 We examine

how much each of these components contributes to the total variation in executive pay, using


12
   The observable firm or manager characteristics are time-variant because observable time-invariant
characteristics (such as a female dummy) are absorbed into the manager or firm fixed effects.


                                                                                                         16
the covariance between log(compensation) and each of the components, normalized by the

variance of log(compensation). Note that model R-squared is calculated as

      cov( Ln( y it ), Ln( yˆ it )) cov( Ln( y it ), X it βˆ + Wit γˆ + ϕˆ j + θˆt + μˆ t )
R2 =                                =
           var( Ln( y it ))                            var( Ln( y it ))
  cov( Ln( y it ), X it βˆ ) cov( Ln( y it ),Wit γˆ ) cov( Ln( y it ), ϕˆ j )
=                           +                        +                                                            (5)
     var( Ln( y it ))              var( Ln( y it ))        var( Ln( y it ))
  cov( Ln( y it ),θˆi ) cov( Ln( y it ), μˆ t )
+                       +                        ,
    var( Ln( y it ))         var( Ln( y it ))

where Ln(yit) is the dependent variable log(total compensation). Therefore, the normalized

covariance (excluding residuals) may be interpreted as a decomposition of model R-squared,

with the covariance values corresponding to the fractions of the model sum of squares

attributable to particular factors. 13

                                                      [Table 4 about here]

         We find that the normalized covariance of manager fixed effects, time-variant firm

characteristics,      firm     fixed      effects,     and     time-variant       manager     characteristics   with

log(compensation) are 0.44, 0.20, 0.04, and 0.04, respectively (Table 4, Panel B, Column (3)).

Year effects and residuals each have a normalized covariance of 0.09 and 0.19. As a result, the

fraction of the model sum of squares attributed to manager fixed effects is 54% (0.44/(1-0.19)),

observable firm characteristics 25%, firm fixed effects 5%, and observable manager

characteristics 5%. Manager fixed effects contribute the most to model R-squared, and




13
  In unreported analysis, we also follow Lemmon et al. (2008) and use analysis of variance (ANOVA) to examine
the relative importance of each factor in explaining the variation in executive pay. We obtain similar implications.
Specifically, in this alternative analysis we first obtain a Type III partial sum of squares for each factor, and then
divide the partial sum for each factor by the total partial sum of squares over all factors for a particular model.
One thing to note is that the normalized partial sum of squares should not be interpreted as the exact share of the
model R-square; rather, it represents the relative power of each factor in reducing the residual sum of squares
given that all the other factors have been included in the model.


                                                                                                                  17
observable time-variant firm characteristics are the second most important factor in explaining

the variation in the level of executive pay.

       In addition, the averages and standard deviations of log(compensation) and various

components shown in Columns (1) and (2) of Table 4, Panel B help us interpret the economic

magnitude of manager and firm fixed effects. Among all the components, manager and firm

fixed effects have the largest and the second largest standard deviations and the values of the

standard deviations are of an order similar to that of log(compensation). This indicates that a

one standard deviation change of manager or firm fixed effects will result in roughly a one

standard deviation change in log(compensation). More specifically, when manager fixed

effects increase by one standard deviation of 1.13, log(compensation) changes from the

average level of 7.08 to 8.21 (7.08+1.13), which can be translated into a change in total

compensation from $1.2 million to $3.7 million. In other words, a one standard deviation

increase in manager fixed effects will increase executive compensation by $2.5 million on

average, which is economically important. Similarly, when firm fixed effects increase by one

standard deviation of 0.97, log(compensation) changes from the average level of 7.08 to 8.05

and this corresponds to a change in total compensation from $1.2 million to $3.1 million.

       The results presented so far indicate that time-invariant executive-specific

heterogeneity is an important component and has significant incremental explanatory power

beyond what is explained by extant determinants. Nevertheless, it is worth highlighting that the

above analysis does not imply that observable characteristics have little power to explain

executive pay variation. If the variation in observable characteristics is largely cross-sectional,

including fixed effects in the regression will decrease the proportion of the variation explained

by observable determinants because fixed effects will absorb the cross-sectional variation. For

example, although the observable determinants have a relatively low explanatory power in the


                                                                                                18
fixed effects analysis, the model that contains observable determinants alone has a high

adjusted R-square of 49%. Also, the explanatory power of unobserved heterogeneities could be

overstated if fixed effects absorb some cross-sectional effects from observable variables.

4.1.3 Implications for Empirical Executive Compensation Research

        We first discuss the general implications of our results for empirical compensation

research. As mentioned earlier, if unobservable person or firm heterogeneity is correlated with

the observable characteristics, empirical methods that do not explicitly account for these

unobservables could result in omitted variable bias. To further shed light on this issue, we

compare the coefficient estimates in the OLS model with those in the three-way fixed effects

model. We focus on the spell method results in Table 3 to facilitate the discussion (Tables 4

and 5 give similar implications). An inspection of Columns (1) and (4) in Table 3 reveals that

the signs of the coefficients are similar in both specifications, but the magnitudes of the

coefficients are sensitive to the specification. The average change in coefficient magnitude in

the three-way fixed effects model relative to the OLS model is 50%. A Hausman test that

compares the two specifications rejects the hypothesis that the OLS estimates are consistent at

the 1% level. The Hausman test also rejects the hypothesis that time-invariant firm and

manager heterogeneities are uncorrelated with the observable determinants. 14 Following

Lemmon et al. (2008), we summarize the implication of ignoring unobserved firm and manager

differences using Hsiao (2002, page 8): “Ignoring the individual effects that exist among cross-

sectional units but are not captured by the included explanatory variables can lead to …

inconsistent or meaningless estimates of interesting parameters.”

14
   Like any specification test, the Hausman test results are suggestive. We also note that it is plausible that
managerial fixed effects are correlated with observable determinants. For example, managerial fixed effects
partially reflect talent, and talent may be correlated with firm size because, on average, firms grow larger when
run by talented managers. Talent may also be correlated with firm performance because good managers increase
firm performance.


                                                                                                              19
        We now discuss the specific implications of our results in the context of existing

empirical evidence on executive compensation. Recent research relates the level of pay to firm

size to justify an efficient contracting view that high pay is the result of optimal contracting in

a competitive market for managerial talent. In the theories developed by Gabaix and Landier

(2008) and Tervio (2008), better skilled managers match with larger firms. Due to the

complementarity between managerial skill and firm size in production, moderately better

managerial skill could lead to significantly greater profits for a large company. Consequently,

compared with smaller companies, larger firms are willing to offer much higher wages. Gabaix

and Landier (2008) empirically test the relation between the level of pay and firm size. Using a

pooled OLS regression and the 1000 highest paid CEOs in the ExecuComp data from 1992 to

2004, they find that the coefficient of log(market value) in the equation with the dependent

variable being log(total pay) is equal to 0.37 (see Table II of their paper). 15 They thus conclude

that the elasticity of CEO pay to firm size is roughly 1/3. 16

         We derive similar results when using OLS regressions in our study, as Table 3

exemplifies. Log(assets), a proxy for firm size, is positively related to pay with a coefficient of

0.37 in the OLS regression. Once we include manager fixed effects, the coefficient declines

significantly to 0.22. The decline (0.37-0.22) in the coefficients is significant, with a t-statistic

of 11.95. The coefficient of 0.37 in the OLS model indicates that when log(assets) increases by

one standard deviation of 1.76, executive pay increases by 92% (exp(0.37×1.76)-1). The three-

way fixed effects coefficient of 0.22 indicates that the percentage increase in pay caused by a

one standard deviation increase in firm size is 47% (exp(0.22×1.76)-1). This calculation

15
   Frydman and Saks (2010) also test the relation between compensation and firm size using historical
compensation data ranging from 1936 to 2005 for the largest 50 firms. Their OLS regression gives a similar
coefficient of 0.29 to 0.36 for the period from 1976 to 2005.
16
   Gabaix and Landier (2008) control for firm fixed effects (but not manager fixed effects) in one of their models
and find a coefficient estimate of 0.26. However, they base their conclusions on the OLS regression results.


                                                                                                               20
roughly implies that the impact of firm size on pay in the OLS model is nearly double what it

is in the three-way fixed effects model. Further, the estimate of 0.22 suggests that the elasticity

of CEO pay to firm size is about 1/5, lower than what is documented in the literature. Thus the

takeaway is that when fixed effects are controlled, the correlation between firm size and

executive pay is significantly smaller than previously documented. 17

         Next, we examine how including fixed effects aids interpretation of the pay increases

associated with being CEO. The coefficient on the CEO indicator is 0.9 in the OLS model and

drops to 0.3 in the manager fixed effects model. The CEO indicator potentially captures two

influences on compensation: the CEO’s person-specific effect (i.e., the person who becomes

CEO is more skillful) and a job promotion effect (i.e., the pay increase resulting from a non-

CEO being promoted to CEO). In models without manager fixed effects, the CEO indicator

captures both factors. In models with manager fixed effects, the person-specific effect is

absorbed into manager fixed effects and the CEO indicator captures the promotion effect only.

The results suggest that, holding other variables unchanged, overall, a CEO is paid 150%

(exp(0.9)-1) more than a non-CEO. For the same person, the pay increase due to promotion to

CEO is only 35% (exp(0.3)-1).18 Thus, the three-way fixed effects analysis allows us to isolate

the promotion effect from the combined promotion plus person-specific effect.

         We close this section by mentioning two major caveats to using fixed effects models.

First, our analysis does not imply that every empirical specification should include firm and

17
   We alternatively use the sum of net debt and the market capitalization of equity as the proxy for firm size (as do
Gabaix and Landier, 2008). This proxy is forward-looking and takes into account intangible assets. Our results are
robust to this firm size variable.
18
   Note that the CEO dummy is not perfectly collinear with manager fixed effects because, in our panel dataset, a
particular manager could be a non-CEO executive during some periods and a CEO in other periods. The
identification of the coefficient on the CEO dummy in the presence of manager fixed effects relies on some
executives being promoted from a non-CEO to a CEO or vice versa. In addition, besides using a CEO dummy to
capture a promotion to CEO effect, one can include a CFO dummy, COO dummy, etc. to separate the promotion
effect to these job titles from the person-specific effect. When we do this, we find that the most important of these
variables by far is the CEO indicator variable.


                                                                                                                 21
manager fixed effects. The decision of whether or not to employ a fixed effects model depends

on the goal of the research. In fact, the fixed effects approach fails if one wants to examine the

direct impact of time invariant variables (such as CEO education, birth year, gender, etc.) on

pay because these variables are absorbed into the fixed effects. Hence, if the explanatory

variable of interest mainly varies cross-sectionally, then fixed effects could potentially wipe

out the variation of interest. 19 Our fixed effects approach is more suitable when the explanatory

variables of interest present sufficient time series (within manager) variation. Therefore, when

employing the fixed effects model, one should interpret the results with the above limitation in

mind, especially for variables of interest that mainly vary cross-sectionally and are highly time

persistent.

        The other caveat relates to the ability of the fixed effects model to address omitted

variable bias. If omitted relevant variables or unobserved factors are time constant or at least

slow moving, then the fixed effects model provides a simple and intuitive method to address

the bias. 20 However, if the unobserved factors are time-changing, controlling for fixed effects

is not sufficient to solve the omitted variable problem. Under this circumstance, using the fixed

effects model does not help address the causality issues that researchers are often interested in;

other methods (such as instrumental variables) are needed.

4.1.4 Robustness Analysis

        In this section, we conduct tests to verify the robustness of the findings reported above.

First, as mentioned previously, to deduce the information for non-movers, the AKM analysis

depends on information about movers. When the number of movers that can be used to

19
   For example, Hermalin and Weisbach (1991) do not adopt the firm fixed effects approach in studying the effect
of managerial ownership on firm value because the primary force driving the results is between-firm variation
(page 107).
20
   As noted in Lemmon et al. (2008), alternative ways to address omitted variable bias, or endogeneity bias more
generally, include first differencing, structural estimation, and natural experiments.


                                                                                                             22
estimate fixed effects is relatively limited, the idiosyncratic component of each move may

weigh heavily on the estimation and potentially increase the estimation errors of non-movers’

fixed effects. The resulting noisy estimation of manager fixed effects may not be truly purged

of firm-level influences, and this may exaggerate the explanatory power of person fixed effects.

To address this concern, in Table 5, Panels A and B, we implement the MDV approach used in

Bertrand and Schoar (2003). By restricting the sample to only managers who have moved

between firms and ignoring all non-mover managers, the MDV method avoids the concern

about using the information on a limited number of moving managers to back out non-movers’

fixed effects.

        Our main results remain intact when we apply the MDV method. As before, time

invariant manager and firm heterogeneities contribute important explanatory power to the

determination of executive pay and controlling for these unobserved heterogeneities mitigates

potential omitted variable bias. When we decompose the variation in pay into several

components using the estimates from the MDV approach, the results, reported in Panel B of

Table 5, show that manager fixed effects continue to contribute the most (a share of 39%) to

the model R-squared. 21 Overall, then, the main economic interpretations of the paper are the

same with either the MDV method or the AKM method. 22

        The separation of firm and manager fixed effects would be more precise if one had

more movers in the sample. Given the limitations of executive compensation data, we


21
   Using the AKM method, the shares contributed by manager and firm fixed effects are 54% and 5%, in
comparison to shares of 39% and 19% with the MDV method. Appendix B.2 explains in detail the reasons for the
differences in these numbers.
22
   Our results consistently indicate that manager fixed effects play a more significant role in explaining
compensation than do firm fixed effects. The results, however, should not be interpreted as indicating firm fixed
effects’ unimportance. In fact, in the MDV sample, which includes movers only, firm fixed effects contribute at
least 10% of R-squared (We show in Appendix B.2 that firm fixed effects play a more significant role in
explaining compensation in samples with a larger proportion of movers). See Appendix B.2 and B.3 for further
details.


                                                                                                              23
acknowledge that the separation of firm and manger fixed effects is potentially noisy. However,

it is important to emphasize that our results in Sections 4.1.1 and 4.1.3 do not depend on the

separation of firm and manager fixed effects. The results from these sections imply that

including both types of fixed effects is important when interpreting compensation regressions.

This implication holds for the full sample, the connectedness sample, and the mobility sample,

and also for the spell, MDV, and AKM methods.

                                               [Table 5 about here]

        The second robustness issue to consider is the possibility of matching. A manager may

move to a company for which he is a better match, and receive a wage increase in the

process. 23 Such a wage increase could result in a larger fixed effect estimate for the company

that the manager matches with, although this larger fixed effect is not due to firm-specific

heterogeneity in pay policy. That is, this matching possibility could contaminate our estimation

of fixed effects; this problem is common to both the MDV and the AKM methods. We address

this concern in two ways.

        First, we note that a better match may be partially reflected in improved firm

performance, which in turn leads to higher compensation. We control for firm performance in

all our model specifications. Second, we examine a subsample of movers in which the

matching issue is arguably less problematic. This subsample includes only the managers whose

movement between firms results in a small change (within ±25%) in total compensation. 24

Although the maximum change is 25%, the mean (median) change in total compensation for

this subsample of managers is small (equal to 0.78% (1.1%)). Given such a small change in

total compensation, there is little if any evidence of matching in this subsample. Our results are

23
   For example, Parrino and Srinivasan (2009) find that CEOs with marketing backgrounds are more likely to be
appointed by firms with larger advertising expenditures.
24
   The results are similar if we use ±10%, ±15%, and ±20% as cutoffs.


                                                                                                          24
robust to this subsample analysis (reported in Table 5, Panels C and D). Including manager or

firm fixed effects increases R-squared by half, and including both fixed effects increases R-

squared by 70%. Also, manager fixed effects contribute the most to the model sum of squares,

with a share of 68% in explaining the variation in pay. These findings continue to indicate the

importance of including firm and manager fixed effects.

        Despite these attempts to deal with the endogenous matching issue, we acknowledge

that out efforts do not completely eliminate the matching/selection problem. In fact, the

matching issue is present in some form in any employer-employee matched dataset (including

the full ExecuComp dataset) and is not a by-product of our methodologies. In models that do

not control for fixed effects, such as an OLS regression, matching can affect the coefficient

estimates because matching between firms and managers could be correlated with executive

pay as well as explanatory variables such as firm performance, firm size, and job tenure. If

matching is only based on observable characteristics and time-invariant effects and does not

depend on unobserved time-variant influences, our fixed effects approach actually provides a

simple and intuitive way to address the potential matching problem that might arise when

studying compensation or similar data. That is, using fixed effects controls for time-constant

factors that affect managers’ selecting or being selected into companies. For example, talent is

a key factor that affects managers’ sorting into companies and our inclusion of manager fixed

effects in the model presents one way to address the selection problem associated with

managerial talent. However, we note that if managers and firms are matched on the basis of not

only observable characteristics and fixed effects, but also unobserved time variant person and

firm effects, then none of the methods can fully address the matching problem. 25


25
 Ackerberg and Botticini (2002) use the fixed effects approach to address endogenous matching in the labor
market. They state that “if … unobserved characteristics are constant …, panel techniques can eliminate the


                                                                                                        25
4.2     Discussion of Estimated Manager Fixed Effects

        Figure 1 presents the distribution of manager fixed effects, estimated using the AKM

method in the connectedness sample (i.e., regression (4) of Table 4, Panel A). Since fixed

effects are estimated relative to a benchmark, the mean and the location of the estimated fixed

effects may change when different benchmarks are used. However, the shape of the

distribution and the standard deviation of fixed effects do not depend on benchmarks. The

graph shows that the estimated manager fixed effects are roughly normally distributed, with a

standard deviation of 1.12. To the extent that manager fixed effects can be interpreted as the

time-invariant component of ability, this standard deviation suggests that there is a fair amount

of variation in managerial ability across managers. This estimate could help parameterize

models that proxy for variation in skill, such as Taylor (2010). Note that such an exercise needs

to be implemented with caution because manager fixed effects could reflect the time-invariant

dimension of a variety of managerial attributes, which include not only talent and ability but

also risk aversion, propensity to exert effort, bargaining power, managerial entrenchment, etc.

                                               [Figure 1 about here]

        We also find that the fixed effects estimated from the AKM method and the fixed

effects from the MDV method are highly correlated at 0.77 (reported in Appendix B Table A1),

suggesting that manager fixed effects estimated from the two methods are similar. Compared

with the graph for the AKM fixed effects in Figure 1, the distribution for the MDV fixed



endogeneity problem.” They then mention that the fixed effects approach “addresses the potential ‘two-sided’
matching problem in our data, where unobserved principal characteristics may be correlated with observed agent
characteristics and unobserved agent characteristics may be correlated with observed principal characteristics.”
The existing literature (Abowd et al., 1999, Bertrand and Schoar, 2003, and Goux and Maurin, 1999, among
others) acknowledges that a more complicated endogenous matching problem (in which managers and firms are
matched based on unobserved time variant effects) is a challenging issue for future research.


                                                                                                             26
effects (Appendix B Figure A1) has a similar shape, but a slightly higher dispersion and fatter

tails. One possible explanation is that the mobility sample is much smaller than the

connectedness sample: the number of observations in the mobility sample is only one-eighth

that of the connectedness sample. Greater dispersion in the MDV fixed effects could be the

result of higher standard errors caused by a smaller sample.

       The evidence provided thus far indicates that a significant part of the executive pay

level is determined by managerial attributes that are not captured by the variables that financial

researchers commonly include in their empirical analyses. We investigate what these attributes

might be by hand collecting the personal characteristics of the CEOs in S&P 500 companies.

These characteristics include education, gender, year of birth, and the year the executive

became a CEO. We perform a cross-sectional regression of the previously estimated

managerial fixed effects on these hand-collected personal traits. The regression results (Table 6)

show that education is positive and significant, indicating that CEOs with more advanced

degrees have higher compensation fixed effects. Because education is often used as a proxy for

talent in the literature (Abowd et al., 1999, 2003), our results provide suggestive evidence that

the compensation fixed effects partially reflect managerial talent.

                                       [Table 6 about here]

       Note, however, that the R-squared of regressing fixed effects on education and other

personal characteristics is only 1%, thus these variables explain a very small proportion of the

variation in compensation fixed effects. The rest of the variation is likely attributable to factors

that are very difficult to quantify or for which the data are difficult or impossible for

researchers to obtain. Such factors might include CEO power, personalities, risk attitudes,

social connections, etc. In unreported analysis, we constrain the sample to CEOs and perform a

pooled OLS regression similar to that in Column (1) of Table 4, Panel A, with the education


                                                                                                 27
variable included. Compared with the specification that excludes the education variable, the

improvement in the R-squared is only 0.1%. This result is consistent with the findings in the

labor economics literature that only a small part of person-specific wage components can be

explained by education and other available personal characteristics (Abowd et al., 2003). 26



4.3     Management Styles

        In this section, we examine management styles and study whether different styles or

traits are remunerated accordingly. Using both the AKM and MDV methods, we estimate

managerial fixed effects in corporate policies, which include research and development

spending (R&D), capital investment, leverage, cash holdings, and dividend payout. These

managerial fixed effects in corporate policies are termed “management styles” in Bertrand and

Schoar (2003). We relate manager fixed policy effects to compensation effects by estimating

the following regression:

                 FE(comp)i = α + β×FE(z)i + εi ,                                                            (6)

where i indexes managers, FE(comp) represents manager fixed effects in compensation, and

FE(z) represents manager fixed effects in a particular policy variable, z. We report the β

estimates in Table 7. A significant β indicates that compensation fixed effects are significantly

associated with policy fixed effects. Note that Equation (6) is a cross-sectional regression

because FE(comp) and FE(z) are time invariant. As a result, we interpret the estimated

coefficients as correlations instead of causal relations between fixed effects. In addition,

because manager fixed policy effects FE(z), as independent variables in Equation (6), are



26
  Our main specifications in Tables 3-5 do not include the education variable because educational information is
sparse for non-CEO executives. Adding the education variable in the main regressions would greatly reduce the
sample size. Further, the education variable is time constant and would be absorbed into fixed effects.


                                                                                                             28
estimated from regressions, the β estimates are subject to classical measurement error and will

be biased toward zero under standard econometric assumptions (Wooldridge, 2001).

                                      [Table 7 about here]

        Column (1) of Table 7, using the fixed effects estimated from the AKM approach,

shows that compensation fixed effects are positively related to R&D, investment, leverage, and

dividend payout fixed effects, and are negatively related to cash holding fixed effects. The

results using the fixed effects estimated from the MDV method (column (2)) generally have

similar directions but are statistically weaker, possibly due to fewer observations and less

statistical power. These results suggest that high and low fixed effects in compensation

correspond to differences in management styles across managers. Better paid managers invest

more, both in R&D and capital investment, employ more debt, pay out more dividends, and

hold less cash in the company. One interpretation is that different managers have different

traits. These traits are reflected in different managerial styles and are also priced in pay. For

example, managers differ in the aggressiveness of their investment and financing choices. Less

risk averse or less conservative managers may invest more, use more debt, pay out more, and

hold less cash, and these managers are paid more, possibly as a reward for bearing additional

risk.

        Finally, we examine the economic significance of the correlations between the fixed

effects (Table 7, Column 3). We focus on the results from the AKM fixed effects; the MDV

results have similar economic implications. For example, the difference in the compensation

fixed effects between the dividend-paying companies and the non-dividend-paying companies

is 0.26, which can be translated into $659 thousand of annual executive pay. This suggests that

managers in the dividend-paying companies may systematically differ from those in the non-

dividend-paying companies, and this difference is significantly priced in managerial pay. In


                                                                                              29
addition, given a one standard deviation change in the capital investment (or R&D) fixed

effects, the change in the compensation fixed effects corresponds to a change in executive pay

of about $258 ($180) thousand. These numbers indicate that the correlations between

compensation and policy fixed effects are economically important.



5.     Conclusion

       This paper examines the role of firm and manager fixed effects in explaining executive

compensation and finds that the majority of the variation in executive pay can be explained by

these time-invariant firm and managerial effects. The substantial heterogeneities among firms

and managers could result from differences in corporate culture and in managers’ latent traits,

such as innate ability, personality, risk aversion, etc., none of which can be easily observed or

measured. We quantify the relative importance of these firm and manager fixed effects. We

also show that including firm and managerial fixed effects alters the magnitudes of the

coefficients estimated for other explanatory variables. Compared to the OLS specification, the

effect of firm size is notably smaller in the fixed effects specification. We also isolate the effect

of being promoted to CEO from the person-specific compensation effect and find that the

former is about one-third of the latter. We further relate the manager fixed compensation

effects to management styles in corporate policies and find that more aggressive managers

appear to be remunerated (possibly for the additional risk they bear).

       We believe that accounting for firm and managerial fixed effects represents an advance

in modeling the determination of executive compensation. The empirical framework in the

paper provides an approach for dealing with potential omitted variable problems if omitted

unobserved factors are primarily time invariant. The method we use has potentially broad



                                                                                                  30
applications in finance and accounting in which separately capturing firm- and manager-

specific effects is desirable. This is especially important in the context of the growing attention

to the role of manager-specific effects in corporate policies. For example, using the AKM

method, one can examine manager and firm fixed effects in various corporate polices, such as

investment, capital structure, payout, earnings management, and financial reporting, among

others. One can also use the method to separately investigate mutual fund manager fixed

effects and fund company fixed effects in mutual fund performance, and analyst fixed effects

and brokerage firm fixed effects in earnings forecasts.

       The analysis in the paper, however, is not without limitations. For example, if one is

studying cross-sectional issues, then the fixed effects approach could wipe out the very

variation in which one is interested. Also, the approach cannot address the omitted variable

problem related to time-variant unobserved factors. Future research could investigate two

exciting areas. First, allowing time variation in and interactions between firm and manager

fixed effects could represent a significant step because one could then begin to address the

omitted variable issue caused not only by unobserved time constant factors but also by

unobserved time changing factors. Second, as new data become available, it will be interesting

to see which factors (beyond those examined in this paper, which include education, birth

cohort, and gender) could explain manager fixed effects. These factors could include talent,

risk preferences, and personalities, among others. Clearly, these issues are very challenging but

interesting to both labor and financial economists.




                                                                                                31
References

Abowd, J. M., R. H. Creecy, and F. Kramarz, 2002, Computing Person and Firm Effects Using Linked
    Longitudinal Employer-Employee Data, Working Paper, Cornell University, U.S. Census Bureau,
    and CREST-INSEE

Abowd, J. M., F. Kramarz, and D. N. Margolis, 1999, High Wage Workers and High Wage Firms,
    Econometrica, 67-2, 251-333

Abowd, J. M., F. Kramarz, P. Lengermann, and S. Perez-Duarte, 2004, Are Good Workers Employed
    by Good Firms? A Test of a Simple Assortative Matching Model for France and the United States,
    Working Paper, Cornell University, U.S. Census Bureau, IZA, and Federal Reserve Board

Abowd, J. M., P. Lengermann, and K. L. McKinney, 2003, The Measurement of Human Capital in the
    U.S. Economy, Working Paper, Cornell University, U.S. Census Bureau, and Federal Reserve
    Board

Ackerberg, D. A. and M. Botticini, 2002, Endogenous Matching and the Empirical Determinants of
     Contract Form, Journal of Political Economy, 110-3, 564-591

Aggarwal, R. K. and A. A. Samwick, 1999, Executive Compensation, Strategic Competition, and
     Relative Performance Evaluation: Theory and Evidence, Journal of Finance, 54-6, 1999-2043

Andrews, M., T. Schank and R. Upward, 2006, Practical Fixed-effects Estimation Methods for the
     Three-way Error Components Model, The Stata Journal, 6-4, 461-481

Andrews, M. J., L. Gill, T. Schank, and R. Upward, 2008, High Wage Workers and Low Wage Firms:
     Negative Assortative Matching or Limited Mobility Bias? Journal of the Royal Statistical Society:
     Series A (Statistics in Society), 171-3, 673-697

Becker, G. S., 1993, Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special Reference to
     Education (3rd edition), University of Chicago Press

Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan, 2001, Are CEOs Rewarded for Luck? The Ones without Principals
      Are, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116-3, 901-932

Bertrand, M. and A. Schoar, 2003, Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers on Firm Policies,
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118-4, 1169-1208

Brav, A., J. R. Graham, C. R. Harvey, and R. Michaely, 2005, Payout Policy in the 21st Century,
      Journal of Financial Economics, 77, 483-527

Chhaochharia, V. and Y. Grinstein, 2009, CEO Compensation and Board Structure, Journal of Finance,
     64-1, 231-261

Coles, J. L. and Z. F. Li, 2011a, Managerial Attributes, Incentives, and Performance, Working Paper,
      Arizona State University

Coles, J. L. and Z. F. Li, 2011b, An Empirical Assessment of Empirical Corporate Finance, Working
      Paper, Arizona State University



                                                                                                  32
Core, J. E., W. Guay, and D. F. Larcker, 2008, The Power of the Pen and Executive Compensation,
      Journal of Financial Economics, 88, 1-25

Core, J. E., R. W. Holthausen, and D. F. Larcker, 1999, Corporate Governance, Chief Executive Officer
      Compensation, and Firm Performance, Journal of Financial Economics, 51, 371-406

Cornelissen, T., 2008, The Stata Command felsdvreg to Fit a Linear Model with Two High-
     Dimensional Fixed Effects, The Stata Journal, 8-2, 170-189

Frank, M. Z. and V. K. Goyal, 2007, Corporate Leverage: How Much Do Managers Really Matter?,
     Working Paper, University of Minnesota and Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Frydman, C., 2007, Rising Through the Ranks: The Evolution of the Market for Corporate Executives,
     1936-2003, Working Paper, MIT

Frydman, C. and R. E. Saks, 2010, Executive Compensation: A New View from a Long-Term
     Perspective, 1936-2005, Review of Financial Studies, 23-5, 2099-2138

Gabaix, X. and A. Landier, 2008, Why Has CEO Pay Increased So Much? Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 123-1, 49-100

Garvey, G. and T. Milbourn, 2003, Incentive Compensation When Executives Can Hedge the Market:
     Evidence of Relative Performance Evaluation in the Cross Section, Journal of Finance, 58-4,
     1557-1582

Goux, D. and E. Maurin, 1999, Persistence of Interindustry Wage Differentials: A Re-examination
     Using Matched Worker-Firm Panel Data, Journal of Labor Economics, 17, 492-533

Hermalin, B. and M. Weisbach, 1991, The Effects of Board Composition and Direct Incentives on Firm
    Performance, Financial Management, 20, 101-112

Hsiao, C., 2002, Analysis of Panel Data, Cambridge University Press

Hubbard, R. G. and D. Palia, 1995, Executive Pay and Performance: Evidence from the U.S. Banking
     Industry, Journal of Financial Economics, 39-1, 105-130

Iranzo, S., F. Schivardi, and E. Tosetti, 2008, Skill Dispersion and Firm Productivity: An Analysis with
      Employer-Employee Matched Data. Journal of Labor Economics, 26-2, 247-285

Joskow, P. L., N. L. Rose, and C. D. Wolfram, 1996, Political Constraints on Executive Compensation:
     Evidence from the Electric Utility Industry, Rand Journal of Economics, 27-1, 165-182

Kraft, K. and A. Niederprum, 1999, Determinants of Management Compensation with Risk-averse
      Agents and Dispersed Ownership of the Firm, Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization,
      40-1, 17-27

Lemmon, M. L., M. R. Roberts, and J. F. Zender, 2008, Back to the Beginning: Persistence and the
    Cross-Section of Corporate Capital Structure, Journal of Finance, 63-4, 1575-1608

Mincer, J., 1974, Schooling, Experience, and Earnings, Columbia University Press


                                                                                                     33
Munch, J. R. and J. R. Skaksen, 2008, Human Capital and Wages in Exporting Firms, Journal of
    International Economics, 75-2, 363-372

Murphy, K. J., 1999, Executive Compensation, In: Ashenfelter, O. and D. Card (Editors), Handbook of
    Labor Economics, Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier, 3, 2485-2563

Murphy, K. J. and J. Zabojnik, 2004, CEO Pay and Appointments: A Market-Based Explanation for
    Recent Trends, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 94-2, 192-196

Murphy, K. J. and J. Zabojnik, 2007, Managerial Capital and the Market for CEOs, Working Paper,
    University of Southern California and Queen’s University

Parrino, R. and R. Srinivasan, 2009, CEOs With Marketing Backgrounds: When Are They Appointed
      and Do They Improve Firm Performance? Working Paper, University of Texas at Austin

Perry, T. and M. Zenner, 2001, Pay for Performance? Government Regulation and the Structure of
      Compensation Contracts, Journal of Financial Economics, 62-3, 453-488

Rose, N. L. and A. Shepard, 1997, Firm Diversification and CEO Compensation: Managerial Ability or
      Executive Entrenchment? Rand Journal of Economics, 28-3, 489-514

Schank, T., C. Schnabel and J. Wagner, 2007, Do Exporters Really Pay Higher Wages? First Evidence
     from German Linked Employer-Employee Data, Journal of International Economics, 72-1, 52-74

Taylor, L. A., 2010, Why Are CEOs Rarely Fired? Evidence from Structural Estimation, Journal of
     Finance, forthcoming

Tervio, M., 2008, The Difference that CEOs Make: An Assignment Model Approach, American
      Economic Review, 98-3, 642-668

Wooldridge, J. M., 2001, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, The MIT Press




                                                                                                34
                                                 Table 1
                                            Managerial Mobility

This table provides information on the mobility of sample managers.

Panel A: Number of movers out of all managers
                Number of firms in which managers
    Mover                                                       Number of managers    Percent
                       have been employed
       No                             1                               24,330           95.09

                                  Subtotal                            24,330           95.09

                                      2                               1,164             4.55
                                      3                                84               0.33
      Yes
                                      4                                 7               0.03
                                      5                                 1               0.00

                                  Subtotal                            1,256             4.91

                                    Total                             25,586           100.00

Panel B: Number of movers in a firm
      Number of movers in a firm               Number of firms          Percent      Cumulative

                     0                               1,072               45.73         45.73
                    1-5                               650                27.73         73.46
                   6-10                               351                14.97         88.44
                  11-20                               224                   9.56       97.99
                  21-30                               39                    1.66       99.66
                  31-50                                8                    0.34       100.00

                   Total                             2,344              100.00           --




                                                                                                  35
                                         Table 2
       Summary Statistics and Sample Representativeness of the Connectedness Sample

  This table provides summary statistics of the variables in the full sample (i.e., the universe of firms in ExecuComp)
  and in the connectedness sample (i.e., the sample that includes all the managers who have worked in companies
  that have hired at least one mover). The table also reports the representativeness of the connectedness sample,
  relative to the universe of ExecuComp firms. The details of the definitions and the measurement of all the
  variables are reported in Appendix A. For the variable leverage, financial (SICs 6000-6999) and utilities (SICs
  4900-4999) firms are excluded because the financial structure is regulated in these industries. Panel A contains the
  statistics of continuous variables. In the table, we first provide the overall universe and sample averages, medians,
  and standard deviations. We then sort all ExecuComp firms with valid data into quintiles and report the universe
  averages for each quintile and the average and percentage of the connectedness sample firms that fall into each
  quintile, based on the universe quintile breakpoints for each variable. The reported percentages can be compared
  with the benchmark 20%. Because more than 20% of firms in the universe and the connectedness sample have
  zero equity-based compensation, we combine the first two quintiles for equity-based compensation; the sample
  percent for this group can be compared with a benchmark 40%. Panel B contains summary statistics for the
  indicator variables.


  Panel A: Summary statistics and representativeness of continuous variables
Variable          Overall     Overall     Overall       Average and percent in each ExecuComp quintile
                    mean      median       stdev         1        2           3         4         5
Total compensationt ($thousands)
Universe          1873.19      902.28    2876.11 267.00 532.21             914.42    1673.45   5978.94
Sample            2217.79     1098.46    3188.49      272.02 535.15        917.98    1683.95   6108.61
Sample percent                                         15.2      17.7        20.1      22.1      25.0

Salary plus bonust ($thousands)
Universe            666.73      453.04          659.30      185.72      313.43      456.92        698.24       1679.35
Sample              728.52      503.55          693.82      186.95      314.48      459.07        701.13       1685.77
Sample percent                                               15.7        18.6        20.6          21.8          23.3

Equity-based compensationt ($thousands)
Universe          950.45      252.69    2034.89                      32.02          261.48        702.93       3723.89
Sample           1168.98      348.78    2285.71                      31.67          265.28        709.05       3850.35
Sample percent                                                        34.2           19.3          21.7          24.8

Tenuret (years)
Universe             10.06          8.16         7.81         2.12           5.71     8.20         11.66        22.60
Sample               9.88            8           7.93         2.06           5.78     8.28         11.65        23.02
Sample percent                                                21.4           21.5     18.7          19.3         19.1

Leveraget
Universe              0.22          0.20         0.18        0.004           0.09     0.20         0.30          0.48
Sample                0.22          0.21         0.17        0.004           0.09     0.20         0.30          0.48
Sample percent                                                17.9           20.3     21.4         21.5          18.9

Assetst-1 ($millions)
Universe            7481.59      1230.52      21137.99      168.44      511.38      1275.42      3635.52      31817.51
Sample              9609.73      1771.80      24084.04      178.54      513.38      1294.91      3640.77      33830.42
Sample percent                                               14.6        17.6         20.3         22.7         24.8



                                                                                                                   36
Market to bookt-1
Universe             2.01       1.48        1.48       1.00       1.20           1.49    2.04    4.32
Sample               2.04       1.51        1.47       1.01       1.20           1.49    2.05    4.27
Sample percent                                         18.7       19.6           20.5    20.5    20.7

Tangibilityt-1
Universe             0.29       0.23        0.24       0.03       0.13           0.23    0.39    0.69
Sample               0.29       0.23        0.23       0.03       0.13           0.23    0.40    0.68
Sample percent                                         18.8       20.9           20.5    20.3    19.4

Return on assetst
Universe            0.047       0.046       0.11      -0.084      0.020          0.047   0.082   0.171
Sample              0.047       0.046       0.11      -0.082      0.020          0.047   0.083   0.171
Sample percent                                         20.7        19.5          20.0    19.8    19.9

Stock returnt
Universe             0.19       0.12        0.52       -0.38      -0.06          0.12    0.31    0.95
Sample               0.18       0.11        0.51       -0.39      -0.06          0.12    0.32    0.93
Sample percent                                          20.3       20.1          19.9    19.8    19.8

Stock return volatilityt
Universe              0.44      0.39        0.21       0.23       0.31           0.39    0.52    0.77
Sample                0.44      0.38        0.20       0.23       0.31           0.39    0.52    0.77
Sample percent                                         21.1       21.1           19.9    18.5    19.5

  Panel B: Summary statistics and representativeness of indicator variables
Variable                                     Mean        Median         Stdev
CEO indicatort                 Universe       0.17          0           0.38
                               Sample         0.17          0           0.38

Female indicator                Universe      0.046           0           0.21
                                Sample        0.045           0           0.21

CEO chair indicatort-1          Universe      0.66            1           0.47
                                Sample        0.68            1           0.47

Dividend paying indicatort-1    Universe      0.59            1           0.49
                                Sample        0.59            1           0.49




                                                                                                  37
                                         Table 3
      Determinants of the Level of Executive Compensation: Full Sample Regressions
The table presents the regression results on the determinants of executive pay, using the full universe of
ExecuComp companies. The dependent variable is log(total compensation). (1) is a pooled OLS regression
without firm or manager fixed effects. (2) is the firm fixed effects regression, (3) is the manager fixed effects
regression, and (4) is a spell fixed effects regression including both firm and manager fixed effects. The detailed
definitions of all the variables are reported in Appendix A. Heteroskedasticity robust t-statistics adjusting for
clustering within firms are in parentheses. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and
***, respectively.

                          (1) Pooled OLS          (2) Firm fixed          (3) Manager            (4) Firm and
                            (No firm or             effects (No        fixed effects (No       manager fixed
                           manager fixed          manager fixed            firm fixed         effects (using the
                               effects)               effects)               effects)           spell method)
                              0.37***                0.29***                0.22***                0.22***
    Log(assets)t-1
                               (51.29)                (21.64)                (23.08)                (21.43)
                              0.15***                0.09***                0.09***                0.09***
  Market to bookt-1
                               (19.22)                (13.43)                (19.24)                (18.68)
                              0.20***                0.17***                0.17***                0.17***
    Stock returnt
                               (19.47)                (18.45)                (27.95)                (27.83)
                              0.04***                0.08***                0.08***                0.08***
    Stock returnt-1
                                (3.81)                (10.19)                (14.72)                (14.28)
                              0.42***                 0.31**                0.38***                0.41***
  Return on assetst
                                (6.09)                 (4.59)                 (7.86)                 (8.42)
                              0.31***                0.29***                0.31***                0.33***
 Return on assetst-1
                                (4.90)                 (4.77)                 (7.35)                 (7.66)
     Stock return             0.91***                   0.03                0.19***                0.12***
       volatilityt             (15.64)                 (0.42)                 (4.23)                 (2.63)
      CEO chair               0.08***                0.04***                  0.02*                   0.02
      indicatort-1              (4.46)                 (3.05)                 (1.89)                 (1.53)
                              0.03***                0.05***                0.04***                0.06***
     Log(tenure)t
                                (4.41)                (10.61)                 (7.35)                (10.23)
                              0.89***                0.87***                0.32***                0.30***
   CEO indicatort
                               (95.10)                (99.13)                (23.14)                (21.26)
                              -0.12***               -0.16***
       Female                                                                 N.A.                   N.A.
                               (-5.70)               (-11.66)
     Year effects                Yes                    Yes                    Yes                   Yes

   Adj. R-squared                0.49                   0.66                  0.76                   0.77
  P-value for F test
    that all fixed              N.A.                  0.00***               0.00***                0.00***
     effects = 0
          N                    112,546                112,546               112,546                112,546




                                                                                                               38
                                       Table 4
    Determinants of the Level of Executive Compensation: Connectedness Sample
Regressions and Relative Importance of Different Factors in Determining Compensation
Panel A of the table presents the regression results on the determinants of executive pay, using the connectedness
sample (i.e., the sample that includes all the managers who have worked in the companies that have hired at least
one mover). The dependent variable is log(total compensation). (1) is a pooled OLS regression without firm or
manager fixed effects. (2) is the firm fixed effects regression, (3) is the manager fixed effects regression, and (4) is
a regression including both firm and manager fixed effects. In (4), we use the AKM method to separately identify
manager and firm fixed effects. The detailed definitions of all the variables are reported in Appendix A.
Heteroskedasticity robust t-statistics adjusting for clustering within firms are in parentheses. Significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively. Panel B of the table presents some statistics
on the components that determine log(total compensation), using the estimation results from column (4) of Panel
A. These components include observable time-variant firm characteristics ( Wγˆ ), observable time-variant
manager characteristics ( Xβ̂ ), firm fixed effects ( ϕ̂ ), manager fixed effects ( θˆ ), year effects ( μ̂ ), and residuals
( εˆ ). The table first reports the means and standard deviations of log( compensation) and the components, and
then reports the covariance between log(compensation) and each of the components, normalized by the variance
of log(total compensation). The normalized covariance (excluding residuals) can be interpreted as a
decomposition of model R-squared and the covariance values correspond to the percentages (in parentheses) of
the model R-squared attributable to particular factors.




                                                                                                                        39
 Panel A: Regression results using the connectedness sample
                             (1) Pooled OLS       (2) Firm fixed        (3) Manager          (4) Firm and
                               (No firm or          effects (No      fixed effects (No      manager fixed
                              manager fixed       manager fixed          firm fixed        effects (using the
                                  effects)            effects)             effects)         AKM method)
                                 0.37***             0.30***              0.21***               0.21***
        Log(assets)t-1
                                  (41.23)             (16.46)              (18.43)              (14.88)
                                 0.15***             0.10***              0.10***               0.10***
       Market to bookt-1
                                  (13.46)             (11.17)              (15.81)              (15.17)
                                 0.20***             0.18***              0.18***               0.17***
         Stock returnt
                                  (14.42)             (13.75)              (20.82)              (20.30)
                                 0.06***             0.09***              0.08***               0.07***
        Stock returnt-1
                                   (3.80)              (7.59)              (10.64)               (9.77)
                                 0.40***              0.20**              0.24***               0.29***
       Return on assetst
                                   (4.65)              (2.23)               (3.72)               (4.24)
                                 0.46***             0.31***              0.33***               0.36***
      Return on assetst-1
                                   (5.45)              (3.84)               (5.60)               (5.82)
         Stock return            0.91***                0.04              0.20***                 0.10
           volatilityt            (12.05)              (0.38)               (3.23)               (1.60)
          CEO chair              0.09***              0.04**                 0.01                 0.01
          indicatort-1             (4.20)              (2.46)               (1.01)               (0.46)
                                 0.03***             0.03***              0.03***               0.05***
         Log(tenure)t
                                   (3.12)              (5.77)               (4.30)               (6.81)
                                 0.92***             0.90***              0.33***               0.30***
        CEO indicatort
                                  (78.58)             (78.60)              (18.05)              (15.76)
                                 -0.14***            -0.17***
            Female                                                         N.A.                  N.A.
                                  (-5.10)             (-9.09)
         Year effects               Yes                 Yes                Yes                   Yes
        Adj. R-squared            0.49                 0.64                0.73                  0.75
              N                  65,421               65,421              65,421                65,421

    Panel B: Relative importance of different components in determining compensation (using the AKM
    method to separately identify manager and firm fixed effects in the connectedness sample)
                                                                cov(log(total compensation), component)
                                                          (3)
                            (1) Mean      (2) Stdev                   var(log(total compensation))
                                                          (Percentages of the model R-squared attributable to
                                                              particular components are in parentheses)
Log(total compensation)       7.08          1.07                                 --
Observable time-variant
                              1.96          0.38                              0.20 (25%)
  firm characteristics
Observable time-variant
                              0.16          0.13                              0.04 (5%)
manager characteristics
   Firm fixed effects         0.00          0.97                               0.04 (5%)
 Manager fixed effects        0.00          1.12                              0.44 (54%)
      Year effects            0.65          0.32                              0.09 (11%)
       Residuals              0.00          0.47                                   0.19




                                                                                                           40
                                                  Table 5
                                                Robustness Tests

The table presents the robustness test results on the determinants of executive pay. The dependent variable is
log(total compensation). In Panels A and C, (1) is a pooled OLS regression without firm or manager fixed effects.
(2) is the firm fixed effects regression, (3) is the manager fixed effects regression, and (4) is a regression including
both firm and manager fixed effects. In (4), we use the MDV method to separately identify manager and firm
fixed effects. Panel A presents the regression results using the mobility sample, which includes only the managers
who have moved between firms. Panel B presents the relative importance of different factors in explaining
compensation, using the estimation results from column (4) of Panel A. Panel C presents the regression results
using the sample that includes only managers who have moved between firms with the change of total
compensation within ±25% (i.e., a subsample where the firm-manager matching problem is arguably less likely).
In this subsample, the mean (median) change in total compensation for managers is equal to 0.78% (1.1%). The
relative importance of different factors in explaining compensation for this subsample is contained in Panel D.
The details of definitions and measurements of all the variables are reported in Appendix A. Heteroskedasticity
robust t-statistics adjusting for clustering within firms are in parentheses. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels is indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively.




                                                                                                                    41
Panel A: Regression results using the mobility sample
                                                                                           (4) Firm and
                                                  (2) Firm fixed      (3) Manager         manager fixed
                           (1) Pooled OLS
                                                      effects         fixed effects      effects (using the
                                                                                          MDV method)
                              0.36***                0.29***            0.23***               0.29***
    Log(assets)t-1
                              (31.24)                (12.22)            (21.91)                (6.18)
                              0.18***                0.10***            0.09***               0.09***
  Market to bookt-1
                              (12.01)                  (8.40)             (9.54)               (4.14)
                              0.20***                0.17***            0.16***               0.17***
     Stock returnt
                               (8.18)                  (8.87)             (9.05)               (6.14)
                              0.08***                0.10***            0.12***               0.09***
    Stock returnt-1
                               (3.18)                  (5.78)             (7.14)               (3.62)
                                0.16                   -0.09              -0.07                 0.08
  Return on assetst
                               (0.97)                 (-0.80)            (-0.64)               (0.38)
                              0.47***                 0.25**            0.37***                0.38**
  Return on assetst-1
                               (3.02)                  (2.20)             (3.59)               (2.04)
                              0.89***                   0.15            0.36***                 0.25
Stock return volatilityt
                               (8.20)                  (1.25)             (4.69)               (1.45)
                               0.11**                 0.06**              0.05*                 0.05
CEO chair indicatort-1
                               (3.31)                  (2.23)             (2.38)               (1.22)
                                0.01                    0.01              0.002               0.05***
     Log(tenure)t
                               (0.42)                  (0.62)             (0.23)               (2.55)
                              0.88***                0.75***            0.35***               0.21***
   CEO indicatort
                              (27.60)                (33.56)            (13.41)                (4.34)
                                0.20                  -0.20*
        Female                                                               N.A.              N.A.
                               (0.33)                (-3.72)
     Year effects               Yes                     Yes                  Yes                Yes
   Adj. R-squared                 0.46                 0.63                  0.65              0.71
           N                   8,692                  8,692              8,692                 8,692

Panel B: Relative importance of different components in determining compensation (using the MDV
method to separately identify manager and firm fixed effects in the mobility sample)
                                                 cov(log(total compensation), component)
                                                       var(log(total compensation))
                                         (Percentages of the model R-squared attributable to particular
                                                        components are in parentheses)
   Observable time-variant firm
                                                                   0.23 (29%)
          characteristics
     Observable time-variant
                                                                   0.03 (4%)
     manager characteristics
        Firm fixed effects                                         0.15 (19%)
      Manager fixed effects                                        0.31 (39%)
            Year effects                                           0.08 (10%)
               Residuals                                              0.20




                                                                                                          42
Panel C: Regression results using the sample that includes only managers who have moved between
firms with a change of compensation within ±25%
                                                                                   (4) Firm and
                                             (2) Firm fixed      (3) Manager      manager fixed
                         (1) Pooled OLS
                                                 effects         fixed effects   effects (using the
                                                                                  MDV method)
                             0.32***               0.09            0.12***              0.08
     Log(assets)t-1
                              (12.78)             (1.12)             (4.33)            (1.03)
                             0.18***             0.11**             0.06**            0.09**
   Market to bookt-1
                               (5.24)             (2.43)             (1.99)            (2.30)
                             0.15***              0.09*              0.08*              0.07
     Stock returnt
                               (2.91)             (1.69)             (1.72)            (1.15)
                                0.07               0.08              0.09*              0.06
    Stock returnt-1
                               (1.31)             (1.15)             (1.92)            (0.98)
                                0.18               0.13               0.16              0.34
   Return on assetst
                               (0.52)             (0.36)             (0.56)            (0.93)
                                0.26              -0.03               0.13              0.06
   Return on assetst-1
                               (0.82)            (-0.09)             (0.53)            (0.18)
                             0.97***              -0.48               0.07              -0.61
Stock return volatilityt
                               (4.36)            (-1.01)             (0.36)           (-1.29)
                               -0.02              -0.03              -0.05              -0.01
 CEO chair indicatort-1
                              (-0.34)            (-0.43)            (-1.15)           (-0.11)
                                0.04               0.04             0.04**              0.07
     Log(tenure)t
                               (1.13)             (0.53)             (2.04)            (1.15)
                             0.97***            0.48***            0.25***              0.18
    CEO indicatort
                              (14.19)             (3.77)             (3.37)            (1.56)
                               -0.03              -0.02
        Female                                                        N.A.              N.A.
                              (-0.24)            (-0.06)
     Year effects               Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
   Adj. R-squared               0.50                 0.75                  0.76                0.85
          N                     1,296               1,296                  1,296              1,296

Panel D: Relative importance of different components in determining compensation (using the MDV
method to separately identify manager and firm fixed effects in the sample that includes only managers
who have moved between firms with a change of compensation within ±25%)
                                                cov(log(total compensation), component)
                                                      var(log(total compensation))
                                        (Percentages of the model R-squared attributable to particular
                                                       components are in parentheses)
 Observable time-variant firm
                                                                 0.09 (11%)
        characteristics
   Observable time-variant
                                                                 0.03 (4%)
   manager characteristics
      Firm fixed effects                                          0.03 (4%)
     Manager fixed effects                                       0.58 (68%)
          Year effects                                           0.12 (14%)
           Residuals                                                0.15



                                                                                                         43
                                           Table 6
                Manager Fixed Effects and Observable Managerial Characteristics
The table presents the frequency distribution of the highest degrees received by CEOs in S&P500 companies
during the period from 1992 to 2008 (Panel A), and the results from regressing manager compensation fixed
effects on observable time-invariant managerial characteristics (Panel B). Education1 is equal to 1 for below
bachelor, 2 for bachelors, 3 for non-MBA masters and MBAs, and 4 for doctorates. Education2 is the number of
years of education, with below bachelor being 12 years, bachelor 16 years, non-MBA masters and MBAs, 18
years, and Ph.D. 21 years. The missing degree information is imputed using the mean values of Education1 and
Education2, 2.74 and 17.6. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively.

Panel A: Frequency distribution of CEOs’ highest degree
      Education (highest degree)                               Frequency        Percent       Cumulative

      Below bachelor                                               15             1.97            1.97

      Bachelor                                                     243           31.85           33.82

      Non-MBA masters                                              80            10.48           44.30

      MBA                                                          225           29.49           73.79

      Ph.D.                                                        102           13.37           87.16

      Missing degree information                                   98            12.84           100.00

      Total                                                        763          100.00              --

Panel B: Results of regressing manager compensation fixed effects on CEO personal characteristics
Dependent variable = manager compensation fixed effects
                                                                                 (1)                     (2)
estimated with AKM approach on connectedness sample
                                                                              0.14***
Education1                                                                                                --
                                                                               (2.63)
                                                                                                    0.06***
Education2                                                                        --
                                                                                                     (2.75)
                                                                               -0.004                -0.004
Year of birth
                                                                               (-0.73)               (-0.68)
                                                                               0.004                 0.004
Year of becoming CEO
                                                                               (0.85)                (0.81)
                                                                                -0.05                 -0.05
Female
                                                                               (-0.12)               (-0.13)
                                                                                0.04                  -0.85
Constant
                                                                               (0.00)                (-0.09)
R-squared                                                                       0.01                     0.01




                                                                                                                44
                                       Table 7
    Relation between Managerial Fixed Compensation Effects and Fixed Policy Effects
The table presents the relation between manager compensation fixed effects and manager “style” fixed effects in
various corporate policies. We perform regression FE(comp)i = α + β×FE(z)i + εi, where j indexes managers,
FE(comp) represents manager fixed effects in compensation, and FE(z) represents manager fixed effects in a
particular corporate policy variable, z. We then report the β estimates in the table, with each entry corresponding
to a regression associated with one particular policy. In Column (1), fixed compensation and policy effects are
estimated using the AKM method, and in Column (2), the MDV method. Column (3) reports the economic
magnitude (in dollar amounts) of the Column (1) estimates. Multiplying the standard deviation of each policy
variable by its corresponding β estimate in (1) gives the change in compensation fixed effects for a one standard
deviation change in policy fixed effects. Based on the change in compensation fixed effects, we calculate the
change in log(compensation) (i.e., log(pay2)-log(pay1)) for an executive with average pay (i.e., pay1 = sample
average $2,218 thousand), holding other variables constant. We then calculate the pay change (pay2-pay1) in
dollar amounts and report it in Column (3). That is, the numbers in Column (3) can be interpreted as the executive
pay change given a one standard deviation change in policy fixed effects (for the dividend indicator, it is the pay
difference between dividend-paying companies and non-dividend-paying companies). The details of the
definitions and the measurements of these variables are reported in Appendix A. Heteroscedasticity robust t-
statistics are in parentheses. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and ***,
respectively.

Coefficient estimates of regressing compensation fixed effects on policy fixed effects
                       (1) Manager fixed effects       (2) Manager fixed       (3) Change in pay based
                       estimated using the AKM      effects estimated using     on the estimates in (1)
                               approach               the MDV approach                ($thousand)
                                  1.51***                          0.94
R&D                                                                                               180
                                   (9.15)                         (1.53)
                                  0.41***                         0.25*
Investment                                                                                        258
                                  (10.65)                         (1.77)
                                   0.17**                          0.15
Leverage                                                                                           57
                                   (2.49)                         (0.58)
                                  -0.09***                         0.06
Cash holdings                                                                                     -66
                                   (-3.05)                        (0.53)
Dividend paying                   0.26***                         0.20*
                                                                                                  659
indicator                          (8.89)                         (1.90)
                                  1.66***                          1.47
Dividend yield                                                                                     96
                                   (3.61)                         (0.84)




                                                                                                               45
                                                     Figure 1
                                Distribution of Estimated Manager Fixed Effects

The figure presents the distribution of estimated manager fixed effects, using histograms and the kernel density
estimation (curved line). Manager fixed effects are estimated using the AKM method in the connectedness sample
(i.e., regression (4) of Table 4, Panel A). Because fixed effects are estimated relative to a benchmark, the mean
and the location of the estimated fixed effects may change when different benchmarks are used. However, the
shape of the distribution function and the standard deviation of fixed effects do not depend on benchmarks. In the
graph, we normalize the fixed effects so that the mean value of the manager fixed effects is zero.

Distribution of manager fixed effects estimated using the AKM method in the connectedness sample

                               Distribution of Estimated Manager Fixed Effects
                 .4  .3
          Proportion
           .2    .1
                 0




                          -5      -4    -3    -2      -1      0      1       2       3       4       5
                                                   Manager Fixed Effects




                                                                                                              46
   Appendix A: Definition of Variables

                            Variable Definitions and Corresponding Compustat and ExecuComp Data
Variable Names
                            Items

Firm level variables
Log(assets)                 Natural log of total assets = log(data6). Assets are measured in $millions.

Market to book              (Market value of equity plus the book value of debt)/total assets =
                            ( data25*data199+data6-data60)/data6.

Tangibility                 Net property, plant and equipment/total assets = data8/data6.

Stock return                Annual stock returns from CRSP.

Return on assets (ROA)      Net income before extraordinary items and discontinued operations divided by
                            total assets = data18/lag(data6).

Return on equity (ROE)      Net income before extraordinary items and discontinued operations divided by
                            the total book value of common equity = data18/data60.

Stock return volatility     Standard deviation of daily log returns over the past five years and then
                            annualized by multiplying by the square root of 254.

CEO chair indicator         A dummy variable equal to one if the CEO of the company is also the board
                            chairman, and zero otherwise.

Leverage                    (Long term debt + debt in current liabilities)/total assets = (data9+data34)/data6.

Dividend paying indicator   A dummy variable equal to one if data21, common dividends, is positive, and
                            zero otherwise.

R&D                         Research and development expense/lag one year net property, plant, and
                            equipment = data46/lag(data8).

Advertisement               Advertising expense/lag one year net property, plant, and equipment =
                            data45/lag(data8).

Capital expenditure         Capital expenditures/lag one year net property, plant, and equipment =
(Investment)                data128/lag(data8).

Cash holdings               Cash and short-term investments/(total assets – cash and short-term investments)
                            = data1/(data6-data1).

Dividend yield              Dividends per share divided by year-end stock price = data26/data24.




                                                                                                          47
Manager level variables
Log(total compensation)   Natural log of total compensation, where total compensation is ExecuComp data
                          item TDC1 and is comprised of salary, bonus, other annual, total value of
                          restricted stock granted, total value of stock options granted (using Black-
                          Scholes), long-term incentive payouts, and all other total. Total compensation is
                          measured in $thousands.

Log(salary plus bonus)    Natural log of salary plus bonus, where salary plus bonus is ExecuComp data
                          item TOTAL_CURR. Salary plus bonus is measured in $thousands.

Log(equity-based          Natural log of total equity-based compensation, where equity-based
compensation)             compensation is equal to the value of options granted as valued using the Black
                          Scholes methodology (OPTION_AWARDS_BLK_VALUE) plus the value of
                          restricted stock grants (RSTKGRNT). Equity-based compensation is measured
                          in $thousands.

Log(tenure)               Natural log of the number of years the manager has been with the company,
                          which equals the difference between the year of the observation and the year
                          when the individual joined the company.

CEO indicator             A dummy variable that equals one if the manager is the CEO in a particular year
                          and zero if the manager is a non-CEO top executive in a particular year. This
                          dummy variable is time variant for a given individual because a specific manager
                          could be a CEO in some years and a non CEO in other years.

Female indicator          A dummy variable that equals one if the manager is a female, and zero
                          otherwise.




                                                                                                      48
Appendix B: Detailed Discussion of the Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (AKM) Method

        This appendix is intended to be read jointly with “Managerial Attributes and Executive

Compensation” and contains a detailed methodological and econometric discussion.



B.1 The Estimation Procedure of the AKM Method

        We first start with a discussion on how to use the AKM method to obtain model

estimates in the three-way fixed effects model (i.e., Equation (4) in the text):

                          Ln(yit)= Xit β + Wjt γ + φj + θi + μt + εit ,                                  (A1)

where Wjt and Xit represent observable firm and manager characteristics, φj, θi, and μt denote

firm, manager, and year fixed effects in compensation, and εit is the residual.

        Including dummy variables for each manager and each firm and then estimating

Equation (A1) using the standard least square dummy variable (LSDV) approach (as one does

in the Mover Dummy Variable (MDV) method) is often computationally infeasible in the

connectedness sample, because a large number of dummy variables associated with firms and

managers require substantive computer memory. 27 In a standard two-way fixed effects model

which includes firm fixed effects and time fixed effects, this problem is circumvented by using

the within transformation to sweep out the heterogeneity. That is, for each cross-section, first

average the two-way fixed effects equation over time to get a mean equation, and then subtract


27
   Using the standard dummy variable approach to estimate the model becomes computationally infeasible in very
large datasets. To quantify this, let N be the number of observations, I the number of persons, J the number of
firms, and K the number of regressors. As in Andrews et al. (2006) and Cornelissen (2008), assume that the
storage of each matrix element requires 4 bytes. The total memory required in the MDV method is roughly
N×(I+J+K-1)×4 + (I+J+K-1)2×4. The total memory required in the AKM method is equal to N×(J+K-1)×4 +
(J+K-1)2×4, independent of the number of persons. Cornelissen (2008) further develops a memory saving Stata
algorithm to reduce the memory used in the AKM method to (J+K-1)2×4, which is independent of not only the
number of persons but also the number of observations. In this paper, using AKM, we have N=65,421, I=15,352,
J=1,272, and K=26 (including 16 year indicators), and the required memory is about 346MB (and only 6.7MB
when using the memory saving algorithm). If the MDV approach is applied to the same dataset, the required
memory is 5.5GB, which is intensive in most personal computers.


                                                                                                            49
the mean equation from the original equation to obtain a transformed time-demeaned equation.

Because firm fixed effects are constant within each cross-section, this transformation

effectively sweeps out firm fixed effects.

       In the three-way fixed effects model, because the correspondence between firms and

managers is unpatterned, no transformation can simultaneously sweep out both firm and

manager fixed effects. To solve the problem, the AKM method first sweeps out manager fixed

effects using the within-person transformation, but keeps time and firm fixed effects, and then

uses the LSDV approach to estimate variable coefficients and firm and year fixed effects.

Abowd et al. (1999) note that this method results in the same solution presented in the full

LSDV method. Specifically, let Yit = Ln(yit) to simplify the notation and write out the firm

dummy variable: Fjit, which equals one if manager i works in firm j at time t, and zero

otherwise. Equation (A1) can thus be rewritten as

                                                        J
                          Yit = X it β + W jt γ + ∑ F jit ϕ j + θ i + μ t + ε it .                             (A2)
                                                      j =1



Average Equation (A1) over t = 1, 2, …, T to get the cross section equation

                                                  J
                          Yi = X i β + Wi γ + ∑ F jiϕ j + θ i + μ + ε i .                                      (A3)
                                                 j =1



Subtracting (A2) from (A1) gives the time demeaned equation

                                                             J
         Yit − Yi = ( X it − X i ) β + (W jt − Wi )γ + ∑ ( F jit − F ji )ϕ j + ( μ t − μ ) + (ε it − ε i ) .   (A4)
                                                             j =1



Manager fixed effects θi are thus swept out and Equation (A4) can be estimated using the

LSDV method. Based on Andrews et al. (2006), Hsiao (2002), and Wooldridge (2001), the

manager fixed effects can later be recovered using the following equation ( μ , often treated as

the benchmark in estimating time effects, is assumed to be zero):



                                                                                                                 50
                                                      J
                          θˆi = Yi − X i βˆ − Wi γˆ − ∑ F jiϕˆ j .                                      (A5)
                                                      j =1



        Interested readers can follow the above steps to apply the AKM method. 28 Intuitively,

using the pay differential of a manager who has worked in different companies, we can

determine the fixed effects for all the firms at which he or she has been employed (with one

firm fixed effect being the benchmark). Once the firm fixed effects are identified, the personal

fixed effects can be determined by subtracting the observable determinants and firm fixed

effects from the pay earned by the manager.



B.2 The Econometric Properties of the Spell, MDV, and AKM Estimates

        In addition to the AKM method, the paper shows that we can estimate Equation (A1)

using the more traditional spell fixed effects and the MDV methods. Here we discuss the

econometric properties of the model estimates using the three methods.

        Recall that the spell method rewrites Equation (A1) as Ln(yit)= Xit β + Wjt γ + Vs+ μt +

εit, where Vs, equal to φj + θi, is a dummy variable representing each unique combination of

manager i and firm j. According to Abowd et al. (1999) and Wooldridge (2001), the estimates

of β and γ from the spell method are consistent and unbiased if the error term is uncorrelated

with all the right-hand-side variables (formally, E(εit|Xit, Wjt, Vs,, μt)=0). The spell estimator is

also efficient when the random error ε is homoscedastic and serially uncorrelated.

        As with the spell estimator, the parameter estimates from the MDV method are

consistent and unbiased under the standard econometric assumption of E(εit|Xit, Wjt, θi, φj, μt)=0,

and efficient with homoscedastic and serially uncorrelated random errors. The estimates of the


28
  For more information, refer to Abowd et al. (1999) and Abowd et al. (2002) for detailed discussions on the
estimation method, and to Andrew et al. (2007) and Cornelissen (2008) for the algorithm developed using Stata.


                                                                                                           51
fixed effects θi and φj are best linear unbiased, i.e., unbiased and efficient among all linear

estimators. However, as Hsiao (2002) and Wooldridge (2001) note, the estimates of the fixed

effects are not consistent. The main intuition as follows: each time a new cross-section of

observations is added, another fixed effect (φj or θi) is added, and information does not

accumulate fast enough on the fixed effects when the number of cross sections goes to infinity.

Although Hsiao (2002) notes that the estimates of fixed effects are consistent if and only if the

number of time periods goes to infinity, this condition is rarely satisfied because, in panel data,

the number of time periods is usually limited.

       The econometric properties of the AKM estimates of β and γ are the same as the spell

and the MDV methods. The properties of the estimates of the fixed effects θi and φj are the

same as those of the MDV method, that is, unbiased and efficient but inconsistent. Also, as

discussed in Section 2.2.3 of the paper, both the MDV and the AKM methods are subject to a

potential limited mobility bias.

       Our estimation results find that manager fixed effects estimated from the AKM and the

MDV methods are close, with a correlation of 0.77 (Appendix B Table A1) and similar

distributions (Appendix B Figure A1). We then discuss two additional econometric properties

of the AKM method, in the context of comparing AKM with MDV. First, the β and γ estimates

are more precise using the AKM method due to the larger connectedness sample (relative to

the smaller mobility sample used in the MDV method). In our application using ExecuComp

data, the mobility sample includes 8,692 observations, 1,256 managers, and 1,272 firms, while

the connectedness sample includes 65,421 observations, 15,352 managers, and 1,272 firms.

Through group connection, the AKM approach increases the sample size about tenfold, and the

resulting coefficient estimates are more precise because standard errors are proportional to




                                                                                                52
1/N0.5, where N is the sample size. For example, the standard errors of the AKM estimates

(Table 4 of the main paper) are about 1/3 of those of the MDV estimates (Table 5). 29

          Second, using the AKM method, the model explanatory power attributable to firm and

manager fixed effects is 5% and 54% (Table 4, Panel B), while the shares are 19% and 39%

using the MDV method (Table 5, Panel B). The differences in the percentages between the two

methods are the result of sample difference and normalization procedure, as described next.

         If we apply the AKM method to the mobility sample, firm and manager fixed effects

respectively explain 11% and 45% of the model R-squared. The improvement (from 5% to

11%) of the relative importance of firm fixed effects is due to the fact that the mobility sample

includes only movers while the connectedness sample includes movers and non-movers. For

each individual mover manager, firm fixed effects contribute to his or her pay variation

because the manager switches between companies that often have different firm fixed effects.

In contrast, for the non-mover managers in the same company, firm fixed effects do not

contribute to the pay variation between these managers because they have the same firm fixed

effects. Firm fixed effects contribute to the pay variation of the non-mover managers who

belong to different firms. That is, firm fixed effects contribute to the between-firm (but not

within-firm) pay variation, and possibly play a more important role in explaining compensation

for mover managers than for non-mover managers. This indicates that in a sample with a larger

proportion of movers (such as the mobility sample), firm fixed effects may play a more

significant role in explaining compensation.




29
   Note that the increased precision applies to the coefficient estimates (β and γ) of the observable explanatory
variables in the model, and may not apply to the estimates of the fixed effects. For the estimates of the fixed
effects, the caveat is that while the extra observations add power, it is still the case that identifying the non-mover
fixed effects ultimately hinges on the movers, who only make up a small proportion of our sample.


                                                                                                                   53
       Using the AKM method on the mobility sample, the results are closer to but not the

same as those attained from the MDV method (Table 5, Panel B) (11% and 45% vs. 19% and

39%). The remaining discrepancy is due to the AKM normalization procedure. The AKM

method normalizes the fixed effects so that they are comparable across different groups (details

in Appendix B.3). In contrast, the MDV method does not normalize the fixed effects. When we

normalize the MDV fixed effects using the AKM normalization procedure, the firm and

manager fixed effects respectively contribute 11% and 45% of the R-squared, identical to the

results from applying the AKM method to the mobility sample.



B.3 The AKM Normalization Procedure

       A practical estimation issue in the AKM method is normalization. Abowd et al. (1999)

show that within each group, all person and firm effects are identified up to a scale.

Specifically, suppose there are J firms and I managers in one group. Then J+I-1 firm and

manager effects will be identified in this group because one firm or manager effect must be

taken as the benchmark: the other J+I-1 fixed effects are expressed as differences from the

reference fixed effect in the group. Overall, exactly M + N − G total person and firm effects are

identified, where M, N, and G are the total number of persons, firms, and groups in the sample.

       Because manager and firm fixed effects are identified relative to a benchmark within

each group, and each group has its own benchmark, the estimated firm and manager effects are

directly comparable only within the same group, not across groups. We follow the

normalization procedure suggested by Cornelissen (2008) to ensure that the fixed effects across




                                                                                              54
groups can be compared. 30 This procedure first normalizes the mean firm fixed effects for each

group to zero and adds the group mean firm fixed effect to manager fixed effects (to ensure

that Equation (A1) holds). The procedure then subtracts the grand mean of manager fixed

effects from each manager fixed effect and adds this grand mean manager fixed effect to the

intercept.

        Although the normalization procedure provides one way to make fixed effects

“comparable” across groups, it could change the relative explanatory power of firm and

manager fixed effects. Because different groups have different benchmarks (which are mean

firm fixed effects for each group, as discussed above), normalization will affect the relative

location and variation of the fixed effects across groups. That is, the between-group

explanatory power will be re-weighted between firm and manager fixed effects after

normalization. Within a group, the fixed effects have one common benchmark and

normalization will not change the relative location or variation of fixed effects and thus should

not affect the explanatory power of firm and manager fixed effects.

        To check the robustness of our results with respect to the normalization procedure, we

re-estimate all our regressions using only the largest group (so normalization is not necessary),

which is composed of around 65% of the connectedness sample; we find similar qualitative

results (available upon request). We also re-examine the relative importance of different factors

in determining compensation using only the largest group in the sample. The AKM results

from the largest group in the connectedness sample show that firm and manager fixed effects

contribute 3% and 56% of the R-squared (Column 1 of Appendix B Table A2). The MDV

results from the largest group (70% of the full mobility sample) in the mobility sample show

30
  In contrast, the MDV method does not normalize the fixed effects and each group has its own benchmark (and
these benchmarks are typically the dummy variables automatically dropped by statistical software). As a result,
the MDV fixed effects are not comparable across groups.


                                                                                                            55
that firm and manager fixed effects contribute 10% and 47% of the R-squared (Column 2 of

Appendix B Table A2). As in the main text, these results consistently suggest that manager

fixed effects play a more significant role in explaining executive compensation than do firm

fixed effects.




                                                                                         56
                                         Table A1
    Statistics on Manager Fixed Effects Estimated Using the AKM and MDV Methods
The table presents the statistics on manager fixed effects estimated using the AKM and MDV methods. Because
the MDV method is only applied to movers and the AKM method can be applied in a larger sample, to ensure that
the analyses in the table are implementable and the statistics comparable, we base the analyses on movers only.
That is, we obtain the manager fixed effects using the two methods, match their fixed effects by executive ids, and
then keep only movers’ fixed effects in the analysis. Because fixed effects are estimated relative to a benchmark,
the mean and the location of the estimated fixed effects may change when different benchmarks are used. The
shape of the distribution function, the standard deviation, and the correlations of fixed effects, however, do not
depend on benchmarks. In Panel A, we normalize the fixed effects so that the mean value of the manager fixed
effects is zero. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively.

Panel A: Summary statistics of the manager fixed effects estimated using the AKM and MDV methods
 Variable name                           Mean       Stdev      P10       P25         P50        P75        P90

 Manager fixed effects estimated
                                          0.00       1.02     -1.19      -0.58     -0.001       0.66       1.26
 using the AKM method

 Manager fixed effects estimated
                                          0.00       1.21     -1.49      -0.72      0.01        0.78       1.43
 using the MDV method



Panel B: Correlation between the manager fixed effects estimated using the AKM and MDV methods
                                                    Manager fixed effects estimated using the MDV
 Correlation
                                                                         method
 Manager fixed effects estimated using the AKM
                                                                         0.77***
 method




                                                                                                                 57
                                            Table A2
      Relative Importance of Different Components in Determining Compensation (Based on
                                       the Largest Group)
    The table presents the relative importance of different factors in explaining compensation, using the estimation
    results from the largest groups in the data samples. Column (1) presents the AKM results from the largest group
    (65% of the full connectedness sample) in the connectedness sample and Column (2) presents the MDV results
    from the largest group (70% of the full mobility sample) in the mobility sample. Detailed information on how to
    estimate the relative importance is contained in Table 4 of the paper.

                                                               cov(log(total compensation), component)
                                                                     var(log(total compensation))
                                                      (Percentages of the model R-squared attributable to particular
                                                                     components are in parentheses)
                                                          (1) Largest group in the           (2) Largest group in the
                                                           connectedness sample                  mobility sample
  Observable time-variant firm characteristics                   0.20 (25%)                          0.23(29%)
Observable time-variant manager characteristics                   0.04 (5%)                          0.03(4%)
               Firm fixed effects                                 0.02 (3%)                          0.08(10%)
             Manager fixed effects                               0.45 (56%)                          0.37(47%)
                  Year effects                                   0.09 (11%)                         0.08 (10%)
                   Residuals                                         0.20                               0.21




                                                                                                                 58
                                                Figure A1
                            Distribution of Estimated Manager Fixed Effects

The figure presents the distribution of estimated manager fixed effects, using histograms and kernel density
estimation (curved line). Manager fixed effects are estimated using the MDV method in the mobility sample (i.e.,
regression (4) of Table 5, Panel A). Because fixed effects are estimated relative to a benchmark, the mean and
location of the estimated fixed effects may change when different benchmarks are used. However, the shape of the
distribution function and the standard deviation of fixed effects do not depend on benchmarks. In the graph, we
normalize the fixed effects so that the mean value of the manager fixed effects is zero.

Distribution of manager fixed effects estimated using the MDV method in the mobility sample

                            Distribution of Estimated Manager Fixed Effects
               .4
               .3
          Proportion
             .2.1
               0




                       -5   -4    -3      -2     -1      0       1         2       3       4       5
                                                Manager Fixed Effects




                                                                                                             59
