NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MANAGING CAPITAL INFLOWS:
THE ROLE OF CAPITAL CONTROLS AND PRUDENTIAL POLICIES
Mahvash S. Qureshi
Jonathan D. Ostry
Atish R. Ghosh
Marcos Chamon
Working Paper 17363
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17363

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2011

We are grateful to Olivier Blanchard, Luc Laeven, and seminar participants at the IMF and NBER-Sloan
conference on the Global Financial Crisis in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, especially to Kristin
Forbes, and to our discussant, Andrés Velasco. Views expressed are those of the authors, and should
not be attributed to the IMF, its Executive Board, or its management, nor to the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Mahvash S. Qureshi, Jonathan D. Ostry, Atish R. Ghosh, and Marcos Chamon. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Managing Capital Inflows: The Role of Capital Controls and Prudential Policies
Mahvash S. Qureshi, Jonathan D. Ostry, Atish R. Ghosh, and Marcos Chamon
NBER Working Paper No. 17363
August 2011, Revised August 2011
JEL No. F21,F32
ABSTRACT
We examine whether macroprudential policies and capital controls can contribute to enhancing financial
stability in the face of large capital inflows. We construct new indices of foreign currency (FX)-related
prudential measures, domestic prudential measures, and financial-sector capital controls for 51 emerging
market economies over the period 1995–2008. Our results indicate that both capital controls and FX-related
prudential measures are associated with a lower proportion of FX lending in total domestic bank credit
and a lower proportion of portfolio debt in total external liabilities. Other prudential policies appear
to help restrain the intensity of aggregate credit booms. Experience from the global financial crisis
suggests that prudential and capital control policies in place during the boom seem to have enhanced
economic resilience during the bust.
Mahvash S. Qureshi
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
HQ1-09-612
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington DC, 20431
mqureshi@imf.org

Atish R. Ghosh
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
HQ1-09-612
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington DC, 20431
aghosh@imf.org

Jonathan D. Ostry
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
HQ1-10-700
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington DC, 20431
jostry@imf.org

Marcos Chamon
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
HQ1-09-612
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington DC, 20431
MCHAMON@imf.org

1

I. INTRODUCTION
The strong recovery in capital inflows to emerging market economies (EMEs) since the
sudden stop in late 2008-early 2009 is giving rise to (at least) two sets of concerns. The first
relates to macroeconomic challenges, especially the intense pressure on a number of
emerging-market currencies, which, if not sustained, may create costly dislocations when
exchange rates come down, given the erosion in competitiveness and possible exposure to
foreign-currency denominated debt on domestic balance sheets. The second relates to
financial-stability risks, especially the possibility that some of the flows may not be
channeled towards productive uses, and may thus end up fueling credit and asset price booms
that may not be sustainable, amplifying financial fragilities down the road.
Such concerns have led to renewed interest in the effectiveness and design of
macroprudential policies and the possible use of capital controls—that is, measures that treat
transactions between residents and nonresidents less favorably than those amongst
residents—in helping to manage financial-stability risks associated with inflows. Systematic
investigations of the impact of macroprudential policies and capital controls on the financialstability risks associated with inflows have nevertheless been lacking.2 This paper thus aims
to fill a gap in the existing literature by examining the nexus between various
macroprudential policies, controls on capital inflows, and economic and financial stability.
As regards capital controls, we focus exclusively on inflow controls.
For the purpose of our analysis, we group the available policy tools into four broad
categories: (i) domestic prudential regulations, (ii) foreign currency (FX)-related prudential
measures, (iii) financial-sector specific capital controls, and (iv) economy-wide capital
controls. We then assess the impact of these various measures on the structure of external
liabilities; the growth of domestic banking system credit; and the currency composition of
domestic bank lending. To the extent that portfolio debt is the riskiest type of external
liability, and credit booms—especially in foreign currency—can exacerbate financial
fragilities, measures that reduce these concerns should be associated with greater resilience
of the economy to financial crises. To test this hypothesis, we exploit the “natural
experiment” afforded by the recent (2008–09) global financial crisis, which triggered
downturns of varying intensities across emerging market economies, and see whether

2

Several studies examine the impact of overall institutional quality on the composition of the external liability
structure (for example, Razin, Sadka, and Yuen, 1998, 2000; Wei, 2001), and the association between financial
regulatory quality and credit booms (for example, Dell’Ariccia and Marquez, 2006; Barajas, Dell’Ariccia, and
Levchenko, 2007; Mendoza and Terrones, 2008; Bakker and Gulde, 2010). A few recent studies, particularly in
the context of Central and Eastern European economies, also investigate the impact of policies related to foreign
currency borrowing on foreign currency lending (for example, Rosenberg and Tirpak, 2009).

2
countries that had prudential measures and capital controls in place before the crisis also
fared better during the crisis (controlling for other characteristics).
While several indices of economy-wide capital controls have been put forward in the recent
literature, composite measures of financial sector-specific capital controls, and prudential
regulations for a wide range of emerging market economies, have hitherto been unavailable.
Using information from the International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) Annual Report on
Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER), we construct new indices
for the regulation of FX transactions in the domestic financial sector, and for financial-sector
specific capital controls. We also construct an index of domestic prudential regulations based
on a survey of IMF desk economists. These three indices, together with Schindler’s (2009)
index of economy-wide controls on inflows, are used in our empirical analysis.
Our results suggest that FX-related prudential measures as well as capital controls, are
associated with a lower proportion of FX loans in domestic bank lending. Second, other
prudential regulations (i.e., measures that do not discriminate either on the basis of currency
denomination or the residency of the parties to the transaction) are associated with smaller
aggregate credit booms. Third, capital controls and FX-related prudential measures are
associated with a shift away from portfolio debt flows towards portfolio equity and FDI
flows within the country’s overall external liability structure. The estimated effects presented
below, moreover, are not only statistically significant, but also economically relevant. For
instance, moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile of capital controls restrictiveness or FXrelated prudential measures lowers the share of portfolio debt in external liabilities by about
4-7 percentage points and the share of FX credit in the domestic banking sector by 20-25
percentage points. Consistent with these results, we also find reasonably strong
(economically and statistically-significant) associations between pre-crisis policies and the
extent of economic resilience during the period of sudden stop—suggesting that capital
controls and prudential measures can indeed reduce financial fragilities.
Our results dovetail nicely with the existing literature, which has mostly focused on possible
macroeconomic effects of capital controls—on the aggregate volume of flows, the exchange
rate, and monetary policy autonomy. By and large, evidence on this is mixed. The survey and
meta-analysis of Magud, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2007) points to capital controls having only
limited effectiveness in altering the overall volume of capital inflows (and hence the level of
the exchange rate). Consistent with our findings, evidence that capital controls may affect the
composition of capital flows is stronger, with at least some studies finding that capital
controls have managed to lengthen the maturity of inflows.3
3

On altering the composition (lengthening maturities) of inflows, see De Gregorio, Edwards, and Valdés (2000)
on Chile, and Cardenas and Barrera (1997) on Colombia. On monetary policy autonomy, De Gregorio,
Edwards, and Valdés (2000) find that capital controls allowed Chile’s central bank to target a higher domestic
interest rate over a period of 6 to12 months; Ma and McCauley (2008), and Hutchison et al. (2009) find that

(continued)

3

Previous studies on capital controls have, however, not examined other aspects of financial
stability—for example, the share of foreign currency lending and the riskiness of the external
liability structure—that we consider here. Further, the mixed evidence of the effectiveness of
capital controls on the aggregate volume of flows (and hence on the exchange rate) has been
taken to imply a severe limitation on their use in practice. It is worth pointing out, however,
that from a financial-stability perspective, altering the composition of inflows without
affecting the aggregate level would be the ideal outcome. One of the contributions of our
paper is therefore to highlight this distinction, and show that while capital controls may be of
limited (or only temporary) use in affecting the aggregate volume of flows, inflow controls
(together with FX-related and other prudential measures) can form an important part of the
policy toolkit to reduce the financial-stability risks associated with inflow surges.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents an overview of the
instruments in the prudential toolkit to manage the macroeconomic and financial stability
risks posed by excessive capital inflows. Section 3 describes the construction of indices of
financial sector capital controls, FX-related prudential measures, and domestic prudential
policies. Section IV presents some empirical evidence on the association between the policy
indices with financial fragilities and crisis resilience. Section 5 concludes.
II. THE PRUDENTIAL TOOLKIT
A. Defining the Toolkit
Beyond purely macroeconomic policies, policy makers have at their disposal a number of
tools to help mitigate financial-stability risks associated with capital inflows. It is convenient
to group these according to whether they discriminate in terms of the residency of the parties
to the capital transaction (capital controls), the denomination of the currency of the
transaction (FX-related prudential measures), or neither (other prudential measures). By
definition, prudential measures apply only to the regulated domestic financial system
(notably banks, but sometimes also other financial institutions), whereas capital controls can
apply to all residents (though they can also be applied selectively to specific sectors).
Capital controls are measures that restrict capital transactions (or transfers and payments
necessary to effect them) by virtue of the residency of the parties to the transaction.4 Controls

interest differentials are significant and persistent in China and India, which maintain more extensive capital
controls. However, Ghosh, Ostry and Tsangarides (2010) find significantly lower monetary autonomy in
countries with fixed exchange rates compared with more flexible regimes, even in countries with relatively
closed capital accounts.
4
There is no unique generally accepted legal definition of capital controls. In the broadest sense, they are
measures meant to affect the cross-border movement of capital. In its Code of Liberalization of Capital

(continued)

4
may be economy-wide, sector- specific (usually the financial sector), or industry specific (for
example, “strategic” industries in the case of controls on FDI). Measures may apply to all
flows, or may differentiate by type or duration of the flow (debt, equity, direct investment;
short-term vs. medium- and long-term). Since much of our analysis focuses on the financialsector, we distinguish between financial-sector and economy-wide capital controls below.
FX-related prudential measures discriminate by virtue of the currency denomination of the
capital transaction, not the residency of the parties to the transaction. These measures are
applied to domestic financial institutions, primarily to banks. Limits on banks’ open FX
position (as a proportion of their capital) are common, as are limits on banks’ investments in
FX assets.5 Other measures may serve to limit FX lending by domestic banks, especially to
borrowers that lack a natural hedge, including for example, differential reserve requirements
on liabilities in local currency and FX. These types of measures will affect the composition
of liabilities, and will also affect the volume to the extent that forcing foreigners to bear the
currency risk affects their willingness to lend.
Other prudential measures are all other prudential regulations that discriminate neither on
the basis of the currency of the transaction or the residency of the parties to the transaction.
Typical measures include maximum loan-to-value (LTV) ratios, limits on domestic credit
growth, asset classification and provisioning rules, sectoral limits on loan concentration,
dynamic loan-loss provisions, and counter-cyclical capital requirements.
While this categorization is analytically convenient, one should bear in mind that policies in
one group can also affect risks that are more directly related to another group of policies. For
example, capital controls may have the effect of reducing FX-denominated capital
transactions (and, likewise, FX-related measures may have the effect of reducing
resident/non-resident transactions), even if that is not their primary intent.
B. Measuring Capital Controls and Prudential Regulations
Like most discrete policy variables, capital controls and prudential measures are difficult to
quantify. Commonly used de jure measures (which are based on the IMF’s AREAER)
include Chinn and Ito (2008), and Quinn and Toyoda (2008), who provide an index of
overall capital account restrictiveness (combining both inflow and outflow controls), and
Schindler (2009), who differentiates between (economy-wide) inflow and outflow controls.
Some studies have resorted to de facto measures or outcome variables to proxy for the de jure
Movements, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2009) considers measures to be
capital controls subject to liberalization obligations if they discriminate between residents and nonresidents.
5
In some currency-board or fixed-exchange-rate countries, exposures in the peg currency are excluded in the
calculation of the open position. In our empirical analysis, asymmetric open position limits, which introduce
different limits on short and long positions, are categorized as FX-related measures—even though these could
be considered a form of capital control inasmuch as they act to discourage inflows (e.g., a lower short position
limit could limit capital inflows).

5
regulation, but clearly that cannot be done here as we are interested in the effect of policy
measures on outcomes.
We therefore develop three new indices of de jure measures of (i) capital controls specific to
the financial sector; (ii) FX-related prudential measures, and (iii) other prudential measures.
For financial sector specific controls and FX-related measures, we obtain information from
the IMF’s AREAER for 51 EMEs over the period 1995–2008.6 For other prudential
measures, we conduct a survey of IMF country teams and compile information for 42 EMEs
for the years 2005 and 2007. For economy-wide capital controls, we rely on the index
provided by Schindler (2009).
Financial sector capital controls
Our measure of financial sector-specific capital controls (Fincont) is based on whether the
AREAER documents provisions that apply only to the financial sector, and that discriminate
based on the residency of the parties to the transaction. Specifically, whether measures exist
that (i) impose limits on financial sector borrowing from abroad; (ii) restrict the maintenance
of accounts abroad; or (iii) impose differential treatment of accounts held by nonresidents
(e.g., different reserve/liquid asset requirements, interest rate, or credit controls). Each type
of restriction, if it exists, is assigned a value of one (and zero otherwise), and this information
is used to create two composite measures—a simple average of restrictions on (i) the
financial sector’s borrowing from abroad, and (ii) differential treatment of accounts held by
nonresidents (labeled Fincont1), and an average of all the three components: (i) differential
treatment of accounts held by nonresidents; (ii) limits on borrowing from abroad; and (iii)
restrictions on maintenance of accounts abroad (denoted as Fincont2).7
Figure 1(a) plots the composite Fincont2 index over 1995–2008 across different regions, and
gives an indication of how financial sector-specific controls have evolved over time. On
average, both Europe and Latin America appear to be the least restrictive in terms of capital
controls on the financial sector, while Asia is the most restrictive. This pattern mimics that of
economy-wide capital controls on inflows, as measured by Schindler’s (2009) index (labeled
here as Kcont). Figure 1(b) shows that Asia is more intensive in economy-wide capital
account restrictions on inflows than either Europe or Latin America. Interestingly, while the
average intensity of economy-wide capital controls has been falling somewhat in EMEs over
the years as countries have moved towards capital account liberalization, the prevalence of

6

See Table A1 for the list of countries in the sample, which is based on the sample of EMEs covered in the
IMF’s Early Warning Exercise (IMF, 2010).

7

Ideally, the index and its subcomponents would capture the intensity, rather than just the existence, of the
various restrictions, but in practice this is almost impossible to do for administrative measures without making
arbitrary choices. The index is therefore coded based on binary variables for the presence of restrictions (as is
the case of other indices in the literature constructed from the AREAER).

6
financial sector-specific capital controls increased in the second half of 2000s, presumably in
response to perceived risks associated with inflow surges.
Foreign currency-related prudential measures
Our index of FX-related prudential regulations is based on whether measures exist to (i) limit
lending locally in foreign currency; (ii) limit purchase of locally issued securities
denominated in foreign currency; (iii) impose differential treatment of deposit accounts in
foreign exchange; and (iv) limit open foreign exchange positions.8 As before, a score of one
is assigned when such restrictions exist (and zero otherwise). Based on this information, we
create two indices: FXreg1, which is a simple average of restrictions on lending locally in
foreign exchange, and differential treatment of deposit accounts in foreign exchange; and
FXreg2, which is an average of all four components.9 Figure 1(c) shows that while FXrelated regulations are more common in Asia, their adoption has increased over the years in
both Asia and Latin America. By contrast, FX regulations are the least prevalent in emerging
Europe, and seem to have been relaxed gradually over the years.
Domestic prudential regulations
Our measures of domestic prudential regulations cover three aspects of macro prudential
policy: maximum loan-to-value (LTV) ratios; existence of reserve requirements; and limits
on credit concentration to specific sectors. While the existence of maximum LTV ratios and
sector-specific credit concentration limits are coded by binary variables, the reserve
requirement measure is coded as 0 if the reserve requirement ratio is below 10 percent; 0.5 if
it is in the range of 10-20 percent; and 1 if it is greater than 20 percent. As above, we create
two measures to capture domestic prudential regulations—Domreg1, which is an average of
the reserve requirement variable, and limit on credit concentration to specific sectors; and
Domreg2, which also includes the LTV limit. Figure 1(d) shows that, between 2005 and
2007, the prevalence of domestic prudential regulations increased across all regions.
Nevertheless, Asian EMEs appear to rely the most on domestic macro prudential measures,
while European EMEs the least.
Measures in the Run-up to the Global Financial Crisis
How prevalent were these measures in the years leading up to the 2008 global financial
crisis? Figure 2 provides a detailed snapshot of the individual measures comprising the
various indices that were in place in our sample of emerging market economies in 2007.
8

If the limits on open FX positions differentiate between residents and nonresidents, they would constitute a
capital control on the financial sector. However, disaggregated data on residents versus nonresidents open
foreign exchange position limits is relatively limited, and where such information is available, there are only a
handful of cases where limits existed on nonresidents’ but not on the residents’ assets and liabilities.
9
Typically, countries with a currency board exclude the anchor currency from the computation of limits on FX
positions; we code such cases as not having limits on open FX positions.

7
Around one half of the countries had controls on bond inflows, with slightly fewer having
controls on portfolio equity and even fewer on FDI flows.10 Somewhat surprisingly, capital
controls specific to the financial sector were not more common than economy-wide controls.
FX-related policies tend to be the most common type of measure, with over half of the
countries imposing restrictions on lending locally in FX, and stricter requirements for deposit
accounts in FX. Virtually all countries had limits on banks’ open FX positions.
In general, the constructed measures tend to be positively correlated with each other as well
as with the measure of economy-wide capital account controls on inflows (Figure 3).11 The
correlation is higher between capital controls (both economy-wide and financial sector) and
FX-related prudential regulations than among these measures and other prudential policies. A
detailed pre-crisis cross-sectional snapshot for the EMEs reveals that most countries had
more than one set of measures in place, with about one-third having measures pertaining to
all the categories considered here—capital controls, FX-related prudential regulations, and
other prudential measures (Figure 4).12 All countries barring Bulgaria (which has a currency
board) and Ecuador (which is dollarized) had some form of FX-related prudential regulations
in place, and several countries (for example, Chile, Costa Rica, Korea, and Israel) had
imposed capital controls on the financial sector but not on the rest of the economy.
III. ESTIMATION RESULTS
Using these measures, we assess the extent to which capital controls and prudential
regulations are associated with a number of financial fragilities—for example, the
composition of external liabilities, the extent of FX lending by domestic banks, and the
intensity of credit booms. We also ask how policies in place during the boom may affect the
intensity of the bust (especially in relation to the decline in economic activity relative to the
pre-crisis trend). Our estimations pertain to cross-sectional data, which is based on the
"natural experiment" afforded by the most recent financial crisis, as well as a panel data set
covering the period 1995–2008.13

10

It is very common for countries to have FDI restrictions on strategic industries, even in the U.S., but these are
not coded as restrictions in Schindler’s (2009) data.
11
Another popular index for capital account restrictions is the one constructed by Chinn and Ito (2008).
However, unlike Schindler (2009), their index does not distinguish between restrictions on inflows from
restrictions on outflows. Nevertheless, the correlation between the Chinn-Ito index and our measures of
financial sector specific capital controls and forex regulations is about 0.5.
12
Only one country (Ecuador)—out of the 34 EMEs for which we had information on all policy measures—had
no type of regulation in place in 2007.
13
We estimate all specifications using pooled ordinary least squares (OLS). This is because inclusion of country
fixed effects in the panel regressions makes it difficult to identify the effect of our policy measures, which tend
to be slow moving variables. In the pooled regressions, however, we control for region specific effects to
capture time-invariant factors specific to countries in different regions, and annual dummies to control for
shocks common across countries, and cluster the standard errors at the country level. The sample size in the
panel estimations drops drastically when indices for other prudential measures (Domreg1and Domreg2) are

(continued)

8
A. Baseline Specification
Composition of external liabilities
To assess the association between capital controls or prudential measures and the share of
debt in the country's total external liabilities, we estimate benchmark specifications including
the Kcont, Fincont, Fxreg, and Domreg indices, while controlling for the country's overall
institutional quality, and a composite measure of vulnerability to capital account crises.14
Columns (1) through (13) in Table 1 present the cross-sectional results for the pre-crisis
liability structure of EMEs.15 Countries rated more vulnerable or with weaker institutions
appear to rely more heavily on debt financing, presumably because foreign investors are
more reluctant to lend to such countries using risk-sharing instruments (e.g., equity).16
Among the variables of interest—economy-wide capital controls have a statistically strong
effect on tilting the composition of external liabilities away from debt liabilities. The
estimated coefficient for FX-related prudential measures is also statistically significant when
included individually in the regression, albeit at the 10 percent level. To put estimates in
perspective, moving from the sample's 25th to the 75th percentile of either the capital
controls or FX-prudential index lowers the share of debt liabilities in total liabilities by about
4-7 percent. While sizable, the effect is in line with previous studies that also tend to find
quantitatively important effects of capital controls on the composition of inflows. 17
While capital controls, particularly those on bond inflows, can have a direct effect on the
share of debt liabilities, FX-related prudential measures that limit a bank’s ability to pass on
the currency risk to domestic borrowers can also affect debt liabilities indirectly, by limiting
the bank’s ability to fund itself abroad to the extent that foreign lenders demand a significant
premium for holding currency risk. When included jointly in the regression, however, the
statistical significance of the association between economy-wide capital controls and a lower
included since, for these measures, the available data is for two years (2005 and 2007) only. Table A2 describes
the variables and data sources.
14
Our measure is based on 18 indicators spanning the external, fiscal, financial and real sectors of the economy
(we exclude variables related to external debt liabilities). The measure is a weighted average of dummies for
whether or not each of the 18 indicators is above a threshold associated with crises: see IMF (2010, 2011).
15

The number of observations across estimated specifications is not uniform as data availability, particularly on
policy measures, varies considerably across countries.
16
Several studies, for example, Wei (2001), suggest that weak institutions may increase the importance of debt
in total liabilities, but reduce the relative importance of FDI, as foreign banks are more likely to be bailed out
than foreign direct investors in the event of a crisis. FDI could also be lower in institutionally weak countries if
foreign investors are concerned about the likely exposure to requests for bribes and red tapism. By contrast,
others (for example, Razin, Sadka, and Yuen, 1998 and 2000) argue that institutionally vulnerable countries
would have a higher share of FDI in total external liabilities since FDI is relatively difficult to expropriate.
17
See, for example, De Gregorio, Edwards, and Valdés (2000) on the maturity of flows in Chile, and Clements
and Kamil (2009) on FDI vs non-FDI flows in Colombia.

9
share of debt liabilities survives (Table 1, columns 8-13). This makes intuitive sense
inasmuch as FX-related prudential measures can, at most, affect flows that are intermediated
through the banking system, whereas Kcont potentially apply to all flows.
The cross-sectional results are supported by the panel specification (Table 1, columns 14-26),
where in addition to the overall institutional quality and external vulnerability, we also
control for the level of financial development and (log of) real per capita income of the
economies. The estimated coefficient of Kcont is statistically significant in almost all
specifications, and the magnitude of the estimated effect is similar to that reported above.
Examining the individual components of Kcont, both in cross-section and panel data, the
association between Kcont and debt liabilities stems from the effect of capital controls on
bond inflows, which strongly reduce the share of debt liabilities in total liabilities.18
Foreign Currency Lending and Domestic Credit booms
To examine whether capital controls and prudential measures are associated with lower
FX-denominated lending by the domestic banking system (another potential source of
financial fragility), we estimate the effect of these measures on the share of foreign currency
loans in total bank credit, while controlling for the effects of the exchange rate regime, the
level of financial development (proxied by the share of private credit to GDP), and the
overall institutional quality. The exchange rate regime is included to capture the possibility
that countries with fixed exchange rate regimes may have higher foreign currency lending,
while countries with more developed financial markets are likely to have less FX lending.19
The cross-sectional evidence from the recent crisis, presented in Table 2 (columns 1-13)
indicates that countries with economy-wide capital controls and FX-related prudential
regulations had lower pre-crisis domestic borrowing in FX. Both measures retain their
(strong) statistical significance when included jointly in the regression (column 10). 20
The estimates suggest that moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile of Kcont or Fxreg2 is
associated with a 20-25 percentage point reduction in the share of foreign currencydenominated lending in total bank lending in 2007. While the magnitude of the effects appear
to be large, they are plausible since FX-related prudential measures can have a direct impact
on foreign currency lending by domestic banks (sufficiently restrictive measures can in

18

The results for individual components of the indices are not reported here but are available upon request.
In panel estimations, we also control for the (log of) real per capita income. The results confirm that fixed
exchange rate regimes are associated with a significantly higher share of FX lending, while a higher level of
financial market development and per capita income (in panel estimations) is associated with a lower share of
FX lending.
20
The obtained results remain qualitatively similar if FX credit-to-GDP ratio is used as the dependent variable.
19

10
principle drive such lending to zero).21 In particular, we find a strong association between
restrictions on lending locally in foreign exchange, and limits on open FX positions and
lower FX lending.
The results obtained from the panel dataset (Table 2, columns 14-26) confirm these findings,
but in addition show a statistically strong association between financial sector-specific capital
controls and lower FX borrowing. Specifically, column (22) shows that an increase in the
composite financial sector-specific controls index, Fincont2, from the 25th percentile to the
75th percentile is associated with about an 11 percentage points reduction in the proportion
of FX-denominated lending. This result is also plausible because when banks borrow abroad,
they typically do so in foreign currency. Therefore, capital controls that impede external
borrowing, combined with limits on banks' open FX positions, will also tend to reduce
foreign currency lending by banks.
In addition to FX lending, we also examine whether regulatory measures have any effect on
overall domestic lending. Table 3 reports the results of the effect on capital controls and (FXrelated and other) prudential measures on the magnitude of credit booms (defined as the
change in private credit-to-GDP ratio), while controlling for other factors such as the level of
financial development, overall regulatory/institutional quality, the availability of creditor
information sharing institutions (à la Djankov, McLiesh, and Shleifer, 2007), the exchange
rate regime, and lagged private credit to GDP ratio as an initial condition.22
Evidence from both the recent crisis (Table 3, columns 1-13) and panel specifications
(columns 14-26) indicate that other prudential measures are significantly associated with
smaller credit booms. Moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile of domestic prudential
regulations slows credit growth during the boom years of 2003-07 by about 1-1.5 percentage
points per year. Among the individual components, reserve requirements and limits on credit
concentration in specific sectors appear to be effective in restraining lending by the domestic
financial system. We do not, however, find any significant association between FX-related
regulations (or capital controls) and the size of credit booms, perhaps because FX lending
typically does not constitute a large share of total lending.
Crisis resilience
If, as Tables 1-3 suggest, capital controls and prudential measures are associated with lower
financial fragilities, then this should show up in greater resilience of the economy in the
21

Of course, that could come at a cost in terms of volume of credit, and in some cases cause lending to migrate
to unregulated corners of the financial sector.
22

In addition, in panel estimations we also include the lagged real GDP growth rate and (log of) real GDP per
capita. The estimation results show that countries with higher institutional quality, fixed exchange rate regimes,
and higher real growth experienced larger domestic credit booms, whereas a higher initial private credit to GDP
ratio and the existence of public or private credit registries/bureaus is associated with smaller booms.

11
event of a crisis. We estimate the effect of these measures on the change in average real GDP
growth in 2008–09 relative to the country’s average growth over 2003–07. Columns (1)
through (13) in Table 4 indicate that economy-wide capital controls are indeed associated
with improved growth resilience, while controlling for overall institutional quality, change in
terms of trade, and real GDP growth of trading partners.23 Thus, countries that had capital
controls in place in the years leading up to the global financial crisis fared better during the
crisis. Moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile of capital control restrictiveness or FXrelated prudential measures reduces the growth decline in the aftermath of the crisis by 2.53.5 percentage points (the average growth decline in our sample is 5.2 percentage points).
Regressions for individual components (not reported here) show that this result is largely
driven by controls on bond inflows.
While FX-related prudential regulations appear to have some effect on growth resilience
during crises when included on their own, the effect of capital controls tends to dominate
when both are included together in the regression (column 11). Other prudential measures,
particularly, limits on sectoral lending and reserve requirements, seem to complement the
effect of capital account restrictions, with both measures retaining significance when
included together. Evidence from past crises episodes (in columns 14-24) supports the
association of capital controls with growth resilience—specifically, we find that among the
EMEs that experienced crises in earlier years, those with higher economy-wide capital
account restrictions in their pre-crisis years experienced smaller growth declines when the
crises occurred.24 These results support those of some earlier studies, for example, Gupta et
al. (2007), who find that the fall in output during crisis episodes is significantly lower if
capital controls were in place in the years running up to the crisis.25
B. Sensitivity Analysis
The results presented in Tables 1-4 suggest that both capital controls and prudential measures
are strongly associated—in the cross-sectional and panel data—with reduced financial
vulnerabilities. We now examine the robustness of our results to model specification,
alternative indices of policy measures, estimation methods, and country sample.

23

The change in terms of trade, and real GDP growth of trading partners are constructed as the difference
between the average of 2008–09 and 2003–07. Using the average growth in 2008–09 instead of the difference
from average growth over 2003–07 has no effect on the results. Further, the finding of a negative association
between restrictions on capital inflows and output decline in the crisis is robust to the inclusion of several other
control variables as reported below.
24
Past crises are those identified by the IMF (2010) database over 1995–2008. Growth decline for these crises
cases is computed as the difference between real GDP growth rate in the crisis year and the average past 5 year
growth rate. Domreg1 and Domreg2 are not included in these regressions (Table 4, columns 14-24) because of
insufficient observations.
25
The sample of Gupta et al. (2007) comprises about 200 crisis episodes in 90 countries over 1970–2007.

12

Model specification
While the regressions reported in Tables 1-4 include several relevant control variables, to
ensure that the strong association between our policy measures and financial fragilities/crisis
resilience is not driven by omitted variables, we also estimate alternative specifications with
additional control variables, particularly, to capture country characteristics such as the level
of financial development (as proxied by stock market capitalization), soundness of the
financial system (proxied by bank return on equity), and the type of political regime in place
(proxied by the polity index).
Tables 5 and 6 report the results with these additional variables added to both the crosssection and panel specifications for debt liabilities, FX lending, domestic credit booms, and
crisis resilience, respectively. We find that the results reported in Tables 1-4 generally
survive the addition of other control variables—specifically, economy-wide capital controls
remain associated with a lower proportion of debt liabilities, lower FX lending, and improved
crisis resilience; FX-related prudential measures have a strong dampening effect on FXlending; and other domestic prudential measures lead to smaller aggregate credit booms.26
In addition to model specification, we check the sensitivity of our results to the construction
of policy indices. Specifically, we replace our financial sector-specific capital controls and
prudential indices (which are simple averages of the individual components, as discussed in
Section III) with the first principal components of the individual sub-indices. The results (not
reported here) using these alternative measures are very similar to those obtained in Tables 14, both in terms of statistical significance and the estimated magnitude of the association
between policy measures and financial/economic vulnerabilities.
Endogeneity
One concern when estimating the effect of capital controls on the aggregate stock or flow of
external liabilities relates to reverse causality—that is, countries may strengthen capital
account restrictions in response to a surge in capital inflows, which could give rise to a
spurious positive association between controls and inflows. While such endogeneity concerns
may be less pertinent when considering the impact of controls on the composition, rather
than on the overall level or flow of liabilities, endogeneity bias—if it exists—would tend to
reduce the estimated effects of capital controls and other prudential measures.27 The
26

In the crisis resilience regressions, we also control for other policy variables such as the pre-crisis foreign
exchange reserves to GDP ratio, exchange rate regime, and the monetary policy and fiscal policy stance over
the crisis (proxied by the change in interest rates and cyclically adjusted fiscal balance to GDP ratio in the crisis
year vis-à-vis the past five years, respectively), but do not find this to have any significant effect on the
estimated coefficient of the economy-wide capital controls variable (results available upon request).
27
The lack of association between capital controls and capital inflows in some studies is often attributed to
econometric identification (see Ostry et al., 2010).

13
relatively strong findings above are therefore, despite, rather than because of, any potential
endogeneity bias (which would tend to bias the results toward finding no effect).28
Nevertheless, we use lagged values of the capital controls index in all estimations to mitigate
the endogeneity concerns, and, in addition, apply an instrumental variable two-stage least
squares (IV-2SLS) approach to explicitly address reverse causality. For this, we require at
least one valid instrument that is correlated with the capital controls index but is not expected
to affect the dependent variable directly. We consider two such potential instruments—a
(binary) variable reflecting the existence of a bilateral investment treaty (BIT) between
country i and the United States in year t, and a (binary) variable indicating whether the
country is a member of the European Union (EU). These variables are expected to be
important determinants of capital controls because both BITs with the United States and EU
membership constrain the use of capital account restrictions, but there is no a priori reason to
believe that they would be directly related to, say, the composition of external liabilities.29
The validity of our instrument is supported by the results from the first stage of the IV-2SLS
estimation: the estimated coefficients of BITs and EU membership are negative and mostly
statistically significant indicating that countries which have ratified a BIT with the United
States, or are members of the EU have lower prevalence of capital controls on inflows. The
F-test of the hypothesis that the estimates in the first stage regression are jointly equal to zero
is rejected, and the R-squared of all first stage specifications (reported in Table 7) is in the
range of 0.30-0.60, offering some evidence on the appropriateness of our instruments. The
Sargan test of over-identifying restrictions also cannot be rejected in most cases, and supports
the validity of the instruments. The results of the second stage of the estimation support the
strong association between capital controls and crisis resilience in both the recent and past
crises episodes. The relationship between capital controls and debt liabilities becomes weaker
in the cross-sectional specification, but is stronger in the panel regressions (Table 7, panel b).
The magnitude of the effect is however somewhat larger, consistent with the intuition above
that not controlling for potential endogeneity would bias the coefficient downwards.

28

Another type of bias might arise if countries that have capital controls tend to pursue less market-friendly
policies, and it is the latter that dissuades investors from investing in the country; however, our vulnerability
measure should capture much of this.
29

In growth resilience regressions, there could be a concern that BITs and EU membership may be directly
associated with the dependent variable. The correlation between growth performance and BITs/EU membership
is only moderate in both cross-sectional and panel data. The Sargan test of over-identifying restrictions
(reported in the last row of Table 7) also supports the validity of the chosen instruments for the growth
resilience regressions. Moreover, existence of a BIT is not especially associated with greater assistance during
the recent global financial crisis—of the 20 EME countries in our sample with a BIT, none received a Federal
Reserve swap line (Korea has an FTA which has not been approved by the U.S. Congress yet, and Mexico has
an exception for balance-of-payments difficulties under NAFTA that is less restrictive on capital controls than
the terms of the BITs).

14
Country sample
Finally, we check the robustness of our results to the country sample, dropping some of the
smallest countries; and dropping countries that are classified as advanced economies in the
IMF's World Economic Outlook classification. In a recent study of 24 EMEs, Cline (2010)
finds no relationship between capital account openness and the output decline during the
crisis, and questions whether such a relationship exists (or whether it is driven by the
experience of the Baltic countries in the EME sample, which he considers
unrepresentative).30 While we believe that including the Baltic countries in the sample is
important, as their experience in the recent financial crisis offers important insights, we reestimate the cross-sectional and panel specifications without the three Baltic countries
(Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania) in the sample.
As shown in Table 5, excluding the Baltic countries from the sample weakens the statistical
significance of the association between economy-wide capital controls on inflows and the
growth decline in the recent crisis (although has no effect on the sign of the estimated
coefficient for Kcont). Nevertheless, we find that the association between growth decline in
past crises and capital controls on inflows remains robust (Table 6). Exclusion of countries
that may be identified as advanced economies otherwise (specifically, Czech Republic,
Iceland, Israel, and Korea), does not change the estimated sign and magnitude of the
coefficients either; and capital controls remain strongly associated with the share of debt
liabilities, FX lending and crisis resilience in both cross-section and panel specifications.
IV. CONCLUSION
This paper analyzes the effects of prudential policies and capital controls on the financialstability risks associated with capital inflow surges and the extent to which policies in place
during booms may help to mitigate the damage that can occur during busts. We construct
new indices for prudential measures and for financial sector-specific capital controls for 51
emerging market economies over the period 1995–2008.
Our findings suggest that capital controls and various prudential policies can help reduce the
riskiness of external liability structures and the extent of risky foreign-currency lending in the
economy. Prudential policies that do not discriminate on the basis either of currency or
residency can also help to mitigate the intensity of domestic credit booms. By helping to
reduce the buildup of financial fragilities during the boom phase, prudential policies and
capital controls can help to enhance economic resilience during the bust when foreign capital

30

Cline (2010), however, uses a composite index of capital account restrictiveness, which does not distinguish
between controls on inflows and controls on outflows, whereas our analysis, based on the Schindler index,
distinguishes explicitly between inflow and outflow controls (so, for example, India and Turkey are similar in
terms of their capital account restrictiveness as defined by the Quinn index; but differ considerably based on the
Schindler inflows index).

15
dries up and flows out. Our empirical results suggest the benefits from appropriate pre-crisis
policies are both statistically significant and economically relevant.
Our paper has not discussed potential costs associated with use of prudential policies and
capital controls. Micro-level studies have shown that capital controls can make access to
financing relatively more difficult to small and medium enterprises (Forbes, 2007) and
domestically-owned firms (Harrison, Love and McMillan, 2004). However, if the choice is
between capital controls and prudential policies, the issue is not completely clear-cut. While
capital controls may indeed make financing for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) more
difficult, these firms typically rely more on domestic bank financing than on foreign flows,
whereas larger and internationally-known firms are more likely to be able to access foreign
financing. Therefore, prudential measures on the domestic banking system are also likely to
disproportionately affect the availability of finance to SMEs. Further, excessive limits on
banks could lead to disintermediation and proliferation of non-regulated financial institutions
(Wakeman-Linn, 2007).
By definition, prudential measures can only have traction on flows that are intermediated
through the regulated financial institutions. Direct borrowing from abroad, through branches
of foreign banks, or intermediated through unregulated institutions such as finance
companies, may not be subject to domestic prudential regulation. Moreover, applying
prudential measures to domestic banks may cause flows to migrate to unregulated corners of
the financial system as a result of regulatory arbitrage.31 This can also create an un-level
playing field for domestic banks relative to foreign competitors and non-banks. While it may
be possible to widen the perimeter of regulation, this normally takes time, and at least in the
interim, capital controls may have a useful role.
Beyond a fuller treatment of the relative costs and benefits of the various measures, future
research might usefully consider a number of issues related to their design, including how
they can be geared to temporary versus more persistent capital flows, whether they should
be broad or narrowly targeted, and whether they should be price or quantity-based.

31

For example, when Croatia imposed “speed limits” on credit growth in 2003, banks moved part of their loan
portfolio to affiliated leasing companies. That speed limit was later replaced by higher marginal reserve
requirements on foreign liabilities, with regulations being continuously refined to close loopholes exploited by
the banks. Their experience suggests that targeted controls may lead to migration to unregulated corners of the
financial sector, and a shift towards direct borrowing from abroad. See Ostry et al. (2011).

16
References
Bakker, Bas and Anne-Marie Gulde, 2010, “The Credit Boom in the EU New Member
States: Bad Luck or Bad Policies?” IMF Working Paper 10/130 (Washington: International
Monetary Fund).
Barajas, Adolfo, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and Andrei Levchenko, 2007, “Credit Booms: The
Good, the Bad, and the Ugly,” (unpublished: International Monetary Fund).
Beck, Thorsten, and Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, 2009, “Financial Institutions and Markets Across
Countries and over Time: Data and Analysis,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
No. 4943 (Washington DC: World Bank).
Cardenas, Mauricio, and Felipe Barrera, 1997, “On the Effectiveness of Capital Controls:
The Experience of Colombia During the 1990s,” Journal of Development Economics,
October 1997, Vol. 54(1), pp. 27-57.
Chinn, Menzie D., and Hiro Ito, 2008, “A New Measure of Financial Openness,” Journal of
Comparative Policy Analysis, Vol. 10(3), pp. 309 -322.
Cline, William R., 2010, Financial Globalization, Economic Growth, and the Crisis of 200709 (Washington DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics).
De Gregorio, José, Sebastian Edwards and R. Valdés, 2000, “Controls on Capital Inflows:
Do They Work?” Journal of Development Economics, October, Vol. 63(1), pp. 59-83.
Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, and Robert Marquez, 2006, “Lending Booms and Lending
Standards,” The Journal of Finance, Vol. 51(5), pp. 2511-2546.
Djankov, Simoen, Oliver Hart, Caralee McLiesh and Andrei Shleifer, 2008, “Debt
Enforcement around the World,” Journal of Political Economy Vol. 116(6), pp. 1105–1149.
Forbes, Kristin, 2007, “One Cost of the Chilean Capital Controls: Increased Financial
Constraints for Smaller Traded Firms,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 71(2), pp.
294-323.
Ghosh, Atish, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Charalambos Tsangarides, 2010, “Exchange Rate
Regimes and the Stability of the International Monetary System,” IMF Occasional Paper 270
(Washington: International Monetary Fund).
Gupta, Poonam., Deepak Mishra, Ratna Sahay, 2007, “Behavior of Output During Currency
Crises,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 72(2), pp. 428-450.
Harrison, Anne, Inessa Love, and Margaret McMillian, 2004, “Global Capital Flows and
Financing Constraints,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 75(1), pp. 269-301.

17
Hutchison, Michael, Jake Kendall, Gurnain Pasricha, and Nirvikar Singh, 2009, “Indian
Capital Control Liberalization: Evidence from NDF Markets,” NIPFP Working Paper No.
2009-60 (New Delhi: National Institute of Public Finance and Policy).
IMF, 2010, The IMF-FSB Early Warning Exercise: Design and Methodological Toolkit,
(Washington DC: International Monetary Fund). Available online at:
www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2010/090110.pdf.
Lane, Phillip, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 2007, “The External Wealth of Nations Mark
II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004,” Journal
of International Economics, Vol. 73(2), pp. 223-250.
Ma, Guonan, and Robert N. McCauley, 2008, “Efficacy of China’s Capital Controls:
Evidence from Price and Flow Data,” Pacific Economic Review, Vol. 13(1), pp. 104–123.
Magud, Nicolas, Carmen Reinhart, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2006, “Capital Controls: Myth and
Reality. A Portfolio Balance Approach to Capital Controls,” mimeo, Harvard University.
Mendoza, Enrique, G., and Marco E. Terrones, 2008, “An Anatomy of Credit Booms:
Evidence from Macro Aggregates and Micro Data,” NBER Working Paper 14049
(Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research).
OECD, 2009, Code of Liberalization of Capital Movements (Paris: Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development).
Ostry, Jonathan D., Atish R. Ghosh, Karl Habermeier, Marcos Chamon, Mahvash S. Qureshi,
and Dennis B.S. Reinhardt, 2010, “Capital Inflows: The Role of Controls,” IMF Staff
Position Note SPN/10/04 (Washington DC: International Monetary Fund).
Ostry, Jonathan D., Atish R. Ghosh, Karl Habermeier , Luc Laeven, Marcos Chamon,
Mahvash S. Qureshi, and Annamaria Kokenyne, 2011, “Managing Capital Inflows: What
Tools to Use?” IMF Staff Discussion Note SDN/11/06 (Washington DC: International
Monetary Fund).
Quinn, Dennis P., and A. Maria Toyoda, 2008, “Does Capital Account Liberalization Lead to
Economic Growth?” Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 21(3), pp. 1403-1449.
Ranciere, Romain, Aaron Tornell and Athanasio Vamvakidis, 2010, “Currency Mismatch
and Systemic Risk in Eastern Europe,” Economic Policy, Vol. 25(64), pp. 597-658.
Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka, and Chi-Wa Yuen, 1998, “A Pecking Order of Capital Inflows
and International Tax Principles”, Journal of International Economics Vol. 44(1), pp. 45-68.

18
Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka, and Chi-Wa Yuen, 2000, “Do Debt Flows Crowd Out Equity
Flows or the Other Way Round?” Annals of Economics and Finance, May 2000, Vol. 1(1),
pp. 33-47.
Rosenberg, Christoph, and Marcel Tirpak, 2009, “Determinants of Foreign Currency
Borrowing in the New Member States of the EU,” Czech Journal of Economics and Finance,
Vol. 59(3), pp. 216-228.
Schindler, Martin, 2009, “Measuring Financial Integration: A New Data Set,” IMF Staff
Papers, Vol. 56(1), pp. 222-238.
Schuknecht, Ludger, 1999, “A Simple Trade Policy Perspective on Capital Controls,”
Finance and Development, March (Washington DC: International Monetary Fund).
Wakeman-Linn, John, 2007, “Managing Large Scale Foreign Exchange Inflows:
International Experiences” (unpublished; Washington DC: International Monetary Fund).
Wei, Shang-Jin, 2001, “Domestic Crony Capitalism and International Fickle Capital: Is
There a Connection?” International Finance, Vol. 4(1), pp. 15-45.

19

Figure 1. Capital Controls and Prudential Measures in EMEs, 1995-2008
(a) Financial Sector Capital Controls Index*
0.7
1995-1999
2000-2004
2005-2008

0.6

(b) Econom y Wide Capital Controls on Inflow Index*
0.8
1995-1999
2000-2004
2005-2008

0.7

0.5

0.6

0.4

0.5
0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1
0
Asia

Europe

Latin
America

Other

EME
average

0
Asia

* Av erage of binary v ariables indicating restrictions on
borrowing f rom abroad, maintenance of accounts abroad,
and dif f erential treatment of nonresident deposit accounts.

1995-1999
2000-2004
2005-2008

0.8
0.7

Latin
America

Other

EME
average

* Schindler's (2009) capital controlson inf low index.

(c) Foreign Currency Regulations Index*
0.9

Europe

(d) Dom estic Prudential Regulations Index*
0.5
2005
2007

0.4

0.6
0.5

0.3

0.4
0.3

0.2

0.2
0.1

0.1

0
Asia

Europe

Latin
America

Other

EME
average

* Av erage of restrictions on lending locally in f oreign currency ,
purchase of locally issued securities denominated in f oreign
currency , dif ferential treatment of deposit cacounts in f oreign
exchange, and open f oreign exchange position limits.

0.0
Asia

Europe

Latin
America

Other

EME
average

*Av erage of reserv e requirements, LTV limit, and limit on
credit concentration to specif ic sectors.

Source: Authors’ estimates based on IMF’s AREAER and Schindler (2009).

20
Figure 2. Frequency Distribution of Pre-Crisis Policy Measures*
(in percent of total observations)
Bonds
Equity
FDI

Economy wide

Capital
controls

Borrowing abroad
Maintenance of acc. abroad
Different treatment of
nonresident accounts

Financial sector

Open FX position limits
Different treatment of FX acc.
Lending locally in FX

FX-related
measures

Purchase of local FX sec.

Loan to value ratio

Other prudential
measures

Reserve requirements
Credit concentration in
specific sectors

0

50

100

Source: IMF's AREAER, Schindler (2009), and IMF country desk survey.
*Numbers reflect the share of countries with a measure in 2007.

Figure 3. Correlation between Policy Measures*
KcontFincont
0.7
0.6
0.5
FxregDomreg

0.4
0.3

KcontFxreg

0.2
0.1
0

FincontDomreg

KcontDomreg

FincontFxreg
Source: Authors' estimates.
* Kcont=Schindler's (2009) capital controls on inflow index. Fincont=mean of binary
variables reflecting restrictions on financial sector's borrowing abroad, maintenance of
accounts abroad, and differential treatment of accounts held by nonresidents.
Fxreg=mean of binary variables reflecting restrictions on financial sector's lending locally
in foreign exchange, purchase of locally issued securities denominated in foreign
exchange, differential treatment of deposit accounts in foreign exchange, and limits on
open forex positions. Domreg=average of binary variables reflecting LTV ratio, limit on
credit concentration in specific sectors, and reserve requirements.

Figure 4. Pre-Crisis Country Coverage of Policy Measures, 2007*
Maintenance of
accounts abroad
Purchase of
locally issued FX
securities

Differential treatment of
FX deposit accounts

Russia

Borrowing Argentina,
abroad
Dominican Rep., China,

Armenia,
Israel

El Salvador,
Indonesia,
Malaysia,
Philippines

Egypt,
Peru, Russia,
Uruguay

Lending locally
in FX

Jamaica,
Pakistan

Czech Rep.,
El Salvador,
Iceland,
Latvia
Panama

Kazakhstan,
Lebanon

Argentina,
Chile, China,
India, Indonesia,
Mexico, Philippines,
Sri Lanka, Tunisia
Guatemala

Bulgaria
Ecuador

Dominican Rep.,
Korea, Malaysia,
Turkey

Chile,
Costa Rica,
Mexico

Israel,
Kazakhstan,
Korea,
Uruguay

Peru

India
Lebanon,
Pakistan,
Sri Lanka,
Tunisia

Open FX position
limit

Armenia, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Czech Rep.,
Ecuador, Egypt,
Guatemala, Iceland,
Jamaica, Latvia,
Panama, Turkey

Thailand

Financial sector
capital controls

Armenia
Czech Rep.
Gutemala
Panama

Forex
regulations

Brazil,
Costa Rica,
Thailand

Differential
treatment of
nonresident
accounts

Egypt,
Latvia,
Turkey

Reserve
requirement

21

Macroprudential
measures

Chile,
Costa Rica, El
Indonesia
Salvador,Korea,
Israel, Peru,
Argentina,
Uruguay
China,
Dominican Rep.,
India, Kazakhstan,
Lebanon, Malaysia,
Mexico, Pakistan, Sri
Lanka,Thailand
Iceland,
Jamaica,
Russia
Brazil

Bulgaria

Economy wide
capital controls

Argentina,
Dominican Rep.,
Jamaica,
Iceland

Argentina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Costa Rica,
Jamaica, Sri Lanka
El Salvador,
Korea, Latvia, Dominican
Rep.,
Mexico,
Lebanon,
Thailand,
Pakistan
Tunisia,
Turkey

Loan-to-value
ratio

Egypt,
Uruguay

China,
Philippines

Kazakhstan,
Philippines

Ecuador

India,
Kazakhstan,
Malaysia,
Peru

Mexico

Concentration of
credit in sectors

Bond inflow

FDI inflow

China,
India,
Indonesia,
Lebanon, Malaysia
Pakistan,
Philippines, Russia,
Sri Lanka, Thailand,
Tunisia

Brazil

Equity inflow

Chile, Israel
Armenia, Czech Rep.,
Ecuador, Guatemala,
Iceland, Indonesia,
Panama, Russia

Armenia, Bulgaria*,
Chile, Costa Rica, Czech Rep.,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Israel, Korea,
Latvia, Panama, Peru, Uruguay

Source: IMF staff estimates based on AREAER, Schindler (2009), and country desk survey. The universe comprises 34 countries for which data on all measures is available. Countries outside the ovals are
those for which the relevant policy measures were not in place. In 2007, Bulgaria did not have controls on bond, equity and FDI inflows, but had restrictions on financial credit inflow. For analytical purposes,
only cases where the reserve requirement exceeds 10 percent are considered as having reserve requirements; countries in the sample where reserve requirements existed in 2007 but were less than 10
percent are Armenia, Chile, Ecuador, El Salvador, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Korea, Latvia, Malaysia, Panama, Peru, Russia, and Turkey.

Table 1: Policy Measures and Debt Liabilities
Recent crisis a
1
Kcont

2

3

4

5

6

7

Panel data (1995-2008)b
9

10

11

12

13

14

-11.517**

-11.311* -9.395 -10.814* -12.946* -10.628* -9.691*

-9.856***

(5.045)

(6.656) (8.727) (6.086) (6.705) (5.286) (5.234)

(3.475)

Fincont1

-7.129

-1.094

(5.719)
Fincont2

17

18

19

20

21

22

-10.307** -7.518
(4.447)

(4.975)

(3.201)

-1.956

(6.406)

(10.544)

(3.430)

(5.189)

(4.234)

-2.462

-1.846

-1.542

(4.492)

(5.733)

(3.152)

(3.661)

-8.614

0.850

-5.071

(6.488)

(9.063)

(3.912)

-4.835**
(2.218)

-2.610

-4.434

-4.291

(7.863)

(7.555)

(6.076)

(6.402)

32

26

(2.248) (4.443) (4.229)

-2.680

Domreg2

37

25

-9.586** -8.225*** -2.751 -2.977

-7.970*

37

24

(4.614)
-5.412

35

23

4.523

-3.727

Domreg1

35

16

-0.545

(7.507)

Fxreg2

38

15

-10.578

Fxreg1

Observations

8

-5.022

-3.817

1.663

-0.756

(8.240)

(8.006)

(6.217)

(6.653)

30

35

35

37

37

32

30

467

481

478

521

492

69

65

400

397

438

420

60

56

R-squared

Fxreg2 is the average of binary variables reflecting restrictions on financial sector's lending locally in foreign exchange, purchase of locally issued securities denominated in forex; differential treatment of deposit accounts in foreign
exchange; and open FX position limits.
Domreg1 is the average of reserve requirements and restrictions on concentration in sectors.
Domreg2 is the average of reserve requirements, restrictions on concentration in specific sectors, and LTV ratios.

22

0.388 0.352 0.375 0.387 0.376 0.383 0.434 0.393
0.396
0.422
0.420
0.434
0.477
0.468 0.471 0.474 0.445 0.416 0.264 0.291 0.479
0.467
0.452
0.440 0.268 0.315
a/ Dependent variable is share of debt liabilities in total liabilities in 2007 (in percent). Kcont, Fincontrol, and Fxreg are averaged over 2000-05. Domreg pertain to the measures in place in 2005. Constant, and a (lagged) composite index of
external vulnerability (excluding debt liabilities), and an indicator of overall institutional quality (ICRG index) in 2007 included as controls in all regressions. Robust standard errors in parentheses; *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10, 5, and
1 percent levels respectively.
b/ Dependent variable is share of debt liabilities in total liabilities (in percent). Kcont, Fincontrol, Fxreg and Domreg are lagged one year. Domreg is available for 2005 and 2007 only. Constant, and region specific and time effects included in all
regressions. Lagged composite index of external vulnerability, (log of) real GDP per capita, institutional quality (ICRG) index and a proxy for financial market development (private credit to GDP) included as controls in all regressions.
Clustered standard errors (on country level) reported in parentheses; *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.
Notes: Kcont is Schindler's (2009) capital controls on inflow index.
Fincont1 is the average of binary variables reflecting restrictions on financial sector's borrow ing abroad, and differential treatment of nonresident accounts.
Fincont2 is the average of binary variables reflecting restrictions on financial sector's borrow ing abroad, maintenanance of accounts abroad, and differential treatment of accounts held by nonresidents.
Fxreg1 is the average of binary variables reflecting restrictions on financial sector's lending locally in foreign exchange, and differential treatment of deposit accounts in foreign exchange.

Table 2: Policy Measures and Foreign-Currency Lending
Recent crisis a
1
Kcont
Fincont1
Fincont2
Fxreg1
Fxreg2
Domreg1
Domreg2

2

3

4

5

6

-38.888**
(14.399)
-11.323
(18.468)
-22.901
(17.307)
-37.459***
(10.136)
-52.233***
(12.374)
6.410
(17.680)

7

Panel data (1995-2008)b
8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

-38.155** -37.782* -25.944** -15.863 -44.688**-44.306** -30.626***
-27.779*** -21.790** -17.197* -11.344 -33.889***-33.731***
(15.638) (18.697) (12.034) (11.895) (17.704) (17.980)
(8.941)
(9.408) (9.614) (9.757) (9.832) (10.800) (10.859)
-6.792
-4.937
-6.043
(17.145)
(8.938)
(8.670)
-2.996
-16.049
-17.050*
(22.260)
(10.023)
(9.949)
-22.700**
-27.328***
-24.674***
(9.531)
(7.220)
(6.972)
-39.219***
-36.814***
-38.768***
(12.466)
(8.587)
(7.237)
-1.742
-2.304
-2.772
(17.823)
(12.384)
(15.563)
5.522
5.074
1.310
3.212
(16.755)

(17.862)

(14.592)

(17.292)

Observations
30
27
27
30
30
25
25
27
27
29
29
24
24
356
373
372
408
402
60
59
309
308
344
342
52
51
R-squared
0.599
0.484 0.504
0.597
0.660
0.410
0.408
0.615
0.612
0.649
0.694
0.643
0.644
0.469 0.293 0.317
0.408
0.428
0.169 0.161
0.469
0.488
0.535
0.563
0.350
0.344
a/ Dependent variable is FX credit to total credit in 2007. Kcont, Fincontrol, and Fxreg are averaged over 2003-05. Domreg pertain to the measures in place in 2005. Constant, lagged private credit to GDP, a dummy variable for the de facto exchange rate regime (=1 if
fixed exchange rate; 0 otherw sie), and institutional quality (ICRG) index included as control variables in all regressions. Robust standard errors in parentheses; *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.
b/ Dependent variable is FX credit to total credit. Kcont, Fincontrol, Fxreg, and Domreg are lagged by one year. Domreg is available for 2005 and 2007 only. Constant, and region specific and time effects included. Lagged private credit to GDP, lagged dummy variable
for a de facto fixed exchange rate regime, (log) of real GDP per capita, and institutional quality (ICRG) index included as control variables in all regressions. Clustered robust standard errors (on country level) in parentheses; *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10, 5,
and 1 percent levels respectively.
Notes: Kcont is Schindler's (2009) capital controls on inflow index.

Fxreg1 is the average of binary variables reflecting restrictions on financial sector's lending locally in forex, and differential treatment of deposit accounts in foreign exchange.
Fxreg2 is the average of binary variables reflecting restrictions on financial sector's lending locally in forex, purchase of locally issued securities denominated in forex; differential treatment of deposit accounts in foreign exchange; and limits on open forex positions.
Domreg1 is the average of reserve requirements and restrictions on concentration in sectors.
Domreg2 is the average of reserve requirements, restrictions on concentration in specific sectors, and LTV ratios.

23

Fincont1 is the average of binary variables reflecting restrictions on financial sector's borrow ing abroad, and differential treatment of nonresident accounts.
Fincont2 is the average of binary variables reflecting restrictions on financial sector's borrow ing abroad, maintenanance of accounts abroad, and differential treatment of accounts held by nonresidents.

Table 3: Policy Measures and Domestic Credit Booms
Recent crisis a
1
Kcont

2

3

4

5

6

7

-6.472

11

12

13

-8.036

-6.685

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

0.618

21

4.122

-1.351

-2.832

(10.147)

(2.814)

(3.873)

2.091

10.267

1.788

1.096

(5.882)

(9.677)

(3.294)

(4.588)

24

25

26

2.119

5.611

-6.895

-6.476

-1.417

-3.981

0.831

-1.217

(6.657)

(6.493)

(3.244)

(3.455)

Fxreg2

-3.795

-3.917

-2.311

-6.975

(7.925)

(7.821)

(4.457)

(5.548)

Domreg1

-14.613**

-13.049*

-10.404**

(6.545)

(7.046)

(4.270)

Domreg2

33

23

(4.345) (4.636) (3.171) (3.605) (4.943) (4.913)

-0.256

33

22

3.182 1.454

(3.293)

(6.187)

Fxreg1

36

10

(10.929) (10.562) (8.769) (8.081) (6.832) (7.612)

Fincont2

Observations

Panel data (1995-2008) b
9

-8.294 -12.913 -3.541 -4.371

(7.049)
Fincont1

8

36

34

32

-10.506**
(4.815)

-13.195*

-13.957*

-7.605

-9.037*

(6.416)

(7.471)

(4.628)

(5.259)

30

33

33

35

33

31

29

388

366

363

411

383

64

60

317

314

360

341

57

53

b/ Dependent variable is the cumulative three year change in private credit to GDP. Kcont, Fincontrol, and Fxreg are averaged over three lags. Domreg is available for 2005 and 2007 only, and is lagged by one year. Constant, region
specific and time effects, an institutional quality (ICRG) index, dummy variable for fixed exchange rate regime (=1 if fixed exchange rate regime; 0 otherw ise), dummy variable for public or private credit registries/bureaus, lagged (log
of) real GDP per capita, lagged real grow th rate of GDP, and three-year lagged private credit to GDP as initial condition included in regressions. Clustered robust standard errors (on country level) in parentheses; *, **, and *** indicate
significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.
Notes: Kcont is Schindler's (2009) capital controls on inflow index.
Fincont1 is the average of binary variables reflecting restrictions on financial sector's borrow ing abroad, and differential treatment of nonresident accounts.
Fincont2 is the average of binary variables reflecting restrictions on financial sector's borrow ing abroad, maintenanance of accounts abroad, and differential treatment of accounts held by nonresidents.
Fxreg1 is the average of binary variables reflecting restrictions on financial sector's lending locally in forex, and differential treatment of deposit accounts in foreign exchange.
Fxreg2 is the average of binary variables reflecting restrictions on financial sector's lending locally in forex, purchase of locally issued securities denominated in forex; differential treatment of deposit accounts in foreign exchange;
and limits on open forex positions.
Domreg1 is the average of reserve requirements and restrictions on concentration in sectors.
Domreg2 is the average of reserve requirements, restrictions on concentration in specific sectors, and LTV ratios.

24

R-squared
0.478 0.469 0.470 0.463 0.467
0.521
0.529
0.485 0.503 0.481 0.482
0.534 0.564
0.326 0.350 0.349 0.326 0.345 0.442 0.442 0.364 0.360 0.337 0.363 0.408 0.417
a/ Dependent variable is the change in private credit to GDP over 2003-07. Kcont, Fincontrol, and Fxreg are averaged over 2003-05. Domreg1 and Domreg2 pertain to the measures in place in 2005. All regressions include a constant,
institutional quality (ICRG) index, a dummy variable for de facto exchange rate regime (=1 if fixed exchange rate regime; 0 otherw sie), and a dummy variable for public or private credit registries/bureaus in 2007. Robust standard
errors in parentheses; *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.

Table 4. Policy Measures and Crisis Resilience
Recent crisis a
1
Kcont

2

3

4

5

6

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

5.153**

5.980** 7.120*** 2.335 5.426* 4.198* 3.657 5.802***

(2.300)

(2.311) (2.523) (2.648) (3.139) (2.380) (2.654) (1.727)

Fincont1

16

Past Crises (1995-2008)b
17
18
19
20

-1.690

(3.271)

(3.119)

(2.573)

(2.401)

1.198

-4.106

1.091

-2.653

(3.073)

(3.379)

(3.201)

(3.531)

5.277**

3.969

0.821

-0.482

(2.160)

(2.471)

(2.359)

(2.597)

Fxreg2

4.231

-0.333

3.978

0.223

(2.780)

(3.103)

(3.090)

(3.840)

Domreg1

4.650*

4.725*

(2.715)

(2.701)

Domreg2

39

39

33

3.115

2.749

(2.534)

(2.487)

31

36

36

39

39

33

31

30

31

31

32

31

27

27

28

27

R-squared
0.236 0.190 0.194 0.272 0.180 0.151 0.086 0.287
0.293 0.285 0.237 0.242 0.156 0.352 0.147 0.150 0.149 0.188 0.378 0.380 0.344 0.354
Notes: All regressions include a constant and control variables (grow th in trading partners, terms of trade change, and an institutional quality (ICRG) index). Robust standard errors in
parentheses; *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively. Kcont is Schindler's (2009) capital controls on inflow index. Fincont1 is the average of binary variables
reflecting restrictions on financial sector's borrow ing abroad, and differential treatment of nonresident accounts. Fincont2 is the average of binary variables reflecting restrictions on financial
sector's borrow ing abroad, maintenanance of accounts abroad, and differential treatment of accounts held by nonresidents. Fxreg1 is the average of binary variables reflecting restrictions on
financial sector's lending locally in foreign exchange, and differential treatment of deposit accounts in foreign exchange. Fxreg2 is the average of binary variables reflecting restrictions on
financial sector's lending locally in foreign exchange, purchase of locally issued securities denominated in forex; differential treatment of deposit accounts in foreign exchange; and limits on open
forex positions. Domreg1 is the average of reserve requirements and restrictions on concentration in sectors. Domreg2 is the average of reserve requirements, restrictions on concentration in
specific sectors, and LTV ratios.
a/ Dependent variable is the difference betw een real GDP grow th rates averaged over 2008-09, and 2003-07. Kcont, Fincont, and Fxreg are averaged over 2000-02. Domreg1 and Domreg2
pertain to the measures in place in 2005.
b/ Dependent variable is the difference betw een real GDP grow th rate in crisis year and the average grow th rate over past 5 years. Kcont, Fincont, and Fxreg are lagged one year.

25

36

22

(1.819) (1.800) (1.714) (1.889)
-0.403

36

21

6.575*** 7.171*** 5.923*** 6.084***

-2.914

Fxreg1

40

15

0.133

Fincont2

Observations

7

26
Table 5: Sensitivity Analysis: Recent Crisis Cross-Section
Baseline1 Stock market Financial
capitalization2 soundness 3

Polity 4

(Log of) Real
Excluding Excluding FX reserves/
GDP per capita5 Baltics 6 advanced7
GDP8

Debt Liabilities
-11.517**

-5.022

-11.576**

-8.556

-12.105*

-8.808

Fincont1

-7.129

-2.820

-7.322

-4.579

-6.596

-5.425

-7.891

Fincont2

-10.578

-4.155

-10.624

-9.283

-10.406

-8.007

-10.678

Fxreg1

-7.970*

-0.564

-8.321

-5.875

-7.598

-5.487

-7.647

Fxreg2

-8.614

-2.303

-8.875

-5.029

-8.036

-6.085

-8.532

Dom reg1

-2.680

4.167

-2.416

-1.549

-2.547

-0.974

-1.586

Dom reg2

-5.022

6.464

-5.569

-3.914

-4.625

-6.738

-3.777

-38.888**

-32.133*

-40.188**

-29.789*

-40.143**

-36.946**

-42.769**

-11.323

-12.112

-8.877

-17.151

-11.483

-6.860

-10.402

-21.157

-27.311*

-16.384

-23.649

Kcont

-11.937**

FX Credit
Kcont
Fincont1

-22.901

-17.516

Fxreg1

-37.459***

-39.362***

-37.826*** -32.574***

-36.751***

-34.028*** -40.160***

Fxreg2

-55.168*** -46.399***

-51.529***

-48.591*** -56.719***

Fincont2

-22.952

-52.233***

-48.788***

Dom reg1

6.410

13.145

6.188

8.280

6.890

12.235

7.231

Dom reg2

5.522

5.476

7.816

7.813

6.671

4.665

7.306

Kcont

-6.472

-7.181

-4.643

-13.781**

-8.608

-4.023

-4.955

Fincont1

-0.256

3.242

1.321

-4.369

-0.886

1.135

0.401

Fincont2

2.091

2.611

2.640

0.288

1.908

4.462

3.409

Fxreg1

-1.417

-0.758

-0.868

-8.671

-4.019

-0.219

-0.484

Fxreg2

-3.795

-2.708

-12.672

Change in Private Credit to GDP

-4.420

Dom reg1 -14.613**

-19.119***

Dom reg2 -13.195*

-11.601

-15.954** -17.679**
-9.758

-16.377*

-6.345

-1.337

-2.207

-14.245**

-13.275*

-14.091*

-17.704**

-15.074**

-11.752*

Crisis Resilience
Kcont
Fincont1
Fincont2
Fxreg1

5.153**

4.182*

5.039**

4.590*

5.497*

2.004

5.593**

5.022*

0.133

-0.679

0.023

0.581

-0.210

-0.932

0.331

-0.322

1.198

-0.193

1.250

1.235

0.785

-0.831

1.660

0.352

5.277**

4.720*

4.885**

5.080**

5.166**

2.675*

5.561**

4.934**

Fxreg2

4.231

3.019

3.670

3.797

3.895

2.149

4.689

3.375

Dom reg1

4.650*

5.484**

4.717*

4.743

4.725*

3.151

4.881

4.677*

Dom reg2

3.115

1.348

2.434

3.116

2.788

3.793

3.649

3.042

So urce: A utho rs's estimatio ns.
No tes: Debt liabilities is the share o f debt liabilities in to tal liabilities in 2007 (in percent). FX credit is the share o f FX lo ans in to tal lo ans
in 2007 (in percent). Change in private credit to GDP is calculated o ver 2003-07. Crisis resilience is the difference between real GDP
gro wth rates averaged o ver 2008-09, and 2003-07. Ro bust standard erro rs. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10, 5, and 1percent levels
respectively. Values in cells indicate the estimated co efficients fo r relevant po licy measures indicated in ro w headers. Thus, fo r example, 11.517 in the first cell (co lumn 1) is the estimated effect o f capital co ntro ls o n the share o f debt liabilities in the benchmark specificatio n,
and -5.022 is the estimated effect o f capital co ntro ls o n the share o f debt liabilities when the sto ck market capitalizatio n variable is
included in the benchmark specificatio n.
1B aseline
2Sto ck

specificatio n refers to co lumns (1)-(7) in Tables 1-4.
market capitalizatio n variable added to the baseline specificatio n.

3B anks'
4The

return o n equity added to the benchmark specificatio n.

ICRG index replaced with the po lity index (reflecting the type o f po litical regime) in the baseline specificatio n.

5(Lo g

o f ) real GDP per capita added to the baseline specificatio n.

6Exluding

the B altic co untries (Esto nia, Latvia, and Lithuania) fro m the sample and re-estimating baseline specificatio n.
the co untries identified as advanced eco no mies (Czech Rep., Iceland, Israel, and Ko rea) fro m the sample and re-estimating
baseline specificatio n.

7Exluding

8(Lo g

o f) fo rex reserves to GDP ratio added to the baseline specificatio n.

27
Table 6: Sensitivity Analysis: Panel Data
Baseline1

Stock market
Financial
capitalization2 soundness 3

Polity 4

Excluding
Baltics 5

Excluding FX reserves/
advanced6
GDP7

Debt Liabilities
-9.856***

-6.345*

-10.140***

-8.239**

-9.476**

Fincont1

-0.545

1.094

-0.922

-1.041

0.112

-0.910

Fincont2

-5.412

-3.261

-5.948*

-6.744*

-4.983

-5.860*

Fxreg1

-1.846

1.980

-2.181

0.234

-2.354

-3.055

Fxreg2

-5.071

-1.979

-6.410

-3.514

-4.277

-6.045

Dom reg1

-4.434

1.851

-5.276

-3.538

-2.575

-2.235

Dom reg2

1.663

7.500

1.241

3.312

1.480

2.316
-30.762***

Kcont

-10.593***

FX Credit
-30.626***

-28.117***

-30.544***

-32.649***

-28.316***

Fincont1

-4.937

-4.906

-6.372

-4.263

-5.440

-5.257

Fincont2

-16.049

-14.192

-18.175*

-15.404

-15.686

-16.261

Fxreg1

-27.328***

-25.722***

-28.435***

-27.749***

-26.667***

-28.332***

Fxreg2

-36.814***

-33.364***

-39.797***

-37.420***

-34.687***

-38.830***

Kcont

Dom reg1

-2.304

4.169

-4.099

4.766

4.764

-4.903

Dom reg2

1.310

1.851

0.212

7.547

2.373

-0.415

Kcont

0.618

0.820

0.625

-1.594

1.892

0.539

Fincont1

-1.351

-1.081

-1.355

-0.771

-0.856

-3.584

Fincont2

1.788

1.992

1.790

2.942

2.749

-0.250

Change in Private Credit to GDP

Fxreg1

0.831

0.923

0.791

-1.541

1.600

0.133

Fxreg2

-2.311

-1.678

-2.212

-4.594

-0.216

-0.353

Dom reg1

-10.404**

-13.991***

-11.535***

-13.047***

-7.820*

-9.607**

Dom reg2

-7.605

-7.853*

-7.849*

-8.416

-8.267*

-8.242*

Crisis Resilience
5.802***

5.083***

5.789***

6.698***

4.562***

6.322***

5.823***

Fincont1

-0.403

-0.572

-0.454

0.181

-0.778

-0.544

-0.310

Fincont2

1.091

-0.875

1.111

2.417

0.247

0.901

1.226

Fxreg1

0.821

0.816

0.820

1.508

-2.392

0.057

1.097

Fxreg2

3.978

3.495

3.997

4.619

-0.144

3.604

4.712

Kcont

No tes: Debt liabilities is the share o f debt liabilities in to tal liabilities (in percent). FX credit is the share o f FX lo ans in to tal lo ans (in
percent). Change in private credit to GDP is calculated o ver three years. Crisis resilience is the difference between real GDP gro wth
rate in crisis year and the average gro wth rate o ver past 5 years. Kco nt, Finco ntro l, Fxreg and Do mreg are lagged o ne year. Do mreg
is available fo r 2005 and 2007 o nly. Clustered ro bust standard erro rs (o n co untry level). *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10, 5, and
1percent levels respectively. Values in cells indicate the estimated co efficients fo r relevant po licy measures indicated in ro w
headers. Thus, fo r example, -10.879 is the estimated effect o f capital co ntro ls o n the share o f debt liabilities in the benchmark
specificatio n, and -6.864 is the estimated effect o f capital co ntro ls o n the share o f debt liabilities when the sto ck market
capitalizatio n variable is included in the benchmark specificatio n.
1B aseline
2Sto ck

3B anks'
4ICRG

specificatio n refers to co lumns (14)-(20) in Tables 1-4.

market capitalizatio n variable added to the baseline specificatio n.
return o n equity added to the benchmark specificatio n.

index replaced with the po lity index (reflecting the type o f po litical regime) in the baseline specificatio n.

5Exluding

the B altic co untries (Esto nia, Latvia, and Lithuania) fro m the sample and re-estimating baseline specificatio n.

estimating baseline specificatio n.
6Exluding the co untries identified as advanced eco no mies (Czech Rep., Iceland, Israel, and Ko rea) fro m the sample and reestimating baseline specificatio n.
7(Lo g

o f) fo rex reserves to GDP ratio added to the baseline specificatio n.

28

Table 7. Sensitivity Analysis: Instrumental Variables Approach
Debt liabilities a
1
Kcont
Fincont1
Fincont2
Fxreg1
Fxreg2
Domreg1
Domreg2

Observations
R2 (1st stage)
Sargan test (p-value)

2

3

4

Grow th resilience b
5

6

7

-38.962 -52.445 -64.263 -124.504 -145.039 -40.411 -26.952
(26.423) (47.645) (76.187) (167.472) (190.080) (43.006) (49.875)
17.646
(24.376)
31.436
(52.369)
47.962
(79.824)
90.253
(137.792)
-0.866
(10.008)
-0.126
(12.695)
38
0.305

35
0.442

35
0.528

37
0.437

37
0.503

32
0.222

0.15

0.25

0.30

0.53

0.93

0.26

8

9

10

11

12

21.049***21.492*** 24.818** 31.610** 47.969** 17.950 20.532
(6.992) (8.334) (11.208) (14.675) (20.482) (11.870) (13.639)
-6.551
(4.205)
-13.011*
(7.332)
-8.936
(7.819)
-32.485*
(16.587)
3.452
(4.457)
-0.231
(5.664)

30
0.226

40
0.453

36
0.465

36
0.536

39
0.551

39
0.647

33
0.418

31
0.428

0.19

0.95

0.96

0.97

0.94

0.90

0.80

0.93

[b] Panel data (1995-2008)

Kcont
Fincont1
Fincont2
Fxreg1
Fxreg2
Domreg1
Domreg2

Debt liabilities a

Grow th resilience b

0.303
2.299
-11.093* -7.486 7.916 -27.306 -8.904
(6.485) (10.805) (17.883) (18.650) (11.991) (21.858) (20.058)
3.020
(4.235)
-10.231
(9.139)
5.035
(7.062)
-2.910
(6.940)
-2.101
(6.365)
-3.139
(6.919)

13.979** 20.998* 31.912 18.851** 22.269
(6.860) (11.144) (21.592) (9.455) (13.715)
-1.219
(3.346)
-11.545
(9.603)
-2.299
(3.060)
-9.081
(7.795)

Observations

505

407

404

445

426

65

61

R2 (1st stage)

0.450

0.497

0.560

0.536

0.559

0.467

0.474

29
0.431

25
0.472

25
0.475

26
0.437

25
0.479

Sargan test (p-value) 0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.03
0.86
0.99
0.80
0.77
0.50
a/ Dependent variable is share of debt liabilities in total liabilities (in percent). Kcont is instrumented w ith binary variables that take the value of
one if the country has a bilateral investment treaty w ith the US in year t (and zero otherw ise); and if the country is in the European Union in year
t (and zero otherw ise). Fincont, Fxreg and Domreg are lagged one year. Domreg is available for 2005 and 2007 only. Constant, and regional and
time effects included in all regressions. Lagged composite index of external vulnerability, (log of) real GDP per capita, and overall institutional
quality index included as controls in all regressions.
b/ Dependent variable is the difference betw een real GDP grow th rate in crisis year and the average grow th rate over past 5 years. Kcont is
instrumented w ith binary variables that take the value of one if the country has a bilateral investment treaty w ith the US in year t (and zero
otherw ise); and if the country is in the European Union in year t (and zero otherw ise). Fincont, and Fxreg are lagged one year. All regressions
include a constant and control variables (grow th in trading partners, terms of trade change, lagged (log of) real GDP per capita, and institutional
quality index.
Notes:All specifications estimated using the instrumental variable-tw o stage least squares approach. Robust standard errors in parentheses; *,
**, and *** indicate signficance at 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.
Kcont is Schindler's (2009) capital controls on inflow index.
Fincont1 is the average of binary variables reflecting restrictions on financial sector's borrow ing abroad, and differential treatment of
Fincont2 is the average of binary variables reflecting restrictions on financial sector's borrow ing abroad, maintenanance of accounts abroad,
Fxreg1 is the average of binary variables reflecting restrictions on financial sector's lending locally in foreign exchange, and differential
Fxreg2 is the average of binary variables reflecting restrictions on financial sector's lending locally in foreign exchange, purchase of locally
Domreg1 is the average of reserve requirements and restrictions on concentration in sectors.
Domreg2 is the average of reserve requirements, restrictions on concentration in specific sectors, and LTV ratios.

29

APPENDIX A: DATA SOURCES
Table A1. List of Countries in the Sample
Algeria

Ecuador

Kazakhstan

Romania

Argentina

Egypt

Korea

Russian Federation

Armenia

El Salvador

Latvia

Serbia, Republic of

Bosnia & Herzegovina

Estonia

Lebanon

South Africa

Brazil

Georgia

Lithuania

Sri Lanka

Bulgaria

Guatemala

Malaysia

Thailand

Chile

Hungary

Mexico

Tunisia

China,P.R.: Mainland

Iceland

Morocco

Turkey

Colombia

India

Pakistan

Ukraine

Costa Rica

Indonesia

Panama

Uruguay

Croatia

Israel

Peru

Venezuela, Rep. Bol.

Czech Rep.

Jamaica

Philippines

Vietnam

Dominican Republic

Jordan

Poland

Table A2. Variable Description and Sources
Variable

Description

Capital controls on the financial sector

Index (betw een 0 (no restrictions)
(restrictions))
Index (betw een 0 (no restrictions)
(restrictions))
Index (betw een 0 (no restrictions)
(restrictions))
Index (betw een 0 (no restrictions)
(restrictions))

Foreign currency regulations
Domestic prudential measures
Capital controls on inflow s index

Obs.

Mean Std. Dev Source

to 1

595

0.4

0.3

to 1

602

0.6

0.3

to 1

78

0.3

0.3

to 1

564

0.4

0.4

Authors' calculations based on IMF's
AREAER
Authors' calculations based on IMF's
AREAER
Authors' calculations based on IMF's
AREAER
Schindler (2009)

Debt liabilities to total external liabilities
FX loans to total loans
Private credit to GDP
Real GDP grow th
Real GDP per capita (Log of)
Foreign reserves to GDP
Exchange rate regime

In percent
In percent
In percent
In percent
In constant 2000 USD
In percent
Binary variable equal to one if fixed
exchange rate regime, and zero otherw ise

691
460
668
692
700
679
700

60.9
37.4
43.2
4.6
7.8
16.3
0.2

17.6
27.8
33.2
3.9
0.9
11.5
0.4

Milesi-Ferretti and Lane (2007)
IMF's External Vulnerability database
IMF's IFS database
IMF's WEO database
World Development Indicators
IMF's WEO database
Ghosh, Ostry and Tsangarides (2010)

Stock market capitalization
Bank return on equity
Institutional quality (ICRG) index

Value of listed shares to GDP
In percent
Index ( betw een 0 (high) to 1 (low ))

593
660
658

0.4
0.1
0.7

0.5
0.2
0.1

Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT)

Binary variable equal to one if a BIT exists
w ith the US, and zero otherw ise

700

0.4

0.5

Beck and Demirguc-Kent (2009)
Beck and Demirguc-Kent (2009)
International Risk Country Guide
(http://w w w .prsgroup.com/ICRG_Method
ology.aspx)
Trade Compliance Center
(http://tcc.export.gov/Trade_Agreements/
All_Trade_Agreements/exp_002699.asp)

