NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TIEBOUT SORTING AND NEIGHBORHOOD STRATIFICATION
Patrick Bayer
Robert McMillan
Working Paper 17364
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17364

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2011

We would like to thank Pat Bajari, Steve Berry, Tim Bresnahan, Fernando Ferreira, Caroline Hoxby,
Tom Nechyba, Steve Rivkin, Jesse Rothstein, Kim Rueben, Holger Sieg, Douglas Staiger, Chris Taber,
and Chris Timmins for helpful discussions about this research. Comments from editor Dennis Epple,
two anonymous referees, Rajashri Chakrabarti and Rich Romano improved the paper considerably.
Financial support is gratefully acknowledged from the US Department of Education, the National
Science Foundation (grant SES-0137289), the Public Policy Institute of California, and SSHRC. All
remaining errors are our own. The research in this paper was conducted while the authors were Special
Sworn Status researchers of the US Census Bureau: thanks to Bert Grider and Arnie Reznek for all
their help. Research results and conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Census Bureau. This paper has been screened to ensure that no confidential
data are revealed. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Patrick Bayer and Robert McMillan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Tiebout Sorting and Neighborhood Stratification
Patrick Bayer and Robert McMillan
NBER Working Paper No. 17364
August 2011
JEL No. H41,I20,R21
ABSTRACT
Tiebout’s classic 1956 paper has strong implications regarding stratification across and within jurisdictions,
predicting in the simplest instance a hierarchy of internally homogeneous communities ordered by
income. Typically, urban areas are less than fully stratified, and the question arises how much departures
from standard Tiebout assumptions contribute to observed within-neighborhood mixing. This paper
quantifies the separate effects on neighborhood stratification of employment geography (via costly
commuting) and preferences for housing attributes. It does so using an equilibrium sorting model,
estimated with rich Census micro-data. Simulations based on the model using credible preference
estimates show that counterfactual reductions in commuting costs lead to marked increases in racial
and education segregation and, to a lesser degree, increases in income segregation, given that households
now find it easier to locate in neighborhoods with like households. While turning off preferences for
housing characteristics increases racial segregation, especially for blacks, doing so reduces income
segregation, indicating that heterogeneity in the housing stock serves to stratify households based on
ability-to-pay. Further, we show that differences in housing also help accentuate differences in the
consumption of local amenities.

Patrick Bayer
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
patrick.bayer@duke.edu
Robert McMillan
University of Toronto
Department of Economics
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
mcmillan@chass.utoronto.ca

1

INTRODUCTION

Tiebout’s classic 1956 paper emphasized the efficiency of decentralized public goods provision in
a system of local jurisdictions. In doing so, it provided a provocative response to Samuelson’s
seminal 1954 article, which had voiced skepticism as to the efficacy of decentralized systems for
providing public goods. Yet beyond its enduring relevance to the debate about public goods
provision, Tiebout’s paper has also served as an immensely fertile starting point for economists
interested in understanding endogenous neighborhood stratification in an urban setting, motivated
in part by concerns that excessive segregation may have adverse welfare consequences.1
Tiebout’s basic treatment was highly stylized – in his words, “extreme.” It focused on a
simple setting in which consumers were “fully mobile” (his Assumption 1), moving costlessly to
their preferred jurisdiction when choosing among a large number of competing jurisdictions
(Assumption 3), which differed only in the exogenous public goods and taxation packages they
offered. With the neighborhood segregation theme in mind, Tiebout’s stylized theory2 has strong
implications regarding stratification across and within jurisdictions. For example, in the simplest
case where households are heterogeneous only in terms of their income, a hierarchy of internally
homogeneous communities ordered by income is predicted.
In practice, urban areas tend to exhibit varying degrees of within-neighborhood mixing,
and it is natural to trace this discrepancy to departures from the standard Tiebout assumptions.3
The potential list of such departures is long.

But given the burden in Tiebout’s theory –

preferences being revealed through a process of ‘voting with feet’ – the character of household
preferences and the role of mobility provide an obvious starting point. In terms of the former,
household tastes when making residential choices are likely to vary according to the household’s
own characteristics (education, income, race and family size, for instance), and this inherent
preference heterogeneity will tend to lead households in a given neighborhood to differ in terms
of, say, income.4

Household tastes will also typically depend on a whole range of choice

attributes – housing characteristics, local amenities, the characteristics of neighbors, geographic
1

Benabou (1993) and Cutler and Glaeser (1997) provide well-known developments of this theme.
The informality of Tiebout’s original presentation has prompted an important literature seeking to place
the rather implicit ‘theory’ on more solid foundations. See, for instance, Bewley (1981).
3
The development of richer theoretical models of systems of jurisdictions has been a central preoccupation
in local public finance over the past three decades. Notable here is the work of Epple and coauthors, who
show in a series of papers how housing and endogenously determined public goods can be incorporated
into rigorous multi-community equilibrium models with mobile households.
4
On this point, Epple and Platt (1998) show theoretically that some degree of within-jurisdiction income
mixing can arise when households are heterogeneous both in terms of income and tastes for public goods.
2

1

convenience – rather than just different expenditure and revenue patterns across communities (as
in Tiebout’s Assumption 2). The distribution of housing characteristics, for example, will often
vary markedly across a metropolitan area, given the complexity of local zoning and the durability
of the housing stock, and this may serve to sort heterogeneous households into given
communities.

Likewise geography: while Tiebout abstracted from “restrictions due to

employment opportunities,”5 the geographic distribution of jobs combined with imperfect
mobility (non-zero commuting costs) should help spread households out across the urban area
and contribute to within-community mixing. Simply put, households may prefer a house in a
neighborhood close to the workplace, especially if commutes are costly, even if it means trading
off against other attributes such as living with similar neighbors.
The goal of this paper is to quantify the separate effects on observed residential mixing of
employment geography (via the disutility of commuting) and heterogeneous preferences for
housing.

Doing so is of clear interest, given concerns about the adverse consequences of

sociodemographic stratification across neighborhoods.6

Yet such quantification is far from

straightforward, not least because it requires the researcher to assess the extent of neighborhood
stratification in a counterfactual environment.
One general approach to conducting such counterfactuals – and few viable alternatives
come to mind – would start with a realistic specification of the preferences that underlie the
existing pattern of residential sorting, and then simulate a counterfactual change in household
preferences, tracing the impact of this change on stratification and other outcomes in the
counterfactual equilibrium. To implement this kind of notional experiment, one would need
credible preference estimates, along with a coherent model of the sorting process that allows
counterfactual equilibria to be simulated.
In this paper, we apply an estimation-simulation approach set out in two prior papers that
attempts to track this type of notional counterfactual exercise. Specifically, we combine the
equilibrium sorting model in Bayer, McMillan and Rueben (2011) and an approach to estimating
sorting models with rich preference heterogeneity presented in Bayer, Ferreira and McMillan
(2007) in order to quantify possible determinants of residential stratification.

Our general

approach builds on two strands of literature. A large body of theoretical research, including
papers by Epple, Filimon and Romer (1984, 1993), Epple and Romano (1996, 1998), Benabou
In this instance, the type space is partitioned in equilibrium into a series of diagonal slices, implying that
the across-neighborhood income hierarchy still obtains, conditioning on tastes.
5
“Restrictions due to employment opportunities are not considered” (Tiebout’s Assumption 4).

2

(1993, 1996), Anas and Kim (1996), Fernandez and Rogerson (1996, 1998), and Nechyba (1999,
2000), has developed equilibrium sorting models, using them to analyze the way that
interdependent individual decisions in the housing market aggregate up to determine the
equilibrium structure of a metropolitan area. More recently, a related line of research has sought
to take these models to the data. Epple and Sieg (1999) develop an estimator for the equilibrium
sorting model of Epple, Filimon, and Romer, providing the first unified treatment of theory and
empirics in the literature. In the same vein, Sieg et al. (2004) use this approach to explore the
general equilibrium impacts of air quality improvements in the Los Angeles Basin. And Ferreyra
(2007) develops an estimator building on the work of Nechyba, using this to simulate the effects
of school vouchers in an equilibrium setting.
By way of a quick overview of the elements of our approach, we start with an
equilibrium framework in which households choose residential locations from the set of available
houses in the metropolitan area, given the employment locations of household heads, in order to
maximize their utility. In terms of locational preferences, the model permits a considerable
amount of household taste heterogeneity, with tastes being allowed to vary over a wide range of
housing and neighborhood characteristics, including those that are endogenously determined
through the sorting process; tastes are also allowed to vary with a range of observable household
characteristics. Neighborhood residential compositions are endogenous, and house prices adjust
to equate demand with fixed supply. In equilibrium, no household can gain from moving and all
local housing markets clear.
We estimate the sorting model using an econometric approach set out in Bayer et al.
(2007). This introduces unobserved neighborhood attributes into McFadden’s (1978) discretechoice housing demand model. Doing so brings an important endogeneity problem to the fore, as
prices and neighborhood compositions – key choice characteristics – are likely to be correlated
with the neighborhood unobservables. To address the potential endogeneity of these endogenous
choice attributes, we develop instruments for price based on exogenous choice characteristics,
here following Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (1995); and to account for the potential endogeneity
of school quality and sorting-dependent sociodemographics, we further extend the boundary
discontinuity approach introduced by Black (1999), making use of sharp changes in school
quality and sociodemographics in the vicinity of school attendance zone boundaries.
In taking the model to the data, we make use of restricted-access Census microdata on a
very large and representative sample (1-in-7) of households in the Bay Area. The long form of
6

It is worth adding that job location is given as the single most important factor influencing residential
choices in the American Housing Survey, and there has been limited recent research examining the effects

3

the Census provides detailed information about a wide set of household characteristics, including
education, income, age, family structure, and race. It also provides information about the chosen
housing unit – its size, when built, whether owned, and more. Because the restricted-access
version of the Census we are using specifies residential locations down to the Census block, we
can merge in a great deal of additional data, relating to local amenities, land use and the
characteristics of immediate neighbors. We can also construct a boundary sub-sample, based on
distance to the closest school attendance zone boundary, in order to implement the boundary
identification approach mentioned above. Particularly valuable for our purposes is the fact that
the restricted-access version of the Census also includes information on places of work down to
the block. This affords a very detailed picture of the employment geography of the metropolitan
area, which we use to anchor household location decisions, taking place of work as given.7
Estimates of the model provide a rich characterization of heterogeneous household
preferences for a variety of housing and neighborhood characteristics, including local public
goods such as school quality and crime, as well as the characteristics of neighbors. Applying the
identification strategies just referred to yields reasonable estimates of household willingness-topay for these choice attributes. As one might expect, households with higher education levels and
incomes are willing to pay more for better schools, as are households with children, though the
extent of the heterogeneity in willingness to pay is rather muted.

While some choice

characteristics are likely to be ranked similarly by all households, the rankings of others might be
expected to vary depending on a household’s own characteristics (their race, for example). In
line with this, we find evidence of strong racial interactions in the utility function, with
households of the same race showing a strong willingness-to-pay to live with like neighbors.
In combination with these rich preference estimates, our equilibrium model serves as a
useful device for exploring the implications of changes in model primitives for residential
stratification and household consumption levels. In that vein, the main analysis in this paper
consists of a series of counterfactual simulations intended to shed light on the factors that
contribute in practice to observed residential mixing. Following on from the above discussion,
we focus on the possible effects of employment geography combined with costly commuting
(taking a queue from Tiebout directly) and also heterogeneity in preferences for housing. We
explore the former by counterfactually reducing households’ estimated disutility of commuting to
work, first cutting the estimated disutility in half and then switching it off entirely, in both cases
while holding the distribution of employment in the study area fixed. And we shed light on the
of employment geography on residential segregation, an exception being Bajari and Kahn (2005).

4

latter by counterfactually switching off household preferences for housing characteristics while
keeping the geographic distribution of the existing housing stock fixed.
Our first set of simulations shows that counterfactual reductions in the disutility of
commuting lead to marked increases in racial and education segregation and, to a lesser degree,
increases in income segregation, as households now find it easier to form neighborhoods with like
households.

While turning off preferences for housing characteristics increases education

segregation and racial segregation, especially for blacks, it actually reduces income segregation,
indicating that the non-uniform distribution of housing characteristics serves to stratify
households based on ability to pay. Further, we show that differences in housing help accentuate
differences in the consumption of local amenities, our estimates providing a sense of the
magnitudes involved.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Sections 2-4, we provide a brief
overview of the approach we apply for assessing the relevant counterfactuals. Specifically, the
next section sets out the equilibrium sorting model and its main properties, drawing on the
comprehensive treatment in Bayer et al. (2011); the estimation of the model, based on Bayer et
al. (2007), is described in Section 3; Section 4 describes the detailed Census microdata drawn
from the Bay Area briefly, along with the model estimates. Sections 5 and 6 represent the core of
the paper, Section 5 summarizing our simulation approach and presenting benchmark measures of
fit, and Section 6 describing results from a series of counterfactual simulations that shed light on
the determinants of residential mixing. Section 7 concludes.
2

THEORETICAL MODEL

The counterfactual simulations at the heart of the paper make use of a version of the equilibrium
residential sorting model developed in Bayer et al. (2011). In order to provide a self-contained
account of the relevant ingredients that feed into the simulation exercise, we begin with a brief
outline of the equilibrium model.

This model combines two key elements: the household

residential location choice problem and a market-clearing condition. In terms of the former,
households have heterogeneous preferences defined over housing and neighborhood attributes in
a flexible way.8 The model also allows housing prices and neighborhood sociodemographic
compositions to be determined in equilibrium, through market-clearing.
7

It is feasible, if more challenging, to further endogenize the place of work in the household choice
process. Doing so is beyond the scope of the current analysis.
8
It is important to point out that this flexibility is made possible because we abstract from issues related to
local politics. As Epple, Filimon, and Romer (1993) note, incorporating local politics into models of

5

The Residential Location Decision.

We model the residential location decision of each

household as a discrete choice of a single residence from a set of house types available in the
market.

To explain the relevant notation, let Xh represent the observable characteristics of

housing choice h, including characteristics of the house itself (e.g., the house’s age and size), its
tenure status (whether rented or owned), and the characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood
(e.g., local land use and topography). We use Zh to represent the average sociodemographic
characteristics of the corresponding neighborhood, writing this separately from the other housing
and neighborhood attributes to make explicit the fact that these sociodemographics are
determined in equilibrium. Let ph denote the price of housing choice h, and let dhi denote the
distance from residence h to the primary work location of household i (where we take that work
location as given).
Each household chooses its residence h to maximize its indirect utility function Vhi:

(1)

.

The error structure of the indirect utility function is divided into a correlated component
associated with each housing choice that is valued the same by all households, !h, and an
individual-specific term, "ih, each household i drawing a vector of taste shocks, one for each
housing type. A useful interpretation of !h is that it captures the unobserved quality of each
housing choice, including any unobserved quality associated with its neighborhood.
We define a household type based on K observable household characteristics. Each
household i’s valuation of given choice characteristics is allowed to vary with its own observable
characteristics, zi, including education, income, race, employment status, and household
composition. Specifically, we let each parameter associated with housing and neighborhood
characteristics and price, #ij, for j ! {X, Z, p, d}, vary with a household’s own characteristics
according to:

residential sorting requires restrictions to be placed on preferences in order to guarantee the existence of an
equilibrium. Accordingly, recent papers by Epple and Sieg (1999) and Epple, Romer and Sieg (2001)
estimate equilibrium models that include voting over the level of public goods, restricting households to
have shared rankings over a single public goods index. We view our model as having a comparative rather
than absolute advantage over the papers in that line of research, suitable for exploring research questions,
such as those related to segregation, where a vertical restriction is less appealing, or for use in an

6

(2)

,

with equation (2) describing household i’s preference for choice characteristic j.
This specification of the utility function gives rise to a horizontal model of sorting in
which household preferences may vary in an unrestricted way over each choice characteristic,
including

housing

features,

commuting

distance,

school

quality

and

neighborhood

sociodemographic characteristics. This contrasts with vertical models, which restrict households
to have preferences over a single locational index, thereby constraining households to have the
same preference ordering across locations. The additional flexibility of the horizontal model is
especially relevant for this paper as it is the magnitude of the heterogeneity in preferences for
various locational factors (including housing and commuting distance) that will determine the
extent of stratification across neighborhoods.
Characterizing the Housing Market. We assume that the housing market can be fully
characterized by a set of housing types that is a subset of the full set of available houses in the
study area, reflecting the fact that we are working with a 1-in-7 sample of the universe of houses
in the Bay Area. Let the supply of housing of type h be given by Sh, with all houses being
occupied in equilibrium. We assume that each household observed in the sample represents a
continuum of households with the same observable characteristics;9 accordingly, the distribution
of idiosyncratic tastes "ih maps into a set of choice probabilities that characterize the distribution
of housing choices that would result for the continuum of households with a given set of observed
characteristics.
Given the household’s problem described in equations (1)-(2), household i chooses
housing type h if the utility that it receives from this choice exceeds the utility that it receives
from all other possible house choices – that is, when

(3)

where Wih includes all of the non-idiosyncratic components of the utility function Vih. As the
inequalities in (3) imply, the probability that a household chooses any particular choice depends
institutional setting as in California, where Proposition 13 leaves almost no discretion over property tax
rates or the level of public goods spending at the local level.
9
This assumption facilitates the proof of the existence of an equilibrium in the model.

7

in general on the characteristics of the full set of possible house types. Thus the probability Pih
that household i chooses housing type h can be written as a function of the full vectors of housing
and neighborhood characteristics (both observed and unobserved) and prices, given by {X, Z, p,
"}, as well as the household’s own characteristics zi:10

(4)

.

Aggregating the probabilities in equation (4) over all observed households yields the
predicted demand for each housing type h, Dh:

(5)

.

In order for the housing market to clear, the demand for houses of type h must equal the supply of
such houses, and so:

(6)

.

Given the decentralized nature of the housing market, prices are assumed to adjust in order to
clear the market. The implications of the market clearing condition defined in equation (6) for
prices are very standard, with excess demand for a housing type causing price to be bid up and
excess supply leading to a fall in price. Given the indirect utility function defined in equation (1)
and a fixed set of housing and neighborhood attributes, Bayer, McMillan, and Rueben (2011)
show that a unique set of prices (up to a scale) clears the market.
Given that some neighborhood attributes are endogenously determined by the sorting
process itself, we define a sorting equilibrium as a set of residential location decisions and a
vector of housing prices such that the housing market clears and each household makes its
optimal location decision given the location decisions of all other households. In equilibrium, the
vector of neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics along with the corresponding vector of
market-clearing prices must give rise to choice probabilities in equation (4) that aggregate back

10

For the purposes of characterizing the equilibrium properties of the model, we include an individual’s
employment location in zi and the residential location in Xh.

8

up to the same vector of neighborhood sociodemographics.11 Whether this model gives rise to
multiple equilibria depends on the distributions of preferences and available housing choices as
well as the utility function parameters.
equilibrium is unique a priori.

In general, it is not possible to establish that the

However, estimation of the model does not require the

computation of an equilibrium nor uniqueness more generally, as we describe in the next section.
3

ESTIMATION

Estimation of the model follows a two-stage procedure closely related to that in Berry,
Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995).

This section outlines the estimation procedure; a rigorous

presentation is contained in Bayer et al. (2007).
It is helpful in describing the estimation approach to introduce some additional notation.
In particular, we rewrite the indirect utility function as:

(7)
where
(8)
and
(9)

.

In equations (7) and (8), $h captures the portion of utility provided by housing type h that is
common to all households, and in (9), k indexes household characteristics. When the household
characteristics included in the model are constructed to have mean zero, $h is the mean indirect
utility provided by housing choice h. The unobservable component of $h, !h, captures the portion
of unobserved preferences for housing choice h that is correlated across households, while "ih
represents unobserved preferences over and above this shared component. (In equation (8), the
term %bh represents a vector of boundary fixed effects, described below.)
The first step of the estimation procedure is equivalent to a Maximum Likelihood
estimator applied to the individual location decisions, taking prices and neighborhood
11

Bayer, McMillan, and Rueben (2011) establish the existence of a sorting equilibrium as long as (i) the
indirect utility function shown in equation (2) is decreasing in housing prices for all households; (ii)

9

sociodemographic compositions as given. This returns estimates of the heterogeneous parameters
in & and mean indirect utilities, $h. The estimator is based simply on maximizing the probability
that the model correctly matches each household observed in the sample with its chosen house
type. In particular, for any combination of the heterogeneous parameters in & and mean indirect
utilities, $h, the model predicts the probability that each household i chooses house type h. We
assume that "hi is drawn from the Type 1 extreme value distribution, in which case this
probability can be written:
(10)

Maximizing the probability that each household makes its correct housing choice gives rise to the
following quasi-log-likelihood function:
(11)

,

where Iih is an indicator variable that equals 1 if household i chooses house type h in the data and
0 otherwise. The first stage of the estimation procedure then consists of searching over the
parameters in & and the vector of mean indirect utilities to maximize .
The Endogeneity of School Quality and Neighborhood Sociodemographic Composition.
Having estimated the vector of mean indirect utilities in the first stage of the estimation
procedure, the second stage involves decomposing $ into observable and unobservable
components according to the regression equation (8).12 In estimating equation (8), important
endogeneity problems need to be confronted. First, to the extent that house prices partly capture
house and neighborhood quality unobserved to the econometrician, so the price variable will be
endogenous, and estimation via least squares will lead to price coefficients biased towards zero,
producing misleading willingness-to-pay estimates for a whole range of choice characteristics.
This issue arises in the context of any differentiated products demand estimation and we follow
the approach described in Bayer et al. (2007) to instrument for price.

indirect utility is a continuous function of neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics; and (iii) " is
drawn from a continuous density function.
12
Notice that the set of observed residential choices provides no information that distinguishes the
components of $ . That is, however $ is broken into components, the effect on the probabilities shown in
equation (10) is identical.

10

A second identification issue involves the correlation of neighborhood sociodemographic
characteristics Z and school quality with unobserved housing and neighborhood quality, !h. To
properly estimate preferences in the face of this endogeneity problem, we adapt an appealing
technique previously developed by Black (1999). Black’s strategy makes use of a sample of
houses near school attendance zone boundaries, estimating a hedonic price regression that
includes boundary fixed effects. Intuitively, the idea is to compare houses in the same local
neighborhood but on opposite sides of the boundary, exploiting the discontinuity in the right to
attend a given school. Differences in valuation will then reflect differences in school quality,
controlling for other neighborhood characteristics (both observed and unobserved).
As shown in Bayer et al. (2007), however, households clearly sort with respect to these
boundaries. Thus, while the boundary fixed effects are likely to control well for differences in
unobserved fixed factors, neighborhood sociodemographics are likely to vary discontinuously at
the boundary. This is important: it implies that boundary fixed effects isolate variation in both
school quality and neighborhood sociodemographics in a small region in which unobserved fixed
features (e.g., access to the transportation network) are likely to vary only slightly, thereby
providing an appealing way to account for the correlation of both school quality and
neighborhood sociodemographics with unobservable neighborhood quality. The approach thus
allows us to treat a range of local public goods as endogenous.
We incorporate school attendance zone boundary fixed effects

when estimating

equation (8). In particular, we create a series of indicator variables for each Census block that
equal one if the block is within a given distance of each unique school attendance zone boundary
in the metropolitan area. Bayer et al. (2007) provide extensive descriptive evidence regarding the
significant extent that the school quality and neighborhood demographics vary at these
boundaries and, important for the identification approach, the essentially continuous way that
other housing and neighborhood attributes run through the boundary.
4

DATA and ESTIMATES

The analysis uses restricted-access Census data from 1990 that combine the detailed individual,
household, and housing variables found in the public-use version of the Census with information
about the location of individual residences and workplaces at a very disaggregate level. We use
data from six contiguous counties in the San Francisco Bay Area: Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin,
San Mateo, San Francisco, and Santa Clara – a sample of 242,100 households drawn from over
39,000 Census blocks.
11

The Census provides a wealth of data on the individuals in the sample – race, age,
educational attainment, income from various sources, household size and structure, occupation,
and employment location. In addition, it provides a variety of housing characteristics: whether
the unit is owned or rented, the corresponding rent or owner-reported value, number of rooms,
number of bedrooms, type of structure, and the age of the building. We use these housing
characteristics directly, and also construct neighborhood variables, such as neighborhood racial,
education and income distributions, based on the households within the same Census block group
(a Census region containing approximately 500 housing units). We merge additional data
describing local conditions with each house record, constructing variables related to crime rates,
land use, local schools, topography, and urban density. The list of the principal housing and
neighborhood variables used in the analysis, along with means and standard deviations, is given
in the first two columns of Table 1.13
School Boundaries. In order to implement the boundary discontinuity design, we gathered school
attendance zone maps for as many elementary schools as possible in the Bay Area, for the period
around the 1990 Census. Our final attendance zone sample consists of 195 elementary schools –
just under a third of the total number in the Bay Area. From this boundary sample, we excluded
portions of boundaries coinciding with school district boundaries, city boundaries, or large roads,
since they could potentially confound our identification strategy.
For our main boundary analysis, we focus on houses in all Census blocks that are within
0.20 miles of the closest school attendance zone boundary. The average distance to the boundary
for this subsample is thus quite a lot smaller than 0.20 miles. For comparison (results not
reported here), we also analyzed a further subsample, consisting of houses assigned to Census
blocks within 0.10 miles of the closest attendance zone boundary.

Although the 0.10-mile

subsample includes approximately half the number of observations, it provides a closer
approximation to the ideal comparison of houses on the opposite sides of the same street, though
in separate attendance zones. Results applying this tighter sample are very similar, if somewhat
less precise.
Table 1 displays descriptive statistics for various samples related to the boundaries. The
first two columns report means and standard deviations for the full sample while the third column
reports means for the sample of houses within 0.2 miles of the closest school attendance zone

13

For each of these measures, a detailed description of the process by which the original data were assigned
to each house is provided in the Data Appendix to Bayer et al. (2007).

12

boundaries.14 Comparing the first column to the third column of the table, the houses near school
attendance zone boundaries are reasonably representative of those in the Bay Area as a whole.
The fourth and fifth columns report means for houses within 0.2 miles of a boundary, comparing
houses on the high versus low average test score side of the each boundary; the seventh column
reporting associated t-tests for the difference in means. Comparing these differences reveals that
houses on the high side cost $18,700 more (on a mean of $250,000) and are assigned to schools
with test scores that are 74 points higher on average. Moreover, houses on the high quality side
of the boundary are more likely to be inhabited by white households and households with more
education and income. These types of across-boundary differences in sociodemographic
composition are what one would expect if households sort on the basis of preferences for school
quality. Given that other housing characteristics are reasonably smooth across these boundaries,
we expect the use of boundary fixed effects to control well for much of the variation in
unobserved housing and neighborhood quality in the boundary region, thereby giving rise to
accurate estimates of mean preferences for neighborhood sociodemographics and school quality.
We now turn to the complete set of preference estimates.
Preference Estimates
The estimation of the full model returns over 150 parameter estimates that characterize
heterogeneous household preferences for housing and neighborhood attributes as well as
commuting distance. While we presented some aspects of these parameter estimates in Bayer et
al. (2007), the focus of that paper was more narrowly on the impact of including boundary fixed
effects on the estimates of preferences for school quality and neighborhood demographics.15 A
much richer set of parameters is relevant for this paper, however, as the counterfactuals that we
conduct below consider the effects of employment geography and heterogeneous housing
preferences on the extent of residential stratification. To that end, we present a much broader set
of parameter estimates here. Accordingly, Table 2 reports estimates of mean preferences for key
housing and neighborhood characteristics for two specifications of equation (8). In estimating
equation (8), we report results here for a specification that restricts the sample to houses within
0.2 miles of boundaries.16
14

Table 1 is taken directly from Bayer et al. (2007). We provide it here to make the current description of
the approach self-contained.
15
In Bayer et al. (2007), we provide a detailed discussion of the impact of instrumenting for price. Doing
so is essential in order for the willingness-to-pay estimates to be reasonable. Otherwise, the price
coefficient tends to be biased towards zero, inflating all WTP measures.
16
We show in Bayer et al. (2007) that these results are robust to changes in the distance that is used,
reporting, for example, a series of results for 0.1 mile boundaries.

13

The second column shows the impact of including boundary fixed effects on the
estimates of mean preferences. Comparing these columns reveals a pattern of results that one
would expect if boundary fixed effects control in part for unobserved neighborhood quality and
unobserved quality is positively correlated with neighborhood income and education and
negatively correlated with the fraction of non-white households. Key parameter estimates include
a marginal willingness-to-pay (MWTP) of just under $100 per month for newly constructed
housing (relative to older housing) and for each additional room and just over $50 per month for
avoiding each additional mile of commuting distance.17
Given our subsequent simulation exercises, it is important that housing preferences and
the disutility of commutes be credibility identified.

While we do not develop tailor-made

identification strategies for these two sets of preference parameters, we would argue that the
relevant parameter estimates are reasonable, for three main reasons: First, our very rich restrictedaccess Census data provide us with a wealth of information, in this case on housing features for a
very large sample (1-in-7) of all housing units in the Bay Area, and also very detailed information
about actual commutes for a very large sample of workers. There is no equivalent micro data set
with the same coverage. Second, the detailed geographic information allows us to apply two
identification approaches that help account for the endogeneity of confounding local
unobservables, likely to be a concern for estimates of housing characteristics and commuting,
among other attributes. In this respect, our estimates are an improvement on prior estimates in
the literature. Third, our choice model allows us to go beyond hedonic estimates that ignore
heterogeneity, based on the revealed pattern of choices by a huge sample of households in our
data set.
Following on from that point, Table 3 reports the implied estimates of the heterogeneity
in MWTP for a wide variety of housing and neighborhood attributes for our preferred
specification, which includes boundary fixed effects. The estimates of the heterogeneity in the
MWTP for neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics reveal that while all households
prefer to live in higher-income neighborhoods, conditional on neighborhood income households
prefer to self-segregate on the basis of both race and education. In particular, the estimates imply
that college-educated households are willing to pay $58 per month more than those without a
17

That the estimated cost of commuting increases with the inclusion of boundary fixed effects (BFEs) is
driven by the fact that this estimate is very sensitive to the estimated mean price coefficient, which roughly
doubles in magnitude when boundary fixed effects are included. In general, the price coefficient is biased
upwards (less negative than it should be) because price is positively correlated with unobserved quality.
That the price coefficient becomes significantly more negative with the inclusion of BFEs is likely due to
the fact that the BFEs help deal with some residual correlation of the price instruments and unobserved
neighborhood quality.

14

college degree to live in a neighborhood that has 10 percent more college-educated households.
When combined with the estimated mean MWTP of $10 per month reported in the first row, this
estimate implies that households at each level of educational attainment prefer neighbors with
like education levels: while college-educated households would pay an addition $32 per month to
live in a neighborhood that had 10 percent more college-educated households, households
without a college degree would actually need compensating to live in a neighborhood with 10
percent more college-educated neighbors, to the tune of $26 per month.
Similarly, the heterogeneity estimates imply that blacks are willing to pay $98 more per
month than whites to live in a neighborhood that has 10 percent more black versus white
households. The mean MWTP for such an increase is -$10.5 per month, primarily reflecting the
negative valuation of the white majority. Thus $98 is the difference between the positive MWTP
of black households for this change and the negative MWTP of white households, indicating that
households have strong self-segregating racial preferences.18
In contrast to education and race, neighborhood income is a normal good for all
households, perhaps in part because higher income neighborhoods are better able to maintain
their properties. Not surprisingly, households with children have stronger preferences for larger
and older houses as well as higher quality schools and the demand for owner-occupancy increases
sharply with income, education and for white and especially Asian households.19 The latter
results are likely due in large part to the relative wealth of white and Asian households compared
to that of their black and Hispanic counterparts.
5

SIMULATION PRELIMINARIES

Having laid out the necessary background to the simulation approach (the model, estimation
procedure, data and preference estimates), we now turn to the simulations that make up the

18

It is also important to point out that these interactions pick up any direct preferences for living near
others of the same race (e.g., a recent immigrant from China may want to interact with neighbors who also
have immigrated from China) as well as any unobservable neighborhood or housing amenities valued more
strongly by households of this group (e.g., recent immigrants from China may have similar tastes for shops,
restaurants, and other neighborhood amenities).
19
That the mean and heterogeneity in estimated willingness to pay is small for school quality relative to
neighborhood socioeconomic characteristics such as education and income may reflect the fact that
households face a difficult identification problem when attempting to distinguish the value added by a
school from its socioeconomic distribution. Given the correlation of the published average test scores with
socioeconomic characteristics, these scores may do little more than serve as a signal of the underlying
socioeconomic composition of the school and neighborhood. It may also be that much of what households
and parents are really willing to pay for when they speak about paying for better schools is the increased
education and income of the peer group in the local school and neighborhood.

15

paper’s primary contribution. We begin this section by describing our simulation procedure,
before discussing the construction of the exposure rate and consumption measures that constitute
the model output. We then compare results from the benchmark (‘pre-experiment’) simulations
with the sample to provide an indication of model fit. The results from the pre-experiment
benchmarks also serve as a useful point of comparison when assessing the counterfactual
simulation results in the next section.
Simulation Procedure
The basic structure of the computation of a new equilibrium consists of a ‘price’ loop
within a larger ‘sociodemographics’ loop. Having changed some primitive in the model, we first
calculate a new set of prices that clears the market. Here, Berry (1994) ensures that there is such
a unique set of market-clearing prices (up to scale); in addition, Berry et al. (1995) provide a
quick means of computing the market-clearing price vector.
We then take the new prices and the initial sociodemographic compositions of each
neighborhood and go on to calculate the probability that each household chooses each housing
type. Aggregating these choices to the neighborhood level, we also compute the corresponding
predicted sociodemographic composition of each neighborhood. We then replace the initial
neighborhood sociodemographic compositions with these new measures and start the price loop
again, calculating a new set of market clearing prices given these updated neighborhood
sociodemographic

measures.

We

continue

this

process

until

the

neighborhood

sociodemographics converge.20 The household location decisions corresponding to the final
sociodemographic measures, along with the vector of housing prices that clears the market, then
constitute the new equilibrium, based on which we construct a variety of predicted segregation
and consumption measures.
Pre-experiment Benchmark and Sample
As noted above, equilibria are not computed during the estimation process. This is
important for the feasibility of our estimator, given that the class of models that ours falls into do
not have generically unique equilibria. This point also matters from the perspective of carrying
out simulations. Specifically, it is unlikely that the prices and neighborhood compositions seen in
the data constitute an equilibrium in the context of our sorting model, given the preference
20

In one variant of the simulation code, we allow school quality and crime rates to adjust further in light of
changing local demographics, allowing for further compounding. In the simulation results reported in this
paper, we close down this channel of adjustment. We view this as a conservative choice that will lead us to
understate the effects of changes in primitives on stratification.

16

estimates we recover – this is something we are able to check computationally. For the purposes
of carrying out simulations, it is therefore useful to start from a comparable benchmark in order to
provide an appropriate comparison with subsequent counterfactuals.21 To this end, we take the
full set of model estimates and the simple structure of the equilibrium model, and slightly perturb
tastes, say, over commuting.

This sets in motion changes in market-clearing prices and

neighborhood compositions until a corresponding equilibrium is found, which – in many
instances – is close to the non-equilibrium predictions of the estimated model.22
Based on this ‘pre-experiment’ equilibrium, it is straightforward to compute predicted
measures of neighborhood stratification and the consumption of amenities for households with
given sociodemographic characteristics; and these can be compared to the corresponding sample
measures, as well as segregation and consumption measures predicted by the model directly,
without imposing any equilibrium requirement.23 The presentation of the results from the ‘preexperiment’ benchmark follows the same format as the results from the counterfactual
simulations, so it is worth commenting on the general structure: for each equilibrium, we compute
exposure rate measures of neighborhood segregation and predicted consumption measures for
housing and neighborhood amenities, separately for households depending on their education,
income, and race.24 We now describe the construction of these measures.
For our education categorization, we assign households to three exhaustive, mutually
exclusive categories, based on the educational attainment of the household head: high school or
less, some college, and college degree or more. For income, we simply assign households to one
of the four income quartiles, where the relevant cutoffs are set based on the sample income
distribution.

And for race, we categorize households into one of three mutually exclusive,

exhaustive racial groups, again based on the reported race of the household head – white, black
and ‘other’ races (defined as non-white and non-black, combining Asians, Hispanics, and native
Americans). In contrast to education and income, which have the character of vertical attributes,
21

We note that multiplicity arises because of the presence of social interactions in the utility function – that
is, the potential dependence of household tastes on the characteristics of neighbors. None of the
simulations we report involve shutting down these interactions, and so there is no guarantee that the
counterfactual equilibria that we describe are unique.
22
On the multiplicity point, we have experimented with perturbing the model by adding noise to covariates
to see whether the equilibria that emerge are markedly different. We find that they are not. Based on these
robustness exercises, multiplicity appears not to be a major concern, which we attribute to the high degree
of smoothness in the model.
23
We do not report segregation and consumption measures based on these simple model predictions here.
For the most part, they are very close to the corresponding sample quantities, consistent with the close fit of
the econometric model to the data.
24
We also computed segregation as well as ‘amenity’ consumption measures on the basis of household
education (whether the household head has a college degree or not) combined with an indicator denoting
children present in the household – thus 2! 2 categories. These results are available upon request.

17

race introduces potentially interesting heterogeneity in household choices across race, which we
will examine below.
Exposure rates provide intuitive measures of the degree of neighborhood stratification (in
this application, at the block group level) faced by households in a particular cell, whether
defined by education, income or race. Take, for instance, a given household in a given education
cell. Based on the model predictions, the probability mass associated with that household is
spread over housing units in the sample, and it is possible to construct the implied
sociodemographic (in this case, educational) composition of each neighborhood that the
household is associated with, having netted out the probability mass associated with the
household’s own presence. Averaging these predicted neighborhood compositions, using the
household’s probabilities across neighborhoods as weights, it is possible to form the predicted
average neighborhood compositions for the given household, based on the full set of choices in
the choice set. In turn, we can average across all like households – for instance, households in the
bottom education category – to determine the education exposure rates for households in that
category. We construct analogous exposure rates for households with some college or a college
degree, and separately, on the basis of household income and race.
For comparison, we also construct sample exposure rate measures, separately on the basis
of education and income and race. Here, for our sample education exposure rates, we simply
record the block group neighborhood education composition for a household in a given category,
then average the neighborhood compositions over all like households.

Both for the pre-

experiment and the sample, we obtain measures of the average neighborhood education
compositions that households in each education category are exposed to, giving a total of nine
exposure rates. These are arranged in columns of three, each column corresponding to the
education compositions – either predicted or sample – for households falling into the education
category denoted by the column heading. In the corresponding case of income, the relevant
matrix of income quartile exposure rates – again, either predicted or sample – consists of 16
numbers, in four columns of four. For race, the relevant exposure rate matrices each have nine
elements – three individual race categories by three neighborhood racial proportions.
Table 4 shows education exposure rates for the sample (uppermost panel) and the preexperiment predictions (bottom panel), with Table 5 showing corresponding income exposure
rates, and Table 6 showing racial exposure rates. To be clear about how one should read the
tables, the top panel of Table 4 shows sample education exposure rates. The top left-most entry,
0.431, indicates that in the sample, the typical household with no more than a high school
education is found in a neighborhood (here, a census block group) in which 43.1 percent of

18

households has no more than a high school education. Looking down the first column, the
remainder of the typical neighbors that less educated households are exposed to consists of
households with some college (22.5 percent), and households with a college degree (34.4
percent). The column entries necessarily sum to one.
The middle panel in the table gives the overall education distribution for the sample for
comparison: 33.8 percent of households have at most a high school education, 22.3 percent have
some college, and 43.8 percent have a college degree or more. It is clear that there is some
degree of education segregation in the Bay Area sample, at least at the top and bottom ends of the
education spectrum, with households tending to locate in neighborhoods where more households
of their own education level are found, relative to the no-stratification case in which the education
composition of all neighborhoods simply equaled the overall sample proportions. Thus, highly
educated households are, on average, located in neighborhoods that are 51.8 percent highly
educated (i.e. in the top education category), as opposed to 43.8 percent highly educated if there
was ‘even spreading.’ This sample over-exposure comes at the expense of households in the two
lower education categories, but especially households in the bottom education category (26.6
percent average exposure in contrast to the overall 33.8 percent). At the same time, it is worth
noting that there is far from complete education stratification in the sample. Households in each
education category tend to be found in neighborhoods that have reasonably high proportions of
households in the other two categories.
A similar general pattern emerges for the sample income exposure rates. Looking at the
top panel of Table 5, even income spreading would imply that all cell entries equaled 25 percent.
Yet the largest numbers in each column are all found on the main diagonal of the 4-by-4 sample
exposure rate matrix. And for households in the top income quartile, for instance, they are on
average exposed to 37.2 rather than 25 percent highly educated neighbors; similar own-quartile
over-exposure is apparent for households in the bottom quartile.
Turning to race, the top panel of Table 6 shows sample segregation measures for each of
the three racial groups. The first column of that panel indicates that the typical white household
lives in a neighborhood (census block group) that is 76 percent white, 4 percent black, and just
under 20 percent ‘other’ race. Given that the Bay Area as a whole consists of around 69 percent
white households, just under 8 percent black, and around 24 percent other (see the overall
proportions in the middle panel), there is clear descriptive evidence of racial segregation on the
part of white households: whites are over-exposed to other whites and under-exposed to other
racial groups, relative to the case where racial groups were evenly distributed across all
neighborhoods. The same is true for blacks, apparent from the second column in the top panel:

19

the typical black household in the Bay Area is greatly over-exposed to other blacks (by a factor of
almost five) relative to even spreading, somewhat over-exposed to the ‘other’ category, and
greatly under-exposed to whites.
It is instructive, from the point of view of gauging model fit, to compare our sample
exposure rates on the basis of education, income and race with the equilibrium exposure rates
corresponding to a slight perturbation of household tastes.

(As noted above, the straight

predictions from the choice model, ignoring equilibrium considerations, are for the most part very
close to the sample exposure rates.) In the case of education, given in the bottom panel of Table
4, the implied exposure rates exhibit somewhat greater ‘own-type’ stratification than the sample,
especially at the top end. This may reflect the strong education interactions we estimate in the
utility function, with highly educated households willing to pay relatively large amounts to live
with similar highly educated households. Of note, this over-exposure pattern is not apparent for
our income quartile exposure rate predictions (see Table 5).

That is, the pre-experiment

predictions for income are really rather similar to the sample, except at the very bottom end; and
further, the predicted income segregation measures exhibit somewhat lower ‘own-cell’
stratification than the sample itself, rather than higher in the case of education. Comparing the
sample to the pre-experiment predictions on the basis of race in Table 6, the own-race exposure
rates for blacks and whites are similar, though the predictions are around 10 percent higher than
the sample in either case. Conversely, the model somewhat under-predicts exposure of whites to
blacks (and vice-versa) relative to the sample.

This may be due to the strength of racial

interactions that we find in the utility function, leading to compounding effects when computing
the pre-experiment equilibria: on this note, the corresponding non-equilibrium predictions of the
choice model are closer to the sample for each cell.
We also report sample and predicted consumption measures based on the same household
categorization – separately for three education categories, four income quartile categories, and
three racial groups. The sample consumption measures, for housing (whether owned, and number
of rooms) and local amenities (school quality and crime), are computed simply by averaging
housing consumption and amenity levels over all households in a given cell, based on education
or income quartile.

In contrast, the predicted consumption measures use the equilibrium

probabilities that spread households over the different choices in the choice set, from which we
construct weighted-average consumption measures for households in a given education group or
income quartile.
Considering first the sample consumption measures by education (see panel (1) of Table
10), ownership rates and houses sizes are all increasing in the education of the household head, as

20

one might expect. For instance, while households with ‘some college’ have average ownership
rates just over 55 percent, households with a college degree or more have ownership rates over 65
percent. There is a similar positive gradient in terms of school quality (as measured by average
test scores), increasing from a score around 505 for the lowest to around 547 for the highest
education group. And crime rates decline by about 35 percent on average, moving from the
lowest to the most highly educated households.
The sample consumption measures by income quartile, shown in the top panel of Table
11, show a similar pattern, though the gradients tend to be steeper:25 households in the top
quartile have ownership rates of around 85 percent, contrasting sharply with households in the
bottom quartile, whose ownership rates are well under half that (just over 37 percent); and house
sizes are around 60 percent larger, comparing bottom to top quartile. School quality exhibits a
similar positive gradient, and the crime rate declines steeply, by almost 60 percent, moving from
the bottom to the top income quartile.
Table 12 reports consumption measures by race, the top panel showing sample measures.
This makes clear the striking across-race differences found in practice in the consumption of
housing and neighborhood attributes. In terms of housing, ownership rates for whites are over 50
percent higher than for blacks, with ‘other’ races in the middle; and whites on average live in
houses that have 0.8 of an additional room than both blacks and other races. The school quality
differences by race are substantial: whites live in neighborhoods with public schools that score an
average of 15 percent higher than blacks (8 percent higher than blacks for the other races). And
the crime rates faced by blacks are almost three times as high as those faced by whites, and
almost twice as high as those for other races.
Comparing sample with the pre-experiment consumption predictions – the top two panels
of Table 10 (for education), Table 11 (for income quartiles) and Table 12 (for racial groups) – it
is clear that the overall fit is very close indeed. It tends to be especially close for the housing
characteristics (ownership rates and number of rooms), reasonably close for test scores, and close
for crime if we look at income quartiles. In terms of household education, the predicted crime
pattern shows a slight upturn not apparent in the sample, and the predicted consumption profile
for school quality is slightly flatter than in the sample; and for race, there is a mild overprediction of the crime rate faced by whites.

Of the choice characteristics we include,

neighborhood crime is almost certainly measured with the most error.

25

Part of this is mechanical, as there are four, not three, categories.

21

6

COUNTERFACTUAL SIMULATIONS

In this section, we present the main results from a set of counterfactual simulations designed to
shed light on the role of preferences for commutes and housing in shaping the extent of
neighborhood sociodemographic mixing.

We take the pre-experiment exposure rates and

consumption measures by education, income and race discussed in the previous section as our
benchmarks, then examine the resulting counterfactual changes in segregation and consumption
measures by education, income and race associated with each experiment. The goal in each case
is to shed light on the relative importance of factors that may in practice contribute to residential
mixing, apparent from the size of the changes compared to the benchmark.26
Counterfactual Simulations – Commuting
As we noted in the Introduction, employment considerations are abstracted from in the
Tiebout model: everyone lives on dividend income. Further, households are assumed to be fully
mobile, which can be taken to mean that moving costs are zero (in a dynamic setting), as are
commuting costs.

In practice, employment considerations play an important role in the

residential choice decision, especially given that commuting is costly.
One way of capturing the impact of ‘employment geography’ on neighborhood
stratification within our static framework involves scaling the parameters on commuting distance
counterfactually. In our model, we condition on the place of work of the primary worker in the
household,27 and are able to measure distance to work very accurately using the restricted version
of the Census. The willingness-to-pay estimates we obtain for commuting distance indicate
strong disutility associated with commutes, these estimates including the financial costs of travel
in addition to the time and psychic costs, especially in the presence of congestion. And the
distaste for long commutes on average is likely to bring households closer to their primary places
of work in equilibrium, with possible implications for neighborhood stratification.
To examine these quantitatively, we begin with two experiments that adjust tastes over
commuting. In the econometric model, household preferences over commuting distance (the
distance between each housing choice and the place of work of the household head) are allowed
to vary with observable household characteristics, including their education, income, race, age,
26

In interpreting the magnitudes of the counterfactual simulation results, a reviewer noted that our
abstracting from moving costs will tend to lead us to overstate the full impacts of counterfactual changes.
To do full justice to that issue would require the specification and estimation of a dynamic equilibrium
model, beyond the scope of the current study.

22

and family structure.

The first experiment takes our taste estimates, which measure

heterogeneous disutility of commuting, and reduces them by 50 percent. The second experiment
is more extreme, switching off any disutility of commuting entirely. This second experiment is
akin to removing geographic considerations from the residential decision process, aside from the
pre-existing geographic variation in choice characteristics (including local public goods) across
the urban area.28
Neighborhood Stratification. We start by examining counterfactual education exposure rates,
comparing the predicted stratification from the two commuting experiments (panels (2) and (3) of
Table 7) against the pre-experiment benchmark (the top panel of Table 7). It is clear that
education stratification increases in both of the counterfactual simulations relative to the preexperiment case, evident in the increase in the entries on the main diagonals of the second and
third panels. For instance, the exposure of households in the top education category (‘college
degree’) to like households increases by around 11 percent when commuting disutilities are cut in
half, and by a further 7 percent when they are switched off entirely – the top education category
accounts for 43 percent of the sample. There is also a slight tendency for those increases to come
more at the expense of the bottom, rather than the middle, education category, consistent with
there being increased educational stratification. In terms of the magnitudes of the changes,
proportionately larger effects also occur for the bottom education category (‘high school or less,’
34 percent of the sample) when moving from the pre-experiment to the counterfactual that cuts
commuting disutilities by half, relative to the change between pre-experiment and switching off
commuting disutilities entirely. For the middle category (‘some college’), which accounts for
around a fifth of the sample, the effects are smaller and approximately linear.
Considering counterfactual income exposure rates (see the top three panels of Table 8),
there is a similar qualitative pattern: the increases in segregation are larger at the extremes
(especially the top) of the distribution and smaller in the middle; and the increased segregation
appears to come most at the expense of the income category furthest away. It is interesting to
note, though, that the changes in income stratification are more muted – for instance, own-income
segregation increasing by 5.4 and 7.6 percent, respectively, relative to the benchmark for
households in the top income quartile.

27

A more general treatment would endogenize choice of workplace, and also firm locations. Doing so is
beyond the scope of the current analysis.
28
Additional counterfactual experiments come to mind. In Bayer et al. (2011), for example, we explore the
consequences of racial sorting through counterfactual changes in race preferences.

23

The counterfactual changes in racial exposure rates associated with the two commuting
experiments are apparent from the top three panels of Table 9. Again, reducing the disutility of
commutes leads to increased segregation, and the effects are non-linear, the larger proportionate
increases relative to the baseline coming from the experiment that cuts the disutility of
commuting in half, rather than switching it of entirely. Of note, the counterfactual increases in
segregation appear to be more marked for blacks than whites. For example, cutting commuting
disutilities in half is predicted to raise black exposure to other blacks by over 9 percent, in
contrast to the 2.4 percent increase in terms of white exposure to other whites.
Consumption. The consumption patterns are shown in panels (2) – (4) of Tables 10, 11 and 12
for education, income and race measures, respectively.

Starting with education, there are

essentially no effects on the consumption of housing characteristics across different education
categories. For neighborhood attributes, the consumption gradients for crime and school quality
become slightly steeper, with consumption of amenities rising slightly for the most highly
educated households, falling slightly for the middle education group, and falling proportionately
more for the bottom education category. This indicates that more highly educated households
find it easier to sort into neighborhoods providing better amenities when commuting costs fall,
the reverse being true for the lowest educated (partly because of fixity of supply overall). In
terms of income, again the commuting experiments have relatively minor effects on housing
consumption (there are very slight increases in housing consumption at the top end, for instance),
changes in consumption of school quality are barely perceptible, and there is only a very slight
increase in the crime gradient, which again steepens. For race, we see more noticeable changes
on the housing consumption side, at least for blacks, whose ownership rates increase slightly
along with house size.

At the same time, blacks appear to be moving into lower crime

neighborhoods when the disutility of commutes falls. There is little impact on the housing
consumption of whites, though exposure to crime declines as the disutility of commuting falls.
As one might expect, commuting distances do increase overall (results not reported in the tables),
by about 50 percent overall relative to the pre-experiment levels when commuting disutilities are
halved, and by around 100 percent when they cease to matter at all.
In sum, the two commuting experiments indicate that reducing the importance of
commuting in the household location decision results in monotonic but successively smaller
increases in stratification on the basis of education, income and race.29 Commuting distance
29

Even with the elimination of commuting costs and housing preferences from the model, there are still a
number of factors that give rise to heterogeneous preferences that prevent perfect neighborhood

24

increases across the board, and consumption of local amenities tends to increase for highly
educated households and decline for other education groups; the changes when broken down by
income are slight, as are the changes on the basis of race. Of note, even if commuting ceased to
matter in the utility function at all, our counterfactuals suggest that there would still be a good
deal of within-neighborhood mixing on the basis of each of these key sociodemographic
characteristics, which is just to say that other factors in the model still serve to bring
heterogeneous households together in given neighborhoods. Accordingly, our next experiment
looks at the role of housing.
Counterfactual Simulations – Housing
Housing did not play an explicit role in Tiebout’s original formulation, though
subsequent research (see, for instance, the contributions of Oates and Hamilton) has made good
this deficit. Analogous to the heterogeneous preferences over commuting distance, our sorting
model interacts observable household characteristics with observed features of the housing stock
(including the house price, whether owned, and house size).

In our third counterfactual

simulation, we switch off these heterogeneous housing preferences entirely. And again, we
consider the associated effects on education, income and racial stratification as well as household
consumption patterns, disaggregated separately by household education category, income
quartile, and race.
Stratification. In terms of stratification, this counterfactual experiment leads to increases in
education segregation (see Table 7) that are remarkably similar to the effects of the first
commuting experiment (that cut the disutility of commutes in half). This makes clear that the
existing distribution of housing serves to integrate households on the basis of education to quite a
sizeable degree. In marked contrast, switching off housing preferences leads to reductions in
income stratification (panel (4) of Table 8), producing reductions in own-quartile income
segregation across the board. This shows that the differential affordability of larger housing
serves to segregate households on the basis of income: our computations give us a sense of how
much by. (At the bottom of the income distribution, for example, own-income segregation is
predicted to fall by 3.8 percent: at the top, it is predicted to fall by a full 8 percent.) More
stratification. The model continues to include heterogeneous preferences for neighborhood and housing
quality (through the heterogeneous price coefficient), idiosyncratic locational preferences (through the logit
error), and heterogeneous preferences for neighborhood attributes and sociodemographic characteristics.
Also, as discussed above, we do not adjust crime rates and school quality with changing neighborhood
compositions in the simulations, viewing this as a conservative approach to estimating the extent to which

25

generally, it indicates that income and education stratification do not work in an exactly co-linear
way.
Turning to racial segregation (see Table 9), there is a general tendency for the experiment
to increase own-race segregation, as with the commuting cost experiments. What is noticeable is
the heterogeneity in the strength of the segregation effect looking at different races. For whites
and ‘other’ racial groups, the magnitude of the changes is very much in line with those in the first
commuting experiment, which halved the disutility of commutes, while for blacks, the
segregation effects are altogether much stronger.

This clearly indicates that differential

preferences for housing attributes by race serve to integrate different racial groups, but especially
so for blacks.
Consumption.

When we look at the effects of the housing experiment on consumption,

switching off housing tastes leads, as one would anticipate, to a partial equalization of housing
consumption (see panel (5) of Tables 10, 11, and 12), especially on the basis of income and
comparing blacks versus whites. Similarly, there is a narrowing in the consumption of local
amenities, with the gaps in the consumption of school quality and crime declining somewhat,
especially across income quartiles.
Counterfactual Simulations – Commuting and Housing Combined
As a final experiment, we explore the consequences of switching off commuting
preferences and preferences over housing at the same time. In terms of education stratification,
the individual experiments are mutually reinforcing, as is apparent from panel (5) of Table 7; the
combined experiment gives rise to the highest levels of education segregation relative to the preexperiment benchmark.

Even so, despite the radical nature of the experiment, education

stratification is still far from complete: highly educated households still live in neighborhoods
that also contain over 16 percent of households, on average, with no more than a high school
education; and households in the bottom education category live in neighborhoods with 21
percent of households who are highly educated. A roughly similar pattern is evident in terms of
race – see panel (5) in Table 9 – with the combined experiment giving rise to a compounding
effect on own-race segregation.
Consistent with the results from the housing experiment, the net effect on income
segregation from the combined experiment (see panel (5) of Table 8) looks remarkably like
income segregation in the pre-experiment simulations, implying that the two experiments are
almost entirely offsetting.
commuting costs and housing preferences contribute to neighborhood stratification.

26

7

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we used a counterfactual equilibrium approach to shed new light on factors that
may contribute to the widespread sociodemographic mixing observed in US cities. Generally
speaking, the approach we use allows us to change the primitives of an econometric sorting
model, estimated using rich Census data, and then compute the implied stratification associated
with counterfactual equilibria that arise.
Our first simulations explored the role of changing the disutility of commutes on
residential mixing counterfactually. The benchmark Tiebout model abstracts from employment
considerations, yet commuting to work is often costly and the location of the workplace is
typically an important influence on households’ choice of residence.

Thus counterfactual

reductions in the disutility associated with commuting should help gauge how much this factor
contributes to observed stratification. We find that as commuting matters less (counterfactually)
to households, so residential stratification at the census block level increases markedly, especially
on the basis of education and race. This makes clear that in practice, employment geography and
non-trivial commuting costs serve to bring heterogeneous households together in the same
residential neighborhoods. As has been noted by Oates and Schwab (1988), among others, firm
production typically requires complementary labor inputs, combining low and high skill workers
and, consistent with our findings, this serves as an integrating force. Never-the-less, even when
commuting considerations are switched off entirely, a fairly high degree of residential mixing on
the basis of education, income and race persists. When we look at the implied consumption of
amenities, our results suggest – as is plausible – that as distance to work matters relatively less
than other considerations in the household location choice, so stratification on the basis of local
public goods consumption increases: highly educated households tend to locate in neighborhoods
with better schools and lower crime than in the benchmark pre-experiment equilibrium, while the
reverse is true for less-educated households, for example.
Examining the separate contribution of heterogeneous tastes for housing, our findings
point to an interesting contrast: while switching off tastes for housing leads to quite marked
increases in racial and education stratification, income stratification declines, drawing attention to
the way the distribution of housing (with larger houses being found in more affluent
neighborhoods) serves to segregate households on the basis of income.

When housing

characteristics cease to matter directly in the household location decision, we see some

27

equalization in the consumption of amenities (in addition to the predictable equalization in
housing consumption).
It is worth noting that our static approach takes as given the distribution of employment
and the characteristics of housing. In terms of the former, research by Anas (see, for instance,
Anas (1982)) has sought to endogenize firm locations, and one could also allow households to
make joint residential and employment choices.

Both types of extension are technically

challenging. Recent research has also sought to endogenized housing supply, Murphy (2011)
being an excellent example. Estimable dynamic equilibrium models that incorporate housing and
that are amenable to counterfactual analysis are highly appealing; as yet, they remain beyond the
frontier of current research.

28

REFERENCES
Anas, Alex, (1982), Residential Location Markets and Urban Transportation: Economic
Theory, Econometrics and Public Policy Analysis, Academic Press, New York.
_______ (2002), “Prejudice, Exclusion, and Compensating Transfers: The Economics of
Ethnic Segregation,” Journal of Urban Economics, 52: 409-32.
Anas, Alex and Ikki Kim, (1996), “General Equilibrium Models of Polycentric Urban
Land Use with Endogenous Congestion and Job Agglomeration,” Journal of Urban
Economics, 40: 232-56.
Bajari, Patrick, and Matthew Kahn (2005), “Estimating Housing Demand with an
Application to Explaining Racial Segregation in Cities,” Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics, 23(1): 20-33.
Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferreira, and Robert McMillan (2007), “A Unified Framework
for Measuring Preferences for Schools and Neighborhoods,” Journal of Political
Economy, 115(4): 588-638.
Bayer, Patrick, Robert McMillan, and Kim Rueben (2011), “An Equilibrium Model of
Sorting in an Urban Housing Market,” revised version of NBER Working Paper 10865.
Benabou, Roland (1993), “The Workings of a City: Location, Education, and
Production,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(3): 619-652.
________ (1996), “Heterogeneity, Stratification, and Growth: Macroeconomic
Implications of Community Structure and School Finance,” American Economic Review,
86(3): 584-609.
Berry, Steven (1994), “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation,”
RAND Journal of Economics, 25: 242-262.
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes (1995), “Automobile Prices in Market
Equilibrium,” Econometrica, 63: 841-890.
Bewley, Truman (1981), “A Critique of Tiebout’s Theory of Local Public Expenditures,”
Econometrica, 49: 713-740.
Black, Sandra (1999), “Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary
Education,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May.
Cutler, David, and Edward Glaeser (1997), “Are Ghettos Good or Bad?” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 112(3): 827-882.

29

Epple, Dennis, Radu Filimon, and Thomas Romer (1984), “Equilibrium Among Local
Jurisdictions: Towards an Integrated Approach of Voting and Residential Choice,”
Journal of Public Economics, 24: 281-304.
________ (1993), “Existence of Voting and Housing Equilibrium in a System of
Communities with Property Taxes,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 23: 585610.
Epple, Dennis, and Glenn Platt (1998), “Equilibrium and Local Redistribution in an
Urban Economy when Households Differ in Both Preferences and Income,” Journal of
Urban Economics, 43: 23-51.
Epple, Dennis and Richard Romano (1996), “The Public Provision of Private Goods,”
Journal of Political Economy, 104(1): 57-84.
Epple, Dennis and Richard Romano (1998), “Competition Between Private and Public
Schools, Vouchers, and Peer Group Effects,” American Economic Review, 88(1): 33-62.
Epple, Dennis, Thomas Romer and Holger Sieg (2001), “Interjurisdictional Sorting and
Majority Rule: An Empirical Analysis,” Econometrica, 69(6): 1437-1455.
Epple, Dennis and Holger Sieg (1999), “Estimating Equilibrium Models of Local
Jurisdictions,” Journal of Political Economy, 107(4): 645-681.
Epple, Dennis, and Allan Zelenitz (1981), “The Implications of Competition among
Jurisdictions: Does Tiebout Need Politics?” Journal of Political Economy, 89(4): 11971218.
Fernandez, Raquel and Richard Rogerson (1996), “Income Distribution, Communities,
and the Quality of Public Education.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(1): 135-164.
________ (2003), “Equity and Resources: An Analysis of Educational Finance Systems,”
Journal of Political Economy, 111(4).
Ferreyra, Maria (2007), “Estimating the Effects of Private School Vouchers in MultiDistrict Economies,” American Economic Review, 97(3): 789-817.
Hamilton, Bruce W. (1975), “Zoning and Property Taxation in a System of Local
Governments,” Urban Studies, 12: 205-211.
McFadden, Daniel (1978), “Modeling the Choice of Residential Location,” in eds.
Karlquist, A. et al., Spatial Interaction Theory and Planning Models, Elsevier NorthHolland, New York.
Murphy, Alvin (2011), “A Dynamic Model of Housing Supply,” mimeo, Washington
University in St. Louis.

30

Nechyba, Thomas J. (1999), “School Finance-Induced Migration and Stratification
Patterns: the Impact of Private School Vouchers,” Journal of Public Economic Theory,
Vol. 1.
________ (2000), “Mobility, Targeting and Private School Vouchers,” American
Economic Review, 90(1): 130-46.
Oates, Wallace E. (1969), “The Effects of Property Taxes and Local Public Spending on
Property Values: An Empirical Study of Tax Competition and the Tiebout Hypothesis,”
Journal of Political Economy, 77: 957-971.
Oates, Wallace E., and Robert M. Schwab (1988), “Economic Competition among
Jurisdictions: Efficiency Enhancing or Distortion Inducing?” Journal of Public
Economics, 35: 333-354.
Samuelson, Paul A. (1954), “The Pure Theory of Public Expenditures,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 36(4): 387-389.
Sieg, Holger, V. Kerry Smith, H. Spencer Banzhaf and Randall Walsh (2004),
“Estimating the General Equilibrium Benefits of Large Changes in Spatially Delineated
Public Goods,” International Economic Review, 45(4): 1047-1077.
Tiebout, Charles M. (1956), “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures,” Journal of Political
Economy, 64: 416-424.

31

Table 1. Sample Statistics Comparing the Full Sample with Houses within 0.20 miles of a Boundary
Sample
full sample
within 0.20 miles of boundaries

Observations

Housing Prices
House value (if owned)
Monthly rent (if rented)
School Quality
Average test score
Housing Characteristics
1 if unit owned
Number of rooms
1 if built in 1980s
1 if built in 1960s or 1970s
Elevation
Population density
Neighborhood Sociodemographics
% Census block group white
% Census block group black
% Census block group coll deg or more
Average block group income

242,100

boundary
sample

high test
score side

low test
score side

difference in
means

test of
difference
(7)

(1)
Mean

(2)
S.D.

27,548
(3)
Mean

13,612
(4)
Mean

13,936
(5)
Mean

(6)
((4) - (5))

t-statistic

297,700
744

178,479
316

250,005
678

259,475
688

240,756
669

18,719
18.80

4.15
1.73

527

74

507

544

471

74

25.44

0.60
5.11
0.14
0.39
210
0.43

0.49
1.99
0.35
0.49
179
0.50

0.54
4.96
0.11
0.34
176
0.39

0.55
5.02
0.11
0.35
178
0.38

0.53
4.90
0.11
0.33
173
0.40

0.02
0.12
0.00
0.01
6
-0.02

0.89
1.56
-0.31
0.84
1.64
-1.38

0.68
0.08
0.44
54,742

0.23
0.16
0.20
26,075

0.61
0.18
0.41
46,271

0.63
0.17
0.44
47,718

0.60
0.20
0.39
44,857

0.03
-0.03
0.05
2,861

3.40
-3.15
6.18
2.61

Note: This table reports summary statistics for the key variables included in the analysis. The boundary sample includes all houses located within 0.20 miles of a
boundary with another school attendance zone. A house is considered to be on the 'high' ('low') side of a boundary if the test score at its local school is greater
(less) than the corresponding test score for the closest house on the opposite side of an attendance zone boundary. Sample statistics are reported for the high- and
low-side of boundaries for which the test score gap is in excess of the median gap (38.4 points) in columns (4) and (5), respectively. Column (7) reports the tstatistic for a test of the hypothesis that the mean of the variable listed in the row heading does not vary across school attendance zone boundaries. This test
conditions on boundary fixed effects (so as to compare houses on opposite sides of the same boundary) and adjusts for the clustering of observations at the Census
block group level.

Table 2: Delta Regressions - Implied Mean Willingness to Pay
Sample
Observations
Boundary Fixed Effects
Number of Rooms
Built in 1980s
Built in 1960s/70s
Owner-occupied
Average Test Score (in standard deviations)
% Neighborhood Black
% Neighborhood Hispanic
% Neighborhood Asian
% Neighborhood College Degree or more
Average Neighborhood Income (/10000)
Distance to Work

Within 0.20 Miles of Boundary
27,458
No
Yes
91.7
(7.1)
92.0
(9.8)
9.2
(3.3)
69.1
(4.7)
18.0
(8.3)
-404.8
(41.4)
-88.4
(32.5)
-39.7
(30.2)
183.5
(26.4)
30.7
(3.7)
-25.6
(0.3)

91.5
(13.9)
95.4
(15.1)
7.3
(2.4)
51.0
(6.1)
19.7
(7.4)
-104.8
(36.9)
-3.5
(31.0)
-5.3
(32.4)
104.6
(31.8)
36.3
(6.6)
-52.2
(0.5)

Note: All regressions shown in the table also include controls for whether house was built in 1960-1979, elevation, population
density, crime, land use (% industrial, % residential, % commercial, % open space, % other) in 1, 2 and 3 mile rings around
each location. The dependent variable is the monthly user cost of housing, which equals monthly rent for renter-occupied units
and a monthly user cost for owner-occupied housing, calculated as described in the text. Standard errors corrected for
clustering at the school level are reported in parentheses.

Table 3. Heterogeneity in Marginal Willingness to Pay for Housing and Neighborhood Characteristics

Own vs. Rent

House Characteristics
+1 Room
Built in 1980s
vs. pre-1960

+10% Black vs.
White

Neighborhood Characteristics
+10% Hisp vs. +10% Asian vs. +10% College
White
White
Educated

Mean MWTP

51.0
(6.1)

91.5
(13.9)

95.4
(15.1)

-10.5
(3.7)

-0.4
(3.1)

-0.5
(3.2)

10.5
(3.2)

Blk Group
Avg Income
+ $10,000
36.3
(6.6)

Average
Test Score
+1 s.d.
19.7
(7.4)

Household Income (+$10,000)

21.7
(0.7)

4.8
(0.2)

9.3
(0.8)

-1.2
(0.4)

0.8
(0.4)

0.1
(0.3)

1.4
(0.2)

0.9
(0.1)

1.4
(0.3)

Children Under 18 vs.
No Children

-13.3
(7.0)

37.5
(1.8)

-26.0
(8.5)

11.9
(3.0)

17.2
(3.3)

12.6
(2.7)

-16.1
(2.2)

2.4
(1.2)

7.4
(3.6)

Black vs. White

-67.7
(13.0)

3.8
(3.5)

5.4
(17.4)

98.3
(3.9)

46.7
(5.6)

48.3
(5.1)

18.4
(4.5)

-1.2
(2.2)

-14.3
(7.4)

Hispanic vs. White

-8.2
(10.1)

-14.5
(2.7)

-6.3
(12.2)

30.9
(3.9)

85.6
(4.0)

18.0
(4.2)

6.3
(3.4)

1.1
(1.4)

-4.1
(6.0)

Asian vs. White

113.5
(9.6)

-22.1
(2.2)

43.9
(11.3)

28.1
(3.8)

22.3
(4.4)

95.2
(3.5)

0.4
(2.6)

0.7
(1.5)

7.0
(5.5)

College Degree or More vs.
Some College or Less

37.6
(8.1)

-0.6
(2.2)

40.2
(9.7)

9.2
(3.1)

-4.6
(3.9)

-13.4
(3.0)

58.0
(2.3)

0.3
(1.4)

13.0
(3.6)

Note: The first row of the table reports the mean marginal willingness-to-pay for the change reported in the column heading. The remaining rows report the difference in willingness to pay associated with the change
listed in the row heading, holding all other factors equal. The full heterogeneous choice model includes 135 interactions between nine household characteristics and fifteen housing and neighborhood characteristics. The
included household characteristics are household income, the presence of children under 18, and the race/ethnicity (Asian, black, Hispanic, white), educational attainment (some college, college degree or more), work
status, and age of the household head. The housing and neighborhood characteristics are the monthly user cost of housing, distance to work, average test score, whether the house is owner-occupied, number of rooms, year
built (1980s, 1960-1979, pre-1960), elevation, population density, crime, and the racial composition (% Asian, % black, % Hispanic, % white) and average education (% college degree) and household income for the
corresponding Census block group. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.

Table 4: Education Exposure Rates - Sample and Pre-Experiment
Sample Exposure Rates
Neighborhood percent ! High school
Neighborhood percent with Some college
Neighborhood percent " College degree
Total

Household Education Level
! High school
Some college
" College degree
0.431
0.341
0.266
0.225
0.235
0.216
0.344
0.424
0.518
1.000
1.000
1.000

Sample Education Distribution
Household Education Level
! High school
Some college
" College degree
0.338
0.223
0.438
Pre-experiment Simulation Exposure Rates

Neighborhood percent ! High school
Neighborhood percent with Some college
Neighborhood percent " College degree
Total

Household Education Level
! High school
Some college
" College degree
0.449
0.367
0.238
0.243
0.245
0.198
0.308
0.388
0.564
1.000
1.000
1.000

Notes:
Each column gives the average exposure of households whose type is given by the relevant column heading to
neighbors in the row category.
Neighborhoods are defined at the block group level.

Table 5: Income Exposure Rates - Sample and Pre-experiment
Sample Exposure Rates
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 1
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 2
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 3
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 4

Quartile 1
0.351
0.268
0.217
0.163
1.000

Household Income
Quartile 2 Quartile 3
0.271
0.218
0.271
0.250
0.252
0.273
0.207
0.258
1.000
1.000

Quartile 4
0.164
0.206
0.258
0.372
1.000

Quartile 1
0.319
0.275
0.238
0.168
1.000

Household Income
Quartile 2 Quartile 3
0.278
0.239
0.265
0.249
0.250
0.257
0.207
0.255
1.000
1.000

Quartile 4
0.169
0.206
0.256
0.369
1.000

Pre-experiment Simulation Exposure Rates

Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 1
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 2
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 3
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 4

Notes
Each column gives the average exposure of households whose type is given by the relevant column heading to
neighbors in the row category.
Neighborhoods are defined at the block group level.

Table 6: Race Exposure Rates - Sample and Pre-Experiment
Sample Exposure Rates
Neighborhood percent White
Neighborhood percent Black
Neighborhood percent Other
Total

White
0.760
0.042
0.198
1.000

Household Race
Black
0.377
0.384
0.239
1.000

Other
0.571
0.076
0.353
1.000

White
0.686

Household Race
Black
0.076

Other
0.238

White
0.847
0.032
0.121
1.000

Household Race
Black
0.290
0.421
0.289
1.000

Other
0.349
0.092
0.559
1.000

Sample Race Distribution

Pre-experiment Simulation Exposure Rates

Neighborhood percent White
Neighborhood percent Black
Neighborhood percent Other
Total

Notes:
"Household race" is taken to be the race of the householder.
The three race categories are defined to be exclusive and exhaustive.
Each column gives the average exposure of households whose type is given by the relevant column heading to
neighbors in the row category.
Neighborhoods are defined at the block group level.

Table 7: Education Exposure Rates - Simulation Results
(1) Pre-experiment

Neighborhood percent ! High school
Neighborhood percent with Some college
Neighborhood percent " College degree

Household Education Level
! High school
Some college
" College degree
0.449
0.367
0.238
0.243
0.245
0.198
0.308
0.388
0.564

(2) Counterfactual: cut disutility of commutes in half

Neighborhood percent ! High school
Neighborhood percent with Some college
Neighborhood percent " College degree

Household Education Level
! High school
Some college
" College degree
0.485
0.392
0.197
0.259
0.259
0.178
0.256
0.349
0.624

(3) Counterfactual: switch off disutility of commutes

Neighborhood percent ! High school
Neighborhood percent with Some college
Neighborhood percent " College degree

Household Education Level
! High school
Some college
" College degree
0.503
0.410
0.174
0.271
0.273
0.161
0.226
0.316
0.664

(4) Counterfactual: switch off housing preferences

Neighborhood percent ! High school
Neighborhood percent with Some college
Neighborhood percent " College degree

Household Education Level
! High school
Some college
" College degree
0.478
0.396
0.202
0.261
0.261
0.175
0.261
0.344
0.623

(5) Counterfactual: switch off disutility of commutes and housing preferences
Household Education Level
! High school
Some college
" College degree
Neighborhood percent ! High school
0.507
0.428
0.162
Neighborhood percent with Some college
0.282
0.288
0.145
Neighborhood percent " College degree
0.210
0.285
0.693

Notes:
Each column gives the average exposure of households whose type is given by the relevant column heading to
neighbors in the row category.
All the columns sum to 1.
Neighborhoods are defined at the block group level.

Table 8: Income Exposure Rates - Simulation results
(1) Pre-experiment

Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 1
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 2
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 3
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 4

Quartile 1
0.319
0.275
0.238
0.168

Household Income
Quartile 2 Quartile 3
0.278
0.239
0.265
0.249
0.250
0.257
0.207
0.255

Quartile 4
0.169
0.206
0.256
0.369

Quartile 1
0.326
0.278
0.237
0.158

Household Income
Quartile 2 Quartile 3
0.281
0.238
0.268
0.250
0.251
0.260
0.199
0.253

Quartile 4
0.159
0.199
0.253
0.389

Quartile 1
0.332
0.279
0.236
0.153

Household Income
Quartile 2 Quartile 3
0.282
0.237
0.269
0.250
0.252
0.261
0.197
0.252

Quartile 4
0.154
0.196
0.253
0.397

Quartile 1
0.306
0.267
0.241
0.186

Household Income
Quartile 2 Quartile 3
0.270
0.242
0.259
0.249
0.250
0.256
0.220
0.254

Quartile 4
0.187
0.220
0.254
0.339

(2) Counterfactual: cut disutility of commutes in half

Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 1
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 2
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 3
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 4
(3) Counterfactual: switch off disutility of commutes

Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 1
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 2
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 3
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 4
(4) Counterfactual: switch off housing preferences

Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 1
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 2
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 3
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 4

(5) Counterfactual: switch off disutility of commutes and housing preferences

Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 1
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 2
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 3
Neighborhood percent Income Quartile 4

Quartile 1
0.314
0.271
0.241
0.174

Household Income
Quartile 2 Quartile 3
0.274
0.242
0.263
0.251
0.252
0.257
0.211
0.250

Quartile 4
0.175
0.211
0.251
0.364

Notes
Each column gives the average exposure of households whose type is given by the relevant column heading to
neighbors in the row category.
All the columns sum to 1.
Neighborhoods are defined at the block group level.

Table 9: Race Exposure Rates - Simulation Results
(1) Pre-experiment

Neighborhood percent White
Neighborhood percent Black
Neighborhood percent Other

White
0.847
0.032
0.121

Household Race
Black
0.290
0.421
0.289

Other
0.349
0.092
0.559

White
0.868
0.029
0.103

Household Race
Black
0.263
0.460
0.277

Other
0.299
0.088
0.613

White
0.882
0.027
0.091

Household Race
Black
0.243
0.464
0.293

Other
0.263
0.093
0.644

White
0.870
0.028
0.103

Household Race
Black
0.253
0.482
0.265

Other
0.296
0.084
0.620

Household Race
Black
0.208
0.526
0.266

Other
0.217
0.084
0.699

(2) Counterfactual: cut disutility of commutes in half

Neighborhood percent White
Neighborhood percent Black
Neighborhood percent Other
(3) Counterfactual: switch off disutility of commutes

Neighborhood percent White
Neighborhood percent Black
Neighborhood percent Other
(4) Counterfactual: switch off housing preferences

Neighborhood percent White
Neighborhood percent Black
Neighborhood percent Other

(5) Counterfactual: switch off disutility of commutes and housing preferences

Neighborhood percent White
Neighborhood percent Black
Neighborhood percent Other

White
0.902
0.023
0.075

Notes:
Each column gives the average exposure of households whose type is given by the relevant column heading to
neighbors in the row category.
All the columns sum to 1.
Neighborhoods are defined at the block group level.

Table 10: Consumption Rates by Education Category
(1) Sample
ownership rate
number of rooms
school test score
crime rate

Household Education Level
! High school
Some college
" College degree
0.549
0.555
0.655
4.7
5.0
5.5
504.7
525.5
546.8
10.4
7.5
6.8

Simulation results:
(2) Pre-experiment

ownership rate
number of rooms
school test score
crime rate

Household Education Level
! High school
Some college
" College degree
0.547
0.561
0.653
4.73
5.10
5.42
508.54
529.60
541.77
9.75
7.16
7.50

(3) Counterfactual: cut disutility of commutes in half
Household Education Level
! High school
Some college
" College degree
ownership rate
0.552
0.562
0.649
number of rooms
4.70
5.08
5.45
school test score
504.79
527.94
545.42
crime rate
10.96
7.44
6.42
(4) Counterfactual: switch off disutility of commutes
Household Education Level
! High school
Some college
" College degree
ownership rate
0.550
0.564
0.650
number of rooms
4.69
5.09
5.45
school test score
504.41
527.74
545.92
crime rate
11.49
7.65
5.89
(5) Counterfactual: switch off housing preferences
Household Education Level
! High school
Some college
" College degree
ownership rate
0.579
0.616
0.601
number of rooms
4.91
5.21
5.23
school test score
510.89
529.91
539.84
crime rate
9.38
6.97
7.86
(6) Counterfactual: switch off disutility of commutes and housing preferences
Household Education Level
! High school
Some college
" College degree
ownership rate
0.534
0.604
0.642
number of rooms
4.70
5.14
5.42
school test score
505.73
527.56
544.96
crime rate
11.10
7.43
6.33

Note: Table gives average consumption levels of the row characteristic for households in the
column heading category.

Table 11: Consumption Rates by Income Quartile
(1) Sample
ownership rate
number of rooms
school test score
crime rate

Household Income
Quartile 1 Quartile 2 Quartile 3 Quartile 4
0.373
0.499
0.671
0.847
3.9
4.6
5.4
6.5
504.2
518.5
530.0
558.6
12.4
8.6
6.7
5.0

Simulation results
(2) Pre-experiment

ownership rate
number of rooms
school test score
crime rate

Household Income
Quartile 1 Quartile 2 Quartile 3 Quartile 4
0.420
0.491
0.625
0.852
4.21
4.62
5.24
6.38
506.43
518.09
530.09
556.69
11.52
9.09
7.19
4.93

(3) Counterfactual: cut disutility of commutes in half
Household Income
Quartile 1 Quartile 2 Quartile 3 Quartile 4
ownership rate
0.416
0.485
0.625
0.862
number of rooms
4.18
4.59
5.24
6.45
school test score
505.32
517.29
529.91
558.63
crime rate
12.09
9.14
7.05
4.45
(4) Counterfactual: switch off disutility of commutes
Household Income
Quartile 1 Quartile 2 Quartile 3 Quartile 4
ownership rate
0.410
0.483
0.627
0.867
number of rooms
4.16
4.59
5.24
6.48
school test score
505.08
517.57
530.23
558.45
crime rate
12.39
9.12
6.92
4.29
(5) Counterfactual: switch off housing preferences
ownership rate
number of rooms
school test score
crime rate

Household Income
Quartile 1 Quartile 2 Quartile 3 Quartile 4
0.539
0.568
0.603
0.679
4.72
4.91
5.15
5.68
508.86
519.99
530.15
552.37
10.56
8.66
7.44
6.04

(6) Counterfactual: switch off disutility of commutes and housing preferences
Household Income
Quartile 1 Quartile 2 Quartile 3 Quartile 4
ownership rate
0.510
0.559
0.604
0.716
number of rooms
4.57
4.85
5.15
5.88
school test score
506.59
518.52
529.62
556.53
crime rate
11.59
8.77
7.23
5.16
Note: Table gives average consumption levels of the row characteristic for households in
the column heading category.

Table 12: Consumption Rates by Racial Group
(1) Sample
0.639
5.37
541.5
6.16

Household Race
Black
0.402
4.57
466.3
17.96

0.636
5.33
538.60
6.80

Household Race
Black
0.388
4.45
473.99
17.71

White
ownership rate
number of rooms
school test score
crime rate

Other
0.539
4.55
507.9
10.92

Simulation results:
(2) Pre-experiment
White
ownership rate
number of rooms
school test score
crime rate

Other
0.552
4.69
513.81
9.14

(3) Counterfactual: cut disutility of commutes in half
White
ownership rate
number of rooms
school test score
crime rate

0.627
5.32
540.70
6.40

Household Race
Black
0.424
4.57
468.46
17.19

Other
0.565
4.68
509.34
10.47

(4) Counterfactual: switch off disutility of commutes
White
ownership rate
number of rooms
school test score
crime rate

0.624
5.31
541.75
6.42

Household Race
Black
0.424
4.55
467.07
16.95

Other
0.574
4.72
506.93
10.48

(5) Counterfactual: switch off housing preferences
White
ownership rate
number of rooms
school test score
crime rate

0.590
5.10
536.59
7.05

Household Race
Black
0.570
4.86
467.68
16.75

Other
0.626
5.24
521.68
8.70

(6) Counterfactual: switch off disutility of commutes and housing preferences
Household Race
! High school
Some college
" College degree
ownership rate
0.604
0.548
0.592
number of rooms
5.18
4.74
5.06
school test score
540.73
463.20
511.05
crime rate
6.48
17.72
10.10

Note: Table gives average consumption levels of the row characteristic for households in the
column heading category.

