                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              FROM THE FINANCIAL CRISIS TO THE REAL ECONOMY:
         USING FIRM-LEVEL DATA TO IDENTIFY TRANSMISSION CHANNELS

                                           Stijn Claessens
                                              Hui Tong
                                           Shang-Jin Wei

                                        Working Paper 17360
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17360


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




We would like to thank the participants in the NBER Global Financial Crisis preconference and conference
and especially Charles Engel, Kristin Forbes, Jeffrey Frankel, and Linda Tesar for very useful comments
and suggestions, and Mohsan Bilal for excellent research assistance. The views expressed in this paper
are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research, the IMF, or IMF policy.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Stijn Claessens, Hui Tong, and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
From the Financial Crisis to the Real Economy: ¸˛Using Firm-level Data to Identify Transmission
Channels
Stijn Claessens, Hui Tong, and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 17360
August 2011
JEL No. F3

                                              ABSTRACT

Using accounting data for 7722 non-financial firms in 42 countries, we examine how the 2007-2009
crisis affected firm performance and how various linkages propagated shocks across borders. We isolate
and compare effects from changes in external financing conditions, domestic demand, and international
trade on firms’ profits, sales and investment using both sectoral benchmarks and firm-specific sensitivities
estimated prior to the crisis. We find that the crisis had a bigger negative impact on firms with greater
sensitivity to demand and trade, particularly in countries more open to trade. Interestingly, financial
openness appears to have made limited difference.


Stijn Claessens                                      Shang-Jin Wei
Research Department                                  Graduate School of Business
IMF Washington DC                                    Columbia University
700 19th Street N.W.                                 Uris Hall 619
Washington, DC 20431                                 3022 Broadway
SClaessens@imf.org                                   New York, NY 10027-6902
                                                     and NBER
Hui Tong                                             shangjin.wei@columbia.edu
Research Department
IMF Washington DC
700 19th Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20431
htong@imf.org
                                                           2


    1. Introduction



The 2007-2009 crisis that originated in the United States shocked the core of the global financial

system. It led to a sharp drop in international trade in goods and services to a degree not seen

since the end of the WWII and triggered a severe global recession, dubbed the “Great Recession,”

unparalleled since the Great Depression. A small literature is emerging that studies the

transmission of the latest crisis across national borders and the role of cross-country differences

in how countries were affected. The evidence from these studies is mixed. For example,

Claessens et al (2010), Blanchard et al (2010), and Cetorelli and Goldberg (2009) document

some evidence that countries more integrated with global financial markets suffered more during

this crisis.2 In contrast, Rose and Spiegel (2010a, 2010b and 2011) fail to find strong evidence

that country factors, including bilateral trade and financial linkages with the U.S., are associated

with how the crisis impacted individual countries.3

         All these studies rely on aggregate data. The mixed evidence on the role of country

factors and the individual contagion channels is perhaps not surprising since the macro data

reflect the aggregation of multiple underlying factors. The crisis likely spread through a

combination of real (e.g., trade) and financial channels, as well as by affecting expectations of

consumers and firms, which in turn changing consumption and investment behaviors. The

existing literature has attempted to distinguish these channels by including proxies for trade or

financial integration (see Rose and Spiegel, 2010 a, b; and Milesi-Ferretti and Lane, 2010). But


2
  Cetorelli and Goldberg (2009) document a role of global banking; Milesi-Ferretti and Tille (2011) find a role for
short-term debt in foreign currency; and Frankel and Saravelos (2010) find foreign reserves as important in
alleviating the spillover.
3
  Rose and Spiegel (2011) find few reliable indicators in the pre-crisis data that can help explain the incidence of the
Great Recession across countries, except that countries with a current account surplus seemed better insulated from
slowdowns.
                                                           3

these proxies tend to be highly correlated with each other and hence per se do not cleanly

separate the different channels. For example, both a reversal of capital flows and a reduction in

demand for exports can induce a worsening of corporate sector performance or a contraction of

investment. When using aggregate data as outcome variables, and because aggregate indicators

for trade and financial openness are highly correlated, it is challenging to separate specific

channels.

         To make progress, one could employ firm-level, micro data. If different transmission

channels imply different firm-level effects as a function of firm types (e.g., more finance

dependent firms versus more trade dependent firms), we will have a better chance to isolate and

quantify the different channels. Such information would have been lost in the aggregate data.

         The first firm-level analysis to study how crises (in emerging markets) spread to other

markets was conducted by Forbes (2004).4 For the 2008-2009 crisis, micro firm-level evidence is

relatively scarce, partly because firm-level investment and performance data for many countries

are only released with a long lag.5

         One substitute that has been used to date is stock market data, as Tong and Wei (2011) do.

They report evidence of liquidity crunches across emerging market economies by showing that

the decline in stock prices was more severe for firms that intrinsically are more dependent on




4
  Claessens, Djankov, and Xu (2000) investigate how individual East Asian corporations were affected by the 97-98
crisis, but their focus was not on spillover channels. In general though, the contagion literature has largely used price
or aggregate data (see Claessens and Forbes (2001) for an early review and Pritsker (2010) for a recent review of the
contagion literature).
5
  There has been more analysis of the drivers of the recent trade retrenchment, also using firm or sector level data.
For example, Levchenko, Lewis and Tesar (2010), Alessandria, Kaboski and Midrigan (2010), and Bems, Johnson
and Yi (2010). And Duchin, Ozbas and Sensoy (2010) have examined quarterly US investment from Q3, 2007 to
Q3, 2008. International firm-level evidence is still scarce. Bricongne et al (2009) and Behrens et al (2010) use firm-
level data for France and Belgium to examine the impact of crisis on firm exports.
                                                        4

external finance for working capital over the period from July 2007 to the end of 2008.6 Due of

lack of appropriate data at the time, they were not able to show the impact of the financial crisis

on the actual investment and performance of firms. In this paper, by using actual firm level

balance sheets and income variables, and investigating these effects for a large number of

countries affected by the crisis, we complement and expand on this research. While the firm-

level data offers richer information than the aggregate data, there are also caveats one has to bear

in mind. First, we work primarily with manufacturing firms, and do not have much to say about

non-manufacturing firms. Second, we work with publicly listed firms, and cannot claim that

these firms are necessarily representative of the whole economy. Third, firm coverage may vary

by countries. We will make an attempt to check whether the differences in country coverage do

not drive our conclusion.

        In the remainder of the paper, we will discuss in Section 2 the framework that guides our

empirical specifications. In Section 3, we describe the sources of the data and the definitions of

key variables. In Section 4, we present our empirical results. Finally, in Section 5, we offer

concluding remarks.



    2. The Framework

    Our goal is to use firm-level data to improve our ability to distinguish different transmission

channels for the financial and economic crisis in the US and other advanced countries to affect

the rest of the world. We examine three possible channels: a financial channel, a domestic

demand channel and a trade channel.


6
 In terms of transmission mechanisms, Tong and Wei (2011) focus on the composition of a country’s pre-crisis
capital inflows, and found that stock prices fell significantly more for firms in countries with a greater share of
short-term capital flows, but did not explore other channels.
                                                 5

   We employ a consistent framework to distinguish the impacts of these three channels. To

isolate the transmission through the finance channel, we make use of the following idea: if a

reduction in available credit (a “credit crunch”) would play an important role for firms, it should

be reflected in the performance of those firms that rely more on external finance for investment

and working capital relative to those firms that rely less on external financing. Similarly, if the

trade channel were to important, it should be reflected in a relatively worse performance of those

firms that rely more heavily on exports compared to those firms that exports less. Finally, if the

crisis would have triggered a negative domestic demand shock in the respective country, it

should be reflected in a relatively worse performance of those firms that are more demand-

sensitive compared to those firms that are less sensitive to demand.

       We cannot use ex post data on trade and finance dependence to achieve our goal. For

example, a firm may well reduce its international trade, and it may thus appear that the trade

channel is important, but the reason for the reduction in trade could be a lack of working capital,

rather than a trade shock. Conversely, a reduction in working capital or investment may be the

logical response to a reduction in international trade or domestic demand, and not reflective of a

shock to the supply of external financing.

       The basic empirical strategy therefore is to check whether ex ante classifications of firms

in terms of their intrinsic characteristics – degree of their financial dependence, demand

sensitivity and exposure to trade - help to explain changes in their ex post “performance” (i.e.,

profits, sales and investments) following the crisis. We use the approach of relying on the sector

characteristics of U.S. firms before the crisis, which are arguably exogenous to our sample of

firms (see Rajan and Zingales, 1998), to proxy these intrinsic characteristics.

       To be precise, our empirical specification is given by the following regression equation:
                                                    6


        (1) Performancei, j,k,t   * FinancialDependence j   * DemandSensivity j
                                   * TradeSensivity j  Controli, j,k,t   ijkt

where i stands for company, j for sector, k for country and t for time. Performancei, j,k,t is our

measure of the changes in firm-level performance due to the crisis. For example, we use the

change in firms’ profit ratio (profits relative to assets) as measured by the average profit ratio for

2008 and 2009 minus the profit ratio in 2007. Using differences in performance has the

advantage of controlling for many firm and country characteristics, such as the differences in

profitability of various firms before the crisis. As a start, we assume the same β, γ, and λ for all

countries in order to estimate an average effect.

       The propagation can depend on not just firm characteristics, but also country features.

For example, firms in more open countries (to trade or financial markets) could be expected to

see their firms suffer more from financial or trade shocks. To investigate this, we also explore

cross-country heterogeneity in the key dimensions. We do so by interacting firm features with

country features, such as country-level exposure to global capital flows, its overall level of

financial development and trade openness, and then include these interaction terms in the

regressions. For example, to see how firms in a country are affected by changes in (international)

financing conditions, we consider the interaction between a country’s degree of international

financial integration and its manufacturing firms’ dependence on external finance. We pay

special attention to the following country features: financial openness, relative importance of

domestic demand, the degree of trade openness, and the level of domestic financial development.

       The previous specification measures a firm’s dependence on external finance and its

sensitivity to demand and trade by sector-level information from the United States. As an
                                                 7

alternative, we can measure the same set of features using a firm’s own history (realized values

during 2000-2006):

(2) Performancei , j , k ,t
  * FinancialDependencei   * DemandSensivityi   *TradeSensivityi  Controli, j ,k ,t   ijkt

         (The only difference between this and Equation (1) is that the subscripts for the key

regressors are now firm specific.) A potential advantage of this approach is that we could

incorporate information about heterogeneity across firms within a sector. A potential

disadvantage is that these measures could be endogenous or reflect omitted variables. To rule out

some obvious omitted variables, we include individual firm characteristics such as firm size,

cash holdings, and leverage.

         Between the two approaches, we place relatively more confidence in the results from the

first specification.



    3. Data Sources, Variables, and Basics Statistics


We obtain annual data from Worldscope on the balance sheet, cash flow and income statements

for all listed, non-financial manufacturing companies. The data cover 42 advanced countries and

emerging markets (note that the US is excluded as it was both the source of the financial crisis

and the country whose data are used to define the sector characteristics). The number of listed

manufacturing firms by country for the year 2009 is presented in Table 1. (Our sample period is

2007 to 2009). Key dependent variables are the changes from 2007 to 2008/2009 in three ratios:

firm-level profits/assets, sales/assets and investments/assets. These dependent variables are all

winsorized at the 1% level to reduce the impact of outliers. All right-hand-side variables are

measured using data prior to 2007..
                                                 8

       Figure 1 plots the density distributions of firm-level profits/assets, sales/assets and

investments/assets from 2007 to 2009. The patterns in Figure 1 are intuitive. For the profit/asset

ratio, the curves shift gradually to the left over the three years in the sample. Indeed both the

mean and the median of the profit/asset ratio decline (reported in Table 2a). The left tail also

increases over time, indicating an increase in the share of those firms with poor performance

when the crisis came. For the sales/asset ratio, the curves shift to the left only in 2009, while the

curves for 2007 and 2008 track each other quite closely (with the 2008 curve being slightly to the

right of that for 2007). For the capital expenditure/asset ratio, we find that the curves for 2007

and 2008 to be quite similar. The 2009 curve clearly shifts to the left, however, with lower mean

and median values, and, interestingly, a greater dispersion as well.

       Collectively, these charts suggest that sales and investments fell somewhat later in the

crisis phrase than profitability did. Figure 1 also suggests that we may find sharper impacts of

our explanatory variables if we look at changes in performance from 2007 to 2009 rather than

from 2007 to 2008. .

i. Sector- and firm level financial dependence indexes

       We use two measures of a firm’s intrinsic dependence on external finance: Intrinsic

dependence on external finance for investment (DEF_INVj) and Intrinsic dependence on external

finance for working capital (DEF_WKj). We construct a sector-level approximation of a firm’s

intrinsic dependence on external finance for capital investment following the methodology

developed by Rajan and Zingales (1998). Specifically, we define:


                                                           capital expenditures - cash flow
   (3) Dependence on external finance for investment =                                      .
                                                                 capital expenditures
                                                9

       Besides capital needed for investment, working capital is required for a firm to operate

and to satisfy both short-term debt payment and ongoing operational expenses, and to allow for

trade finance. We follow Raddatz (2006) and construct such a measure of intrinsic need for

external finance using the notion of “cash conversion cycle”, which is commonly used in

financial analysis to measure the liquidity position of a firm. The cycle measures the time

elapsed from the moment a firm pays for its inputs to the moment it receives payment for the

goods it sells. Specifically, we define:

                                         inventories - account payables account receivables 
        (4) Cash conversion cycle= 365*                                                    .
                                               cost of goods sold           total sales     

       Following Tong and Wei (2011), both sector level indexes are constructed as follows.

First, for each U.S. firm during 1990-2006, we calculate its dependence on external finance and

its cash conversion cycle based on the annual data from Compustat USA Industrial Annual.

Second, we define the sector-level value of the two indexes by calculating the median across all

firms in the sector (at each SIC 3 digit sector). While the original Rajan and Zingales (1998)

paper covered only 40 (mainly SIC 2-digit) sectors, we expand the coverage to 111 3-digit SIC

sectors. The index numbers are based on U.S. firms, which are judged to be least likely to suffer

from financing constraints (during normal times) relative to firms in other countries, meaning we

can reasonably assume that the same intrinsic external financing dependence applies to firms in

all other countries. This assumption is common in the literature (earlier papers that have used

such indexes include Claessens and Laeven, 2003; Raddatz, 2006; and Kroszner, Laeven, and

Klingebiel, 2007). The literature has also confirmed that similar rank order of sectors in terms of

finance dependence ratio holds for Canada. (Rajan and Zingales (1998).

       Our alternative measure uses information on the history of a firm during 2000-2006. We

define individual firms’ actual use of external financing for working capital and investment
                                                  10

(Actual firm use of external financing for investment, ACT_INVi, and Actual firm use of external

financing for working capital, ACT_WKi) in a similar way:

        (5) ACT _ INVi  Actual use external finance for investment
                          capital expenditures - cash flow
                      =                                    .
                                capital expenditures

        (6) ACT _ WK i  Actual use external finance for working capital
                             inventories - account payables account receivables 
                     = 365*                                                    
                                   cost of goods sold           total sales     

       We calculate the median of these ratios, ACT _ INVi or ACT _ WKi , over the period

2000 to 2006. Using these firm-level indicators, we ask whether firms that were more dependent

on external financing prior to the crisis were more affected by the global crisis. Even though the

firm-level actual use of external finance may be endogenous, our measures are at least pre-

determined with respect to the 2008-2009 crisis.




ii. Sector-level and firm-level demand sensitivity indexes

       We next define our index for a firm’s relative sensitivity to a contraction in aggregate

consumer demand. As noted, the effect of a crisis on demand is likely to vary by type of product

and sector. For example, consumer durables are typically more affected than consumer

necessities during a recession. Tong and Wei (2008) develop such a sector-level index using the

stock price reactions of US firms to the September 11, 2001 terrorist attack. To construct the

index, they compute the change in log stock price for each U.S. firm between September 10 and

September 28, 2001. They then calculate the mean log stock price change for all firms in each

three-digit SIC sector, and use it as a measure of the sector-level demand sensitivity. Excluding

financial sector firms, they do this in total for 361 three-digit level sectors. Similar to the external
                                                          11

financing dependence ratio, this approach assumes that the sensitivity to demand shocks is an

intrinsic property of a sector, and therefore the index derived from the pre-crisis data is

applicable to firms in the same sector across all countries during the crisis. Tong and Wei (2008)

conduct a number of checks to make sure that this index reflects the relative sensitivity of a

firm’s stock price to an unexpected shock in consumer demand, and is not contaminated by a

firm’s sensitivity to liquidity or other shocks.7

         We also develop an indicator for the pre-crisis, firm-specific degree of demand

sensitivity. We construct this as the elasticity of firm-specific sales to the country’s GDP in the

six years before the crisis, i.e., 2000-2006. More specifically, we regress for each firm the

change in its (log) real sales (in local currency) on the change in the (log) country’s real GDP (in

local currency) over the period 2000 to 2006, and then use the coefficient as the firm-level

measure of demand elasticity.



iii. Sector-level and firm-level trade sensitivity indexes

         We next construct a sector-level measure of exposure to trade. Specifically, we regress

the change in the log global exports at the 3-digit sector level over the period 2000-2006 on the

change in log global GDP (in US dollar) during the same period. We then use the coefficient on

global GDP as the sector-level trade sensitivity. Note that this trade sensitivity index is neither



7
  First they verify that there was indeed a big downward shift in expected aggregate demand, as reflected by a
downward adjustment in the consensus forecast of subsequent U.S. GDP growth in the aftermath of the shock at the
same time. Second, they argue that because the Federal Reserve took timely and decisive actions, the relative stock
price moves do not reflect effect of the 9/11 shock on firms’ financial constraints since that was small or at most
short lived. Indeed they show that for that episode, both the level of the real interest rate and the TED spread (risk
premium), after initial spikes, quickly returned to a level only moderately higher than the pre-9/11 level, suggesting
that the market regarded the Federal Reserve’s actions as sufficient to restore the market’s desired level of liquidity.
They therefore conclude that the cumulative stock price change from September 10 to 28, 2001, is unlikely to also
reflect firms’ reactions to a deterioration of credit availability..
                                                  12

country nor firm specific, similar to the earlier sector indexes for investment, working capital and

demand.

        We also construct a measure of firm-level index for sensitivity to trade shocks. By

regressing the annual change of a firm’s real sales on the annual percentage change in its home

country exports over the period 2000 to 2006, we derive a firm-specific coefficient on the

exports variable that is then used as a proxy of the pre-crisis trade sensitivity of the particular

firm. Because this measure is firm-specific, it varies across firms, sectors, and countries.



iv. Basic Statistics

        Table 2a provides summary statistics of general firm performance before and during the

2008-09 crisis.    Table 2b reports summary statistics for our dependent variables and key

explanatory variables. The statistics confirm the impression gleaned from Figure 1. The

dispersion across firms indicates wide variations among firms (and countries). Indeed, there are

firms that actually increased their profitability in spite of the crisis. Similarly, while the sales and

capital expenditure to assets ratios generally decline, there are exceptions. The variations would

allow us to perform meaningful analysis.

        Table 2c reports the correlations of variables, with an asterisk indicating correlations

significant at the 5% level. We find that the change in profit is significantly negatively associated

with more than half of the explanatory variables. This suggests that different firm types may

experience different effects in the crisis. Of course, these are only pair-wise correlations, without

controlling for other factors. We next address this issue formally by employing multivariate

regression analyses.
                                                      13



    4. Empirical Results



i. Baseline Results

         We start with our basic regression, which examines how various sector features affect

changes in firm performance during the crisis. These results are reported in Table 3. As our

explanatory variables are at the sector level, we cluster standard errors by sector.

         In Column 1, we look at the impact of the crisis on changes in firms’ profit/asset ratios.

We find that the impact on profits to be more pronounced for those sectors that are intrinsically

more sensitive to demand shocks. This result suggests that there was indeed a significant global

demand shock during the crisis period as consumers and firms adjusted. The impact of crisis on

profits is also more pronounced for trade-sensitive sectors, consistent with the decline in global

trade during the crisis period. The coefficients on DEP_WK and DEP_INV are also negative,

albeit insignificant..8

         In Column 2 of Table 3, we look at the impact of the crisis on sales over assets. Similar to

profit, sales declined significantly for those sectors more sensitive to demand and trade,

consistent with the presence of important demand and trade effects. Sales over assets also

decreased significantly for those sectors with greater intrinsic needs for working capital. This

result suggests that disruptions to the supply of working capital related to the global financial

crisis reduced firm-level sales. This finding is consistent with Tong and Wei (2011), who found

that the crisis reduced stock prices significantly more in those sectors with large working capital

needs.

8
  Note that the trade effect could indirectly refect a financing effect if a contraction of trade is caused by a
contraction of trade financing(see Amiti and Weinstein (2009); Paravisini, Rappoport, Schnabl, and Wolfenzon
(2011).
                                                   14

        In Column 3, we examine the impact on capital investment. Here we find no significant

relationships. This may not be surprising, however, since investment is notoriously difficult to

explain in general as it depends on (volatile) expectations of future profitability and is subject to

long leads and lagsas well as lumpy behavior. The demand and the trade channels could be

related especially in a country that is highly open to trade. To give the trade channel the

maximum chance to reveal itself, in Columns 4 to 6, we drop the demand channel. We find that

the coefficients for the trade channel for the profits, sales and investment regressions remain

almost the same as in column 1-3, suggesting that our demand sensitivity index and trade

sensitivity index capture different aspects of the crisis effects.      (The coefficients on trade

sensitivity are larger in Columns 4 and 5 than in Columns 1 and 2. This suggests that a part of

the trade effect may be reflected in the demand channel, although the differences in the

coefficients are not statistically significant).

        To provide the economic impact of our estimates, we focus on statistically significant

variables in Columns 1-3. Based on the coefficient, a one standard deviation increase in the

demand sensitivity, say from a level in the sector of Surgical and Medical Instruments to one in

the sector Construction Machinery, will reduce profit by 0.44%, or 14% of the average change of

profit. Meanwhile, a one standard deviation increase in trade sensitivity will reduce profit by

0.64%, or 21% of the average change in profit. Finally, a one standard deviation increase in the

intrinsic needs for working capital will reduce the sales by 0.70%, or equivalent to the average

drop in sales (0.73%). These estimates suggest that the economic impacts are significant.

ii. Addressing Possible Sample Selection

        Across the 42 countries in the sample, the number of firms is uneven. In this subsection,

we wish to examine the concerns that the varying country coverage may create a bias due to the
                                                 15

dominance of some large countries with many firms. We address this in two ways. We first run a

weighted regression using the same specifications as in Table 3, with the weights equal to the

inverse of the square root of the number of firms in the sample for each country. The weighting

scheme is meant to reduce the dominance of large countries in the estimation results. We find

that the results become even more pronounced for the demand and the trade channels for profits

and sales (Table 4, columns 1-3). For example, the coefficient of demand sensitivity is -1.2 in the

profit equation with the weighted regression, while it was -0.46 in the baseline regression. Also,

the coefficient for trade sensitivity is -3.3 in the sales equation with weighted regression, while it

was -1.78 in the baseline regression. Moreover, dependence on external finance for capital

investment (DEP_INV) is now significantly negative at the 10% level for the equation of

investment. That is, the crisis tightens financial constraints and reduces available funding for

capital investment.

       As an alternative way to control for uneven sample coverage, we restrict our sample to

the 100 largest listed manufacturing firms in each country. This ensures that all countries receive

similar weight. The results are presented in columns 4 to 6 of Table 4. Here the sample size

drops to about one-third of the number in Table 3. Again, we find the results for both the demand

and trade channels to be larger and more significant than those reported in Table 3. For example,

trade sensitivity has a coefficient of -3.42, while it was -1.78 in the baseline regression.

Furthermore, dependence for working capital (DEP_WK) now becomes significant negative in

the sales equation, suggesting that the crisis reduces the availability of working capital and hence

decreases firms’ sales.

       Our sample of listed firms could have a built-in survivorship bias – those firms that

experienced the most declines in profitability during the crisis may exit the sample. So the true
                                                                    16

decline in firm performance may be greater than what our statistical tables capture9 We control

for survivorship bias by running a Heckman selection model, which has a selection equation and

an outcome equation. In the selection equation, we include all the explanatory variables from the

outcome equation (i.e., the explanatory variables in Table 3), as well as firm O-score measured

as of 2007. The O-score is developed by Ohlson (1980) and measures the likelihood of firm

bankruptcy, with higher O-score indicating higher likelihood of bankruptcy.10 In Table 5, we

report the results for the outcome model in columns 1, 3, 5 and for the one-step Heckman

selection model in columns 2, 4 and 6. The selection equations confirm that firms with a higher

O-score are more likely to drop out of the sample by 2009. After controlling for this selection

effect (or the survivorship bias), the coefficients on demand sensitivity and trade sensitivity in

the outcome equations are still negative and statistically significant, which are similar to those in

Table 3. In other words, those firms that are most sensitive to a demand shock or most sensitive

to a trade shock experience a greater decline in profit and sales. Moreover, the coefficient for

working capital needs (DEP_WK) remains significantly negative in the sales equation.



iii. Country Features

           We next investigate the role of country factors. To examine differential effects of the

crisis across we include the following country characteristics: financial openness (defined as total

9
    Worldscope drops a company if it becomes privately held, merged, liquidated, or otherwise inactive.
10
    The O-Score combines nine accounting ratios into a single statistic:

                                             Total Liability        Working Capital        Current Liabilities
           O -Score=  1.32  0.41Size  6.03                 1.43                  0.08
                                              Total Asset             Total Asset           Current Asset
                          Net Income               FFO
                    2.37              1.83                    0.285F  1.72G  0.52 H
                          Total Asset        Total Liabilities

where Size is the log of total asset divided by the GDP deflator; FFO means pre-tax income plus depreciation and
amortization; F is a dummy equal to one if cumulative net income over the previous two years is negative; G is a
dummy equal to one if owners’ equity is negative; and H is the change in net income.
                                                 17

international assets plus liabilities over GDP), financial development (defined as credit to private

sector over GDP), trade linkage (defined as exports minus imports over GDP), and the share of

domestic expenditure in total demand (defined as the sum of consumer expenditures, investment

and government expenditure over GDP). Note that, by definition, the last two variables, the

shares of trade and domestic expenditures in GDP, sum up to one. Country-level financial

openness and financial development are interacted with both DEP_WK and DEP_INV; country-

level trade linkage is interacted with sector-level trade sensitivity; and country-level domestic

expenditure share is interacted with sector-level demand sensitivity. These country features are

all measured as of the year 2006, i.e., prior to the crisis, and hence do not vary over time.

       The results are reported in Table 6. In Columns 1-3, we do not include any country or

sector fixed effects, while in Columns 4-6, we include both sector and country fixed effects (and

thus drop the country level variables that are not interacted).

       Column 1 reports the results for the change in profits. Here we find a significantly

negative coefficient for the interaction term between trade sensitivity and trade linkage, but no

significant coefficient for the interaction terms between the other sector characteristics and

country features. Column 2 reports the results for the change in sales. Here we again find the

interaction of trade sensitivity and trade linkage to have a negative and statistically significant

coefficient, but no other variable is found to be statistically significant. Column 3 reports the

results for the change in capital expenditures. The only significant coefficient is the interaction

between trade sensitivity and trade linkage, with trade-sensitive sectors reducing capital

expenditures more in trade-open countries. The coefficient for general trade linkage is positive

(0.66), but its interpretation has to consider the interaction effect as well. Overall, the net effect
                                                 18

for trade linkage is significantly negative for firms with average trade sensitivity (i.e.,-4.84 =

0.66-4.17*1.32).

       In Columns 4-6, we include both country and sector fixed effects. The sector-level trade

sensitivity interacted with country-level trade linkage always retains its significantly negative

coefficient for all three performance measures. For profit, demand sensitivity interacted with

domestic expenditure has again a negative coefficient, but now significant at the 10% level. For

capital expenditures, dependence on external finance for investment interacted with financial

openness is again negative, but now also statistically significant at the 5% level.

       Collectively, these results differ from Rose and Spiegel (2010a,b), who find little

systematic evidence regarding the role of cross-country linkages during the crisis on outcomes at

the macro level. Here we find the openness of the country to trade and finance to have affected

the impact of the crisis on firms in a material way.

       To gauge the economic impact, we can use the coefficients of Columns 1-3 in Table 6.

We find that, for a firm in a sector whose trade sensitivity is at the 75th percentile (which is

General Industrial Machinery), an increase in the country trade linkage by one standard deviation

(e.g., from France to Brazil) will reduce a firm’s profit ratio by 0.53%, or about 18% of the

average drop in the profit ratio over the crisis period. The same increase in trade linkage would

reduce the sale/asset ratio by 2.14%, which even exceeds the average decline of sales of 0.73%.

Furthermore, the same increase in trade linkage would reduce the capital expenditures to asset

ratio by 0.41%, which is large compared to the average decline of capital investment, 0.57%.

Overall, Table 6 suggests that exposure to international trade was a statistically and economically

important channel in the global transmission of the crisis.
                                                  19




iv. Policy Measures

       Countries took many measures aimed at mitigating the effects of the financial crisis on

their economies. These measures varied from monetary easing and fiscal stimulus, to financial

sector interventions, such as liquidity support, recapitalization and guarantees, and direct support

to the real sectors, as for trade finance and SMEs. These policy measures could have mitigated

the impact of the crisis, and thus also have led to less significant results on the importance of

spillovers in our regressions. In the extreme case, if most affected countries also adopted more

counter-cyclical policies, then we may not see much connection between country features and

the magnitude of the effect. In any case, it is interesting to investigate the effects of these policies

on firm performance considering specific channels.

       In Table 7, we specifically examine whether countries’ monetary and fiscal stimulus

mitigated the impact of the crisis in general and affected the severity of the demand and

financing channels in particular. (We do not include the trade channel here as that is not directly

affected by these policy measures.) We now include country and sector fixed effects as general

controls (this also means we can no longer identify the demand, trade and finance channels on

their own). Our first measure of monetary stimulus is proxied by the change in nominal short-

term interest rates from September 2008 to March 2009 as also used in Laeven and Valencia

(2011). We interact this measure of monetary stimulus with DEP_INV and DEP_WK to examine

the impact of monetary stimulus on profits, sales, and investment through the financing channel.

We do not include monetary stimulus on its own as it has been captured by country fixed effects.

We interact the fiscal stimulus, measured by the size of discretionary fiscal stimulus as a percent

of GDP as announced between September 2008 and March 2009, with our demand sensitivities.
                                                  20

Both the monetary and fiscal stimulus might be endogenous as they could be driven by the

severity of the shocks and the depth of the recession within the country. Since this would bias the

coefficients toward zero, to the extent that we find statistically significant effects, we can

reasonably argue that the stimulus indeed played a positive role.

       The measure of fiscal stimulus interacted with demand sensitivity has a positive

significant coefficient in the case of profits, but is insignificant for sales and investment (Table 7,

columns 1-3). The interaction term of monetary stimulus with DEP_WK is positive for the

changes in profits, sales and investment and significant at the 5% level in case of the profit

equation. In Columns 4-6, we use another measure of monetary policy: the change in the money

base over GDP from September 2008 to March 2009. We find again that monetary policy

stimulus interacted with DEP_INV has a significant positive coefficient in case of profits, and

now the coefficient in the sales equation is also significant, but remains insignificant in case of

investment. Overall, we find some positive impacts of fiscal stimulus through the demand

channel and strong positive impacts of monetary stimulus operating through the financial

channel and affecting working capital.



iv. Additional robustness checks

       In Table 8 we include among the set of explanatory variables a number of firm-specific

control variables, such as cash holding/asset, total assets in US Dollar, Tobin’s Q, short-term

debt over assets, and long-term debt/assets. All these firm controls are again measured by their

values in the year 2006, so they are pre-determined with respect to the crisis. In Columns 1-3 of

Table 8, we replicate the first three columns of Table 3. Adding these firm variables does not

weaken our results for sectoral measures and strengthens them in some cases. For example, in
                                                21

Column 1, studying the change in the profit ratio, the coefficient for demand sensitivity is now

larger (-0.63) compared with Table 3 (-0.46). In Columns 4-6 of Table 8, we repeat the exercise

of Columns 4-6 of Table 6 regarding the interaction of country and sector features, but adding

now again these firm-specific controls. The interaction terms of sector and country features

become slightly more significant. For example, in the profit equation (Column 4), trade linkage

interacted with trade sensitivity now has a coefficient of (-9.0) compared with (-8.0) earlier

(Table 4, column 4). Of the firm controls themselves, a higher Tobin’s Q is significantly

associated with lower profit and lower sales, possibly reflecting the fact that firms that were

valued higher because of their (perceived) greater growth opportunities suffered more in the

crisis. But we need to exercise caution in interpreting these results, as they may suffer from

endogeneity or omitted variables issues.

       We next check whether our results are affected by the specific period over which we

conduct the comparison. In Table 9, we replicate the setup of Table 3 but study separately the

crisis as to its effects over the 2008 and 2009 subperiods. In Columns 1-3, we study the change

between 2007 and 2008, while in Columns 4-6, we look at the change between 2007 and 2009.

We largely confirm the role of the various channels and country factors. Since the change in firm

performance appears to have been stronger in 2009 (as also suggested by Figure 1), we can

expect to find more evidence and greater significance for the demand and trade integration

channels during the second sub-period.

       In case of the change in profit in 2008 compared to 2007 (Column 1), we find no

significant result for the sectoral variables in terms of the demand, trade and financial channels.

In contrast, for the change in profits between 2009 and 2007 (Column 4), the coefficients are all

negative for all three channels and significant for the demand and trade channels. For the change
                                                  22

of sales in 2008 (Column 2), we find demand sensitivity to be significantly negative, but trade

sensitivity to be significantly positive. One possibility for the positive result for trade sensitivity

could be because we are using annual data on firm performance and may thus miss the decline of

trade in the fourth quarter of 2008. (Note that on an annual basis, exports still increased rather

than decreased in 2008, as shown at the global level in Figure 2.) In Column 2, we find a

significant and negative coefficient for working capital needs, which suggests the presence of

some financial constraints already in 2008. For sales in 2009 (Column 5), we find that trade

sensitivity has a negative coefficient, significant at the 1% level. Moreover, compared to 2008,

demand sensitivity has a more pronounced impact, which is also more statistically significant.

Overall, this suggest that, while financing constraints may have played a role already in 2008, the

trade and demand channels played a more significant role in affecting firm performance in 2009

than in 2008.

       We next use another proxy for the trade channel, namely the percentage change in

exports between 2007 and 2009 at the 4-digit SIC sector level for each country where the firm is

located. We use this measure with the caveat that it is a measure over the same period as our

dependent variables, i.e., it is not pre-determined with respect to our dependent variable, and

hence is more subject to the problem of endogeneity. On the other hand, it presumably captures

the trade channel more directly, as it measures the degree to which exports declined, and could

hence serve as a useful check on our earlier measure of trade channel. In Table 10, we find that

the country-sector decline of exports from 2007 to 2009 is associated with a decline in firm-level

profits, sales and investment over the same period, with the effect being significant for profits.

Moreover, we continue to find significant negative impact of the crisis through the demand
                                                23

channel (measured in the normal manner), on the change in profits and sales and evidence of a

negative effect through the financing channel as regards investment on the change in profits.



v. Firm-level measure of demand, trade and financial channels

       In Table 11, we replace our sector-level measures of financial and real sensitivities with

firm-level measures. That is, we use the actual firm-level dependence on external finance for

investment, firm-level working capital usage, and firm-level demand sensitivity and trade

sensitivities. These variables are measured using the pre-crisis firm-level data from 2000 to

2006. As noted, relative to sector features derived from US data, the firm-level measures could

be subject to some endogeneity issues and hence could bias our estimation.

       In Column 1, we report the results for the change in profits. We find that the profit rate is

significantly lower for firms that are more demand-sensitive. This result is consistent with Table

3 where we used sector-level demand sensitivity. However, we find the coefficient on ACT_INV

to be significantly positive, which could reflect the endogeneity in ACT_INV. In Column 2, we

report the results for the change in sales over assets. Again, we find the coefficients on demand

and trade sensitivity to be negative and statistically significant, similar to the findings based on

sectoral measures of sensitivity. In Column 3 of Table 11, we report the results for the change in

capital expenditures. Firms with high trade sensitivity or large ACT_INV prior to the crisis seem

to need to adjust their capital expenditures during the crisis significantly more downwards.

       These findings are intuitive, but differ from the sectoral analysis in Table 3 (where we did

not find a significant impact on investment). As a robustness check, in Columns 4 to 6, we focus

on the trade channel and do not include the demand channel, to avoid their possible joint

codetermination affecting our regression results (the firm-level trade and demand sensitivities
                                                  24

have a correlation of 0.28). Now the trade channel shows a coefficient with a larger magnitude

and is significantly negative for all three dependent variables. This suggests that some of the

demand effects operated through the trade channel.

       In Table 12, we repeat the regression of Table 11 by including the interaction terms

between firm-level sensitivities and country features. Column 1 reports the result for the change

in profits. The interaction between ACT_INV and financial development (proxied by private

credit/GDP) is significant at the 1%. The other interaction terms are not significant, however.

Columns 2 and 3 report the results for the changes in sales and capital expenditures, respectively.

We do not find significant interaction effects for sales, but do find evidence of the financial

channel for the changes in capital expenditures. We also find that trade sensitivities are

statistically significant for both the change in sales and in capital expenditures. In Columns 4 to

6, we further include country dummies and find the patterns to be very similar, with evidence

mostly for the financial channel on investment.

       The lack of significant results using firm specific indicators could be due to the increased

noise associated with the firm specific measures. And, as noted, these firm-specific indexes are

more subject to the issues of endogeneity, e.g., firms with lower profitability have to obtain more

external financing. For that reason, sector-level indexes behave much more like instruments than

these firm-specific indexes do. Hence, we put more weight on our results from sector-based

analysis than that using firm-level indicators. Nonetheless, the analyses with firm-specific

indexes confirm the role of demand and trade sensitivity and find some evidence for a financial

channel.
                                                 25


   5. Conclusions

       In this paper, we apply a simple and well-established methodological framework to study

the real impacts of the 2008-09 crisis on firm-level performance and the role of global linkages

in the crisis. We analyze three channels through which the crisis may have affected firms: a

financial channel, a demand channel, and a trade channel. To investigate the financial channel,

we asked the question: if we characterize manufacturing firms into different baskets based on

their ex ante sensitivity to shocks to external financing (in terms of investment and working

capital needs), does this characterization help us to explain the ex-post performance of these

firms? Similarly, if we characterize these firms based on their intrinsic sensitivity to demand or

trade shocks, do firms with different scores perform differently during the crisis? And to

investigate the role of global linkages, we include country-level financial and trade linkages, and

their interactions with the proxies for the financial/demand/trade channels, into our regression

framework.

       We examine changes over the crisis period in three measures of firm performance—sales,

profits and capital expenditure—for 7722 manufacturing firms from 42 countries. We find that,

in economic terms, the trade and demand channels were the most important, particularly in 2009.

When we examine the role of country-level linkages, including financial and trade linkages, we

find that trade linkages played a significant role in the spillover of crisis, while the evidence for

the role of financial linkages is considerably weaker.

       It is important to point out that the current paper is not meant to be a comprehensive

assessment of the welfare effects of global linkages. To do that, several additional aspects need

to be examined, including how different forms of global linkages affected firm external financing
                                                 26

constraints and growth rates during tranquil times, e.g., before the crisis. This would be a fruitful

topic for future research.
                                              27




References


Alessandria, George, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan, 2010, The Great Trade Collapse
       of 2008–09: An Inventory Adjustment?, IMF Economic Review 58, 254-294.

Amiti, Mary and David E. Weinstein, 2009, Exports and Financial Shocks, NBER Working
       Papers 15556.

Arcand, Jean Louis, Enrico Berkes, and Ugo Panizza, 2011, Too Much Finance?, UNCTAD
      working paper.

Blanchard, Olivier J., Mitali Das, and Hamid Faruqee, 2010, The Initial Impact of the Crisis on
      Emerging Market Countries, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 263-307.

Bems, Rudolfs, Robert C Johnson, and Kei-Mu Yi, 2010, Demand Spillovers and the Collapse of
      Trade in the Global Recession, IMF Economic Review 58, 295-326.

Cetorelli, Nicola, and Linda S. Goldberg, 2009, Global Banks and International Shock
       Transmission: Evidence from the Crisis, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Working
       paper.

Claessens, Stijn, and Kristin Forbes, 2001, International Financial Contagion: An Overview, in
       International Financial Contagion, Stijn Claessens and Kristin Forbes (eds.), Kluwer
       Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA.

Claessens, Stijn, and Luc Laeven, 2003, Financial Development, Property Rights, and Growth,
       Journal of Finance 58, 2401–36.

Claessens, Stijn, Giovanni Dell'Ariccia, Deniz Igan, and Luc Laeven, 2010, Lessons and Policy
       Implications from the Global Financial Crisis, Economic Policy, A European Forum, Vol.
       62, 269-293.

Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, and Lixin Colin Xu, 2000, Corporate Performance in the East
       Asian Financial Crisis, World Bank Research Observer, Oxford University Press, vol.
       15(1), 23-46, February.

Duchin, Ran, Oguzhan Ozbas, and Berk Sensoy, 2010, Costly external finance, corporate
      investment, and the subprime mortgage credit crisis, Journal of Financial Economics, 97,
      418-435.

Forbes, Kristin, 2004, Asian Flu and Russian Virus: The International Transmission of Crises in
       Firm-Level Data, Journal of International Economics, vol. 63, 59-92.
                                              28

Frankel Jeffrey, and George Saravelos, 2010, Are Leading Indicators of Financial Crises Useful
       for Assessing Country Vulnerability? Evidence from the 2008-09 Global Crisis, NBER
       Working Papers 16047.

Kroszner, Randall, Luc Laeven, and Daniela Klingebiel, 2007, Banking crises, Financial
      Dependence, and Growth, Journal of Financial Economics 84(1), 187-228.

Laeven Luc, Fabian Valencia, 2011, The Real Effects of Financial Sector Interventions During
      Crises, IMF Working Papers 11/45.

Levchenko, Andrei A, Logan T Lewis, and Linda L Tesar, 2010, The Collapse of International
      Trade during the 2008–09 Crisis: In Search of the Smoking Gun, IMF Economic Review
      58, 214-253.

Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria, and Cédric Tille, 2011, The Great Retrenchment: International
       Capital Flows During the Global Financial Crisis, Economic Policy, 26(66), 289-346,
       April.

Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria, and Philip Lane, 2010, The Cross-Country Incidence of the Global
       Crisis, IMF Working Paper 10/171.

Ohlson, James, 1980, Financial Ratios and the Probabilistic Prediction of Bankruptcy, Journal of
      Accounting Research 18, 109-131.

Paravisini, Daniel, Veronica Rappoport, Philipp Schnabl, Daniel Wolfenzon, 2011, Dissecting
       The Effect of Credit Supply on Trade: Evidence From Matched Credit-Export Data,
       NBER Working Paper 16975.

Pritsker, Matthew, 2010, Contagion: Definitions, Types, and Linkages (unpublished manuscript;
        Federal Reserve Board).

Raddatz, Claudio, 2006, Liquidity Needs and Vulnerability to Financial Underdevelopment,
      Journal of Financial Economics 80, 677–722.

Rajan, Raghuram and Zingales, Luigi, 1998, Financial Dependence and Growth, American
       Economic Review 88(3), 559-86.

Rose, Andrew K., and Mark M. Spiegel, 2010a, Causes and Consequences of the 2008 Crisis:
       International Linkages and American Exposure, Pacific Economic Review, 15(3), 340-
       363, August 2010

Rose, Andrew K., and Mark M. Spiegel, 2010b, The Causes and Consequences of the 2008
      Crisis: Early Warning, Global Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
                                              29

Rose, Andrew K. and Mark M. Spiegel, 2011, Cross-country Causes and Consequences of the
       Crisis: An update, European Economic Review, 55(3), 309-324.

Tong, Hui and Shang-Jin Wei, 2011, The Composition Matters: Capital Inflows and Liquidity
      Crunch during a Global Economic Crisis, Review of Financial Studies 24(6): 2023-52.

Tong, Hui and Shang-Jin Wei, 2008, Real effects of the subprime mortgage crisis: is it a demand
       or a finance shock?, NBER Working Paper No.14205, and IMF Working Paper 08/186.
                                                30


      Table 1. Number of Listed Manufacturing Firms by Country
           Country             Obs #                   Country                  Obs #
1.       ARGENTINA             28         2.      ITALY                         100

3.       AUSTRALIA             212        4.      JAPAN                         1,584

5.       AUSTRIA               30         6.      KOREA (SOUTH)                 643

7.       BELGIUM               48         8.      MALAYSIA                      376

9.       BRAZIL                111        10.     MEXICO                        40

11.      CANADA                196        12.     NETHERLANDS                   49

13.      CHILE                 41         14.     NEW ZEALAND                   32

15.      CHINA                 866        16.     NORWAY                        53

17.      COLOMBIA              5          18.     PAKISTAN                      66

19.      CZECH REPUBLIC        2          20.     PERU                          22

21.      DENMARK               46         22.     PHILIPPINES                   31

23.      EGYPT                 41         24.     POLAND                        114

25.      FINLAND               60         26.     PORTUGAL                      11

27.      FRANCE                225        28.     RUSSIAN FEDERATION            105

29.      GERMANY               275        30.     SOUTH AFRICA                  72

31.      GREECE                91         32.     SPAIN                         43

33.      HUNGARY               11         34.     SWEDEN                        148

35.      INDIA                 995        36.     SWITZERLAND                   93

37.      INDONESIA             96         38.     THAILAND                      208

39.      IRELAND               12         40.     TURKEY                        125

41.      ISRAEL                67         42.     UNITED KINGDOM                349

Total                          7722

Note: The table lists the number of manufacturing firms in the sample for the year 2007.
Source: Worldscope.
                                                              31



                 Table 2a. Summary statistics of firm performance before and during the 2008-09 crisis
Variable                      Year        Obs         Mean         Std      p25     Median   p75     Min      Max
Profit/asset                  2007        7540        0.097        0.131    0.062   0.108    0.155   -0.555   0.395
Profit/asset                  2008        7506        0.074        0.146    0.045   0.092    0.143   -0.555   0.395
Profit/asset                  2009        7147        0.063        0.141    0.030   0.080    0.131   -0.555   0.395

Sales/asset                   2007        7722        1.019        0.554    0.658   0.933    1.284   0.028    2.964
Sales/asset                   2008        7721        1.035        0.564    0.665   0.946    1.307   0.028    2.964
Sales/asset                   2009        7402        0.988        0.551    0.614   0.902    1.255   0.028    2.964

Capital expenditure/asset       2007       7606          0.059      0.059   0.019   0.041    0.078   0.000    0.301
Capital expenditure/asset       2008       7575          0.059      0.058   0.019   0.041    0.079   0.000    0.301
Capital expenditure/asset       2009       7261          0.049      0.052   0.015   0.033    0.063   0.000    0.301
Note: The data is for 7722 listed manufacturing firms from 42 countries.
Source: Worldscope.
                                                             32




                          Table 2b. Summary statistics of key dependent and explanatory variables
Variable                               Obs       Mean         Std      p25     Median       p75             Min        Max
Firm level
Change in Profit/Asset (%)              7540      -3.09       9.26        -6.27     -2.01       0.86       -38.26     26.68
Change in Sales/Asset(%)                7722      -0.73       22.56      -10.57      0.10       9.85       -82.07     70.73
Change in CapEX/asset (%)               7606      -0.57       4.90        -1.99     -0.08       1.31       -19.91     14.74

Actual firm use of working capital
(ACT_WK, in days)                       7257      105.60      58.01      64.50      96.84      134.40       4.40      307.86
Actual firm use of external financing
for investment (ACT_INV)                6152      -0.31       2.26       -1.17       -0.22      0.51        -8.95     11.81
Firm-level demand sensitivity           5756       1.93       10.23      -1.79        1.56      5.63       -40.10     47.43
Firm-level trade sensitivity            5710       0.48        2.88      -0.47        0.26      1.44       -10.57     12.62

Sector Level
Dependence on external finance for
working capital (DEF_WK , days)         111       91.91       32.71      66.98      88.45      116.06      22.34      158.62
Dependence on external finance for
investment (DEF_INV )                   100        0.03       0.44       -0.26       0.04       0.33       -0.86       1.13
Demand sensitivity                      123        1.56       0.96        1.02       1.43       2.07       -1.06       4.58
Trade sensitivity                       132        1.32       0.60       0.99        1.29       1.57       -0.64       3.58

Country level
Financial Openness (year 2006)          42         3.47       4.14       1.18        2.07       4.19       0.61       23.81
Trade linkage (year 2006)               42         0.02       0.07       -0.02       0.02       0.06       -0.10       0.22
Credit over GDP (year 2006)             42         0.87       0.51       0.35        0.87       1.12       0.13        1.86
Domestic expenditure (year 2006)        42         0.97       0.07       0.94        0.97       1.02       0.78        1.09

Note: The data is for 7722 listed manufacturing firms in 42 countries. Key dependent variables are the changes between 2007 and
2008/2009 in the ratios of firm-level profits/assets, sales/assets and investments/assets.
Source: Worldscope.
                                                                 33




                         Table 2c.Correlation table of key dependent and explanatory variables
                                                                        Demand Trade                            Firm demand
                             ∆Profit   ∆Sales ∆CE        DEF_WK DEF_INV sensitivity sensitivity ACT_WK ACT_INV sensitivity
∆Sales                       0.18*
∆Capital Expenditure         0.001     -0.03*
DEF_WK                       -0.02     -0.04* 0.02
DEF_INV                      -0.05*    -0.04* 0.01       0.26*
Demand Sensitivity           -0.04*    -0.04* -0.01      0.03*      0.23*
Trade sensitivity            -0.07*    -0.05* 0.02*      0.01       0.24*      0.06*
ACT_WK                       0.002     0.005    -0.003   0.20*      0.03*      0.04*       0.01
ACT_INV                      0.03*     0.03*    -0.03*   0.03*     0.06*       0.02        -0.02      0.09*
Firm demand sensitivity      -0.03*    -0.04* -0.03      0.01       0.01       0.04*       0.004      0.04*       -0.01
Firm trade sensitivity       -0.03     -0.03* -0.03*     0.01       0.01       0.01        0.02       0.01        0.04*       0.28*

Note: * is at the 5% significance level. The data is for 7722 listed manufacturing firms in 42 countries. Change in profit/asset refers to the
difference between the profit/asset ratio averaged over 2008-09 and the profit/asset ratio in 2007. Similar for the changes of sales and
capital expenditure (CapEX). Source: Worldscope.
                                                                 34




                                  Table 3. The Impact of Crisis on Firm Performance
                                                  -sector feature
                                                        (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)
                                                      ∆Profit          ∆Sales        ∆CapEx        ∆Profit       ∆Sales     ∆CapEx

Demand sensitivity                                    -0.456**        -1.196***      -0.0835
                                                       [0.222]          [0.451]       [0.106]
Trade sensitivity                                    -1.068***         -1.778**        0.125     -1.091***     -1.815**   0.121
                                                       [0.266]          [0.693]      [0.0817]      [0.304]      [0.781] [0.0839]
Dependence for working capital                        -0.00406         -0.0213*      0.00183      -0.00379      -0.0206 0.00188
(DEP_WK)                                             [0.00509]         [0.0129]     [0.00193]    [0.00556]     [0.0140] [0.00189]

Dependence on external finance for investment         -0.489           -0.398        0.0997        -0.666       -0.884      0.0673
(DEF_INV)                                             [0.392]          [0.767]       [0.165]       [0.409]      [0.866]     [0.165]
                                                                                                                               -
Constant                                              -0.391          5.750***     -0.809***       -1.057       3.959*     0.931***
                                                      [0.745]          [2.092]       [0.300]       [0.715]      [2.181]     [0.235]
Observations                                           7,540            7,722         7,606         7,547        7,729       7,613
R-squared                                              0.008            0.005         0.001         0.007        0.004       0.000
Note: Key dependent variables are the changes between 2007 and 2008/2009 in the ratios of firm-level profits/assets, sales/assets and
investments/assets. Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the 3-digit sector level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                               35



                                 Table 4. The Impact of Crisis on Firm Performance
                                    -sector feature with weighted regressions
                                                        Weighted regressions                          Top 100 firms
                                                       (1)             (2)         (3)         (1)           (2)        (3)
                                                    ∆Profit          ∆Sales     ∆CapEx       ∆Profit        ∆Sales    ∆CapEx


Demand Sensitivity                                  -1.219**        -1.479**     -0.153     -0.948***     -2.475***   -0.156
                                                    [0.577]          [0.638]     [0.219]     [0.316]       [0.791]    [0.111]
Trade sensitivity                                   -1.154**        -3.250***    -0.151     -1.354***     -3.421***    0.107
                                                    [0.516]          [0.885]     [0.296]     [0.276]       [1.127]    [0.108]
Dependence for working capital                      0.00363         0.00299     0.00680     -0.00351       -0.0311*   0.00167
 (DEP_WK)                                           [0.0133]        [0.0311]    [0.00418]   [0.00796]      [0.0172] [0.00241]
Dependence on external finance for investment        -0.459          -2.411     -0.609*      -0.212         1.506     -0.109
 (DEP_INV)                                          [0.967]          [2.263]     [0.355]     [0.507]       [1.339]    [0.253]
Constant                                             -0.761          4.695       -0.669      -0.0270      9.397***    -0.634*
                                                    [1.263]          [3.538]     [0.550]     [1.079]       [2.917]    [0.320]
Observations                                         7,540           7,722       7,606       2,635          2,703      2,666
R-squared                                            0.015           0.014       0.006       0.018          0.016      0.001

Note: Key dependent variables are the changes between 2007 and 2008/2009 in the ratios of firm-level profits/assets,
sales/assets and investments/assets. Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the 3-digit sector level. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                               36




                                    Table 5. The Impact of Crisis on Firm Performance
                                               --Heckman Selection Model
                                                     (1)           (1)             (2)             (2)          (3)          (3)
                                                   ∆Profit      Selection         ∆Sales        Selection     ∆CapEx      Selection

Demand Sensitivity                                -0.586***      0.0748*         -1.284***        0.0714       -0.0851     0.0817**
                                                   [0.219]       [0.0397]         [0.466]        [0.0439]      [0.124]     [0.0399]
Trade sensitivity                                 -1.173***       0.0242         -1.625***        0.0441        0.126       0.0423
                                                   [0.264]       [0.0443]         [0.625]        [0.0681]     [0.0958]     [0.0598]
Dependence for working capital                    -0.00374      -0.000527         -0.0221*      -0.000526     0.00255      0.000115
 (DEP_WK)                                         [0.00530]     [0.000884]        [0.0133]      [0.00116]     [0.00201]    [0.00108]
Dependence on external finance for investment       -0.435        0.0493           -0.172         0.0790       0.0727       0.0490
 (DEP_INV)                                         [0.370]       [0.0662]         [0.778]        [0.0749]      [0.179]     [0.0785]
O-score 2007                                                   -0.00552***                      -0.00668**                -0.0277***
                                                                 [0.00142]                      [0.00280]                  [0.00372]
Constant                                            0.508        1.498***        6.420***        1.634***    -0.914***     1.407***
                                                   [0.764]        [0.132]         [2.080]         [0.172]      [0.316]      [0.167]
Observations                                        7,411           7,411          7,411          7,411         7,411        7,411

Note: Key dependent variables are the changes between 2007 and 2008/2009 in the ratios of firm-level profits/assets, sales/assets
and investments/assets. Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the 3-digit sector level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                                37



                                      Table 6. The Impact of Crisis on Firm Performance
                                                -Sector and Country Interaction
                                                    (1)             (2)         (3)                 (4)          (5)         (6)
                                                   ∆Profit           ∆Sales       ∆CapEx          ∆Profit       ∆Sales    ∆CapEx


Domestic expenditure*Demand sensitivity              -3.431            6.651        0.0651          -4.140*        4.208      0.439
                                                    [2.351]           [6.562]       [1.301]          [2.160]      [6.383]    [1.198]
Trade linkage*Trade sensitivity                    -9.139**          -18.05**     -4.172***       -8.049***       -13.23* -3.874***
                                                    [3.548]           [8.999]       [1.497]          [2.496]      [7.309]    [1.349]
Financial Openness*DEP_WK                          0.00175          -0.00651      0.000668         0.000914     -0.00653 0.000954
                                                  [0.00223]         [0.00446] [0.000746]           [0.00234]    [0.00450] [0.000752]
Financial Openness*DEP_INV                          0.0424             0.593       -0.0963           0.0306         0.438   -0.136**
                                                    [0.162]           [0.362]      [0.0614]          [0.166]      [0.342] [0.0652]
Credit/GDP*DEP_WK                                 -0.00152            0.0357      0.000226         -0.00134       0.0201 -0.00480
                                                   [0.0139]          [0.0347]     [0.00674]         [0.0137]     [0.0334] [0.00639]
Credit/GDP*DEP_INV                                    0.353            -1.385        0.651            0.443        -1.397     0.632
                                                    [1.139]           [2.709]       [0.611]          [1.034]      [2.525]    [0.533]
Demand sensitivity                                    2.883            -7.720        -0.141
                                                    [2.273]           [6.410]       [1.234]
Trade sensitivity                                -0.920***             -1.132      0.259**
                                                    [0.296]           [0.713]       [0.130]
Dependence for working capital                    -0.00670            -0.0417    -0.000740
(DEP_WK)                                           [0.0110]          [0.0285]     [0.00596]
Dependence on external finance for                   -0.920            -0.795       -0.307
investment (DEF_INV)                                [0.913]           [2.223]       [0.590]
Financial openness                                 -0.400**             0.155        -0.105
                                                    [0.192]           [0.447]      [0.0747]
Credit /GDP                                           0.407            2.526         0.863
                                                    [1.281]           [3.431]       [0.656]
Domestic expenditure/GDP                             -3.620            -35.58        -5.656
                                                    [13.50]           [29.69]       [5.458]
Trade linkage                                         6.764            -2.277         0.663
                                                    [13.69]           [30.91]       [5.601]
Constant                                              3.639             37.82         4.144
                                                    [13.37]           [29.61]       [5.396]
Sector fixed effects                                    n                 n             n               y             y         Y
Country fixed effects                                   n                 n             n               y             y         Y
Observations                                          7,540            7,722         7,606            7,540         7,722     7,606
R-squared                                             0.013             0.012         0.005           0.052         0.060     0.031
Note: Key dependent variables are the changes between 2007 and 2008/2009 in the ratios of firm-level profits/assets, sales/assets
and investments/assets. Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the country-sector level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                               38


                               Table 7. The Impact of Crisis on Firm Performance
                                     --Role of monetary and fiscal stimulus
                                                 (1)           (2)             (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)
                                               ∆Profit        ∆Sales         ∆CapEx       ∆Profit      ∆Sales      ∆CapEx

Fiscal stimulus*demand sensitivity            0.332***         0.252         -0.0643 0.317***  0.240  -0.0680
                                               [0.115]        [0.344]       [0.0551]  [0.116] [0.354] [0.0569]
Change in ST interest rate*DEP_WK            0.00490**        0.00440      0.000926
                                             [0.00187]       [0.00523]     [0.00135]
Change in ST interest rate*DEP_WK               0.159          0.307        -0.0138
                                               [0.156]        [0.367]        [0.134]
Change in Money base*DEP_WK                                                           -0.004  -0.014    0.001
                                                                                      [0.006] [0.016]  [0.002]
Change in Money base*DEP_INV                                                         0.852** 2.680*** -0.131
                                                                                      [0.398] [0.918]  [0.153]
Country fixed effects                            Y               Y              Y        Y       Y        Y
Sector fixed effects                             Y               Y              Y        Y       Y        Y
Observations                                   7,540           7,722          7,606    7,540   7,722    7,606
R-squared                                      0.053           0.059          0.030    0.052   0.060    0.030

Note: Key dependent variables are the changes between 2007 and 2008/2009 in the ratios of firm-level profits/assets,
sales/assets and investments/assets. DEP_WK is the intrinsic dependence on external finance for working capital; while
DEF_INV is the intrinsic dependence on external finance for investment. Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the
3-digit sector level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                               39



                         Table 8. The Impact of Crisis on Firm Performance-Adding firm controls


                                                        (1)              (2)        (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
                                                     ∆Profit          ∆Sales      ∆CapEx        ∆Profit       ∆Sales      ∆CapEx
Demand sensitivity                                 -0.626***        -1.374***     -0.110
                                                     [0.216]          [0.462]     [0.122]
Trade sensitivity                                  -1.261***         -1.533**     0.0804
                                                     [0.249]          [0.620]    [0.0980]
Dependence for working capital                      -0.00231        -0.0258**    0.00261
(DEP_WK)                                           [0.00480]         [0.0124]   [0.00208]
Dependence on external finance                        -0.274           -0.400     0.0553
for investment (DEF_INV)                             [0.379]          [0.791]     [0.178]
Domestic expenditure*Demand sensitivity                                                     -4.067*            9.334        0.804
                                                                                            [2.256]           [6.589]      [1.192]
Trade openness*Trade sensitivity                                                          -9.001***          -14.87**    -3.591***
                                                                                            [2.759]           [7.278]      [1.212]
Financial Openness*DEP_WK                                                                 0.000451          -0.00776*    0.000987
                                                                                          [0.00247]         [0.00469]   [0.000666]
Financial Openness*DEP_INV                                                                 0.00597             0.358     -0.172***
                                                                                            [0.171]           [0.358]     [0.0606]
Credit/GDP*DEP_WK                                                                          0.00123            0.0181      -0.00171
                                                                                           [0.0146]          [0.0351]    [0.00619]
Credit/GDP*DEP_RZ                                                                             1.048            -0.198       0.857
                                                                                            [1.092]           [2.629]      [0.536]
Tobin-Q (06)                                       -0.773***        -1.612***    -0.0772  -0.686***         -1.269***      -0.0785
                                                     [0.160]          [0.365]    [0.0618]   [0.158]           [0.348]     [0.0778]
Firm size (06)                                      -0.184**          -0.0751   0.0984*** -0.0883            -0.398**      0.0173
                                                    [0.0742]          [0.165]    [0.0303]  [0.0778]           [0.173]     [0.0379]
Cash holding/Assets (06)                            -2.376**         14.73***      0.226   -2.778**          11.76***       -0.400
                                                     [1.157]          [2.789]     [0.601]   [1.240]           [2.479]      [0.531]
Short-term debt/Assets (06)                          -0.0461           1.442       0.404     -1.203            3.798        0.672
                                                     [1.157]          [2.563]     [0.532]   [1.337]           [2.796]      [0.544]
Long-term debt/Assets (06)                           0.0954          5.017**    -1.844***    0.285           7.498***     -1.157**
                                                     [1.102]          [2.262]     [0.625]   [1.134]           [2.787]      [0.558]
Constant                                            3.578***         6.455**    -1.744***
                                                     [1.204]          [3.137]     [0.548]
Sector and country fixed effects                        n                n           n          y               y            y
Observations                                          6,954            7,094       7,008      6,954           7,094        7,008
R-squared                                             0.020            0.014       0.005      0.064           0.070        0.039
Note: Key dependent variables are the changes between 2007 and 2008/2009 in the ratios of firm-level profits/assets, sales/assets and
investments/assets. Robustness standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                        40




                              Table 9. The Impact of Crisis on Firm Performance
                                       --Separating Year 2008 and 2009
                                          (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
                                       ∆Profit 08     ∆Sales 08     ∆CapEx08      ∆Profit 09    ∆Sales 09     ∆CapEx09


Demand sensitivity                       -0.379      -0.784*         -0.0623     -1.153***      -1.847**           -0.172
                                        [0.257]       [0.470]        [0.126]       [0.286]        [0.739]         [0.141]
Trade sensitivity                        -0.363      1.232**          0.0561     -2.301*** -4.473***               0.141
                                        [0.305]       [0.546]       [0.0973]       [0.352]        [0.995]         [0.126]
Dependence for working capital         0.00678     -0.0423***       0.00178       -0.00759       -0.0118         0.00204
 (DEP_WK)                             [0.00519]      [0.0115]      [0.00207]     [0.00763]       [0.0195]       [0.00264]
Dependence on external finance            0.208        0.163         0.0401        -0.509         -1.363          0.0741
 for investment (DEF_INV)               [0.463]       [0.730]        [0.157]       [0.561]        [1.246]         [0.226]
Tobin-Q (06)                          -0.677***     -1.479***        -0.0341     -0.924*** -1.592***              -0.0916
                                        [0.181]       [0.391]       [0.0703]       [0.267]        [0.603]        [0.0932]
Firm size (06)                          -0.179*       0.395*       0.106***      -0.311***      -0.477**          0.0832*
                                        [0.102]       [0.210]       [0.0325]       [0.103]        [0.218]        [0.0428]
Cash holding/Assets (06)              -4.598***     14.45***         -0.0650       -1.217       16.79***           0.178
                                        [1.700]       [2.821]        [0.603]       [1.413]        [4.562]         [0.771]
Short-term debt/Assets (06)            -4.273**      7.284**          0.398        3.700*         -2.360           0.279
                                        [1.811]       [3.406]        [0.592]       [1.871]        [3.552]         [0.639]
Long-term debt/Assets (06)               -0.617       -2.079       -1.680**         1.734       10.64***       -2.287***
                                        [1.460]       [2.388]        [0.664]       [1.758]        [3.996]         [0.833]
Constant                                2.496*         -0.519       -1.382**      6.780***       12.53**         -1.898**
                                        [1.386]       [3.228]        [0.528]       [1.910]        [4.846]         [0.770]
Observations                              6,923        7,093          6,979         6,619          6,827            6,715
R-squared                                 0.010        0.013           0.003        0.027          0.016            0.004
Note: Key dependent variables are the changes between 2007 and 2008 (or 2009) in the ratios of firm-level profits/assets,
sales/assets and investments/assets. Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the 3-digit sector level. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                        41




                        Table 10. The Impact of Crisis on Firm Performance
                              --alternative measure of trade channel
                                                                    (1)               (2)            (3)
                                                                  ∆Profit            ∆Sales        ∆CapEx

Demand Sensitivity                                                -0.406*           -1.146**        -0.0638
                                                                  [0.246]            [0.477]        [0.107]
Trade channel (% change of country-sector exports)               1.353***             1.127          0.150
                                                                  [0.379]            [0.776]        [0.195]
Dependence for working capital                                   -0.00216            -0.0194       0.00181
 (DEP_WK)                                                       [0.00534]           [0.0126]      [0.00197]
Dependence on external finance for investment                     -0.707*             -0.906         0.159
 (DEP_INV)                                                        [0.362]            [0.692]        [0.163]
Constant                                                        -2.144***             2.957*       -0.644**
                                                                  [0.663]            [1.557]        [0.274]

Observations                                                      7,552              7,735          7,619
R-squared                                                         0.006              0.004          0.001
Note: Key dependent variables are the changes between 2007 and 2008/2009 in the ratios of firm-level
profits/assets, sales/assets and investments/assets. Standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                        42




                                 Table 11. The Impact of Crisis on Firm Performance
                                                    -firm features
                                                (1)            (2)          (3)       (4)         (5)          (6)
VARIABLES                                     ∆Profit         ∆Sales      ∆CapEx    ∆Profit      ∆Sales      ∆CapEx

Firm-level demand sensitivity              -0.0246***     -0.0511**      -0.00481
                                            [0.00869]      [0.0205]     [0.00410]
Firm-level trade sensitivity                  -0.0345       -0.125*      -0.0273*    -0.0574*    -0.174**    -0.0348**
                                             [0.0308]      [0.0727]      [0.0145]    [0.0295]    [0.0696]     [0.0139]
Actual firm use of working capital          0.000835       -0.00513     0.000626    0.000548     -0.00569    0.000548
 (ACT_WK)                                   [0.00183]     [0.00432]    [0.000863]   [0.00183]   [0.00432]   [0.000863]
Actual firm use of external financing       0.105***        0.210**     -0.0432**    0.108***     0.217**    -0.0430**
for investment (ACT_INV)                     [0.0401]      [0.0941]      [0.0190]    [0.0401]    [0.0940]     [0.0190]
Constant                                    -2.891***        0.166      -0.476***   -2.892***      0.162     -0.472***
                                              [0.228]       [0.540]       [0.108]     [0.228]     [0.539]      [0.108]
Observations                                   5,808         5,915         5,868       5,812       5,919        5,872
R-squared                                      0.003         0.003         0.002       0.002       0.002        0.002
Note: Key dependent variables are the changes between 2007 and 2008/2009 in the ratios of firm-level profits/assets,
sales/assets and investments/assets. Standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                       43



                          Table 12. The Impact of Financial Crisis on Firm Performance
                                          ---firm and country features
                                                 (1)           (2)        (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)
VARIABLES                                      ∆Profit       ∆Sales     ∆CapEx    ∆Profit      ∆Sales     ∆CapEx

Firm-level demand sensitivity                    0.151          0.421   -0.0955     0.145         0.407   -0.0874
                                               [0.131]        [0.313] [0.0623] [0.131]          [0.310] [0.0624]
Domestic expenditure                            -0.179         -0.490   0.0956     -0.175        -0.500   0.0852
 *Firm demand sensitivity                      [0.138]        [0.329] [0.0654] [0.138]          [0.326] [0.0655]
Firm-level trade sensitivity                   -0.0416        -0.148* -0.0297* -0.0161         -0.0498 -0.0200
                                              [0.0370]       [0.0879] [0.0176] [0.0371]        [0.0873] [0.0177]
Trade linkage*Firm trade sensitivity             0.766          2.180    0.105      0.419         0.521   -0.0127
                                               [0.583]        [1.384]   [0.277]   [0.585]       [1.375]   [0.279]
Actual firm use of working capital            0.00430       -0.000617 0.000509 0.00375         0.00963 0.00139
  (ACT_WK)                                   [0.00602]       [0.0142] [0.00284] [0.00620]      [0.0144] [0.00292]
Financial openness*ACT_WK                      0.00167       -0.00181 0.000506 0.00160        -0.00422 0.000500
                                             [0.00118]      [0.00281] [0.000568] [0.00130]    [0.00308] [0.000629]
Credit/GDP*ACT_WK                             -0.00873       -0.00126 -0.00101 -0.00717        0.00252 -0.00145
                                             [0.00693]       [0.0163] [0.00327] [0.00721]      [0.0168] [0.00340]
Actual firm use of external financing        -0.473***         -0.382 -0.137** -0.426***         -0.174 -0.125**
 for investment (ACT_INV)                      [0.124]        [0.289] [0.0586] [0.126]          [0.291] [0.0598]
Financial Openness*ACT_INV                      0.0289          0.123  0.00246 0.0216           0.0941 0.00245
                                              [0.0317]       [0.0752] [0.0151] [0.0320]        [0.0753] [0.0153]
Credit/GDP*ACT_INV                            0.544***          0.345   0.0934 0.543***           0.281   0.0904
                                               [0.161]        [0.377] [0.0760] [0.163]          [0.379] [0.0772]
Financial openness                           -0.377***         -0.209   -0.104*
                                               [0.128]        [0.305] [0.0612]
Credit/GDP                                     1.691**        3.777* 0.931**
                                               [0.821]        [1.945]   [0.390]
Domestic expenditure/GDP                        -11.57          19.74    -5.041
                                               [11.06]        [26.28]   [5.233]
Trade linkage                                   -7.160          14.12    -4.709
                                               [10.82]        [25.69]   [5.115]
Constant                                         7.954         -22.34    3.888
                                               [11.03]        [26.21]   [5.219]
Country fixed effects                              n              n         n         y           y          y
Observations                                     5,808          5,915     5,868     5,808       5,915      5,868
R-squared                                        0.014          0.008     0.006     0.034       0.045      0.023
Note: Key dependent variables are the changes between 2007 and 2008/2009 in the ratios of firm-level profits/assets,
sales/assets and investments/assets. Standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                      44


Figure 1. Density distribution of firm performance around the 2008-09 crisis
                                                       45




                                 Figure 2. Trend of global GDP and its components
             0.6




             0.5




             0.4
Difference




             0.3




             0.2
Log




             0.1




               0
               2000       2001       2002    2003     2004    2005      2006    2007   2008   2009

             -0.1

                    Household consumption      Government expenditure    Net exports
                    Capital formation          GDP
