                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  SOCIAL SECURITY AND INDIVIDUAL
                  WELFARE: PRECAUTIONARY SAVING,
                      LIQUIDITY CONSTRAINTS,
                       AND THE PAYROLL TAX



                         R. Glenn Hubbard


                         Kenneth L. Judd




                      Working Paper No. 1736




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 1985




We are grateful to John Shoven, Jonathan Skinner, Lawrence Summers,
and the NBER Summer Institute Program on Tax Simulation Models for
comments, and to Nick Williams for excellent research assistance
and helpful discussions. Financial support from the Alfred P.
Sloan Foundation is acknowledged. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Taxation and project in
Government Budgets. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                ER Working Paper #1736
                                                October 1985




             Social Security and Individual Welfare:
           Precautionary Saving, Liquidity Constraints,
                       and the Payroll Tax



                             ABSTR\CT



     Recent advances in the examination of efficiency gains from dynamic
tax reforms have used simulation models to isolate intragenerational
and/or intergenerational effects. Important considerations having to do
with uncertainty or capital market imperfections are frequently missing
from such a framework.   In this paper, we focus on the welfare gains
from introducing social security retirement annuities, given lifetime
uncertainty and borrowing restrictions.

     Our principal findings are four. First, given the considerations
mentioned above, "precautionary saving" exceeds life—cycle saving (that
would have taken place in the absence of lifetime uncertainty), lending
further support to the notion that the perfect—certainty version of the
life—cycle model provides an inadequate explanation of observed saving
behavior.   Second, the introduction of an actuarially fair social
security system leads to a significant partial equilibrium increase in
lifetime consumption and welfare, accompanied by a reduction in the
capital stock.   The increase in lifetime welfare is reduced, however,
and in many cases eliminated, when borrowing restrictions are imposed.
Third, extending the model to general equilibrium, we find that the
partial equilibrium gains in lifetime welfare from participation in
social security are offset by the interaction of higher steady—state
interest rates and binding liquidity constraints.   Finally, replacing
the proportional payroll tax with a progressive tax (essentially a
linear tax with an exemption), we show that age—specific tax schemes can
restore much of the potential gain from introducing social security.




R. Glenn Hubbard                               Kenneth L. Judd
tpartrrent of Economics
Northwestern University
                                               1parent    of Managerial
                                                 Economics and Decision
2003 Sheridan Poad                              Sciences
Evanston, IL 60201                             Northwestern University
                                               2001 Sheridan Poad
                                               Evanston, IL 60201
                                  —1—

I. INTRODUCTION

     It has been recognized for some time in applied public economics

that discussion of the impact of taxation and public programs on

individual welfare (as well as on such aggregate measures of interest as

the saving rate or the capital stock) requires an explicit analysis of

agents' intertemporal budget constraints.1      Recent advances in the

examination of efficiency gains from dynamic tax reforms have used

simulation models to isolate Intragenerational and/or intergenerational

effects.2 Analytical techniques have also been used to examine marginal

tax changes (see for example Judd, 1985).

     Two important considerations are missing from such a framework.

First, most of these exercises have assumed perfect certainty.     Many

government programs, most notably social insurance programs, affect

agents' lifetime budget constraints to the extent that the private

insurance markets (against uncertainty over length of life, job loss,

catastrophic illness, etc.) are incomplete. It is possible to think of

the "event—conditioned" transfer programs that comprise social insurance

as relaxing constraints on individual consumption. For example, one of

the primary goals of the social security retirement program is the

maintenance of consumption in old age.      Outside of social security,

Hamermesh (1982) discusses the role of unemployment insurance in

removing liquidity constraints on recipients during unemployment. When

social insurance is viewed in the framework of precautionary saving, its

provision will in general affect lifetime consumption, and not just

consumption during the periods in which payments are received.   In this

paper, we focus on social security retirement annuities both because
                                  —2—

of their importance in the existing literature on tests of the life—

cycle model and because of the way in which they are financed.

      Since the pioneering paper by Feldstein (1974), studies have

examined the impact of social security over the life cycle and not just

in old age. Empirical work has tested the impact on consumption of the

individual wealth transfers accompanying the introduction of a pay—as—

you—go social security system.3 Extending this discussion of the impact

of social security on pre—retirement consumption, some recent studies4

have shown in the context of lifetime uncertainty that even an

actuarially fair, fully funded social security system can raise lifetime

welfare. Hence previous partial equilibrium estimates of the impact of

social security on consumption drawn solely from the consideration of

the intergenerational wealth transfers at the introduction of the system

may even be too small.

      Second, the specification of a 1ifetie budget constraint may be

too narrow a description of restrictions on individuals' optimizing

behavior in the presence of capital market imperfections.         Actual

limitations on borrowing appear in upward sloping interest rate

schedules, collateral requirements, and quantity restrictions. Hayashi

(1982) found that approximately twenty percent of all consumption in the

U.   S. is accounted for by liquidity—constrained consumers.      Flavin

(1984) found that the estimate of the marginal propensity to consume is

affected dramatically by the inclusion of proxies for liquidity

constraints, suggesting that liquidity constraints are an important part

of the observed excess sensitivity of consumption to current income.5

We find that the presence of liquidity constraints reduces substantially

the welfare gains from introducing social security annuities.
                                    —3—

       These two qualifications are certainly related.     The extent to
 which agents can spread the benefits from participation in social

 security annuities over their lifetimes depends on the degree to which

 capital markets permit Consumption—smoothing when current resources are

 insufficient. More important, since social security is financed through

 a proportional payroll tax on current earnings, payroll taxes depress

 consumption dollar for dollar when liquidity constraints are binding.

 Including realistic limitations on borrowing introduces the possibility

 that increasing the provision of social security coverage (financed by

 the payroll tax) may leave individuals worse off in terms of utility

 gained from lifetime consumption, while at the same time increasing

 potential lifetime resources.   In general, one expects that an optimal

 tax structure should reallocate this burden over        an individual's
lifetime.

      Our approach suggests an extended view of analyzing the impact of

social insurance programs and tax reform on lifetime consumption in the

presence of restrictions on private trades.      Such a framework will

facilitate analysis of fiscal policy changes on steady—state levels of

individual welfare and national saving, and may permit reconciliation of

observed individual saving behavior with that predicted by the life—

cycle model.

     We organize our analysis of the importance of capital—market

imperfections (market failure in the private provision of annuities and

borrowing restrictions) in describing the impact of social security on

individual welfare and the capital stock as follows.   In section II, we

investigate the relevance of borrowing restrictions and uncertainty over

longevity for the size of the capital stock.     In particular, we find
                                  —4—

that the stock of "precautionary saving" far exceeds the size of the

capital stock accounted for by the life—cycle model in the absence of

lifetime uncertainty, corroborating recent findings by others that the

perfect—certainty version of the life—cycle model cannot explain

observed saving behavior.

     In section III, we take up the partial equilibrium effects on

individual consumption.     For any plausible set of assumptions about

underlying parameters, social security generates a significant increase

in lifetime consumption and welfare accompanied by a reduction in the

capital stock if borrowing restrictions are absent.        The partial

equilibrium increase in individual welfare is reduced, and in some cases

eliminated, when borrowing restrictions are imposed.    The substantial

difference suggests the importance of reexamining the proportional

payroll tax finance of social security.

     In section IV, we extend the model to general equilibrium, with

endogenous factor prices. Partial equilibrium gains in lifetime welfare

from participation in social security are offset by the interaction of

higher steady—state interest rates and binding liquidity constraints.

The steady—state welfare cost of social security under proportional

payroll tax finance is in general substantial.    Section V Illustrates

the ability of alternative proposals for financing social security to

alleviate the problem created by the interaction of borrowing

constraints and the proportional payroll tax. Age—specific tax schemes

can restore much of the potential gain from participating in social

security annuities.

     Conclusions and directions for future research are discussed in

section VI.
                                      —5—

II.      LIFETIME UNCERTAINTY, BORROWING RESTRICTIONS, AN]) INDIVIDUAL
         SAVING BEHAVIOR

         Our emphasis in this paper is on lifetime uncertainty and social

security, though many of the results are applicable to other types of

uncertainty and social insurance.          Consideration of the impact of

uncertain longevity on "precautionary" saving has figured prominently in

analyses of consumption. Yaari's (1965) seminal paper showed that with

an uncertain lifetime, intertemporal utility maximization can dictate

saving for the probability of living longer than expected. More recent

applications to public pension schemes have appeared in Davies (1981),

Sheshinski and Weiss (1981), Abel (1983), and Hubbard (1983, 1984b).

        Before considering social security per Se, we begin by analyzing

the potential contribution of "uncertainty saving" (here against

variable longevity) to the size of the capital stock. That contribution

could be an important part of the explanation for the finding by

Kotlikoff and Summers (1981) that pure "life—cycle" wealth is dwarfed by

the stock of wealth from intergenerational transfers in accounting for

the capital stock. Their analysis — conducted in a certainty model —

seems     to imply that planned bequests are an important motive for

individual saving.6        To the extent that precautionary saving is

significant, however, modifying the basic life—cycle model to include

uncertainty may account for much of the failure of the basic life—cycle

model to explain observed wealth—age profiles (particularly among the

aged).

      Such precautionary saving is necessary because of market failure in

the private provision of old—age annuities.         This market failure is

likely because of asymmetries of information between individuals and

insurers, the classic adverse selection problem discussed by Rothschild
                                  —6--


and Stiglitz (1976) and elaborated in the context of social security by

Ecksteln, Eichenbauni, and Peled (1985). Friedman and Warshawsky (1985)

show that under plausible assumptions about risk aversion, the returns

on life annuity contracts actually offered in the market would not be

purchased by optimizing individuals.7

     In this study, we do not explicitly model the reason for the

absence of annuity markets.   We assume that they simply exist neither

prior to nor after the introduction of the social security system. This

is an appropriate assumption given our focus on the importance of the

interaction of liquidity constraints and the social security system. By

ruling out all annuities, we make the impact unrealistically large,

biasing the results in favor of social security.     If we were to add

reasonable features such as overpriced annuities, manipulative bequest

motives (Bernheim, Schleifer, and Summers, 1984), or altruistic bequest

motives, the value of social security annuities would decline.      The

importance of liquidity constraints would not be affected, however,

Implying that our negative results would be more likely to hold.

     In this section, we derive consumption—age and wealth—age profiles

given lifetime uncertainty, and contrast the resulting size of the

capital stock with that from a similar model in which lifetime is

certain.   Consider the following life—cycle model. Agents are assumed

to be selfish, in that no bequests are desired. Individuals live for a

maximum of T years, working only for the first R years; the retirement

age of R is taken as exogenous, and labor is supplied inelastically.

The probability of surviving through period t is Pt for each t.     Our

simulations begin at the beginning of individuals' working lives
                                           —7


(assumed to be age twenty).             Retirement occurs at model age forty—

five. The maximum model age to which one can survive is ninety.

        Following Yaari (1965) and Barro and Friedman (1977), we let

utility be additively separable across periods, and let utility from

consumption U(C) be evaluated contingent on being alive at time t.

That is, individuals choose C so as to maximize



(1)       1T pU(C)ePtdt,
          0



subject to



(2)           = w + rA +3 — C   ,   A(0)   =   0, A(T)0,


where C,       p, and r represent consumption and the (constant) subjective

discount rate and interest rate, respectively. A represents the stock

of accumulated assets.          A dot over a variable denotes a time rate of

change.        The income stream w represents labor earnings;     B includes

resources from unplanned bequests from the previous generation.8

        Assuming that the utility function is of the isoelastic form, we

can rewrite (1) as



(3)           max 1T -- p C l+e_Ptdt,
              C    0



where     is the coefficient of relative risk aversion.         Note that if

h(t)dt is the probability of death during (t, t+dt), the hazard rate,

the problem becomes
                                               —8—

                            _1T (p+h(s))ds
(4)       max --- J e           0              C   dt.
                     0


subject to (2).                 Denoting the marginal utility of consumption
conditional on being alive by A and the sum of the rate of time

preference and the hazard rate reflecting lifetime uncertainty by p

the differential equations describing the time paths of consumption and

asset accumulation are given by



(5a)      A = (p —    r)A   ,       and


                                          —1
(5b) t=rA+w+B—A

together with the boundary conditions A(0) = ACT) = 0.

       Within the framework of the model described above, we can simulate

the effect of lifetime uncertainty on the size of the capital stock.

The total capital stock is aggregated up from age—specific individual

asset stocks assuming a population growth rate of one percent per

annum.    Individuals in the certain—lifetime case are assumed to die at

the average age of death in the population.              Data on average survival

probabilities are taken from Faber (1982). The individual age—earnings

profile is taken from Davies (1981). The rate of time preference p is

assumed to equal 0.015. 10

       There Is some evidence on the value of             in the literature. In

their study of household portfolio allocation, Friend and Blume (1975)

estimated the coefficient of relative risk aversion to be in excess of

2.0. Farber's (1978) estimation of preferences of United Mine Workers

from collective bargaining agreements yielded estimates of the
                                   —9—

                                            bt4wetm
 coefficient   of relative risk aversion ofA3.O and 3.7.      Hansen and

 Singleton (1983) found estimates of the coefficient of relative risk

aversion between 0 and 2.0.     In our simulation exercises, we use four

values of 13(—.9, —2, —4, and —6) along with three alternative values of

r (.02, .04, and .06).

     Bequests are incorporated in the simulations as follows.      Using
information °' Pt     over the life cycle, a distribution of initial

bequests can be generated. We consIder intergenerational transfers from

a generation of single "parents" to the next generation.       Iteration

proceeds for a given set of parameter values until an individual would

transmit (in expected present value) the same bequest he receives. As

our principal concern is with the first—order effects of lifetime

uncertainty (and later social security) on the aggregate capital stock

(and hence output and consumption), we do not discuss the impact of

lifetime uncertainty or social security on the steady—state distribution

of bequests (e.g., Abel, 1983).      Given our emphasis on life—cycle

patterns of consumption and savings, it is important that we do not

aggregate intertemporally.    We must allow the individual to live for

several periods if we are to get a quantitative idea of the importance

of liquidity constraints. We use a year as our unit of time; we shall

see that a year is large enough that any substantially greater unit

would involve too much aggregation. However, given this fineness in our

intertemporal consumption patterns, it would be numerically intractable

to calculate a steady—state rational expectations distribution of

bequests.      Therefore, all individuals are assumed to receive the

weighted—average bequest regardless of their particular family mortality

history. The implicit assumption is that individual bequests are taxed
                                   — 10 —




away by the government and redistributed lump—sum to individuals. To

model the observation that these bequests are most likely to occur when

the recipient is in early middle age, such receipts are assumed to be

obtained after twenty periods.'1

       Table 1 below illustrates the importance of lifetime uncertainty

for the size of the capital stock by reporting values for the aggregate

savings—income ratio (K/Y) In the certain—lifetime and uncertain—

lifetime cases, the ratio of the capital stocks in the two cases, and

the value of average unplanned bequests as a fraction of lifetime

earnings.    The simulation results in Table 1 illustrate clearly the

significance of uncertainty over longevity for explaining the stock of

savings. For all assumptions about the interest rate or the coefficient

of relative risk aversion, unplanned bequests accompanying lifetime

uncertainty are significant relative to lifetime earnings, and capital—

Income ratios are substantially higher in the uncertain—lifetime case.

Aggregate capital stocks implied by the life—cycle model with certain

longevity are small relative to those implied by the uncertain—lifetime

case under similar assumptions; for example, the ratio of the former to

the latter is 0.22 for the plausible case wherein r = .02 and

  =   —2. The unrealistically low K/Y ratios in the certain—lifetime case

lend further support to the finding in Kotlikoff and Summers (1981) that

the basic life—cycle model can explain only a small portion of the

aggregate capital stock. Our finding of the importance of precautionary

saving could help to explain this discrepancy without relying on
intentional bequest motives.

      An additional critique of standard life—cycle models is that

borrowing restrictions inhibit the ability of individuals to carry out
                                            — 11 —




 their   optimal age—consumption profile. One such limitation — and the

one which we employ in our work —                is   a collateral restriction, so that

net worth must be nonnegative at all times. That this restriction is

most likely to be binding for the young implies that consumption will be

shifted to later in life for the representative individual, and the

aggregate capital stock will be larger than it would have been if

capital markets were not subject to this restriction.

       The ImposItIon of a borrowing restriction of this form requires

motivation.      Here we rely on observed collateral requirements for

borrowing in U.S. capital markets, i.e., the restricted access to

"consumption loans."           Institutional motivations for the constraint

Include legal restrictions prohibiting the inclusion of human capital as

an asset In bankruptcy proceedings or, also for our purposes, the

assignment of future social security benefits. Allowing individuals to

borrow some fixed "small" amount would increase significantly the

numerical complexity of the problem, without qualitatively altering the

results.     Taken together, our assumptions about market failure in the

private provision of annuities and borrowing restrictions should

Introduce no bias a priori, since the former magnifies the potential

impact of social security on lifetime welfare, and the latter reduces

It.

       When we impose the constraint that net worth must be nonnegative at

all times, we substantially change the nature of the consumer's

optimization problem. The budget constraint in (2) becomes



(2')       A = w +   r   A + B — C   ,   A (t)        0, for all t.
                                                        — 12 —



The   first—order conditions must be altered to take into account this

state constraint (see Kamien and Schwartz, 1982, for a discussion of

such problems). The new arbitrage equations become




        (A = (p
                —        r   )   A   ,   if    A > 0 or A > U'(w)

(5a')

        "A = U' (w), if A =                   0 and A      U'(w )



         A =   0,   if   A = 0 and f               B(s)   ds     is continuous at t,
                                               0
(5b')
                                             8_i
         A = w + rA + B —                A         , otherwise.


        If assets are positive or if wages exceed consumption, then (5a)

still holds.         Otherwise, consumption is limited to current earnings.

This divides the consumer's problem into constrained and unconstrained

periods of time. (5b') governs how these intervals meet. At the moment

when A     0 becomes binding, it imposes the tangency relation between A

and the constraint.

        Tables 2 and 3 point up the additional relevance of liquidity

constraints for the size of the capital stock in the certain—lifetime

and uncertain—lifetime cases, respectively.                             In each table, we report

the number of periods in youth during which the constraint is binding,

the value of the aggregate capital—income ratio (K/Y) in the
unconstrained and constrained cases, and the loss in individual lifetime

welfare expressed as a percentage of lifetime earnings (Li).                             In all

cases, the aggregate capital—income ratio is higher in the constrained

regime, and individual welfare costs due to the constraints are
                                                   — 13 —




substantial        (particularly for risk—averse individuals).                               Table 4
summarizes the combined effect of lifetime uncertainty and borrowing

constraints on the size of the capital stock.



III. UNCERTAINTY LIFETIMES AND SOCIAL SECURITY: INDIVIDUAL WELFARE
       AND THE CAPITAL STOCK

       Social Security and Individual Saving Behavior
       In    an earlier paper, Hubbard (1984b) showed that public provision

 c a,-.,,                                         ,1-14
                               ¼JLLLpL1J..OJLJ ptALJL.&t..
                                                                        ( SL,L.La.z. OCLUt SLJ
                                                             JJCILOS¼JLLO                        I scau
to partial equilibrium increases in individual welfare and national

saving.         A brief outline of such a social security system follows.

Individuals are compelled to pay a payroll tax t on gross wages, from

which the social security system is funded.                              During retirement they

receive an annuity benefit S in each period t until death.                                 The asset

accumulation constraint (in the absence of borrowing restrictions)

becomes



(6)         A = rA + w +   B   + S —     C   ,   A(T) = 0.


       If    benefits are set according to a replacement rate of the terminal

wage, then the economy—wide actuarially fair benefit S satisfies the

condition that



(7)         sfTp e rtd =          jR pwertdt.
            R                     0


Hubbard (1984b) shows that, in the absence of borrowing restrictions,

the system generates an increase in the propensity to consume out of
                                   — 14 —




lifetime   resources. This increase in lifetime consumption occurs even

in a system which is actuarially fair and fully funded.

     In Table 5 below, we simulate the partial equilibrium impact on

initial participants of the imposition of an actuarially fair social

security system financed by a proportional payroll tax of six

percent.12 Percentage changes in the capital—output ratio and average

bequests as a fraction of lifetime earnings are reported, as is the

change in lifetime welfare (expressed in terms of a percentage change in

initial lifetime earnings). Two features of the results in Table 5 are

noteworthy. First, the system generates very large initial declines in

the capital stock.      Given the dramatic reduction in the size of

accidental bequests shown in the table, this is not surprising.'3

Second, potential welfare gains to initial participants from introducing

an actuarially fair social security system are significant for plausible

parameter values.




Liquidity Constraints and the Partial Equilibrium Gains from Social
Security

     Of course, much of the partial equilibrium welfare gain from the

introduction of social security comes about because of increases in pre—

retirement consumption made possible by the annuity provisions. With a

nonnegativity constraint on net worth, however, the social security

payroll tax depresses pre—retirement consumption as long as the
constraint binds, and increases consumption after the constraint ceases

to bind. Hence the effect of an actuarially fair social security system

is to increase desired consumption of the young, while decreasing actual
                                 — 15 —




consumption due to the interaction of the payroll tax and restrictions
on borrowing.

     The extent to which social security depresses pre—retirement

consumption depends in part on the importance of bequests. Even in the

absence of an explicit bequest motive, given uncertainty over longevity,

transfers at death will be positive on average.    Inheritances play two

roles with respect to liquidity constraints.         The larger is the

anticipated bequest, the greater is desired consumption in each period

of life.   On the other hand, received inheritances also improve the

ability to pay for current consumption.

     The imposition of borrowing restrictions mitigates the effects of

social security on individual lifetime consumption and the aggregate

capital stock noted earlier.     Because the system is financed by a

proportional payroll tax on earnings, forced saving occurs in youth. In

the simulation exercises reported in Table 6 that follows, we illustrate

the impact of the introduction of social security on the aggregate

capital stock, average bequests relative to lifetime earnings, and

individual lifetime welfare.   The numbers in the last set of columns

represent the gains in lifetime welfare from participating in social

security expressed as a percentage of lifetime earnings. As before, the

simulations are conducted over four values of     and three values of r.

In all cases, the social security payroll tax is set equal to six

percent;   the system is by construction actuarially fair and fully

funded.

     The first set of columns in Table 6 illustrates the importance of

the restriction on borrowing against future net earnings for consumption

even under a moderate social security tax with consumption constrained
                                 — 16 —




to be no more than current resources for at least 10 periods at an
interest rate of .02.   For modest risk aversion ( = —2), the gains in

lifetime welfare reported for this case in Table 6 are substantially

smaller than the potential gains in the absence of borrowing
restrictions. For greater risk aversion,    = —4, the gains are trivial

when the interest rate is .02, and at interest rates of .04 or .06, the

operation of the social security system actually leads to a

loss in lifetime welfare, as it does for all cases when       = —6.   These

results suggest the importance of both uncertainty and the method used

to finance the system in explaining the impact of social security on

individual saving behavior. Before returning to the issue of financing

the system in section V, we take up in section IV the problem of

considering these effects when factor prices are endogeous.



IV. GENERAL EQUILIBRIUN, STEADY—STATE IMPACTS OF SOCIAL SECURITY
        ON INDIVIDUAL WELFARE AND TilE CAPITAL STOCK

     To examine seriously the welfare effects of social security under
different   assumptions about capital market imperfections, we must

analyze the new steady state after the system is introduced. Changes in

the steady—state capital stock will affect the level of output and

consumption per head, and hence the lifetime utility of a representative

agent. Members of the first generation in the system benefit both from

the increase in lifetime resources from the uninsured previous

generation and   the gains from participating in social security
annuities.14 The reduced value of accidental bequests permits smaller

gains in consumption for succeeding generations. Hence, to consider the

potential welfare gains from compulsory pensions, the tradeoff between
                                   — 17 —



the benefits to early participants and the costs of a lower capital

stock to subsequent generations must be examined.

      The partial equilibrium effects of social security on individual

saving will be dampened in a general equilibrium analysis of the impact

on aggregate capital formation, once factor price changes are taken into

account.       Such considerations have been examined in the certainty

models.     For example, Kotlikoff (1979a) used a life—cycle model with

certain longevity and a Cobb—Douglas production technology to consider

the impact of a pay—as—you—go social security system on the capital

stock.      For plausible parameter values, he found that the positive

lifetime wealth increment traceable to social security caused a twenty—

percent decrease in the steady—state capital stock.    While this effect

is certainly substantial, it is roughly half of his calculated partial

equilibrium effect which is directly related to the excess of the

present value of benefits over the present value of contributions.

      To examine the impact of savings against lifetime uncertainty on

aggregate saving we assume that output is produced according to a Cobb—

Douglas production function in capital and labor, with a capital share

equal to cz.      Factor markets are assumed to be competitive, so that

capital and labor are paid their marginal products.        That is, the

interest rate (r) and base wage rate (w) are such that:



(8)   r =   czkal,    and



(9)   w =   (1a)ka,


where k represents the capital—labor ratio.
                                 — 18 —




     Within this framework, the steady state can be solved for as
follows.   A guess is made for k.     Solutions for r and w are then

generated from the marginal productivity conditions to produce
individual consumption and wealth profiles.      The resulting aggregate

consumption and capital stock in intensive form are compared with the

initial guess, and iteration proceeds until convergence is reached.

     As In the partial equilibrium case, a second calculation of the

value of the steady—state bequest must also be made. Within the routine

described above, each parameterization of r and w generates a different

expected bequest, which Is then transferred to the child.

     We pursue our analysis of the general equilibrium impact of social

security on the capital stock and individual welfare in four steps in

Table 7.    In all cases, c is assumed to equal 0.3, and p= 0.015.

First, we compute the Initial steady—state values of the interest rate,

capital—output ratio, average bequest relative to lifetime earnings, and

lifetime welfare in the absence of social security for each of the four

values of .     Those results are reported in the northwest corner of

Table 7.   As expected, higher levels of risk aversion are associated

with higher average bequests and capital stocks, and hence lower steady—

state interest rates.

     Introducing actuarially fair social security financed by a

proportional payroll tax of six percent in the northeast corner of Table

7, the interest rate and initial bequest are held constant from the

original no—social—security steady state.     As the third column shows,

average bequests are reduced substantially, as the initial generation to

participate In social security obtains the dual benefits of a high

initial bequest and access to social security annuities.         Partial
                                    — 19 —




equilibrium     welfare gains are recorded for the = —.9 and =   —2   cases.

The added burden of payroll contributions to social security during

youth causes welfare losses for the two higher measures of risk aversion

(=   —4,   =   —6).   Moving to the southwest corner, the interest rate is

still fixed at its initial steady—state level, but a new steady—state

bequest is computed. The capital stock and lifetime welfare continue to

decline relative to their counterparts in the no—social—security steady

state.

      Finally, in the southeast corner of Table 7, the new steady state

is computed. As expected from the substantial reduction in bequests and

the capital stock, steady—state interest rates increase considerably.

The interaction of the higher interest rates and lower earnings with the

contribution of payroll taxes to binding liquidity constraints leads to

significant reductions in lifetime welfare. For example, in the =—.9

case, a 3.8 percent partial equilibrium increase in lifetime welfare

becomes a 14.7 percent reduction in the new steady state.

     We do not mean to imply that these calculations represent an

accurate description of the historical impact of social security on the

capital stock in the U.S.       Participants in social security have, for

example, obtained returns much greater than the actuarially fair

return.    The assumption of complete market failure in the private

provision of annuities leads to a large effect on desired lifetime

consumption from the introduction of social security annuities. While

the annuity market in the U.S. is very imperfect, it is not nonexistent;

Kotlikoff, Shoven, and Spivak (1983) point            family risk—sharing

arrangements, and Hubbard (1984a) identifies the importance of private

pensions as annuity substitutes.      Constraints due to the proportional

payroll tax finance are, however, unaffected by this qualification. In
                                  — 20 —




the next section, we illustrate the importance of liquidity constraints
for these impacts by examining an alternative financing method.




V.   PROGRESSIVE TAXATION AND THE WELFARE GAINS FROM SOCIAL SECURITY



     To examine more carefully the influence of the method of financing

social security on its impact on the capital stock and individual

welfare, we now remove the assumption of proportional payroll tax

finance. In its place we institute a progressive social security tax in

which the first fifteen working periods are exempt from payroll

taxation.     To preserve comparability with our previous results, the

retirement benefit is kept the same as under the proportional tax case

where t= .06.       A new, higher flat tax rate is instituted in the

sixteenth period to maintain the average actuarial fairness of the

system.     The use of an exemption (effectively, an "earned income

credit") alleviates the added contribution to the social security

payroll tax to liquidity constraints on consumption.    By shifting the

burden of the tax intertemporally through higher taxes later in life,

the same present value of contributions can be collected with an

increase in individual lifetime utility from consumption.15       Cross—

sectionally, the use of the exemption corresponds to progressive

taxation.

     Partial equilibrium results for the impact of social security on

lifetime welfare (comparable to Table 6) are presented in Table 8.

Simulations are run over four values of      and three values of r as

before.     The top entry in each cell represents the gain in lifetime
                                  — 21 —



welfare (expressed as an equivalent percentage of lifetime earnings)

from participating in the "progressive—tax—financed" social security

system.   The numbers in parentheses below are the corresponding gains

from the "proportional—tax—financed" system in Table 6.       Gains are

positive in all cases in Table 8, and for many parameterizations are

substantially higher than in the proportional—tax—financed case. We are

exploring these results further in extensions allowing for elastic labor

supply. That age—specific tax schemes can restore much of the potential

gain from participating in social security puts in a new light claims

based on "perfect markets" models that large welfare costs necessarily

accompany progressive taxation.



VI. CONCLUSIONS

     One of the original goals of the social security old—age benefit

program was the maintenance of consumption in retirement. Over the past

decade, however, many theoretical and empirical studies have focused on

the impact on pre—retirement consumption of the provision of social

security annuities.   For example, with uncertainty over longevity and

imperfections in private annuity markets, the introduction of even an

actuarially fair social security system can generate a substantial

increase in lifetime consumption and welfare.   When borrowing against

future resources is limited, however, the use of proportional payroll

tax finance for social security increases the incidence of liquidity

constraints on the consumption of individuals whose current resources

are low relative to their future resources.
                                  — 22 —




    Using simulation models under various assumptions about individual
preferences and technology, we analyze the impact of precautionary

saving against lifetime uncertainty and borrowing restrictions on

individual welfare and the capital stock in the presence and absence of

social security annuities. Our principal conclusions are four.    First,

we find that precautionary saving exceeds life—cycle saving (that would

have taken place in the absence of lifetime uncertainty), lending

further   support to the notion that the perfect—certainty version of the
life—cycle   model provides an inadequate explanation of observed saving

behavior.     Second, the introduction of an actuarially fair social

security system leads to a significant partial equilibrium increase in

lifetime consumption and welfare, accompanied by a reduction in the

capital stock. The increase in Individual welfare is reduced, however,

and in some cases eliminated, when borrowing restrictions are imposed.

     Third, extending the model to general equilibrium, we find that the

partial equilibrium gains in lifetime welfare from participation in

social security are offset by the interaction of higher steady—state

interest rates and binding liquidity constraints.    Indeed, the steady—

state welfare cost of social security under proportional payroll tax

finance can be substantial. Finally, replacing the proportional payroll

tax with a progressive tax (essentially a linear tax with an exemption),

we show that age—specific tax schemes can restore much of the potential

gain from participating in social security.

     This last finding suggests fruitful extensions of our research.

Since such schemes correspond cross—sectionally to progressive taxation,

the results cast doubt on recent claims of the inherent welfare costs

associated with progressive taxation.         By modeling labor—supply
                                   — 23 —




responses to tax—induced changes in the net wage, more formal methods of
optimal taxation can be applied.

     While we focus on the social security system, our approach should

be more generally applicable to examinations of fiscal policy in life—

cycle models.   Social security provides an appropriate starting point

for analysis, since realizing the large potential welfare gains from the

insurance features of the system depends importantly on agents' ability

to smooth consumption over the life cycle.    An obvious application of

the emphasis on precautionary saving is to types of uncertainty other

than that over longevity, and appropriate social insurance programs.   In

addition, to the extent that liquidity constraints play an important

role, conclusions about the welfare effects of such policy reforms as

switching from progressive to proportional income taxation, changing the

tax base from income to consumption, or lowering taxes on capital income

while raising labor—income taxes will have to be reexamined.
                                    — 24 —




                                  Footnotes



'See for example the survey in Kotlikoff (1984).

2The focus of such analyses is generally on switching tax regimes, say
from a proportional general income tax to a proportional consumption or
wage tax.    See for example Summers (1981), Auerbach and Kotlikoff
(1983), Evans (1983), and Seidman (1984).     Auerbach, Kotlikoff, and
Skinner (1983) have considered progressive taxation as well.

3Feldstein's results have by no means gone unchallenged;      see for
example Barro (1974, 1978), Leimer and Lesnoy (1982), and the reply to
Leimer and Lesnoy in Feldstein (1982). Cross—sectional evidence has
been supportive of the proposition that social securIty has reduced
individual saving;    see Feldsteln and Pellechio (1979), Kotlikoff
(1979b), Blinder, Gordon, and Wise (1981), Diamond and Hausman (1984),
King and Dlcks—Mireaux (1982), and Hubbard (1983).

4See for example Sheshinski and Weiss (1981), Abel (1983), and Hubbard
(1984a,b).

5Additional evidence in support of the importance of liquidity
constraints in the U.S. is provided by Hayashi's (1985) study of data
from the 1963 Survey of Consumer Finances.   Bernanke (1984) found no
evidence against the permanent income hypothesis in his examination of
expenditures on automobiles.    Automobile loans are, however, self—
collateralized, while our discussion focuses primarily on non—
collateralized consumption loans.

6Distinguishing the extent to which intergenerational transfers
represent planned bequests is important for analyses of the effects of
government debt policy or social security policy on Individual
consumption.

7To illustrate the unimportance of non—pension annuities in the
U.S. ,only about one percent of households surveyed in the 1962 Survey
of Financial Characteristics held any annuities, with holdings of less
than 0.1 percent of household net worth for those who did (see
Projector and Weiss, 1966).

8The corresponding problem for the certain—lifetime case would be to
maximize
      rD
      j U(C)e
                 pt dt,   subject to A = w + rA —   C
      0
where D Is the expected date of death in (0,T) in the uncertain—
lifetime case.

9As In Davies (1981, p. 572), the lifetime path of mean noninvestment
income E Is approximated from ages 20 to 65 by a fourth—order
polynomial:
E(t) = 36,999.4 + 3520.22t — 101.878 t2 + 1.34816 t3 — 0.00706233 t4.
                                 — 25 —



Since   the marginal loss due to a tighter liquidity constraint is
negligible if the constraint is light and greater when the constraint
is tight, losses due to the liquidity constraint are convex in the
tightness of the constaint. This indicates that the losses that arise
are underestimated by examining an average earnings pattern, since the
distribution of earnings patterns would include some with much tighter
constraints as well as some with looser constraints.

10 Our results       in the absence of borrowing restrictions are
qualitatively robust to changes in p (p<r). We chose a rate of 1.5
percent, which we believe to be on the low side" of previous studies,
so as to avoid overemphasizing the effect of the liquidity
constraint.   That is, higher values of p would increase desired
consumption in youth, magnifying the loss in welfare from the borrowing
restriction.

11The results reported are not very sensitive to changes in the timing
of the receipt of the bequest after twenty periods.

12We chose a moderate payroll tax rate between the rate assessed at the
beginning of the system and the much higher rate in place now.      The
results are not qualitatively sensitive to the choice of the payroll
tax rate.   When the wealth nonnegativity constraint is introduced in
the next section, welfare losses from the interaction of the borrowing
constraint and the payroll tax increases with the tax rate in a
nonlinear fashion.

'3For example, Kotlikoff and Spivak (1981) report very large welfare
gains from the introduction of a perfect annuity market.

140f course, the extent to which this benefit can be realized depends
on the extent to which borrowing constraints are binding when young.
As shown before, liquidity constraints can sharply reduce gains in
consumption due to social security even in a partial equilibrium model.

'5The model presented here assumes that labor is supplied inelastically
in all periods. A negative labor supply response to the higher payroll
tax would necessitate still higher taxes later in life.      For a
discussion of the impact of social security on pre—retirement labor
supply, see Burkhausser and Turner (1978).
                                  — 26 —




                                References

Abel,    Andrew B.  "Bequests with Uncertain Lifetimes."    Mimeograph,
Harvard University, 1983.

Auerbach, Alan J. and Kotlikoff, Laurence J.        "National Savings,
Economic Welfare, and the Structure of Taxation."   In Martin Feldstein
(ed.).      Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983.

Auerbach, Alan J., Kotlikoff, Laurence 3., and Skinner, Jonathan. "The
Efficiency Gains from Dynamic Tax Reform."     International Economic
Review 24 (February 1983): 81—100.

Barro, Robert J.     "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?"     Journal of
Political Economy 82 (November/December 1974): 1095—1117.

Barro, Robert 3.    The Impact of Social Security on Private Savings:
Evidence from the U. S. Time Series.      Washington, D. C.: American
Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, 1978.

Barro, Robert J. and Friedman, James W. "On Uncertain Lifetimes."
Journal of Political Economy 85 (August 1977): 843—849.

Bernanke, Ben S. "Permanent Income, Liquidity, and Expenditure on
Automobiles: Evidence from Panel Data." Quarterly Journal of Economics
99 (August 1984): 587—614.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, Schleifer, Andrei, and Summers, Lawrence H.
"Bequests as a Means of Payment."  Working Paper No. 1303, National
Bureau of Economic Research, March 1984.

Blinder, Alan S., Gordon, Roger H., and Wise, Donald E.      "Social
Security, Bequests, and the Life Cycle Theory of Saving:      Cross—
Sectional Tests." Working Paper No. 619, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Inc., January 1981.

Burkhauser, Richard V. and Turner, John A. "A Time—Series Analysis of
Social Security and Its Effect on the Market Work of Men at Younger
Ages." Journal of Political Economy 86 (August 1978): 701—715.

Davies, James. "Uncertain Lifetime, Consumption and Dissaving in
Retirement." Journal of Political Economy 89 (June 1981): 561—578.

Diamond, Peter A. and Hausman, Jerry A.   "Individual Retirement and
Savings Behavior."   Journal of Public Economics 23 (February/March
1984): 81—114.

Eckstein, Zvi, Eichenbaum, Martin, and Peled, Dan.          "Uncertain
Lifetimes and the Welfare—Enhancing Properties of Annuity Markets and
Social Security." Journal of Public Economics 26 (April 1985):
303—3 26.
                                 — 27   —



 Evans, Owen J.   "Tax Policy, the Interest Elasticity of Saving, and
Capital Accumulation: Numerical Analysis of Theoretical Models."
American Economic Review 73 (June 1983): 398—410.


Faber, J. F.    Life Tables for the United States:     1900—2050.   U.S.
Department   of    Health   and   Human   Services,   Social    Security
Administration, Actuarial Study No. 87, September 1982.

Farber,   Henry   S.      "Individual   Preferences and    Union Wage
Determination:   The Case of the United Mine Workers."       Journal of
Political Economy 86 (October 1978): 923—942.

Feldstein, Martin S.     "Social Security, Induced Retirement and
Aggregate Capital Accumulation."  Journal of Political Economy 82
(September! October 1974): 905—926.

_____________________________     "Social Security and Private Saving:
Reply.   Journal of Political Economy 90 (June 1982): 630—641.

Feldstein, Martin S. and Pellechio, Anthony.     "Social Security and
Household Wealth Accumulation: New Microeconomic Evidence."
Review of Economics and Statistics 61 (August 1979): 361—368.

Flavin, Marjorie.     "Excess Sensitivity of Consumption to Current
Income:   Liquidity Constraints or Myopia?" Working Paper No. 1341,
National Bureau of Economic Research, May 1984.

Friedman, Benjamin M. and Warshawsky, Mark. "Annuity Yields and Saving
in the United States." Mimeograph, Harvard University, February 1985.

Friend, Irwin and Blume, Marshall E. "The Demand for Risky Assets."
American Economic Review 65 (December 1975): 900—922.

Hamermesh, Daniel S.  "Social Insurance and Consumption: An Empirical
Inquiry." American Economic Review 72 (March 1982): 101—113.

Hansen, Lars Peter and Singleton, Kenneth J. "Stochastic Consumption,
Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns."
Journal of Political Economy 91 (April 1983): 249—265.

Hayashi, Fumio. "The Effect of Liquidity Constraints on Consumption: A
Cross—Sectional Analysis." Quarterly Journal of Economics 100 (February
1985): 183—206.

Hayashi, Fumio.    "The Permanent Income Hypothesis:   Estimation and
Testing by Instrumental Variables."   Journal of Political Economy 90
(October 1982): 895—918.

Hubbard, R. Glenn. The Financial Impacts of Social Security: A Study
of Effects on Household Wealth Accumulation and Allocation. Monograph
1983—3, Monograph Series in Finance and Economics, Salomon Brothers
Center for the Study of Financial Institutions, New York University,
1983.
                                  — 28 —




_____________________   (a) "'Precautionary' Saving Revisited:  Social
Security individual Welfare, and the Capital Stock." Working Paper No.
1430, National Bureau of Economic Research, August 1984.

_________________ (b)    "Uncertain Lifetimes, Pensions, and Individual
Saving." Working Paper No. 1373, National Bureau of Economic Research,
April 1984;   forthcoming in Zvi Bodie, John B. Shoven, and David A.
Wise (eds.), Issues in Pension Economics, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1985.

Judd, Kenneth L.   "Short—Run Analysis of Fiscal Policy in a Simple
Perfect Foresight Model."   Journal of Political Economy 93 (April
1985): 298—319.

Kamien, Morton I. and Schwartz, Nancy L. Dynamic Optimization: The
Calculus of Variations and Optimal Control In Economics and Management.
New York: North Holland, 1982.

King, Mervyn A. and Dicks—Mireaux, Louis. "Asset Holdings and the Life
Cycle." Economic Journal 92 (June 1982): 247—267.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J.        "Social Security and Equilibrium Capital
Intensity." Quarterly Journal of Economics 94 (May 1979a): 233—253.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J.      "Taxation and Savings:     A Neoclassical
Perspective." Journal of Economic Literature 22 (December 1984): 1576—
1629.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J.  "Testing the Theory of Social Security and Life
Cycle Accumulation."   American Economic Review 69 (June 1979b): 396—
410.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., Shoven, John B., and Spivak, Avia.    "Annuity
Markets, Saving, and the Capital Stock."      Working Paper No. 1250,
National Bureau of Economic Research, December 1983.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Spivak, Avia. "The Family as an Incomplete
Annuities Market." Journal of Political Economy 89 (April 1981): 372—
391.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Summers, Lawrence H.          "The Role of
Intergenerational Transfers in Aggregate Capital Accumulation."
Journal of Political Economy 90 (August 1981): 706—732.

Leimer, Dean R. and Lesnoy, Selig D.   "Social Security and Private
Saving: New Time—Series Evidence."  Journal of Political Economy 90
(June 1982): 606—629.

Projector, Dorothy S. and Weiss, Gertrude S. Survey of Financial
Characteristics of Consumers: Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System, 1966.

Rothschild, Michael and StiglItz, Joseph. "Equilibrium In Competitive
Insurance Markets:      An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect
                                — 29 —




Information."   Quarterly Journal of Economics 90 (November 1976): 629—
650.


Seidman, Laurence S. "Conversion to a Consumption Tax: The Transition
in a Life—Cycle Growth Model." Journal of Political Economy 92 (April
1984): 247—267.

Sheshlnski, Eytan and Weiss, Yoram.   "Uncertainty and Optimal Social
Security Systems.   Quarterly Journal of Economics 96 (May 1981): 189—
206.

Summers, Lawrence H.    "Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a Life
Cycle Growth Model."    American Economic Review 71 (September 1981):
533—544.

Yaarl, Menahem E. "Uncertain LIfetIme, LIfe Insurance, and the Theory of the
Consumer." Review of Economic Studies 32 (April 1965): 137—158.
                                                                     TABLE   I




                                           LIFETIME UNCERTAINTY, THE CAPITAL STOCK,          ANI)   BEQUESTS

                                                                                                                      Expected Bequest as a
                                                                                                                      Percentage of Lifetime
                 (K/Y)                       (K/Y)UL                             (K/KUL)                                   Earnings

        —.9     —2     —4     —6     —.9      —2       —4     —6       —.9       —2     —4          —6         —.9         —2    —4     —6



r=.02    1.93   1.28   1.02   0.93    3.63    5.97     8.00   9.04      .57       .22    .12         .10       9.2        15.8   22.2   25.7

r=.04    5.29   2.56   1.34   0.93    7.45    6.69     6.86   7.10      .70       .35    .17         .11       19.1       20.6   23.4   25.1

r=.06    7.35   3.61   1.67   0.97    9.40    7.13     6.15   5.88      .67       .41    .21         .13       38.5       26.7   23.8   23.3



        Note:   "CL" and "IJL" refer to the certain—lifetime and uncertain—lifetime
                 cases, respectively. All cases are unconstrained; i.e., no borrowing
                 restrictions are imposed.
                                                                                 TABLE 2

                                             LIQUIDITY CONSTRAINTS, THE CAPITAL STOCK, AM) IM)IVLDUAL WELFARE

                                                                         (CERTAIN—LIFETIME CASE)

                  Periods
                Conat rained                          Unconstrained                        Constrained
                                                              8                                 8                               8
        —.9     —2        —4          —6       —.9     —2         —4     —6        —.9     —2       —4     —6      —.9    —2        —4   —6
r=.02   9       10        10          11       1.93    1.28       1.02   0.93      3.09    2.71     2.56   2.52   —1.8   —6.4 —20.5 —35.2
r.O4    6       8         10          11       5.29    2.56       1.34   0.93      5.53    3.44     2.69   2.46   —0.3   —4.6 —20.0 —35.4
r=.06   2       6             9       10       7.35    3.61       1.67   0.97      7.37    4.13     2.82   2.42   —0.1   —3.4   —19.3 —34.8

        Note:        A   is       expressed as a percentage of lifetime earnings.
                                                                   TABLE   3


                                    LIQUIDITY CONSTRAINTS, THE CAPITAL STOCK, AND IM)IVIDUAL WELFARE
                                                        (UNCERTAIN—LIFETIME CASE)

                                                                    K/V
                  Pe nods
                Constrained                IJnconstralned                        Cons trained
                      8


r=.02   9    8        7       7    3.63     5.97   8.00     9.04      4.86     7.11    9.01     9.99   —3.6 —7.2     —16.1   —26.5

r=.04   4       7     8       8    7.45    6.69    6.86     7.10      7.70     7.37    7.19     8.11   —0.9 —5.4 —18.1       —31.5

r=.06   2       5     8       9    9.40     7.13   6.15     5.88      9.42     7.49    6.94     6.86   —0.1   —4.0   —18.7   —33.3

        Note:         is expressed as   a percentage of lifetime earnings.
                                                                    TABLE     4


                                       CONTRIBUTIONS OF LIFETIME UNCERTAINTY AND BORROWING RESTRICTIONS
                                                             TO THE CAPITAL STOCK

                  (KCL,NC/KCL     ,)                            (KcL,c/1(uL                             (KcL,Nc/KULc)
                             8                                           B

           —.9         —2        —4    —6                 —.9      —2         —4    —6            —.9       —2    —4     —6
r=.02      .61         .46       .39   .36                .68      .38       .27   .24            .41      .18   .10    .08
r.O4       .95         .71       .47   .36                .11      .42       .30   .25            .67      .30   .14    .09
r=.06      .99         .84       .55   .36                .67     .45        .32   .27            .67      .37   .17    .10

        Note:    CLW and "ilL" refer to the certain—lifetime and uncertain—lifetime
                 cases, respectively.   "NC' and "C" refer to the absence and
                                                                               presence
                 of borrowing constraints.
                                                             TABLE 5

                                     SOCIAL SECURITY, THE CAPITAL STOCK AND INDIVIDUAL WELfARE
                                                     (No LIQUIDITY CONSTRAINTS)

                                                    Percentage Change in Bequests
                Percentage Change in K/Y           as a Fraction of Lifetime Earnings                   A


          —.9           —2      —4         —6        —.9     —2        —4    —6            —.9    —2        —4     —6


r=.02    —48.2       —58.1   —58.9     —57.9       —88.0   —83.5    —79.3   —76.7           4.4   8.2       11.1   12.6

r=.O4    —27.7       —50.4   —65.2     —70.1       —80.1   —94.2    —98.3   —98.8           5.4   6.6       7.7    8.1
r=.06    —17.0       —32.0   —36.5     —39.3       —73.8   —95.5    —97.5   —98.3           6.1   3.8        1.9    1.3

        Note:       A is expressed as percentage of lifetime earnings.   A and
                    the percentage change in K/Y are measured with respect to the
                    corresponding no—social—security cases under lifetime uncertainty.
                                                                                TABLE 6

                                                               LIQUIDITY CONSTRAINTS AND SOCIAL SECURITY:

                                                               THE CAPITAL STOCK AND INDIVIDUAL WELFARE


               Periods Constrained              Percentage Change in K/Y        Percentage Change in Bequests
                                                                                  as a Fraction on Lifetime
                            8                                                                    8
           —.9        —2        —4        —6     —.9      —2      —4    —6        —.9       —2         —4      —6    —.9    —2     —4     —6

 t       .O6
     8



r=.02          13     12        11        10    —29.4   —39.2 —42.4 —42.7        —82.1    —77.1      —12.9   —70.2    3.5   4.5    0.1   —4.3
r=.04           5      9        12        13    —24.5   —39.0 —47.8 —51.4        —78.6    —89.5      —93.3   —94.5    5.0   3.9   —1.8   —5.2
r=.06           2      7        11        12    —16.7   —29.1 —31.4 —32.8        —73.6    —93.6      —95.8   —96.6   5.9    2.4   —3.5 —5.6

                    Note:            It   and
                                            the percentage change in K/Y are measured with
                                                                                           respect to the
                                     corresponding no—social—security cases under lifetime uncertainty.
                                                                      TABLE 7

                                                  GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF SOCIAL SECURITY

                                                  ON   THE CAPITAL STOCK AND INDIVIDUAL WELFARE*


                          Initial     Steady      State                           Imposition of Social Security
                                                                                       (Fixed r, Fixed Bequest)

                          r     K/Y       b            A                              r     K/Y      b

                        .€135    8.51     21.1%                                      .035    6.86   6.9%    +3.8%
                        .031     9.62     26.9                                       .031    7.79   10.2    +0.3
                        .024    12.48     35.8                                       .024   10.18   17.8    —4.5
                        .020    14.66     42.1                                       .020 12.23     24.3    —4.9


                     Imposition of Social Security                                 Imposition of Social Security
                      (Fixed r, Bequest Adjusts)                                        (New Steady State)

                          r     K/Y           b         A                              r    K/I      b        A

8=—.9                  .035     5.51       4.1%     —8.2%                            .044   6.74    3.5%   —14.7%
B=—2                   .031     4.78       3.8      —9.0                             .058   5.22    1.8    —27.9
B=—4                   .024     5.90       7.6      —6.9                             .061   4.87    1.1    —37.2
8=—6                   .020     7.34      11.7      —7.4                             .063   4.78    1.0    —41.8


        *                                         A is measured with respect to changes from
            In all cases, P=O.015, and t80.06.
            the initial no—social—security steady state. b represents the average bequest as a
            percentage of Lifetime evenings.
                                                                TABLE   8


                                               PROGRESSIVE TAXATION AND SOCIAL SECURITY:

                                              REASSESSING THE IMPACT ON INDIVIDUAL   WELFARE



                                                      _____                  f3=—4

r   =   .02                        4.2%                6.3%                   4.3%           1.4%
                                  (3.5)               (4.5)                  (0.1)         (—4.3)


r   = .04                          5.1                 5.3                    2.7            0.6
                                  (5.0)               (3.9)                 (—1.8)         (—5.2)


r   = .06                          6.0                 4.0                    0.8            0.2
                                  (5.9)               (2.4)                 (—3.5)         (—5.6)


              Note:   L is measured with respect to the corresponding no—social—security
                      cases under lifetime uncertainty, with borrowing restrictions
                      imposed.  Individuals are exempt from social security tacation for
                      for the first fifteen working periods. Numbers in parentheses are the
                      welfare gains from imposing a social security system of identical size
                      financed by a proportional payroll tax.
