                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 EMBODIED CARBON TARIFFS

                                         Christoph Böhringer
                                          Jared C. Carbone
                                        Thomas F. Rutherford

                                        Working Paper 17376
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17376


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2011




This research has been supported by Environment Canada. Research assistance has been provided
by Justin Carron. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Christoph Böhringer, Jared C. Carbone, and Thomas F. Rutherford. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Embodied Carbon Tariffs
Christoph Böhringer, Jared C. Carbone, and Thomas F. Rutherford
NBER Working Paper No. 17376
August 2011
JEL No. F18,H23,Q54,Q56

                                             ABSTRACT

In a world where the prospects of a global agreement to control greenhouse gas emissions are bleak,
the idea of using trade policy as an implicit regulation of foreign emission sources has gained many
supporters in countries contemplating unilateral climate policies. Embodied carbon tariffs tax the direct
and indirect carbon emissions embodied in imported goods. The appeal seems obvious: as OECD countries
are, on average, large net importers of embodied emissions from non-OECD countries, carbon tariffs
could substantially extend the reach of OECD climate policies. We investigate this claim by simulating
the effects of embodied carbon tariffs with a computable general equilibrium model of global trade
and energy use. We find that embodied carbon tariffs do effectively reduce carbon leakage. However,
the scope for improvements in the global cost-effectiveness of unilateral climate policy is limited.
The main welfare effect of the tariffs is to shift the burden of OECD climate policy to the developing
world.


Christoph Böhringer                                 Thomas F. Rutherford
University of Oldenburg                             ETH Zurich
Department of Economics                             Zurichbergstrasse 18
D-26111 Oldenburg                                   8032 Zurich
Germany                                             Switzerland
christoph.boehringer@uni-oldenburg.de               trutherford@ethz.ch

Jared C. Carbone
University of Calgary
Department of Economics, SS 454
2500 University Drive NW
Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada
jccarbon@ucalgary.ca
1   Introduction
In a world where the likelihood of a global agreement to control greenhouse gas emissions
seems small, the idea of using trade policy as a form of indirect regulation of foreign emis-
sion sources has gained many supporters in OECD regions considering unilateral climate poli-
cies. One popular proposal involves the taxation of carbon emissions embodied in imported
goods — an instrument we refer to in this paper as an “embodied carbon tariff.” Under such
a scheme, for example, imported steel from non-OECD countries would face a tax based on
direct emissions (those due to the combustion of fossil energy in steel production) as well as
indirect emissions (such as emissions created by the generation of electricity for use in steel
production).
    The intuitive appeal of embodied carbon tariffs to those concerned about climate change
is clear: when emissions from domestic production activities are priced unilaterally, the global
environmental impact will be undermined to the extent that emissions increase elsewhere — an
effect known as carbon leakage. Advocates of consumption-based emission policies (including
embodied carbon tariffs) argue that regulating emissions in domestic production also fails to
account for other emissions a country is “responsible for” if its citizens consume imported
goods with embodied emissions. Embodied carbon tariffs may provide a way for climate-
concerned nations to reduce carbon leakage and regulate the emissions embodied in imported
consumption goods. Taxation of embodied carbon is also attractive from a political economy
perspective; embodied carbon tariffs ensure that the production of emission-intensive goods
cannot easily avoid regulation by relocating abroad, ameliorating concerns about the loss of
competitiveness in domestic industries due to climate policy.
    All of these arguments have contributed to the popularity of recent climate policy initia-
tives that seek to regulate emissions embodied in consumption activities. Examples include
California’s low-carbon fuel standard (LCFS), the proposed United States federal LCFS, and
the discussion of border adjustments (or carbon tariffs) at relatively mature states of the cli-
mate policy debate in both the United States and the European Union.
    Advocates of embodied carbon policies cite the results of engineering studies based on
life-cycle analysis or, more specifically, multi-regional input-output (MRIO) studies, that calcu-
late carbon emissions embodied in production, consumption and trade throughout the world
economy. The calculations show that the developed world is, on average, a large net importer
of embodied emissions from developing countries and has been becoming more so over time
(Weber and Matthews 2007, Peters and Hertwich 2008a, Peters and Hertwich 2008b, Peters
and Hertwich 2008c). Furthermore, a substantial amount of the emissions embodied in traded
goods is not due to the combustion of fossil energy inputs used directly in their production.
For example, much of the emissions embodied in manufactured goods stems from electricity
use, where the combustion of fossil fuels in electricity generation is the primary source of the


                                                1
emissions in the supply chain. Supporters of embodied carbon tariffs argue, therefore, that this
instrument could substantially extend the reach of unilateral OECD climate policies — first, by
covering foreign sources of emissions and, second, by covering indirect sources of emissions.
   In this paper we quantify the economic and environmental performance of embodied car-
bon tariffs. We use a global dataset on economic activity and carbon flows to calculate the
carbon embodied in traded goods drawing on standard MRIO methods. We then use a com-
putable general equilibrium (CGE) model that is calibrated to the same dataset to simulate
policies based on embodied carbon tariffs. We compare policies in which OECD countries rely
solely on a domestic carbon tax to produce abatement to policies in which all OECD countries
additionally use embodied carbon tariffs on imports from all non-OECD countries in order to
meet the same global abatement target.
   Our simulation results indicate that while embodied carbon tariffs do effectively reduce
carbon leakage the global cost savings are small compared to the redistributive impacts. The
main welfare effect of the tariffs is to shift the burden of OECD climate policy to the developing
world. The OECD regions benefit by extracting surplus from non-OECD exporters of emission-
intensive goods. The redistributive impacts generated by the tariffs are large; some of the
OECD regions implementing the tariffs even experience negative net costs of climate policy,
whereas most non-OECD countries suffer from substantial welfare losses due to the imposition
of tariffs. China suffers a loss of 4% of GDP when subjected to them. The tariff policies are
therefore heavily penalized when we assess their global welfare effects through the lens of
social welfare functions that exhibit some degree of inequality aversion.
   Compensation of non-OECD countries for tariff-induced welfare losses — either through
lump-sum transfers or by returning tariff revenues — can alleviate the burden shifting problem.
However, it also tends to offset the global cost savings associated with using the tariffs. This is
because part of the effectiveness of tariffs stems from the fact that they are harmful to countries
subjected to them: the negative income effect to these countries reduces demand for emission-
intensive goods and thereby decreases carbon leakage.
   Thus we conclude that the use of embodied carbon tariffs is difficult to justify based on
the idea that it would move the world closer to implementing optimal second-best policy. The
tariffs may, however, represent a tempting policy option for OECD countries seeking to reduce
their domestic compliance costs and eliminate carbon leakage from their unilateral climate pol-
icy initiatives. How their use, or the threat of their use, would impact international negotiations
on climate change policy remains an important open question.
   The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In section 2 we review the case for and
against embodied carbon tariffs as a second-best instrument in unilateral carbon regulation.
Section 3 lays out the dataset and the key economic accounting identities which underlie our
empirical assessment of embodied carbon tariffs. Section 4 presents the MRIO calculations
to determine the full carbon content embodied in traded goods. Section 5 contains a non-

                                                2
technical summary of the CGE model we use to assess the economic responses of the alternative
regulations that we consider. Section 6 describes and interprets our policy scenarios. Section 7
draws policy conclusions. The appendices include technical details on the MRIO calculations
and the algebraic structure of the CGE model.


2   Background
A fundamental problem with unilateral climate policy is carbon leakage: policies meant to re-
duce emissions in one country cause emissions to increase in other countries without emission
controls in place (Hoel 1991, Felder and Rutherford 1993). Leakage can occur through interna-
tional energy markets, as the drop in demand for fossil fuels in the abating countries lowers
world prices for these goods which in turn stimulates fossil fuel demand abroad. It can also
occur through the markets for energy-intensive goods, as the cost of producing these goods in
the abating countries rise and energy-intensive production will be relocated abroad.
    In order to reduce leakage and increase cost-effectiveness of unilateral climate policy, var-
ious instruments have been considered to complement domestic emission regulation. One
prominent policy measure is based on the idea of border carbon adjustments. On the import
side, this involves a tariff levied on the embodied carbon of energy-intensive imports from non-
abating regions assessed at the prevailing carbon price. On the export side, energy-intensive
exports to non-abating countries would get a full refund of carbon payments at the point of
shipment. Full border adjustments combine import tariffs with export subsidies, effectively
implementing destination-based carbon pricing (Whalley and Lockwood 2010). In practice,
the policy debate focuses on the use of import tariffs.
    Estimates of carbon leakage are predominantly based on multi-region, multi-sector, com-
putable general equilibrium (CGE) models where prices play a central role in the determi-
nation of market supply and demand: trade flows respond to relative prices, and unilateral
carbon regulation in large open economies influences carbon emissions in the rest of the world
(i.e. carbon leakage). CGE models combine data from input-output tables with assumptions
about market structure and elasticities that govern how responsive supply and demand are
to price changes. Analysts then compute the outcome of how the economy adjusts to policy
interventions.
    Average leakage rates in CGE studies of comparable climate policy regulations range be-
tween 10-30% (Paltsev 2001, Böhringer and Löschel 2002, Babiker and Rutherford 2005, McK-
ibbin and Wilcoxen 2008, Ho, Morgenstern and Shih 2008, Böhringer, Fischer and Rosendahl
2010) but there are “outliers” on both sides of this range depending on key determinants such
as the price responsiveness of fossil fuel supply (Burniaux and Martins 1999), the degree of
heterogeneity in traded goods (Böhringer, Rutherford and Voss 1998), or market imperfections



                                                3
(Babiker 2005).1 In the quantitative impact assessment of carbon tariffs based on direct em-
bodied emissions, CGE studies commonly find a leakage dampening effect accompanied by
terms-of-trade changes that can be substantial relative to the direct cost of emission abatement
(Böhringer and Rutherford 2002, Mattoo, Subramanian, Mensbrugghe and He 2009).
       The literature on the optimal taxation of international environmental externalities provides
support for the idea of using trade restrictions as an instrument to reduce leakage and increase
economic efficiency of unilateral emission regulation. Markusen (1975) was the first to develop
the insight that a sufficiently large country (or group of countries) might be able to discourage
foreign production of pollution-intensive goods through the use of import tariffs. Markusen
analyzes a simple two-region model in which one region imposes tariffs on the other. Pro-
duction of dirty goods results in a fixed amount of pollution per unit of output, all pollution
is generated by the dirty-goods sector in the model, and there are no indirect emissions em-
bodied in the production of other goods through the use of pollution-intensive intermediate
inputs. In this setting, Markusen derives a condition for the optimal tariff on dirty-goods im-
ports as a function of the domestic pollution tax in the country imposing the tariffs as well as
the elasticities of supply and demand for dirty goods outside the regulated region. The intu-
itive result is that the optimal tariff corresponds to the optimal (Pigouvian) domestic pollution
tax discounted by the degree to which demand for dirty goods outside the regulated region
is stimulated by the tariff-induced reduction in the world price of the good. Hoel (1996) pro-
vides a more general theoretical model to derive the conditions for optimal consumption and
production in the unilaterally regulating country. He shows that, in the optimum, a uniform
carbon tax on all domestic consumers and producers should be complemented with tariffs on
the traded goods (i.e. taxes on net imports or subsidies on net exports) in order to account for
counterproductive spillovers on foreign emissions via international trade.
       While carbon tariffs have support from economic theory as a second-best instrument in uni-
lateral climate policy regulation, they face a number of practical challenges not confronted by
the theoretical studies. From a legal perspective, tariffs are generally not permitted according to
trade agreements such as GATT or NAFTA and it is not clear whether environmental tariffs are
an exception (Brewer 2008, Pauwelyn 2007, Howse and Eliason 2008, Charnowitz, Hufbauer
and Kim 2009). There are also practical problems in the calculation and application of appro-
priate tariff rates. The complexity of calculating defensible measures of embodied carbon for
goods with long and complicated supply chains would likely limit tariff coverage to a fraction
of the total emissions embodied in trade, reducing their effectiveness. Furthermore, regulators
would ideally trace out the specific supply chains for individual foreign firms and all of their
individual upstream partners to calculate individualized tariffs rates but this is a challenging
and potentially expensive task. As a consequence, the tariffs rate would most likely need to
   1
    For individual sectors — in particular, for energy-intensive and trade-exposed industries — leakage rates can
be much higher than the average leakage rates (Ho et al. 2008, Fischer and Fox 2009).


                                                       4
be calculated based on industry-average measures of embodied carbon in each country. In this
situation, the tariffs do not give individual polluters responsible for the upstream emissions in-
cluded in embodied carbon measures an immediate incentive to adopt less emission-intensive
production techniques. Finally, in a world where agents respond to changes in relative prices
the effectiveness of unilateral tariffs would be further reduced to the extent that countries can
find alternative unregulated markets in which to sell their carbon-intensive products, an effect
known as demand-side leakage (Copeland and Taylor 2004).2
        The legal and technical challenges of calculating and implementing embodied carbon tariffs
as well as the potential for re-routing of carbon-intensive demand work against the possibility
that tariffs might represent a cost-effective policy instrument. However, abatement cost tend to
be significantly lower in the countries subjected to the tariffs (in fact, the pre-policy marginal
cost of abatement are zero as long as countries have no emission controls of their own in place)
which may make emission reductions in these countries — even when triggered through a rela-
tively blunt instrument — cheaper than equivalent reductions in currently regulated countries.
        Policymakers also worry about the wider implications of using carbon tariffs for on-going
international climate policy negotiations (Houser, Bradley and Childs 2008) or trade relations
(ICTSD 2008). In particular, the United Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
guarantees compensation from Annex B to the developing world for induced economic cost
under Articles 4.8 and 4.9. In this context, the Kyoto Protocol to the UNFCCC warns of neg-
ative impacts for the developing world. The principal concern is that unilateral abatement
in industrialized countries may deteriorate the terms of trade for developing countries with
adverse effects on their economic well-being (Böhringer and Rutherford 2004).3 On the other
hand, proponents of tariffs view the threat of trade sanctions as a political stick in the drive to
commit intransigent countries to adopt emission restrictions.


3       Dataset and Accounting Identities
For our empirical assessment of embodied carbon tariffs we make use of the GTAP 7.1 database
which includes detailed national accounts on production and consumption (input-output ta-
bles) together with bilateral trade flows and CO2 emissions for up to 112 regions and 57 sectors
(Narayanan and Walmsley 2008).
        The economic structure underlying the GTAP dataset is illustrated in Figure 1 and can be
readily incorporated in an economic model with either fixed input-output ratios (here, MRIO
    2
     Another more subtle reaction to carbon tariffs is the re-shuffling of production where less carbon-intensive
varieties of a good are shipped to regulated countries while more carbon-intensive varieties are reallocated to un-
regulated ones (Bushnell, Peterman and Wolfram 2008).
   3
     The Kyoto Protocol explicitly reflects concerns on adverse terms-of-trade effects by postulating that developed
countries ‘. . . shall strive to implement policies and measures. . . in such a way as to minimize adverse. . . economic
impacts on other Parties, especially developing countries Parties. . . ’ United Nations (1997), Article 2, paragraph 3.


                                                           5
models) or price-responsive relationships (here, CGE models). Symbols correspond to vari-
ables in the economic model. Yir indicates the production of good i in region r. The labels
Cr , Ir and Gr portray private consumption, investment and public demand, respectively. Mjr
portrays the import of good j into region r. RAr stands for the representative household in
each region.
    In Figure 1, commodity and factor market flows appear as solid lines and tax payments
associated with various economic activities in production, consumption and trade appear as
dotted lines.
    Domestic production (vomir ) is distributed to exports (vxmdirs ), international transporta-
tion services (vstir ), intermediate demand (vdf mijr ), household consumption (vdf miCr ), in-
vestment (vdf miIr ) and government consumption (vdf miGr ). The accounting identity on the
output side thus reads as:
                          X                                                                  X
     vomir            =            vxmdirs +                   vstir             +                   vdf mijr         + vdf miCr + vdf miIr + vdf miGr
     | {z }                                                    | {z }                                                   |             {z             }
Domestic Production           s                        Transport Exports                         j
                          |         {z     }                                                 |        {z          }              Final Demand (C + I + G)
                          Bilateral Exports                                           Intermediate Demand

    The value of output is, in turn, related to the cost of intermediate inputs, value-added, and
                                            Y by sector i in region r:
tax payments (net of production subsidies) Rir
                                               X                                                     X
                          vomir            =            vif mjir + vdf mjir +                                vf mf ir +       RYir                      (1)
                          | {z }                                                                                              |{z}
                      Value of Output              j                                                     f
                                               |                       {z                    }       |       {z       }   Tax Revenue
                                                        Intermediate Inputs                          Factor Earnings


    Imported goods which have an aggregate value of vimir enter intermediate demand (vif mjir ),
private consumption (vif miCr ) and public consumption (vif miGr ). The accounting identity for
these flows on the output side reads as:
                                                               X
                                     vimir             =                vif mijr             + vif miCr + vif miGr
                                     | {z }                                                    |        {z       }
                              Value of Imports                     j                                     Final Demand (C+G)
                                                               |            {z       }
                                                           Intermediate Demand

and the accounting identify relating the value of imports to the cost of associated inputs is:
                                                        X                            X
                                  vimir            =           vxmdisr +                         vtwrjisr +               RMir                          (2)
                                  | {z }                                                                                  |{z}
                      CIF Value of Imports                 s                             j
                                                               |                     {z                      }    Tariffs Net Subsidies
                                                               FOB Exports + Transport Cost




                                                                                 6
                      vxmir , vstir




    vif mijr                                           vif miCr                                      vif miGr

               vdf mijr                vdf miCr                   vdf miIr           vdf miGr                       vimir

                          vomir

                                                  Cr                     Ir                     Gr                  Mir

                Yir
                                                       vpmr                   vimr     vgmr




7
                                      vf mmir


                      vf msir                                           RAr


        RYir                                RC
                                             r                                                        RG
                                                                                                       r    RM
                                                                                                             ir




                                                                             vbr                                vxmdisr , vtwrjisr


                                          Figure 1: GTAP7 Benchmark Flows
   Part of the cost of imports includes the cost of international transportation services. These
services are provided with inputs from regions throughout the world, and the supply demand
balance in the market for transportation service j requires that the sum across all regions of
service exports (vstjr ) equals the sum across all bilateral trade flows of service inputs (vtwrjisr ):

                                   X                           X
                                        vstjr          =               vtwrjisr                     (3)
                                   | r {z }                    |isr {z           }
                               Service Exports for j       Transport Demand for j

   Carbon emissions associated with fossil fuels are represented in the GTAP database through
a satellite data array (eco2igr ) constructed on the basis of energy balances from the International
Energy Agency (IEA). These emissions are proportional to fossil fuel use. Given detailed emis-
sions associated with fossil fuel inputs, we can calculate direct carbon emissions emerging from
the production of good j in region r as:
                                                               X
                                  co2ejr         =                     eco2ijr
                                  | {z }
                                                                   i
                              Aggregate Carbon                 |       {z    }
                                                       Sum of Carbon in Fuel Inputs


where eco2ijr is the IEA-based statistic describing carbon emissions linked to the input of fuel
i in the production of good j in region r.
   In our quantitative analysis we keep all the 57 sectors provided by the GTAP database to
reflect sector-specific differences in energy and trade intensity. The energy goods identified
are coal, crude oil, natural gas, refined oil products, and electricity which allows to distinguish
energy goods by CO2 intensity and to capture the potential for fossil-fuel switching in the price-
responsive CGE model. Furthermore, the GTAP dataset features a variety of energy-and-trade-
intensive (non-energy) commodities that are most exposed to unilateral climate policies and
therefore are prime candidates for border measures: paper, pulp and print; chemical products;
mineral products; iron and steel; non-ferrous metals; machinery and equipment; plant-based
fibers; air, land and water transports. At the regional level, the model features explicitly all G20
economies which are the major players in international climate policy negotiations as they col-
lectively account for the bulk of global gross national production, trade, population and CO2
emissions. We include Ethiopia as the poorest country in the GTAP dataset to test the robust-
ness of policy conclusions when we account for inequality aversion in our impact analysis of
carbon tariffs. All remaining countries are subsumed in a composite “Rest of World” region.
   Table 1 provides a list of sectors and regions for the composite dataset underlying our quan-
titative analysis.




                                                           8
                                                      R EGIONS

OECD                               Australia and New Zealand (ANZ), Canada (CAN), France (FRA),
                                   Italy (ITA), Germany (DEU), Japan (JPN), United Kingdom (GBR ),
                                   United States (USA), Rest of European Union (EUR)

Non-OECD                           Argentina (ARG), Brazil (BRA), China and Hong Kong (CHN), In-
                                   dia (IND), Indonesia (IDN), Mexico* (MEX), Russian Federation
                                   (RUS), South Africa (ZAF), South Korea* (KOR), Turkey* (TUR),
                                   OPEC (OPC), Ethiopia (ETH), Rest of World (ROW)


                                                      S ECTORS

Energy                             Coal (COA), Crude oil (CRU), Natural gas (GAS), Refined
                                   petroleum and coal (OIL), Electricity (ELE)

Energy-and trade-intensive         Paper, pulp, print (PPP), Chemical, rubber, plastic products (CRP),
                                   Iron and steel (I _ S), Non-ferrous metal (NFM), Non-metallic min-
                                   eral (NMM), Machinery and equipment (OME), Plant-based fibers
                                   (PFB), Water transport (WTP), Air transport (ATP), Other transport
                                   (OTP)

Rest of industry and services      Paddy rice (PDR), Wheat (WHT), Other cereal grains (GRO), Veg-
                                   etables, fruit, nuts (V _ F), Oil seeds (OSD), Sugar cane, sugar beet
                                   (C _ B), Other crop (OCR), Bovine cattle, sheep and goats, horses
                                   (CTL), Other animal products (OAP), Raw milk (RMK), Wool, silk-
                                   worm cocoons (WOL), Forestry (FRS), Fishing (FSH), Other min-
                                   erals (OMN), Bovine meat products (CMT), Other meat products
                                   (OMT), Vegetable oils and fats (VOL), Dairy products (MIL), Pro-
                                   cessed rice (PCR), Sugar (SGR), Other food products (OFD), Bev-
                                   erages and tobacco products (B _ T), Textiles (TEX), Wearing ap-
                                   parel (WAP), Leather products (LEA), Wood products (LUM), Metal
                                   products (FMP), Motor vehicles and parts (MVH), Other transport
                                   equipment (OTN), Electronic equipment (EEQ), Other manufac-
                                   tures (OMF), Water (WTR), Construction (CNS), Trade (TRD), Com-
                                   munication (CMN), Other financial services (OFI), Insurance (ISR),
                                   Other business services (OBS), Recreational and other services
                                   (ROS), Public administration, defense, education, health (OSG),
                                   Dwellings (DWE)


* — These countries are OECD members but are re-assigned to the non-OECD group in our model to better
reflect their historical role in international climate policy.

                        Table 1: Regions and Sectors in the G20 Aggregation




                                                           9
4    MRIO Calculation of Embodied Carbon
To determine the full carbon content embodied in goods we need to account for the indirect
carbon emissions associated with intermediate non-fossil inputs in addition to the direct carbon
emissions stemming from the combustion of fossil fuel inputs. For this calculation (based on
the GTAP dataset) one must define a multi-region input-output (MRIO) model.
    Three sets of variables characterize the MRIO model. xygr describes the embodied carbon of
produced goods, final private demand (C), investment (I) and government demand (G), where
g indexes this joint set of activities. xm
                                         ir describes the embodied carbon of imported commodity
i defined as a weighted average of imported varieties across trade partners. xtj describes the
embodied carbon of international trade services. The multi-regional input-output model relates
these variables to the accounting identities in the GTAP dataset described in equations (1-3).
Thus, the composite carbon embodied in the output, xygr , is defined as:

                                                                                                        xyir vdf migr
                                                                   X                              X
                   xygr vomgr          =     co2egr            +         xm
                                                                          ir vif migr +                                  (4)
                                             | {z }
                                                                   |i                             |i
                   | {z }
               Total Embodied Carbon       Direct Carbon                     {z               }             {z       }
                                                                    Indirect Imported              Indirect Domestic


which follows directly from equation (1). Total embodied carbon is composed of the direct
emissions generated by production plus indirect emissions produced by the use of domestic
and imported intermediate inputs.
    The embodied carbon of imports, xm
                                     ir , is defined as:


                                                               xyis vxmdisr +
                                                       X                                  X
                           xm   vim               =                                               xtj vtwrjisr           (5)
                           | ir {z ir}
                                                           s                                  j
                    Carbon Embodied in Imports         |                {z           }    |            {z        }
                                                           Carbon in Goods                Carbon in Transport


which follows from equation (2). The carbon embodied in imports consists of the carbon em-
bodied in the output of the good from the region of origin plus the emissions embodied in
transport services consumed to bring the good to the destination market.
    Finally, the embodied carbon of international transport, xtj , is defined as

                                                                                     xyjr vstjr
                                                                             X
                                            xtj vtwj                     =                                               (6)
                                                                                 r
                                            | {z }
                               Embodied Carbon of Transport                  |           {z       }
                                                                             Carbon in Inputs


which follows from equation (3). The carbon embodied in transport consists of the carbon
embodied in the inputs required to produce transport services.
    Equations (4)-(6) can be represented as a linear system of the form:

                                                   x = b + Ax

                                                               10
which can be formulated and solved directly as a square system of equations or solved recur-
sively using a diagonalization algorithm. We use the latter approach, the details of which are
described in Appendix A.
       We now discuss the results of our MRIO calculations. Figure 2 compares embodied carbon
for the ten most carbon-intensive sectors in the dataset across three countries of production —
China, the United States, Japan — together with the composites for non-OECD countries and
OECD countries.4



                  30




                  25




                  20
           Kg/$




                  15

                                                                                                   China
                                                                                                   Non-OECD
                  10                                                                               United States
                                                                                                   OECD
                                                                                                   Japan
                  5




                  0




                                                     Sector




                       Figure 2: Embodied Carbon in Production by Region and Sector


       The most carbon-intensive commodities are electricity, metal and mineral products, trans-
portation services, and chemical products.5 Looking across regions, it becomes obvious that
   4
     Note again that in our analysis of unilateral OECD climate policies we assume that Mexico, South Korea and
Turkey will not adopt unilateral emission pledges. Thus, these three regions are accounted for within the composite
of non-OECD regions described in the figure rather than the composite of OECD regions.
   5
     Note that the carbon intensity of the fossil fuels coal, gas and oil only includes the embodied carbon associated
with refining and mining operations, not the carbon associated with burning of these fuels.


                                                              11
non-OECD production is significantly more carbon-intensive than OECD production. Most
striking is the carbon intensity of (mainly coal-based) electricity produced in China, with a
value which is nearly twice that of the average value in all non-OECD countries, almost five
times the average value in OECD countries, and roughly ten times the carbon intensity of
(mainly nuclear-based) electricity produced in Japan.
   Figure 3 provides a decomposition of the average embodied carbon of goods produced in
OECD and non-OECD countries. Elements of the decomposition include:

Direct (co2e) Carbon associated with fossil fuels employed directly in production of this com-
     modity,

Indirect Domestic (vdf m) Carbon embodied in domestic intermediate inputs, generally rep-
     resenting electricity inputs,

Indirect Imported (vif m) Carbon embodied in imported intermediate inputs, and

Transport (vtwr) Average carbon embodied in international transport of exports.

   Figure 3 omits electricity from the sectors listed on the x-axis of the diagram in order to
improve resolution for goods which are more widely traded. While the pairwise comparison
between OECD and non-OECD embodied carbon is highly variable, it is generally the case
that domestic indirect emissions are responsible for a large share of embodied emissions and
for the differences in carbon intensity across regions. Carbon tariffs based on direct embodied
emissions alone would therefore substantially underestimate the full emissions embodied in
the most carbon-intensive goods. Indirect emissions stem largely from electricity use: while
electricity itself is not a widely traded commodity its indirect effect on emissions embodied in
trade appears to be sizable.
   Figure 4 compares carbon embodied in net exports for OECD and non-OECD regions. The
embodied carbon of exports is defined as:
                                                                          
                                           xy vxmdirs +
                                  X                        X
                          CrX =                ir              xtj vtwrjirs  ,
                                     i,s                   j


and the embodied carbon of imports is defined as:
                                                                          
                                           xy vxmdisr +
                                  X                        X
                          CrM =              is                xtj vtwrjisr  .
                                     i,s                   j


Each data point in the figure represents the net exports (CrX − CrM ) between a given region
and its OECD (y-axis) or its non-OECD (x-axis) trade partners. Thus a point above the x-axis
indicates that the region listed next to the point is a net exporter of embodied emissions to

                                                    12
              4.5


               4


              3.5


               3


              2.5
       Kg/$




               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                Transport
                                                                                                                                                                                                Indirect Imported
              1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                Indirect Domestic
                                                                                                                                                                                                Direct
               1


              0.5


               0
                     Non-OECD




                                       Non-OECD




                                                         Non-OECD




                                                                               Non-OECD




                                                                                                    Non-OECD




                                                                                                                        Non-OECD




                                                                                                                                          Non-OECD




                                                                                                                                                            Non-OECD




                                                                                                                                                                              Non-OECD
                                OECD




                                                  OECD




                                                                       OECD




                                                                                          OECD




                                                                                                               OECD




                                                                                                                                   OECD




                                                                                                                                                     OECD




                                                                                                                                                                       OECD




                                                                                                                                                                                         OECD
                    Non-Metallic Iron and Steel                 Coal          Non-Ferrous             Water            Air Transport Chemicals,               Other               Water
                     Minerals                                                   Metals              Transport                        Rubber and             Transport
                                                                                                                                       Plastics
                                                                                                 Sector by Region




       Figure 3: Direct and Indirect Sources of Embodied Carbon by Region and Sector



OECD countries and a point to the right of the y-axis indicates that it is a net exporter to non-
OECD countries.
   As can be seen in Figure 4, the United States, Germany, Italy, Japan and Rest of EU im-
port more carbon in trade with non-OECD states whereas they all engage in roughly balanced
carbon trade with other OECD states. The United Kingdom and France import carbon from
both OECD and non-OECD states while Canada imports from non-OECD states and exports
to OECD states.
   Among the non-OECD states, China, India, and Indonesia all export more carbon than they
import in trade with OECD states but run relatively balanced carbon trade with non-OECD
partners. Russia, OPEC and South Africa are net carbon exporters to OECD and non-OECD
states alike. Mexico imports a relatively small amount of carbon from non-OECD states and
runs a roughly balanced carbon trade with the OECD.
   To summarize, our embodied carbon calculations indicate that the amount of carbon em-


                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                            800
                                                                                                                                                           China




                                                                                                                                            600
         Net Exports of Embodied Carbon to OECD Countries (Tg)




                                                                                                           Rest of World
                                                                                                                                            400




                                                                                                                                                          OPEC
                                                                                                                                            200                      Russia
                                                                                      Rest of EU
                                                                                                                                        Canada        South Africa
                                                                                                                                                       India
                                                                                                   Japan   Germany         Italy
                                                                                                                                              0
                             -600                                United States              -300                               France             0


                                                                                                            United Kingdom


                                                                                                                                           -200
                                                                                 Net Exports of Embodied Carbon to Non-OECD Countries (Tg)




                                                                                 Figure 4: Embodied Carbon Trade



bodied in trade is substantial. Non-OECD countries, in general, are net exporters of embodied
carbon to OECD countries — non-OECD exports to OECD are equivalent to 14.5% of all OECD
emissions or 13% of all non-OECD emissions. Indirect emissions are a significant component of
embodied carbon in production and the largest contribution to indirect emissions is from elec-
tricity usage. Non-OECD countries (particularly China) generate distinctly higher emissions
in electricity production than OECD countries. Thus, to the extent that embodied carbon tar-
iffs reduce emissions in tandem with demand for carbon-intensive imports, the MRIO results
suggest that the tariffs imposed by OECD countries on non-OECD countries could represent
an effective environmental policy.




                                                                                                           14
5        The General Equilibrium Model
The MRIO framework is necessary to calculate the total (direct and indirect) embodied car-
bon of traded goods as a prerequisite for modeling the effects of the embodied carbon tariffs.
However, the fixed input-output relationships cannot reflect economic responses in production
and consumption triggered by policy interventions. To do this, we employ a computable gen-
eral equilibrium (CGE) model, the standard tool for assessing the economy-wide impacts of
counterfactual policies (Shoven and Whalley 1992). CGE models build upon general equilib-
rium theory that combines assumptions regarding the optimizing behavior of economic agents
with the analysis of equilibrium conditions: producers combine primary factors and intermedi-
ate inputs at least cost subject to technological constraints; given preferences consumers max-
imize their well-being subject to budget constraints. CGE analysis provides counterfactual
ex-ante comparisons, assessing the outcomes with a reform in place with what would have
happened had it not been undertaken. The main virtue of the CGE approach is its comprehen-
sive micro-consistent representation of price-dependent market interactions. The simultaneous
explanation of the origin and spending of the agents’ incomes makes it possible to address both
economy-wide efficiency as well as distributional impacts of policy interventions.
        We make use of a generic multi-region, multi-sector CGE model of global trade and energy
use established for the analysis of greenhouse gas emission control strategies (Böhringer and
Rutherford 2010).6 The model features a representative agent in each region that receives in-
come from three primary factors: labor, capital, and fossil-fuel resources. Labor and capital
are intersectorally mobile within a region but immobile between regions. Fossil-fuel resources
are specific to fossil fuel production sectors in each region. Production of commodities, other
than primary fossil fuels is captured by three-level constant elasticity of substitution (CES) cost
functions describing the price-dependent use of capital, labor, energy and materials. At the top
level, a CES composite of intermediate material demands trades off with an aggregate of en-
ergy, capital, and labor subject to a constant elasticity of substitution. At the second level, a CES
function describes the substitution possibilities between intermediate demand for the energy
aggregate and a value-added composite of labor and capital. At the third level, capital and la-
bor substitution possibilities within the value-added composite are captured by a CES function
whereas different energy inputs (coal, gas, oil, and electricity) enter the energy composite sub-
ject to a constant elasticity of substitution. In the production of fossil fuels, all inputs, except
for the sector-specific fossil fuel resource, are aggregated in fixed proportions. This aggregate
trades off with the sector-specific fossil fuel resource at a constant elasticity of substitution.
        Final consumption demand in each region is determined by the representative agent who
maximizes welfare subject to a budget constraint with fixed investment (i.e., a given demand
for savings) and exogenous government provision of public goods and services. Total income
    6
        A detailed algebraic model summary is provided in Appendix B.


                                                        15
of the representative household consists of net factor income and tax revenues. Consumption
demand of the representative agent is given as a CES composite that combines consumption
of composite energy and an aggregate of other (non-energy) consumption goods. Substitution
patterns within the energy bundle as well as within the non-energy composite are reflected by
means of CES functions.
        Bilateral trade is specified following the Armington’s differentiated goods approach, where
domestic and foreign goods are distinguished by origin (Armington 1969). All goods used on
the domestic market in intermediate and final demand correspond to a CES composite that
combines the domestically produced good and the imported good from other regions. A bal-
ance of payment constraint incorporates the base-year trade deficit or surplus for each region.
        CO2 emissions are linked in fixed proportions to the use of fossil fuels, with CO2 coefficients
differentiated by the specific carbon content of fuels. Restrictions to the use of CO2 emissions
in production and consumption are implemented through exogenous emission constraints or
(equivalently) CO2 taxes. CO2 emission abatement then takes place by fuel switching (inter-
fuel substitution) or energy savings (either by fuel-non-fuel substitution or by a scale reduction
of production and final demand activities).7
        The CGE model is calibrated using the same GTAP dataset used in the MRIO calculations.
We follow the standard calibration procedure in applied general equilibrium analysis in which
the base-year dataset determines the free parameters of the functional forms (i.e., cost and
expenditure functions) such that the economic flows represented in the data are consistent
with the optimizing behavior of the model agents.8
        The responses of agents to price changes are determined by a set of exogenous elasticities
taken from the pertinent econometric literature. Elasticities in international trade come from
the estimates included in the GTAP database (Narayanan and Walmsley 2008). Substitution
elasticities between the production factors capital, labor, energy inputs and non-energy inputs
(materials) are taken from Okagawa and Ban (2008). The elasticities of substitution in fossil fuel
sectors are calibrated to match exogenous estimates of fossil-fuel supply elasticities (Graham,
Thorpe and Hogan 1999, Krichene 2002).


6       Policy Scenarios and Simulation Results
Our main objective is to assess the potential of embodied carbon tariffs as a viable instru-
ment for improving the global cost-effectiveness of unilateral emission policies. Addressing
this issue first requires that we establish a reference policy without embodied carbon tariffs
    7
      Revenues from emission regulation accrue either from CO2 taxes or from the auctioning of emission allowances
(in the case of a grandfathering regime) and are recycled lump sum to the representative agent in the respective
region.
    8
      See Shoven and Whalley (1992) for a detailed description of the calibration procedure.



                                                       16
against which we measure the changes induced when embodied carbon tariffs are used. For
our central-case simulations we define this reference scenario (REF) as a 20% uniform emission
reduction across all OECD countries relative to their base-year emission levels. The magnitude
of emission reduction reflects the unilateral abatement pledges of major industrialized coun-
tries such as the U.S., the EU or Canada. Emission abatement within the OECD takes place
in a cost-minimizing manner — at equalized marginal abatement cost (implemented through
OECD-wide emissions trading). We can then quantify the extent to which the application of
the tariffs on embodied carbon reduces leakage and overall economic cost of global emission
reduction. The principal comparison reported in our core simulation results is between the
regional cost and emissions produced by REF and their respective levels when OECD coun-
tries impose embodied carbon tariffs on non-OECD countries. The tariff rates are calculated by
taking the MRIO numbers for carbon embodied in imported goods (xm
                                                                ir from equation (5)) mul-
tiplied by the prevailing domestic carbon price in OECD countries. We make the assumption
that carbon tariffs cover all sectors and can be levied without transaction costs on all sources
of embodied carbon. In the discussion that follows, we refer to this scenario as the border tax
adjustment (BTA) scenario.
   It is worth noting that the tariff simulations presented here are not intended to provide a
detailed analysis of any particular policy that has been put forward in recent debates. They
are designed to provide a performance benchmark for this class of policy instruments. Based
on this, our strategy is to simulate policies that are broadly consistent with the international
climate policy context and use a set of optimistic (in terms of the potential effectiveness of
the instrument) assumptions regarding the implementation of the tariffs to evaluate their per-
formance. If we find that the tariffs are not effective in this setting then it is unlikely that
experiments based on more realistic implementations would overturn our main results.
   In addition to reporting on emission responses and regional welfare effects, we also re-
port on global welfare impacts of the different counterfactual policies. The simplest metric for
measuring global welfare effects is based on a utilitarian perspective where we add up money-
metric utility with equal weights across all regions. While this measure is a standard metric to
quantify global welfare changes it is agnostic about the distribution of cost. In policy practice,
the appeal of carbon tariffs will not only hinge on the magnitude of aggregate cost savings but
also on how the cost are distributed across regions. If the market outcome does not deliver a
Pareto improvement but makes some countries worse off, then the issue of unfair burden shift-
ing arises. This is a problem that has been at the core of the international climate policy debate
from the very beginning.
   We address the normative issue of equity in two different ways. First, we define three
additional scenarios in which non-OECD regions are compensated at specific levels for their
losses under the tariffs. Scenarios CMP _ BAU and CMP _ REF include explicit compensating lump-
sum transfers from OECD to non-OECD countries that leave the latter at least as well off as at

                                               17
their pre-policy welfare levels (CMP _ BAU) or their welfare levels in the REF scenario (CMP _ REF)
without tariffs.9 The two direct compensation variants reflect different normative equity per-
spectives that might be pursued in the policy debate: under CMP _ BAU non-OECD countries
claim full compensation for adverse spillovers of unilateral OECD emission abatement; under
CMP _ REF    non-OECD countries are only compensated for potentially adverse effects of border
tariffs. The third compensation scenario CMP _ VER mimics an implicit transfer — it hands back
the revenues from embodied carbon tariffs to non-OECD countries. This scenario is equiva-
lent to a voluntary export restraint where non-OECD countries agree to impose tariffs on their
exports to OECD countries based on embodied carbon.
       Second, as an alternative to the hypothetical compensation scenarios, we report global eco-
nomic welfare based on social welfare metrics that exhibit differing degrees of inequality aver-
sion ranging from an Benthamite utilitarian perspective, which is agnostic about the distribu-
tion of cost, to the Rawlsian perspective, where only the welfare of the least-well-off region
determines global welfare.
       Table 2 summarizes the differences across the alternative unilateral climate policy scenarios.



            Scenario     Embodied carbon tariffs     Compensation to non-OECD regions

            REF          No                          No
            BTA          Yes                         No
            CMP _ BAU    Yes                         Yes (at the level of BaU welfare)
            CMP _ REF    Yes                         Yes (at the level of REF welfare)
            CMP _ VER    Yes                         Yes (through transfer of tariff revenues)

                          Table 2: Differences between key policy scenarios


       The benchmark equilibrium against which we measure the impacts of policy intervention
is defined by the business-as-usual (BAU) economic patterns in 2004 — the most recent base-
year provided by the GTAP dataset. Note that this was before the Kyoto Protocol entered into
force — climate policies are thus almost absent internationally (and from our dataset) which
provides a coherent starting point for our analysis.
       Given that we do not attempt to measure the benefits from emission abatement, we must
hold global emissions constant across all of the policy scenarios to assure consistency of our
cost-effectiveness comparison.10 The exogenous global emission cap is defined as the world-
wide emissions that arise in the REF scenario where OECD regions reduce their business-as-
   9
      In our model implementation, the endogenous lump-sum transfers are split across OECD regions proportional
to their initial OECD income shares.
   10
      We furthermore need to assume separability between utility obtained from emission abatement as a global
public good and utility derived from private good consumption.


                                                      18
usual emissions by 20%. If carbon tariffs reduce leakage then the effective reduction require-
ment of OECD regions will be lower than 20%. Technically, the global emission constraint
requires an endogenous scaling of the initial 20% OECD emission pledge to match the world-
wide emissions emerging from the reference scenario (REF). The costs of the emission con-
straints are measured in terms of the Hicksian equivalent variation (EV) in income.
   We begin our discussion of simulation results by examining how emission levels respond
to alternative climate policy designs. Columns (1) and (2) of Table 3 report abatement rates by
region for the reference scenario (REF) and the uncompensated tariff scenario (BTA) relative to
pre-policy baseline emissions.
   Because global emissions are held constant across these scenarios, the change in OECD
emissions across the scenarios gives an indication of the shift in abatement responsibility be-
tween OECD and non-OECD regions implied by the imposition of the tariffs in BTA. In our
central case simulations, the use of the tariffs relieves OECD countries on average of more than
10% of their domestic abatement requirements.



                        Region           % ∆ Emissions         Leakage Rate
                                          REF          BTA     REF     BTA
                                           (1)         (2)      (3)     (4)

                        Global            -7.76        -7.76   15.30   3.19
                        OECD             -20.00       -17.58       -      -
                        Non-OECD           2.59         0.54       -      -

                        Rest of World      4.19         1.49    4.77    1.70
                        China              1.22         0.06    2.54    0.13
                        Russia             3.28        -0.06    1.89   -0.04
                        OPEC               2.87        -0.15    1.88   -0.09
                        South Africa       6.91         0.38    1.20    0.07
                        India              1.81         0.87    0.93    0.44
                        South Korea        2.85         2.28    0.55    0.44
                        Indonesia          3.13         1.27    0.45    0.18
                        Mexico             2.20        -0.09    0.36   -0.01
                        Brazil             2.25         0.78    0.29    0.10
                        Turkey             3.00         2.08    0.28    0.20
                        Argentina          2.66         1.75    0.13    0.08
                        Ethiopia           5.24        -2.58    0.01   -0.01

                     Table 3: Emission Responses by Region and Scenario


   Looking across non-OECD regions, we see evidence of carbon leakage under REF with non-


                                                 19
OECD emissions increasing on average by 2.6% (emissions of individual non-OECD regions
increase 1-7%) in response to the externally imposed 20% emission reduction by OECD. Tariffs
on embodied carbon under BTA uniformly dampen the emission increase in non-OECD regions
and thus reduce the effective abatement burden for the OECD.
   Columns (3) and (4) of Table 3 describe the same emissions responses in terms of average
leakage rates — the change in each non-OECD region’s emission level divided by the cumula-
tive change in emissions in OECD countries relative to the pre-policy baseline. The reduction
in the leakage rates induced by the carbon tariffs is substantial. The average leakage rate for
all non-OECD countries decreases from just over 15% under REF to around 3% under BTA.
Thus leakage is to a large extent eliminated by the tariffs. China, OPEC and Russia, all major
contributors to global emissions, see their leakage rates fall to approximately zero under BTA.
   Table 4 reveals the differences in regional welfare costs as we move from the reference sce-
nario without embodied carbon tariffs (REF) to the BTA scenario with embodied carbon tariffs
(regions are ranked in descending order of their welfare losses under BTA). The top of the ta-
ble summarizes the global efficiency cost of the different policies as well as the average cost
to OECD and non-OECD regions when we are agnostic on cost distribution. In the reference
scenario, the biggest economic losses are experienced by the energy-exporting regions, Rus-
sia and OPEC, despite the fact that they are not subject to emission regulation. These wel-
fare cost, corresponding to around 3% of base-year consumption, are a direct consequence of
terms-of-trade changes. Carbon abatement lowers demands for fossil fuels, and this depresses
the international price of oil, coal and natural gas — products which represent a substantial
share of export earnings and GDP for Russia and OPEC. Beyond terms-of-trade changes on
international fuel markets, OECD countries can pass on part of their cost increase in domestic
energy-intensive production to trading partners. We see that the welfare impacts for remaining
non-OECD countries (other than energy exporters Russia and OPEC) are in a similar order of
magnitude as those experienced by abating OECD regions with India and Turkey experiencing
modest welfare gains relative to business-as-usual.
   Implementation of embodied carbon tariffs without compensation as captured by scenario
BTA   induces a substantial cost shifting from OECD countries to non-OECD countries. Among
the most heavily impacted non-OECD regions are, once again, Russia and OPEC (6-7% losses).
China goes from experiencing negligible welfare effects under REF to almost a 4% welfare loss
under BTA. The tariffs have a pronounced impact on relative prices, essentially operating as
a monopsony markup on exports from the unregulated non-OECD countries. As a result, the
indirect terms-of-trade benefits realized by OECD regions more than offset direct abatement
cost for major industrialized regions such as Germany, Rest of EU, the United States and Japan.
The carbon tariffs function as a sort of “back-door” trade policy for these countries, substi-
tuting for optimal tariffs that would be illegal under free trade agreements. These effects are
large enough that OECD countries on average experience net gains from climate policy relative

                                              20
                                                   % ∆ Welfare (EV)
                                                    REF        BTA


                             Global                -0.32      -0.32
                             OECD                  -0.25       0.30
                             Non-OECD              -0.58      -2.48

                             Russia                -3.28      -7.04
                             OPEC                  -2.91      -6.28
                             China                 -0.20      -3.85
                             South Africa          -0.20      -2.30
                             Rest of World         -0.26      -1.96
                             Argentina             -0.28      -1.83
                             Indonesia             -0.65      -1.80
                             Mexico                -0.34      -1.04
                             Brazil                 0.01      -0.72
                             South Korea            0.24      -0.49
                             Canada                -1.00      -0.47
                             Australia/NZ          -0.59      -0.26
                             India                  0.28      -0.26
                             Turkey                 0.40      -0.05
                             France                -0.41       0.02
                             United Kingdom        -0.40       0.06
                             Italy                 -0.44       0.16
                             Japan                 -0.26       0.22
                             United States         -0.15       0.29
                             Germany               -0.13       0.68
                             Rest of EU            -0.19       0.79
                             Ethiopia               0.31       0.89

                       Table 4: Welfare Effects by Region and Scenario



to business-as-usual for our central case simulation. Non-OECD regions are on average nega-
tively impacted by unilateral OECD climate policy. However, the welfare losses become much
more pronounced with the carbon tariffs. We see clear evidence for the concerns of developing
countries that the developed world could enact carbon tariffs as a trade policy instrument to
change terms of trade in their favor. The comparison of the global efficiency cost under REF
and BTA shows that the tariffs do yield global cost savings relative to REF but their magnitude
is very small in our central case. We return to this issue in our discussion of the sensitivity
analysis below.
   Figure 5 formalizes the assessment of the distributional effects of the different policies by


                                              21
comparing global welfare changes using social welfare functions that exhibit different degrees
of inequality aversion. The general form of the social welfare function is
                                           "                    #1/(1−1/σ)
                                            X
                                  SW F =         γr Wr(1−1/σ)
                                             r

where Wr represents the money-metric per capita welfare level in model region r, σ is the
inequality aversion parameter, and γr is region r’s share of world population.
   Figure 5 reports percentage changes in SW F from pre-policy baseline levels under different
assumption about the value that σ takes on. A value of σ = +∞ (“Bentham” in the figure)
corresponds to the change in aggregate economic surplus, a measure of global welfare change
that is agnostic about the regional distribution of cost. A value of σ = 0 (“Rawls” in the figure)
corresponds to the social welfare function

                                           SW F = min(Wr )
                                                        r

where it is the welfare level of the poorest region that determines global welfare. (Ethopia is
the poorest country represented in the GTAP 7.1 dataset.) Entries listed in between these two
extreme cases on the x-axis of the figure describe results based on intermediate values of σ.
   When we compare the alternative policies from a utilitarian perspective (“Bentham”) we
find that embodied carbon tariffs increase global cost-effectiveness of unilateral climate pol-
icy. Under the Benthamite welfare metric, introducing the carbon tariffs (BTA) is cheaper than
relying on domestic OECD abatement alone (REF) but only modestly so.
   Assessing the tariff scenarios which involve explicit compensation to non-OECD regions
(CMP _ BAU, CMP _ REF and COMP _ VER) we see that compensation tilts the results based on the
Benthamite welfare function back in favor of REF. Compensation increases income levels in
non-OECD countries. This positive income effect raises demand for fossil energy and emission-
intensive goods which results in higher leakage rates. Holding global emissions constant at the
REF   level requires more domestic abatement efforts on the part of OECD regions, raising the
overall cost of these policies.
   Finally, we evaluate the welfare impacts of alternative unilateral climate policy designs
for different forms of the social welfare function. We find that the welfare cost of BTA rises
substantially as inequality aversion becomes a more important element of the welfare criteria.
This reflects the finding that OECD tariffs shift emission abatement cost to non-OECD countries
via a deterioration of the terms of trade. As non-OECD countries represent the poorer part
in the global economy, the burden shifting of unilateral climate policy towards these regions
exacerbates pre-existing inequalities. Interestingly, this pattern is interrupted as σ approaches
zero in the social welfare function because the poorest region in the model, Ethiopia, actually



                                                   22
             2



           1.5



             1



           0.5



             0
                                                                                  BTA
       %




                                                                                  REF
           -0.5
                                                                                  CMP_BAU
                                                                                  CMP_REF
            -1
                                                                                  CMP_VER


           -1.5



            -2



           -2.5




                                        Social Welfare Metric




        Figure 5: % Change in Global Welfare by Social Welfare Function and Scenario



benefits from terms-of-trade gains — mainly through reduced expenditures for energy imports.
   Naturally, the various compensation scenarios fare better than BTA as inequality aversion
become important. CMP _ REF yields similar welfare changes to REF because non-OECD coun-
tries are, by definition, compensated to REF welfare levels. CMP _ BAU and CMP _ VER do even
better because the scope for compensation to non-OECD countries increases. Note, however,
that these results are more of a statement about the potential for improving standards of living
in non-OECD countries through wealth transfers than they are evidence of the effectiveness of
embodied carbon tariffs.
   Past studies of carbon leakage based on CGE simulations show that magnitude of leakage
is sensitive to a few key model assumptions. First, the larger is the unilateral cutback in emis-
sions that is assumed in the model, the stronger is the leakage effect as abating regions move to
increasingly inelastic portions of the demand curve for emission-intensive goods. Second, the
higher are the Armington elasticities that determine how substitutable varieties of emission-


                                                    23
intensive goods from different countries are, the stronger is the leakage effect as regions may
more easily substitute to new sources for these goods in response to the changes induced by
the climate policy regime. Finally, the lower are the fossil-fuel supply elasticities that are as-
sumed in the model, the stronger is the leakage effect as the decreased demand for fossil fuels
in abating regions produces larger reductions in the price of these goods on world markets,
stimulating demand abroad.
   We have performed comprehensive sensitivity analysis with respect to all three of these
assumptions to test how they alter our conclusions regarding the effectiveness of the carbon
tariffs. Table 5 summarizes our main findings. The table depicts the average leakage rate pro-
duced by the model under the REF scenario (“REF Leakage Rate” in the table) and the difference
in the global cost of the REF and the BTA scenarios as a percentage of global consumption (“BTA-
REF   Cost Savings” in the table) for three alternative leakage scenarios. The first three columns
of the table describe the alternative assumptions underlying the leakage scenarios we model.
The table shows the percentage cutback assumed and the values that the Armington and fossil
fuel supply elasticities take on relative to their values in the central case that our discussion has
focused on up to this point.



                  Cutback   Armington        Supply           REF         BTA - REF
                            Elasticities   Elasticities   Leakage Rate   Cost Savings

                  10%       1/2x           2x                    6.86          0.011
                  20%       1x             1x                   15.30          0.004
                  30%       2x             1/2x                 30.64          0.097

                               Table 5: Leakage Sensitivity Analysis


   The leakage rate produced by the model is increasing as we move down the rows of the
table. The leakage rates produced by the model are approximately 7% and 15% in the low and
medium-leakage scenarios, respectively. The cost savings are close to zero in both of these sce-
narios — less than 0.02 percent of world consumption and approximately 1 percent of the total
REF   policy cost. The leakage rate increases to approximately 30% in the high-leakage scenario
and the cost savings are larger in this case — approximately 0.1 percent of world consumption
or 12% of the total cost of the REF policy. Thus, we find that there may be measurable efficiency
gains from the tariffs for policy scenarios that produce higher levels of leakage than those re-
ported in our central case. It is worth noting, however, that when we repeat the exercise with
the social welfare functions described in Figure 5 using the assumptions of the high-leakage
scenario, the efficiency gains produced by the use of the tariffs are not sufficient to overturn the
ranking of the policies we established for the central case. That is, the BTA scenario produces

                                                   24
larger global welfare losses than the reference policy for all of the welfare metrics that exhibit
inequality aversion.


7   Conclusions
In the international climate policy debate, the idea of imposing tariffs on embodied carbon has
attracted significant attention in OECD countries contemplating unilateral emission reductions.
The basic idea is to combine domestic carbon taxes or cap-and-trade systems that cover direct
emissions in production with tariffs on the embodied carbon of goods imported from non-
abating trade partners. From a theoretical perspective, the measures could serve as a second-
best instrument to improve cost-effectiveness of unilateral climate policies.
    In our quantitative experiments, we find that the carbon tariffs are quite effective in reduc-
ing carbon leakage from unilateral OECD policies. However, the efficiency gains from carbon
tariffs are modest even under our optimistic assumption that the tariffs cover all sectors and
can be levied on the full embodied carbon content without transaction costs.
    The tariffs are a clear winner from the perspective of those countries implementing them
and quite damaging to many of the countries subject to them. Many major OECD members
experience net gains from implementing climate policy when tariffs are used but, from an dis-
tributional perspective, the tariffs exacerbate pre-existing income inequality, and the modest
global cost savings provided by border tariffs quickly evaporate as inequality aversion is taken
into account.
    It would be difficult to overstate the influence that the divide between the perspectives of
developed and developing-world nations has exerted on the international climate policy pro-
cess to date. Developing countries argue that they cannot accept binding emissions targets un-
der any equitable climate policy regime. Major developed countries, notably the United States,
argue that they cannot accept binding targets for fear that their abatement efforts will be un-
dermined by carbon leakage if their developing-world partners are not subject to comparable
restrictions.
    In light of this tension, the decision to use embodied carbon tariffs — by punishing the
developing-world countries subjected to them — could be quite destructive to the existing pol-
icy process. In the extreme, it could even result in a tariff war. A different view is that tariffs
might function as a political stick in the drive to commit intransigent countries to adopt emis-
sion restrictions. They have the appeal of (i) being a credible threat, since OECD members
benefit from their use while being very damaging to those countries subject to them, and (ii)
carrying a certain moral stamp of approval because they are being used in the name of envi-
ronmental policy and appear to have the potential to reduce carbon leakage.
    A logical next step in the analysis we have carried out here would be to consider how
countries subjected to embodied carbon tariffs might respond and what actions they would be

                                                25
willing to undertake to avoid the tariffs in the first place.




                                                 26
Acknowledgements
This research has been supported by Environment Canada. Research assistance has been pro-
vided by Justin Carron. The views expressed here and any errors are our own.




                                            27
References
Armington, Paul S., “A Theory of Demand for Producers Distinguished by Place of Produc-
    tion,” IMF Staff Papers, 1969, 16 (1), 159–78.

Babiker, Mustafa H., “Climate change policy, market structure and carbon leakage,” Journal of
    International Economics, 2005, 65 (2), 421–45.

Babiker, Mustafa H and Thomas F Rutherford, “The Economic effects of Border Measures in
    Subglobal Climate Agreements,” The Energy Journal, 2005, 26 (4), 99–126.

Böhringer, Christoph and Andreas Löschel, “Assessing the Costs of Compliance: The Kyoto
    Protocol,” European Environment, 2002, 12 (1), 1–16.

     and Thomas F. Rutherford, “Carbon Abatement and International Spillovers,” Environ-
    mental and Resource Economics, 2002, 22 (3), 391–417.

     and       , “Who should pay and how much? Compensation for International Spillovers
    from Carbon Abatement Policies to Developing Countries — A Global CGE Assessment,”
    Computational Economics, 2004, 23 (1), 71–103.

     and       , “The Cost of Compliance: A CGE Assessment of Canada’s Policy Options
    under the Kyoto Protocol,” World Economy, 2010, 33 (2), 177–211.

    , Carolyn Fischer, and Knut E. Rosendahl, “The Global Effects of Subglobal Climate Poli-
    cies,” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 2010, 10 (2), Article 13.

    , Thomas F. Rutherford, and Alfred Voss, “Global CO2 Emissions and Unilateral Action:
    Policy Implications of Induced Trade Effects,” International Journal of Global Energy Issues,
    1998, pp. 18–22.

Brewer, Thomas L., “U.S. Climate Policy and International Trade Policy Intersections: Issues
    Needing Innovation for a Rapidly Expanding Agenda,” Technical Report, Center for Busi-
    ness and Public Policy, Georgetown University February 2008.

Brooke, Anthony, David Kendrick, and Alexander Meeraus, GAMS: A User’s Guide 1996.

Burniaux, Jean-Mark and Joaquim Oliveira Martins, “Carbon Emission Leakage: A General
    Equilibrium View,” Working Paper 242, Economics Department, Organisation for Eco-
    nomic Co-operation and Development 1999.

Bushnell, James, Carla Peterman, and Catherine Wolfram, “Local Solutions to Global Prob-
    lems: Climate Change Policies and Regulatory Jurisdiction,” Review of Environmental Eco-
    nomics and Policy, 2008, 2, 175–193.

                                                28
Charnowitz, Steve, Gary Clyde Hufbauer, and Jisun Kim, “Global Warming and the World
     Trading System,” Technical Report, Peterson Institute for International Economics 2009.

Copeland, Brian R. and M. Scott Taylor, “Trade, Growth and the Environment,” Journal of
     Economic Literature, 2004, XLII, 7–71.

Dirkse, Steve and Michael Ferris, “The PATH Solver: A Non-Monotone Stabilization Scheme
     for Mixed Complementarity Problems,” Optimization Methods & Software, 1995, 5, 123–56.

Felder, Stefan and Thomas F. Rutherford, “Unilateral Reductions and Carbon Leakage. The
     Effect of International Trade in Oil and Basic Materials,” Journal of Environmental Economics
     and Management, 1993, 25, 162–176.

Fischer, Carolyn and Alan Fox, “Comparing Policies to Combat Emissions Leakage: Border
     Tax Adjustements versus Rebates,” RFF discussion paper, 2009, RRF DP 09-02.

Graham, Paul, Sally Thorpe, and Lindsay Hogan, “Non-competitive market behavior in the
     international coking coal market,” Energy Economics, 1999, 21, 195–212.

Ho, Mun S., Richard Morgenstern, and Jhih-Shyang Shih, “Impact of Carbon Price Policies
     on U.S. Industry,” Technical Report, Resources For the Future December 2008.

Hoel, Michael, “Global Environmental Problems: The Effects of Unilateral Actions Taken by
     One Country,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Managament, 1991, 20, 55–70.

     , “Should a carbon tax be differentiated across sectors?,” Journal of Public Economics, 1996,
     59, 17–32.

Houser, Trevor, Rob Bradley, and Britt Childs, “Leveling the Carbon Playing Field, Interna-
     tional Competiton and US Climate Policy Design,” Peterson Institute for International Eco-
     nomics, World Resources Institute: Washington DC., 2008.

Howse, Robert and Antonia L. Eliason, “Domestic and International Strategies to Address
     Climate Change: An Overview of the WTO Legal Issues,” International Trade Regula-
     tion and the Mitigation of Climate Change. Cambridge University Press., 2008.

ICTSD, “Climate Change: Schwab Opposes Potential Trade Measures,” Bridges Trade BioRes,
     March 2008, 8 (4).

Krichene, Noureddine, “World crude oil and natural gas: a demand and supply model,” En-
     ergy Economics, 2002, 24, 557–576.

Markusen, James R., “International Externalities and Optimal Tax Structures,” Journal of Inter-
     national Economics, 1975, 5, 15–29.

                                                29
Mattoo, Aaditya, Arvind Subramanian, Dominique Van Der Mensbrugghe, and Jianwu He,
    “Reconciling Climate Change and Trade Policy,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
    No. 5123, 2009.

McKibbin, Warwick J. and Peter J. Wilcoxen, “The Economic and Environmental Effects of
    Border Tax Adjustments for Climate Policy,” Working Paper - Syracuse University, 2008.

Narayanan, Badri and Terrie L. Walmsley, “The GTAP 7 Data Base Documentation,” Technical
    Report, Purdue University, Center for Global Trade Analysis 2008.

Okagawa, Azusa and Kanemi Ban, “Estimation of Substitution Elasticities for CGE Models,”
    mimeo, Osaka University April 2008.

Paltsev, Sergey V., “The Kyoto Protocol: Regional and Sectoral Contributions to the Carbon
    Leakage,” Energy Journal, 2001, 22 (4), 53–79.

Pauwelyn, Joost, “US Federal climate policy and competitiveness concerns: the limits and
    options of international trade law,” Duke University working paper, 2007.

Peters, Glen P. and Edgar G. Hertwich, “CO2 Embodied in International Trade with Implica-
    tions for Global Climate Policy,” Environmental Science & Technology, March 2008, 42 (5),
    1401–1407.

     and       , “Post-Kyoto greenhouse gas inventories: production versus consumption,”
    Climatic Change, 2008, 86, 51–66.

     and      , “Trading Kyoto,” Nature Reports Climate Change, 2008, 2, 40–41.

Shoven, John B. and John Whalley, Applying general equilibrium, Cambridge University Press,
    1992.

United Nations, Text of the Kyoto Protocol, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
    Change, 1997.

Weber, Christopher L. and H. Scott Matthews, “Embodied Environmental Emissions in U.S.
    International Trade, 1997-2004,” Environmental Science and Technology, 2007, 41, 4875–4881.

Whalley, John and Ben Lockwood, “Carbon-motivated Border Tax Adjustments: Old Wine in
    Green Bottles?,” World Economy, 2010, 33 (6), 810–9.




                                              30
     A        MRIO Recursive Solution Algorithm
     The estimate in iteration k + 1 is a simple refinement of the estimate in iteration k

                                                   xk+1 = b + Axk

         Iterative solution of the MRIO model involves the following steps:

Initialize:
                                                    xygr = co2egr /vomgr

  Repeat:      i. Refine estimates of the embodied carbon of international trade services:

                                                                          vstjr xyjr
                                                                     P
                                                                      r
                                                          xtj   =
                                                                          vtwj

               ii. Refine estimates of the embodied carbon of bilateral imports:

                                                  P                                                  
                                                          vxmdisr xyis +               xtj vtwrjisr
                                                                                 P
                                                    s                             j
                                        xm
                                         ir =
                                                                          vimir
              iii. Update embodied carbon estimates:
                                                          P        m
                                                                                       P      y
                                                co2gr +         i xir vif migr    +        i xir vdf migr
                                     xygr   =
                                                                          vomgr




                                                                31
B    Algebraic Description of the CGE Model
The computable general equilibrium model is formulated as a system of nonlinear inequalities.
The inequalities correspond to the two classes of conditions associated with a general equilib-
rium: (i) exhaustion of product (zero profit) conditions for constant-returns-to-scale producers;
and (ii) market clearance for all goods and factors. The former class determines activity levels
and the latter determines price levels. In equilibrium, each of these variables is linked to one
inequality condition: an activity level to an exhaustion of product constraint and a commodity
price to a market clearance condition.
    In our algebraic exposition, the notation is used to denote the unit profit function (calculated
as the difference between unit revenue and unit cost) for constant-returns-to-scale production
of sector i in region r where z is the name assigned to the associated production activity. Differ-
entiating the unit profit function with respect to input and output prices provides compensated
demand and supply coefficients (Hotelling’s Lemma), which appear subsequently in the mar-
ket clearance conditions. We use g as an index comprising all sectors/commodities i (g = i),
the final consumption composite (g = C), the public good composite (g = G), and aggregate
investment (g = I). The index r (aliased with s) denotes regions. The index EG represents the
subset of all energy goods (here: coal, oil, gas, electricity) and the label F F denotes the subset
of fossil fuels (here: coal, oil, gas). Tables 6 - 11 explain the notation for variables and parame-
ters employed within our algebraic exposition. Figures 6 - 8 provide a graphical exposition of
the production structure. Numerically, the model is implemented in GAMS (Brooke, Kendrick
and Meeraus 1996) and solved using PATH (Dirkse and Ferris 1995).

Zero-profit conditions:

    • Production of goods except fossil fuels (g ∈
                                                 / F F ):


                                                                                                                                       KLEM
                                                                                                                                1/(1−σgr
                                                                                                                    KLEM )                 )
                            KLEM
                                                          
                                                        KLE                      KLE
                                                                                                               (1−σgrKLE
                   M M (1−σgr   )               E E(1−σgr  )              KL(1−σgr  )                            (1−σgr    )
      ΠYgr = pgr −θgr pgr                 M
                                   + (1 − θgr ) θgr pgr               E
                                                              + (1 − θgr )pgr                                                                   ≤0
                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                



    • Sector-specific material aggregate:

                                                                                             M
                                                                                      #1/(1−σgr
                                                          "                                     )
                                                                               M
                                                                      M N A(1−σgr )
                                                              X
                                     ΠM
                                      gr   =    pM
                                                 gr   −              θigr pigr                      ≤0
                                                              i∈EG
                                                               /


    • Sector-specific energy aggregate:

                                                                                                      E
                                                                                               #1/(1−σgr
                                            "                                                            )
                                                X                                          E
                             ΠE     E
                              gr = pgr −
                                                        EN
                                                       θigr (pA      CO2 CO2 (1−σgr )
                                                              igr + pr  aigr )                               ≤0
                                                i∈EG




                                                                     32
   • Sector-specific value-added aggregate:

                                                                                                        KL
                                                                                                 1/(1−σgr
                                                             KL                                           )
                                                       K (1−σgr )                    (1−σ KL )
                            ΠKL
                             gr     =   pKL
                                         gr   −       θgr vgr         + (1 −    K
                                                                               θgr )wr gr                        ≤0

   • Production of fossil fuels (g ∈ F F ):

                                                                                                                          Q
                                                                                                                Q 1/(1−σgr )
                                                                                                            !(1−σgr )
                                       Q
                                   (1−σgr )                                              X
              ΠYgr = pgr − θgr
                             Q
                                qgr                   Q
                                              + (1 − θgr    L
                                                         ) θgr       K
                                                               wr + θgr vgr +                    FF A
                                                                                                θigr pigr                       ≤0
                                                                                         i∈F
                                                                                          / F


   • Armington aggregate:

                                                                                          A
                                                      A                         A 1/(1−σir )
                                                   (1−σir )               IM (1−σir )
                               ΠA      A      A
                                igr = pigr − θigr pir
                                                                    A
                                                            + (1 − θigr )pir                   ≤0

   • Aggregagte imports across import regions:

                                                                                              IM
                                                                                       #1/(1−σir
                                                                "                                )
                                                                               IM
                                                                       IM (1−σir )
                                                                 X
                                        ΠIM
                                         ir     =     pIM
                                                       ir   −         θisr pis                       ≤0
                                                                  s


Market-clearance conditions:

   • Labor:

                                                                      X      KL   ∂ΠKL
                                                                                    gr
                                                            L̄r ≥          Ygr
                                                                      g
                                                                                   ∂wr

   • Capital:


                                                                         KL   ∂ΠKL
                                                                                 gr
                                                                K̄gr ≥ Ygr
                                                                               ∂vgr

   • Fossil fuel resources (g ∈ F F ):

                                                                              ∂ΠYgr
                                                                 Q̄gr ≥ Ygr
                                                                              ∂qgr

   • Material composite:

                                                                              ∂ΠYgr
                                                                 Mgr ≥ Ygr
                                                                              ∂pM
                                                                                gr

   • Energy composite:

                                                                              ∂ΠYgr
                                                                 Egr ≥ Ygr
                                                                              ∂pE
                                                                                gr

   • Value-added composite:

                                                                               ∂ΠYgr
                                                                KLgr ≥ Ygr
                                                                               ∂pKL
                                                                                 gr




                                                                      33
• Import composite:

                                                              X              ∂ΠAigr
                                                IMir ≥                Aigr
                                                                  g
                                                                             ∂pIM
                                                                               ir


• Armington aggregate:

                                                                        ∂ΠYgr
                                                       Aigr ≥ Ygr
                                                                        ∂pA
                                                                          igr


• Commodities (g = i):

                                            X               ∂ΠAigr
                                                                     X      ∂ΠIM
                                                                               is
                                    Yir ≥            Aigr          +   IMis
                                                g
                                                             ∂pir            ∂pir
                                                                           s6=r


• Private consumption (g = C):

                                              X                       X
                         YCr pCr ≥ wr L̄r +           vgr K̄gr +              qir Q̄ir + pCO
                                                                                          r
                                                                                             2  ¯ 2r + B̄r
                                                                                               CO
                                                g                     i∈F F


• Public consumption (g = G):


                                                            YGr ≥ Ḡr

• Investment (g = I):


                                                             YIr ≥ I¯r

• Carbon emissions:


                                  ¯ 2r ≥
                                           X X                                ∂ΠE
                                                                                gr
                                 CO                         Egr                            aCO
                                                                                            igr
                                                                                                2

                                            g       i∈F F
                                                                  ∂(pA
                                                                     igr   + pCO
                                                                              r
                                                                                 2 CO2
                                                                                  aigr )




                                                             34
i, j   Sectors and goods

g      The union of produced goods i, private consumption C,
       public demand G and investment I

r, s   Regions

EG     Energy goods; coal, crude oil, refined oil, natural gas and
       electricity

FF     Fossil fuels; coal, crude oil and natural gas.


                       Table 6: Indices & Sets




Ygr     Production of item g in region r

Egr     Energy composite for item g in region r

KLgr    Value-added composite for item g in region r

Aigr    Armington aggregate for commodity i for demand category
        (item) g in region r

IMir    Aggregate imports of commodity i in region r


                       Table 7: Activity Levels




                                  35
pgr        Price of item g in region r

pM
 gr        Price of material composite for item g in region r

pE
 gr        Price of energy composite for item g in region r

pKL
 gr        Price of value-added composite for item g in region r

pA
 igr       Price of Armington good i for demand category g in region
           r

pIM
 ir        Price of import composite for good i in region r

wr         Wage rate in region r

vir        Capital rental rate in sector i in region r

qir        Rent to fossil fuel resources in region r (i ∈ F F )

pCO
 r
   2       Implicit price of carbon in region r


                               Table 8: Prices




L̄r        Aggregate labor endowment for region r

K̄ir       Capital endowment for sector i in region r

Q̄ir       Endowment of fossil energy resource i in region r (i ∈ F F )

B̄r        Initial P
                   balance for payment deficit or surplus in region r
           (note: r B̄r = 0)

 ¯ 2r
CO         Aggregate carbon emission cap in region r

aCO
 igr
     2
           Carbon emission coefficient for fossil fuel i in demand cate-
           gory g in region r (i ∈ F F )


         Table 9: Endowments and Carbon Emissions Specification



                                      36
 M
θgr    Cost share of material composite in production of item g in
       region r

 E
θgr    Cost share of energy composite in the aggregate of energy
       and value added of item g in region r

 MN
θigr   Cost share of material input i in the material composite of
       item g in region r

 EN
θigr   Cost share of energy input in the energy composite of item g
       in region r

 K
θgr    Cost share of capital within the value-added composite of
       item g in region r

 Q
θgr    Cost share of fossil fuel resource in fossil fuel production
       (g ∈ F F ) in region r

 L
θgr    Cost share of labor in non-resource inputs to fossil fuel pro-
       duction (g ∈ F F ) in region r
 K
θgr    Cost share of capital in non-resource inputs to fossil fuel pro-
       duction (g ∈ F F ) in region r
 FF
θigr   Cost share of good i in non-resource inputs to fossil fuel pro-
       duction (g ∈ F F ) in region r
 A
θigr   Cost share of domestic output i within the Armington item
       g in region r

 M
θisr   Cost share of exports of good i from region s in the import
       composite of good i in region r


                  Table 10: Cost Share Parameters




                                 37
 KLEM
σgr        Substitution between the material composite and the
           energy-value-added aggregate in the production of item g
           in region r*

 KLE
σgr        Substitution between energy and the value-added compos-
           ite in the production of item g in region r*

 M
σgr        Substitution between material inputs within the energy
           composite in the production of item g in region r*

 KL
σgr        Substitution between capital and labor within the value-
           added composite in the production of item g in region r*

 E
σgr        Substitution between energy inputs within the energy com-
           posite in the production of item g in region r (by default
           = 0.5)

 Q
σgr        Substitution between natural resource input and the com-
           posite of other inputs in the fossil fuel production (g ∈ F F )
           of region r***

 IM
σir        Substitution between imports from different regions within
           the import composite for good i in region r**

* — Calibrated based on estimates from Okagawa and Ban (2008).
** — Calibrated based on estimates from Narayanan and Walmsley (2008).
*** — Calibrated based on estimates from Graham et al. (1999) and Krichene (2002).

                          Table 11: Elasticity Parameters




                                           38
   Figure 6: Nesting in Non-Fossil-Fuel Production




     Figure 7: Nesting in Fossil-Fuel Production




Figure 8: Nesting in Armington Composite Production




                         39
