NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTEGRATING PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY INTO ECONOMICS
James J. Heckman
Working Paper 17378
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17378

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2011

This research was supported by grants from NIH R01-HD054702 and R01-HD065072; the University
of Chicago; The Institute for New Economic Thinking (INET); A New Science of Virtues: A Project
of the University of Chicago; the American Bar Foundation; a conference series from the Spencer
Foundation; the JB & MK Pritzker Family Foundation; the Bu˙ffett Early Childhood Fund; the Geary
Institute, University College Dublin, Ireland; and an anonymous funder. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by James J. Heckman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Integrating Personality Psychology into Economics
James J. Heckman
NBER Working Paper No. 17378
August 2011
JEL No. I2,J24
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews the problems and potential benefits of integrating personality psychology into economics.
Economists have much to learn from and contribute to personality psychology.

James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and University College Dublin and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu

What can economists learn from and contribute to personality psychology? What do we learn from
personality psychology? Personality traits predict many behaviors—sometimes with the same or greater
strength as conventional cognitive traits. Personality psychology considers a wider array of actions than
are usually considered by economists and enlarges the economist’s way to describe and model the world.
Personality traits are not set in stone. They change over the life cycle. They are a possible avenue for policy
intervention.
Personality psychologists lack precise models. Economics provides a clear framework for recasting the
field. Economics now plays an important role in clarifying the concepts and empirical content of psychology.
More precise models reveal basic identification problems that plague measurement in psychology. At an
empirical level, “cognitive” and “noncognitive” traits are not easily separated.
Moreover, personality psychologists typically present correlations and not causal relationships. Many
contemporaneously measured relationships suffer from the problem of reverse causality. Economists can apply
their tools to define and estimate causal mechanisms. In addition, psychological measures have substantial
measurement error. Econometric tools account for measurement error, and doing so makes a difference.
Economists formulate and estimate mechanisms of investment—how traits can be changed for the better.
There are major challenges in integrating personality psychology and economics. Economists need to
link the traits of psychology with the preferences, constraints and expectation mechanisms of economics. We
need to develop rigorous methods for analyzing causal relationships in both fields. We also need to develop
a common language and a common framework to promote interdisciplinary exchange.
There is a danger in assuming that basic questions of content and identification have been answered by
psychologists at the level required for rigorous economic analysis. In explaining outcomes, how important is
the person? How important is the situation? How important is their interaction? I address these issues in
this paper.

1.0.

A Brief History of Personality Psychology

Alfred Binet, architect of the first modern intelligence test that became the Stanford-Binet IQ test, noted
that performance in school
“...admits of other things than intelligence; to succeed in his studies, one must have qualities
which depend on attention, will, and character; for example a certain docility, a regularity of
habits, and especially continuity of effort. A child, even if intelligent, will learn little in class if
he never listens, if he spends his time in playing tricks, in giggling, is playing truant.”
-Binet (1916, p. 254)

3

All later pioneers have made similar statements. Many feature the Big Five trait “Conscientiousness” as
a main determinant of success.1 Before considering the Big Five traits, it is useful to briefly examine the
modern concept of cognition by way of contrast.

2.0.

Cognition: “g”— a single factor that is claimed to
represent intelligence

Traditional “g” is a product of early Twentieth Century psychology. The concept of “g” has been broadened
even beyond the traditional subcomponents of “fluid” and “crystallized” intelligence. Figure 1 summarizes
current thinking where “g” or general intelligence is at the top of a large pyramid of cognitive traits.

Figure 1: An Hierarchical Scheme of General Intelligence and Its Components
Visual Perception

Math Reasoning
Quantitative Reasoning
Math Problems

Gf
(Fluid Intelligence)
Sequential Reasoning
Inductive Reasoning
Quantitative Reasoning
Piagetian Reasoning

Closure

Visualization
Spatial Relations
Closure Speed
Closure Flexibility
Serial Perceptual Integration
Spatial Scanning
Imagery

Closure Speed
Closure Flexibility

Perceptual Speed
Number Computation
RT and other Elementary Cognitive Tasks
Stroop
Clerical Speed
Digit/Symbol

Gc
(Crystallized Intelligence)
Verbal Comprehension
Lexical Knowledge
Reading Comprehension
Reading Speed
“Cloze”
Spelling
Phonetic Coding
Grammatical Sensitivity
Foreign Language
Communication
Listening
Oral Production
Oral Style
Writing

General
Intelligence

Learning and Memory
Memory Span
Associative Memory
Free Recall Memory
Meaningful Memory
Visual Memory

Ideational Fluency
Ideational Fluency
Naming Facility
Expressional Fluency
Word Fluency
Creativity
Figural Fluency
Figural Flexibility

Knowledge and Achievement
General School Achievement
Verbal Information and Knowledge
Information and Knowledge, Math and Science
Technical and Mechanical Knowledge
Knowledge of Behavioral Content

Source: Recreated from Ackerman and Heggestad (1997), based on Carroll (1993).

1 See

Almlund et al. (2011).

4

3.0.

Personality Traits

Early pioneers used a lexical approach to define personality. They classified words that are used to describe
people. This practice culminated in the “Big Five” derived from factor analysis of measurements of personality extracted from a variety of measures—observer reports, tests and measured productivity on the job
(Costa and McCrae, 1992; Goldberg, 1993). No single “gp ” explains all traits. There are strong correlations
within clusters but weak correlations across clusters.
Almlund, Duckworth, Heckman, and Kautz 12/31/2010

Table 1: The Big Five Domains and Their Facets70
Table 3. The Big Five domains and their facets
Big Five Personality
Factor
Conscientiousness

Openness to
Experience

Extraversion

Agreeableness

Neuroticism/
Emotional Stability

American Psychology
Association Dictionary
description
“the tendency to be
organized, responsible,
and hardworking”

“the tendency to be open
to new aesthetic,
cultural, or intellectual
experiences”

“an orientation of one’s
interests and energies
toward the outer world
of people and things
rather than the inner
world of subjective
experience;
characterized by
positive affect and
sociability”
“the tendency to act in a
cooperative, unselfish
manner”

Emotional stability is
“predictability and
consistency in emotional
reactions, with absence
of rapid mood changes.”
Neuroticism is “a
chronic level of
emotional instability and
proneness to
psychological distress.”

Facets (and correlated
trait adjective)

Related Traits

Childhood
Temperament Traits

Competence (efficient)
Order (organized)
Dutifulness (not careless)
Achievement striving
(ambitious)
Self-discipline (not lazy)
Deliberation (not
impulsive)
Fantasy (imaginative)
Aesthetic (artistic)
Feelings (excitable)
Actions (wide interests)
Ideas (curious)
Values (unconventional)

Grit
Perseverance
Delay of gratification
Impulse control
Achievement striving
Ambition
Work ethic

Attention/(lack of)
distractibility
Effortful control
Impulse control/delay
of gratification
Persistence
Activity*

Warmth (friendly)
Gregariousness
(sociable)
Assertiveness (selfconfident)
Activity (energetic)
Excitement seeking
(adventurous)
Positive emotions
(enthusiastic)
Trust (forgiving)
Straight-forwardness (not
demanding)
Altruism (warm)
Compliance (not
stubborn)
Modesty (not show-off)
Tender-mindedness
(sympathetic)
Anxiety (worrying)
Hostility (irritable)
Depression (not
contented)
Self-consciousness (shy)
Impulsiveness (moody)
Vulnerability to stress
(not self-confident)

Sensory sensitivity
Pleasure in lowintensity activities
Curiosity
—

—

Surgency
Social dominance
Social vitality
Sensation seeking
Shyness*
Activity*
Positive emotionality
Sociability/affiliation

Empathy
Perspective taking
Cooperation
Competitiveness

Irritability*
Aggressiveness
Willfulness

Internal vs. External
Locus of control
Core self-evaluation
Self-esteem
Self-efficacy
Optimism
Axis I
psychopathologies
(mental disorders)
including depression
and anxiety disorders

Fearfulness/behavioral
inhibition
Shyness*
Irritability*
Frustration
(Lack of) soothability
Sadness

Notes: Facets specified by the NEO-PI-R personality inventory (Costa and McCrae [1992b]). Trait adjectives in
parentheses from the Adjective Check List (Gough and Heilbrun [1983]). *These temperament traits may be related
to two Big Five factors.
specifiedSource:
by the
NEO-PI-R
inventory
Table
adapted frompersonality
John and Srivastava
[1999]. (Costa and McCrae, 1992). Trait adjectives

Notes: Facets
in parentheses from
the Adjective Check List (Gough and Heilbrun, 1983). ∗ These temperament traits may be related to two Big Five factors.
Source: Table adapted from John and Srivastava (1999).

5

The Big Five predict many outcomes. The Big Five are defined without reference to any context (i.e.,
situation). This practice gives rise to an identification problem that I discuss below.

4.0.

The Person-Situation Debate: A Strong Influence
on Behavioral Economics

Is variation across people in behavior a consequence of personal traits or of situations? Economists are still
badly divided over this question. The modern origins of the debate start with the works of psychologist
Walter Mischel:
“. . . with the possible exception of intelligence, highly generalized behavioral consistencies have not
been demonstrated, and the concept of personality traits as broad dispositions is thus untenable”
-Mischel (1968, p. 146)
Many behavioral economists hold a similar view and appeal to Mischel as a guiding influence.
“The great contribution to psychology by Walter Mischel [. . . ] is to show that there is no such
thing as a stable personality trait.”
-Thaler (2008)
The accumulated evidence speaks strongly against the claims of Mischel and the behavioral economists.2

5.0.

Personality Psychology After the Person-Situation
Debate

Correlational evidence shows that for many outcomes, measured personality traits are as predictive, and
are sometimes more predictive, than standard measures of cognition. Traits are stable across situations.
Situations also matter. Behavioral genetics show that personality traits are as heritable as cognitive traits.
Alterations in brain structure and function through accidents, disease and by experiments affect measured
personality.3
2 See
3 See

Almlund et al. (2011).
Almlund et al. (2011).

6

6.0.

The Predictive Power of Personality Traits

A growing body of evidence suggests that personality measures–especially those related to Conscientiousness,
and, to a lesser extent, Neuroticism–predict a wide range of outcomes. The predictive power of any particular
personality measure tends to be less than the predictive power of IQ but in some cases rivals or exceeds it.

7.0.

Difficulties in Synthesizing Studies of the Effects of
Personality

Measures of personality and cognition differ among studies. Different studies use different measures of
predictive power. Many studies do not address the question of causality, i.e., does the measured trait cause
(rather than just predict) the outcome?
Few economists or psychologists working on the relationship between personality and outcomes address
the issue of causality, and when they do so, it is usually by employing early measures of cognition and
personality to predict later outcomes This practice trades an endogeneity problem with an errors in variables
problem. Almlund et al. (2011) discuss alternative approaches to causality building on the analysis of Hansen
et al. (2004).

8.0.

Main Findings from Predictive Analyses

The predictive power of “g” decreases with the level of job complexity. Personality traits are predictive at
all levels of job complexity. Conscientiousness is the most predictive Big Five trait across many outcomes
such as educational attainment, grades, job performance across a range of occupational categories, longevity
and criminality. Neuroticism (and related Locus of Control) predicts schooling outcomes and labor market
search. Other traits play roles at finer levels. I now present examples of the power of personality traits.

8.1. Educational Attainment and Achievement
In explaining educational attainment, Conscientiousness plays a powerful role. See Figure 2.

7

Figure 2: Association of the Big Five and Intelligence with Years of Schooling
in GSOEP

Source: German Socio-Economic Panel (GSOEP), waves 2004-2008, calculations performed by Pia Pinger. (See Almlund
et al., 2011.)
Note: The figure displays standardized regression coefficients from multivariate of years of school attended on the Big Five and
intelligence, controlling for age and age-squared. The bars represent standard errors. The Big Five coefficients are corrected for
attenuation bias. The Big Five were measured in 2005. Years of schooling were measured in 2008. Intelligence was measured
in 2006. The measures of intelligence were based on components of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS). The data is
a representative sample of German adults between the ages of 21 and 94.

Another example is the GED in America. GEDs are high school dropouts who exam certify to be high
school equivalents. They have the same cognitive skills as high school graduates but much lower noncognitive
skills. See Figures 3 and 4.

8

Figure 3: Distribution of Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skills by Education
Group

Source: Heckman et al. (2011).

Figure 4: Distribution of Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skills by Education
Group

Source: Heckman et al. (2011).

9

GEDs earn at the rate of dropouts. Their lower levels of noncognitive skill leads to lower wages than
ordinary high school graduates even though they have the same level of cognitive skills.
Cognitive and noncognitive skills are both important in explaining college graduation. See Figures 5 and
6 . Persons with low levels of noncognitive skills are unlikely to graduate college, as are persons with low
levels of cognitive skills.

Figure 5: Probability of Being a 4-year-college Graduate or Higher at Age
30, Males
Figure 19. Probability of Being a 4-yr College Graduate by Age 30 - Males
i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors

1

Probability

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
10

0
10

8

9

8

7

6

6

5

4

Decile of Cognitive

3

4
2

2

1

ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor

iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor

1
Probability and
Confidence Interval (2.5-97.5%)

Decile of Noncognitive

1

Notes: The
0.8 data are simulated from the estimates of the model0.8and the NLSY79 sample. Higher deciles are associated with
higher values of the variable. The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Solid lines depict
0.6
0.6
probability,
and dashed lines, 2.5%-97.5% confidence intervals. The
upper curve is the joint density. The two marginal curves
(ii) and (iii)
0.4 are evaluated at the mean of the trait not being varied.
0.4
Source: Heckman et al. (2006, Figure 21).
0.2
0

0.2
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0

10

Decile

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Decile

Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws).

10

9

10

1

Probability

0.8
0.6
0.4

Figure 6: Probability of Being a 4-year-college Graduate or Higher at Age
0.2

10

0
10

30, Males

8

9

8

7

6

6

5

4

Decile of Cognitive

3

4
2

2

1

Probability and
Confidence Interval (2.5-97.5%)

ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor

iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor

1

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Decile of Noncognitive

9

0

10

1

2

3

Decile

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Decile

Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws).

Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and the NLSY79 sample. Higher deciles are associated with
higher values of the variable. The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Solid lines depict
probability, and dashed lines, 2.5%-97.5% confidence intervals. The upper curve is the joint density. The two marginal curves
(ii) and (iii) are evaluated at the mean of the trait not being varied.
Source: Heckman et al. (2006, Figure 21).

Similar results hold for course grades. See Figure 7. Indeed, course grades are a good measure of
conscientiousness. (See Almlund et al., 2011; Borghans et al., 2011.)

Figure 7: Correlations of the Big Five and Intelligence with Course Grades

Notes: All correlations are significant at the 1% level. The correlations are corrected for scale reliability and come from a meta
analysis representing a collection of studies representing samples of between N=31,955 to N=70,926, depending on the trait.
The meta-analysis did not clearly specify when personality was measured relative to course grades.
Source: Poropat (2009).

8.2. Labor Market Outcomes
Intelligence is the greatest single predictor of job performance, especially in complex tasks, but noncognitive
skills are also important predictors. See Figure 8.

11

Figure 8: Associations with Job Performance

Notes: The values for personality are correlations that were corrected for sampling error, censoring, and measurement error.
Job performance was based on performance ratings, productivity data and training proficiency. The authors do report the
timing of the measurements of personality relative to job performance. Of the Big Five, the coefficient on Conscientiousness is
the only one that is statistically significant with a lower bound on the 90credibility value of 0.10. The value for IQ is a raw
correlation.
Sources: The correlations reported for personality traits come from a meta-analysis conducted by Barrick and Mount (1991).
The correlation reported for IQ and job performance come from Schmidt and Hunter (2004).

8.3. Longevity
Personality traits also predict longevity. In particular, Conscientiousness is a better predictor than IQ. See
Figure 9.

Figure 9: Correlations of Mortality with Personality, IQ, and Socioeconomic
Status (SES)

Notes: The figure represents results from a meta-analysis of 34 studies. Average effects (in the correlation metric) of low
socioeconomic status (SES), low IQ, low Conscientiousness (C), low Extraversion/Positive Emotion (E/PE), Neuroticism (N),
and low Agreeableness (A) on mortality. Error bars represent standard error. The lengths of the studies represented vary from
1 year to 71 years.
Source: Roberts et al. (2007)

12

9.0.

Conceptualizing Personality Within an Economic
Model

How should one conceptualize these correlations and establish a causal basis for them? Recent work (Almlund
et al., 2011) develops economic models of personality and their implications for measurement of personality
and preference. They place the concept of personality within an economic framework. Personality is defined
as an emergent property of a system. Economic models frame and solve a central identification problem in
empirical psychology: How to go from measurements of personality to personality traits.
It is important to distinguish personality traits from measured personality. One definition of
personality by a leading psychologist is:
“Personality traits are the relatively enduring patterns of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors that
reflect the tendency to respond in certain ways under certain circumstances.”
-Roberts (2009, p. 140)
His conceptual framework for personality is presented in Figure 10. Personality is a property of a system.
This type of analysis is typical of the models used in personality psychology.

Figure 10: Roberts’s Model of Personality

Source: Roberts (2006).

13

10.0.

An Economic Framework for Conceptualizing and
Measuring Personality and Personality Traits

How can we interpret personality within economic models? Through preferences (the standard approach),
constraints (Borghans et al., 2008) or through expectations? Or does it operate through all three?

10.1. Personality Affects Productivity
Almlund et al. (2011) develop models in which productivity in task j depends on the traits of agents
represented by trait vector θ, and the “effort” they expend on the task, ej :

j ∈ J = {1, . . . , J} , ej ∈ E, θ ∈ Θ.

Pj = φj (θ , ej ),

J
P

Traits θ are endowments, like a public good.
φj (θ, ej ) is concave and increasing in ej ;

(1)

ej = ē. ē is endowment.

j=1
∂ 2 φj
∂θ∂e0j

≥ 0, ∀j. Rj is the reward per unit task output. The agent

is assumed to maximize
J
X

Rj φj (θ, ej )

(2)

j=1

with respect to {ej }Jj=1 subject to the constraint

J
X

ej = ē. In general, as Rj ↑ ej ↑. Effort in one task

j=1

might diminish effort in another. If tasks are mutually exclusive, we obtain the Roy model (Heckman and
Honoré, 1990; Heckman and Sedlacek, 1985).

10.2. Identifying Personality Traits From Measured Performance
on Tasks
I next consider a basic identification problem. Some tasks may require only a single trait or only a subset
of all of the traits. Divide θ into “mental” (µ) and “personality” (π) traits, θµ and θπ . To use performance
on a task (or on multiple measures of the task) to identify a trait requires that performance on certain
tasks (performance on a test, performance in an interpersonal situation, etc.) depends exclusively on one
component of θ, say θ1,j , as well as on the effort used in the task. Thus measurement assumes task j output

14

is generated by the following relationship:

Pj = φj ( θ1,j , ej ).
|{z}
single
trait
used in
trait j

We need to standardize for effort at a benchmark level, say e∗ , to use Pj to identify a measure of the trait
θ1,j .
The activity of picking a task (or a collection of tasks) that measure a particular trait (θ1,j in our example)
is called operationalization in psychology. Demonstrating that a measure successfully operationalizes a
trait is called construct validity. Note, however, that we need to standardize for effort to measure the
trait. Otherwise variation in effort produces variation in the measured trait across situations with different
incentives.

10.3. A Fundamental Identification Problem
Operationalization and construct validation require heroic assumptions. Even if one adjusts for effort in
a task, measured productivity may depend on multiple traits. Thus two components of θ (say θ1,µ , θ1,π )
may determine productivity in j. Without further information, one cannot infer which of the two traits
produces the productivity in j. In general, even having two (or more) measures of productivity that depend
on (θ1,µ , θ1,π ) is not enough to identify the separate components.
Consider the following case of two productivity measures for the two tasks j and j 0 :

Pj = φj (θ1,µ , θ1,π , ej )
Pj 0 = φj 0 (θ1,µ , θ1,π , ej 0 ) ,

j 6= j 0 .

Standardize measurements at a common level of effort ej = ej 0 = e∗ . Note that if the supports of ej and
ej 0 are disjoint, no (θ1,µ , θ1,π ) exists. Assume that the φk () are known. If the system of equations satisfies
a local rank condition, then one can solve for the pair (θ1,µ , θ1,π ) at e∗ . Only the pair is identified. One
cannot (without further information) determine which component of the pair is θ1,µ or θ1,π .
In the absence of dedicated constructs (constructs that are generated by only one component of θ),
there is an intrinsic identification problem that arises in using measures of productivity in tasks to infer
traits. Analysts have to make one normalization in order to identify the traits. However, we need only one
such construct joined with patterned structures on how θ enters other task to identify the vector θ (e.g. one

15

example is a recursive, triangular structure). See the discussion in Almlund et al. (2011).

Almlund, Duckworth, Heckman, and Kautz 12/31/2010
10.4. Examples of Nonidentification
84
and Within
andscores reflect
Motivation
was and At
baselineand
(in the
fall), both
“…performance
an personality
IQ andZigler
achievement
test
incentives
efforts,
capture
cognitiveonand
Butterfield

between subjects

optimized without

there was a full standard

intelligence test is best

study of 52 low
givingthat
test-relevant
deviation difference
conceptualized
as reflecting
traits. [1968]
Table 2 summarizes
the evidence
paying disadvantaged
students for
correct answers
on IQ tests
SES children who

information. Gentle

(10.6 points and SD was

three distinct factors: (a)

didmeasured
or did not IQ. Almlund
encouragement,
9.5 in this many
sample)other
formal
cognitive processes;
substantially raises
et al. (2011)about
summarize
studies.

attend nursery
easier items after
between scores of
(b) informational
Almlund,
Duckworth,
and Kautzwhich
12/31/2010
school were tested
items were missed,
children
in the Heckman,
achievements
reflect
at the beginning
and so on.
optimized vs
the content rather than the 83
and end of the year
standardconditions The
formal properties of
Table 5. Incentives
and Performance on Intelligence
Tests
on Stanford-Binet
nursery
group improved cognition, and (c)
Study
Sample
and Study
Experimental
Effect
size ofbut
incentive
Summary
Intelligence
Test
their scores,
only in
motivational
factors which
Group
(in standard
underDesign
either
the standard
condition.
involve a wide range of
deviations)
optimized or
personality variables. (p. 2)
Edlund
Between
“…a
carefully
chosen
M&M candies
Experimental group
standardsubjects
“…the
significant
difference
[1972]
study.
11 matched
consequence,
candy,
given
given for each
scored 12 points higher
conditions.
in improvement
in standard
than control group
pairs of low SES
contingent
on each
occurrence
right answer
IQ performance
found
during a second testing
children; children
ofbetween
correct the
responses
an nonIQ
nurserytoand
on an alternative form of test,
were about one
can result
a
nursery
groupsinwas
the Stanford Binet
standard deviation
significantly
higher to
IQ
attributable solely
(about 0.8 standard
below average in
score.”(p.
319)factors…” (p.
motivational
deviations)
IQ at baseline
10)
Ayllon
&
“…test
scores often
reflect of
Within
Tokens
given
in as 6.25
points
out of aby
Breuning
Withinsubjects
and
Incentives
such
Scores
increased
“In summary,
the promise
Kelly
poor
academic skills,
but they
12 mentally
experimental
possible
51points.
points Results
on
and Zella study.
between
subjects
record albums,
about 17
individualized
incentives
[1972]
may
also reflect
of in
retarded
condition
for right
Readiness
[1978]
study ofchildren
485
radios (<$25)
given Metropolitan
were consistent
across
contingent
on anlack
increase
t = 4.03
Sample 1
to do well (as
in the
(avg
IQ 46.8)
answers
special
education
for improvement in Test.
the Otis-Lennon,
WISC- motivation
IQ test performance
test…These
results,
exchangeable
for
high school
test performance
R, and Lorge-Thorndike criterion
compared
with pretest
obtained
from both
a in an
students all took IQ prizes
tests.
performance)
resulted
population
typically
limited in
tests, then
were
approximate
17-point
Ayllon &
t = 5.9
Within
subjects
Tokens given in
skills
and in
ability
as scores.
well as
randomly
assigned experimental
increase
IQ test
Kelly
study
34 urban
from
a group
of normal
to control
or (avg condition for right
These
increases
were equally
[1972]
fourth
graders
children
(Experiment
II), The
incentive
spread across
subtests…
Sample 2
IQ
= 92.8) groups to answers
demonstrate
that the use
of
retake tests.
incentive condition
effects
exchangeable for
reinforcement
procedures
Subjects were
were much less
pronounced
prizes
below-average
for students
having pretest
applied
to a behavior
that is
Ayllon &
Within
subjects in
Six weeks of token Experimental group
IQ. of 12
IQs between
98asand
regarded
“at120
its and
Kelly
study
reinforcement for
scored 3.67 points out of tacitly
did not
for students
peak”
canoccur
significantly
alter
[1972]
matched pairs of
good academic
possible 51 points on a
having
IQs between
the
levelpretest
of performance
of
Sample 3
mentally retarded
performance
post-test given under
121behavior.”
and 140.” (p.
(p. 483)
225)
that
children
standard conditions
Holt and
Between and
“Knowledge of results does
Exp 1-Token
1.06 standard
deviation
higher
than at baseline;
Hobbs
within subjects
not appear to be a sufficient
reinforcement for control
difference
groupbetween
droppedthe
[1979]
study of 80
correct responses; 2.75
token
reinforcement
and incentive to significantly
points.
On a second
improve
test performance
Exp 2 – Tokens
control with
groups
(inferred
post-test
incentives,
A considerabledelinquent
fractionboys
of the variance
in achievement
tests
is explained
by personality
traits.
3.31 for
39
randomly assigned forfeited for
among below-average I.Q.
from
exp
andt=control
groups
degrees
of
freedom)
three
rewards
incorrect
responses
increased
7.17
and
Figure 11. Gradestoare
explained more
by the
Big Five
traits than
by6.25
IQ. Seesubjects…Immediate
Figure 12.
experimental
or response cost may be more
(punishment), Exp points, respectively
groupssubjects
and one
effective withcandy
below-average
3-feedback
Clingman Within
M&Ms
givenonfor
Only among low-IQ
“…contingent
increased
control
group.
I.Q.
subjects
other
correct/incorrect
and
study
of 72
firstright
answers in
(<100) subjects was
the
I.Q.
scoreswhile
of only
the
Each
exp group
conditions
may be This
moreresult
responses cdtn;
Fowler
and
second-graders
contingent
there an effect of the
‘low
I.Q.’ children.
receivedrandomly
a standard M&Ms given
effectivethat
with
or
[1976]
assigned
incentive. Contingent
suggests
theaverage
high and
modified
above-average
subjects.”
toand
contingent
regardless of
reward group scored
medium
I.Q. groups
were (p.
administration of
83) functioning at a higher
reward,
correctness in
about 0.33 standard
already
the WISC-verbal
noncontingent
noncontingent
deviations higher on the
motivational level than
section.or no
reward,
condition
Peabody Picture
children in the low I.Q.
reward conditions.
Vocabulary test than did group.” (p. 22)
no reward group.

Table 2: Incentives and Performance on Intelligence Tests

16

See

Figure 11: AFQT Score Decomposed by IQ, Rosenberg, and Rotter

0.90

1.00

0.80
0.90

0.70
0.60
0.50

0.80

0.58
0.70

0.53
0.46

0.40
0.30

R‐Aquared

R‐Aquared

1.00

0.60
0.50

0.51

0.49

0.53 0.43
0.46

0.49
0.43

0.32
0.28

0.40

0.29
0.32

0.23

0.20

0.30

0.20

0.58

0.51

0.28

0.23

0.29
0.20

0.20

0.130.2

0.20

0.09

0.08

0.10

0.08

0.10

0.00
All

0.00

Males

Females

All

Males

Top 50%

Females

Bottom 50%

Top 50%

IQ, Rosenberg, and Rotter IQ, Rosenberg,
IQ and Rotter
Rosenberg and
IQ RotterRosenberg and Rotter

Notes: The data come from the NLSY. Rosenberg, and Rotter were administered in 1979. The ASVAB was administered in
1980.To account for varying levels of schooling at the time of the test, scores have been adjusted for schooling at the time of
the test conditional on final schooling using the method developed in Hansen et al. (2004). AFQT is constructed from the
Arithmetic Reasoning, Word Knowledge, Numeric Operations, and Paragraph Comprehension ASVAB subtests. DAT and
DAT percentile, IQ, and GPA are from high school transcript data. IQ is pooled across several IQ tests using IQ percentiles.
GPA is the individual’s core-subject GPA from each year of school. Sample excludes the military over-sample. Background
variables include mother’s highest grade completed, father’s highest grade completed, southern residence at age 14, urban
residence at age 14, living in a broken home at age 14, receiving newspapers in the household at age 14, receiving magazines
in the household at age 14, and the household having a library card at age 14.
Source: Borghans et al. (2011).

17

Figure 12: DAT scores and GPA decomposed by IQ and Personality
0.2
0.18

0.18

Adjusted R‐Squared

0.16
0.14

0.14

0.12
0.1

0.07

0.08

0.05

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.01

0.02
0

DAT

GPA

IQ and Big 5

IQ

Big 5

Notes: Data is from Stella Maris, a high school in the Netherlands. Students were administered part of a Raven’s IQ test and
personality questions based on the Big 5. DAT and GPA are from high school records.
Source: Borghans et al. (2011).

10.5. Measures of Personality in Psychology Based on Linear Factor Analysis
Such measures account for measurement error, and identify factors that can be interpreted as traits. Cunha
et al. (2010) develop nonlinear factor models (nonlinear and nonparameteric). Using these models they
establish that measurement error is quantitatively important. The share of error variance for proxies of
cognition, personality and investment ranges from 1%–90%. Not accounting for measurement error produces
downward-biased estimates of self-productivity effects and perverse estimates of investment effects.

11.0.

A Definition of Personality

I now add preferences and goals to the analysis. Preferences and goals also shape effort. They are personality
traits broadly defined. Income is the return to productivity:
J
X

Income =

j=1

18

Rj Pj

Preferences are defined over final consumption goods X, productivity P and effort e:

U (X, P, e | ψ) , ψ ∈ Ψ.

(3)

Agents have preferences over goods, agents may value the output of tasks in their own right and agents may
value the effort devoted to tasks. The agents maximize (3) with respect

Y
|{z}

exogenous
flow of
income

+R0 P = |{z}
W0 X

(4)

prices
of
goods

11.1. Adding Uncertainty
Let I be the information possessed by an agent. “E” denotes the expectation operator. The agent can be
interpreted as making decisions based on

E [U (X, P, e | ψ) | I] .

(5)

11.2. Personality Traits
Personality traits are the components of e, θ and ψ that affect behavior. We observe measured personality—behaviors generated by incentives, goals, and traits.

11.3. Actions
Actions are styles of behavior that affect how tasks are accomplished. They are aspects of behavior that go beyond effort. Smiling, cajoling, etc. are examples. Tasks are accomplished by taking actions. The ith possible

action to perform task j is denoted ai,j , i ∈ {1, . . . , Kj }. Array actions in a vector aj = a1,j , . . . , aKj ,j ∈ A.
Actions may be the same or different across the tasks. The productivity of the agent in task j depends on
the actions taken in that task:

Pj = τj a1,j , a2,j , . . . , aKj ,j .

(6)

The actions themselves depend on traits θ and “effort” ei,j :

ai,j = νi,j (θ, ei,j )

19

(7)

where

Kj
X

ei,j = ej and

i=1

J
X

ej = ē.

j=1

Actions generalize the notion of effort to a broader class of behaviors.
Let M be the set of actions, including actions that do not directly contribute to productivity. Let M be
the index set of items in M

ai,m = νi,m (θ, ei,m ) , m ∈ M, A ⊆ M.

The agent solves
max E [U (a, X, P, e | ψ) | I]
with respect to X and e given the stated constraints.
We can introduce situations indexed by h ∈ H. For a person with traits θ and effort vector ej with action
ai,j , using the specification (7), the action function can be expanded to be dependent on situation h:

ai,j,h = νi,j (θ, ei,j,h , h).

(8)

11.4. A Definition of Personality
Let T ∈ T be a vector of traits (θ, ψ, ē). Personality is a response function.

Personality: a = a (R, W, T, h, Y, I) .

(9)

The behavior that constitutes personality is defined as a pattern of actions in response to the constraints,
endowments, and incentives facing agents given their goals and preferences.
Actions—not traits—constitute the data used to identify the traits. Personality psychologists use actions
(e.g., “dispositions”) to infer traits. Identification issues similar to those previously discussed apply to this
broader set of measurements of behaviors.

11.5. Personality as Enduring Actions
Many personality psychologists define personality as “enduring patterns of thoughts, feelings and behaviors”
that reflect tendencies of persons to respond in certain ways under certain circumstances. (See Cervone
and Pervin (2009).) What are enduring patterns of actions? “Enduring actions” are the average of the a

20

functions for a person with a given trait vector T = t over situations and efforts.

11.6. Average Actions
Consider task j and trait vector T = (θ, ψ, ē). Define the average action for information set I:
Z
νi,j (θ, ei,j , h) g (h, ei,j | T = (θ, ψ, ē), I) dh dei,j

āT,j,I =
ST ,I (h,ei,j )

where ST,I (h, ei,j ) is the support of (h, ei,j ) given T and I. g (h, ei,j | T = (θ, ψ, ē), I) is the density of
(h, ei,j ) given T = (θ, ψ, ē) and information set I. āT,j,I is the “enduring action” of agents across situations
in task j with information I, i.e., the average personality. Only if νi,j is separable in T , the marginal
effect of personality trait vector θ is the same in all situations.
One can define the “enduring traits” in a variety of ways, say by averaging over tasks, j, situations, h,
or both. Only under separability in T will one obtain the same marginal effect of θ. Epstein (1979) and
a subsequent literature present evidence against nonseparability but in favor of an “enduring trait” that is
common across situations. He argues strongly against the extreme form of situational specificity assumed in
modern behavioral economics.

12.0.

Stability and Change in Personality Traits and
Preferences

While it is commonly thought that personality traits are stable, at least in adult life, in fact traits change
over the life cycle. See Figures 13–16.

21

Figure 13: Cumulative Mean-Level Changes in Personality Across the Life
Cycle

Note: Social vitality and social dominance are aspects of Big Five Extraversion. Cumulative d values represent total lifetime
change in units of standard deviations (“effect sizes”).
Source: Figure taken from Roberts et al. (2006) and Roberts and Mroczek (2008). Reprinted with permission of the authors.

Figure 14: Cumulative Mean-Level Changes in Personality Across the Life
Cycle

Note: Social vitality and social dominance are aspects of Big Five Extraversion. Cumulative d values represent total lifetime
change in units of standard deviations (“effect sizes”).
Source: Figure taken from Roberts et al. (2006) and Roberts and Mroczek (2008). Reprinted with permission of the authors.

22

Figure 15: Cumulative Mean-Level Changes in Personality Across the Life
Cycle

Note: Social vitality and social dominance are aspects of Big Five Extraversion. Cumulative d values represent total lifetime
change in units of standard deviations (“effect sizes”).
Source: Figure taken from Roberts et al. (2006) and Roberts and Mroczek (2008). Reprinted with permission of the authors.

Figure 16: Cumulative Mean-Level Changes in Personality Across the Life
Cycle

Note: Social vitality and social dominance are aspects of Big Five Extraversion. Cumulative d values represent total lifetime
change in units of standard deviations (“effect sizes”).
Source: Figure taken from Roberts et al. (2006) and Roberts and Mroczek (2008). Reprinted with permission of the authors.

23

12.1. Processes of Development Discussed in the Literature
There are many hypothesized mechanisms of change. Two common processes discussed in the literature are
ontogeny (programmed developmental processes common to all persons) and sociogeny (shared socialization
processes). Personality also changes through external forces above and beyond common ontogenic and
sociogenic processes. Such changes operate through alterations in normal biology, such as brain lesions and
chemical interventions. A channel that receives a lot of attention in economics is investment: educational
interventions and parental investment that affect personality throughout the lifecycle.

12.2. Life Cycle Dynamics
Let T v be traits at age v, v ∈ {1, . . . , V } ∈ V. Information I v may be updated through various channels
of learning. The technology of skill formation (Cunha and Heckman, 2007, 2009) postulates the following
equation of motion:
T v+1 = η v (

Tv
|{z}

,

IN v , hv ), v = 0, . . . , V − 1.
|{z}

(10)

self-productivity investment

Functions can be nonautonomous (v-dependent). Situations may change over time as a function of past
actions, past situations, investment, information, and the like:

hv+1 = χv (hv , IN v , av ) .

(11)

Information I v may also change over the life cycle through experimentation and learning:

I v+1 = ρv (I v , av , T v , IN v , hv ) .

(12)

Figure 17 summarizes the dynamics of skill formation as formulated in Cunha and Heckman (2007, 2009).

24

Figure 17: A Life Cycle Framework for Organizing Studies and Integrating
Evidence: Period Life Cycle
θv capacities at v
IN v : investment at v
hv environments at time v
θv+1 = η v (θv , IN v , hv )

h 1

 -1

PRENATAL

0

BIRTH

1

EARLY
CHILDHOOD 0-3

2

LATER
CHILDHOOD 3-6

 V 1

ADULTHOOD

IN -1

h0

IN 0
h1

IN 1
V
h

IN V

Cunha et al. (2010) estimate technology (10) using longitudinal data on the development of children
with rich measures of parental investment and of child traits. Self-productivity becomes stronger as children
become older, for both cognitive and noncognitive capability formation. The elasticity of substitution for
cognitive inputs is smaller in the adolescent years, so that it is more difficult to compensate for the effects
of adverse environments on cognitive endowments at later ages than it is at earlier ages.
This finding explains the evidence on ineffective cognitive remediation strategies for disadvantaged adolescents. Personality traits foster the development of cognition but not vice versa. Cunha et al. (2010)
show that it is equally easy to substitute for deficits in personality traits at both early and late stages for
socioemotional skills over the life cycle.

25

Overall, 16% of the variation in educational attainment is explained by factors extracted from adolescent
cognitive traits, 12% is due to factors extracted from adolescent personality (socioemotional traits), and 15%
is due to factors extracted from measured parental investments.

12.3. The Causal Effects of Schooling on Cognitive and Personality
Traits
Using the methodology of Hansen et al. (2004), it is possible to estimate the causal effect of schooling on
cognitive and noncognitive measurements. See Figures 18–21. Schooling has substantial effects on both
types of traits.

Figure 18: Causal Effect of Schooling on ASVAB Measures of Cognition

Notes: Effect of schooling on components of the ASVAB. The first four components are averaged to create male’s with average
ability. We standardize the test scores to have within-sample mean zero, variance one. The model is estimated using the
NLSY79 sample. Solid lines depict average test scores, and dashed lines, confidence intervals.
Source: Heckman et al. (2006, Figure 4).

26

Figure 19: Causal Effect of Schooling on ASVAB Measures of Cognition

Notes: Effect of schooling on components of the ASVAB. The first four components are averaged to create male’s with average
ability. We standardize the test scores to have within-sample mean zero, variance one. The model is estimated using the
NLSY79 sample. Solid lines depict average test scores, and dashed lines, confidence intervals.
Source: Heckman et al. (2006, Figure 4).

Figure 20: Causal Effect of Schooling on ASVAB Measures of Cognition

Notes: Effect of schooling on components of the ASVAB. The first four components are averaged to create male’s with average
ability. We standardize the test scores to have within-sample mean zero, variance one. The model is estimated using the
NLSY79 sample. Solid lines depict average test scores, and dashed lines, confidence intervals.
Source: Heckman et al. (2006, Figure 4).

27

Figure 21: Causal Effect of Schooling on Two Measures of Personality

Notes: The figures show the causal effect of schooling on two measures of personality traits. We standardize the test scores to
have within-sample mean zero, variance one. The model is estimated using the NLSY79 sample. Solid lines depict average test
scores, and dashed lines, confidence intervals.
Source: Heckman et al. (2006, Figure 4).

28

12.4. The Evidence from Interventions
The Perry Preschool program intervened early in the lives of disadvantaged children. It has a 7–10%
rate of return per annum. (See Heckman et al., 2010.) The Perry Preschool Program did not have a
lasting improvement on cognitive ability, but it did improve important later-life outcomes through changes
in personality (Heckman et al., 2011).

Figure 22: Perry Preschool Program: IQ, by Age and Treatment Group

Notes: IQ measured on the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale (Terman and Merrill, 1960). Test was administered at program
entry and each of the ages indicated.
Source: Cunha et al. (2006) and Heckman and Masterov (2007) based on data provided by the High Scope Foundation.

The Perry Preschool Program worked primarily through socioemotional channels. It raised scores on
achievement tests but not IQ tests. As previously noted, socioemotional factors and cognitive factors both
explain performance on achievement tests (Duckworth, 2007; Borghans et al., 2008; Borghans et al., 2009).

13.0.

Personality and Preference Parameters

Measures of personality predict a wide range of life outcomes that economists study. Personality psychologists define traits as relatively stable, person-specific determinants of behavior. Preferences are the natural
counterpart of these traits in economics. However, the exact link between personality and preferences is
unclear. Table 3 shows one possible correspondence between conventional economic preference parameters
and personality measures.

29

Almlund, Duckworth,
and Kautz 12/31/2010
Table 3: Standard Preference Parameters
and Heckman,
Conceptually
Similar
Measures
94
Table 6.Literature
Standard preference parameters and conceptually similar measures in the psychology
in the Psychology
literature.
Preference parameter
Time preference

Personality measures
Conscientiousness
Self-control
Affective mindfulness
Consideration of future consequences
Elaboration of consequences
Time preference

Risk aversion

Impulsive sensation seeking
Balloon Analogue Risk Task

Leisure Preference

Achievement Striving
Endurance
Industriousness

Social preference

Warmth
Gregariousness
Trust
Altruism
Tender-mindedness
Hostility

Table 6 presents an overview of measures of personality which conceptually relate to preference
An empirical literature
is emerging that attempts to make this correspondence. See Table 4
parameters in economics. The table includes measures as well as latent factors (see Section 4).
Almlund, Duckworth, Heckman, and Kautz 12/31/2010
Psychologists have used experiments to elicit time preference and risk preference since96

Table 4: Empirical
Studies of the Links Between Preferences and Traits
Table 7. Overview of empirical studies of the links between preferences and traits.
the 1960’s, see, e.g., Mischel, Ayduk, Berman et al. [2010] and Slovic [1962]. A recent example
Preferences

Personality measure

Empirical study

isTime
the Balloon
Analogue
Risk Task (BART)
(Lejuez, Read, Kahler
et al. [2002]),
a computer
Preference
Conscientiousness,
Self-control,
Daly, Delaney
and Harmon
[2009]
Affective mindfulness, Elaboration of

game in which participants
make repeated
choices
between keeping a certain smaller monetary
consequences,
Consideration
of future
consequences.

reward and taking a chance
on an incrementally larger reward.
In addition
to the experimental
Extraversion
Dohmen,
Falk, Huffman
et al. [2010]
Time Preference

measures,
it is tempting
to try to
map preferences to more vaguely
defined
traits.
Time
Risk Aversion
Sensation
Seeking
Zuckerman
[1994],
Eckel
and
Grossman [2002]

preference seems to relate
to Conscientiousness, self-control,Dohmen,
and consideration
of future
Openness
Falk, Huffman
et al. [2010]
Neuroticism, ambition, Agreeableness
Balloon Analogue Risk Task
Social Preferences
Altruism
Reciprocity
Trust

Neuroticism, Agreeableness
Neuroticism, Agreeableness,
Conscientiousness
Neuroticism, Agreeableness, Openness,
Conscientiousness

Borghans, Golsteyn, Heckman et al.
[2009]
Lejuez, Aklin, Zvolensky et al. [2003]
Ashton, Paunonen, Helmes et al.
[1998],Osiński [2009] , Bekkers [2006]
Dohmen, Falk, Huffman et al. [2008]
Dohmen, Falk, Huffman et al. [2008]

The evidence relating personality to time preferences is mixed. Using data from an
experiment involving college students, Daly, Delaney and Harmon [2009] find that a factor that
loads heavily on self-control, consideration of future consequences, elaboration of consequences,
affective mindfulness, and Conscientiousness, is negatively associated with the discount rate.
Dohmen, Falk, Huffman et al. [2010] measure time preferences experimentally, and while time
preference is related to cognition, Openness to Experience is the only Big Five trait that explains
some of the variation in time preference. Figure 7 reports correlations between experimental
measures of time preference, Big Five factors, and measures of cognition. 156 Here only cognitive
measures are correlated with time preference.

30
156

Figures A2 and A3 in Section A6 of the Web Appendix display correlations among the survey measures in the
GSOEP.

14.0.

Summary and Conclusions

What can economists take from and contribute to personality psychology? What do we learn from personality
psychology? Personality traits predict many behaviors sometimes with the same strength as conventional
cognitive traits. Personality psychology considers a wider array of actions than are usually considered by
economists. It enlarges the economist’s way to describe and model the world. Cognition is one aspect of
personality broadly defined.
Personality traits are not set in stone. They change over the life cycle. They are a possible avenue for
intervention and policy.
Personality psychologists lack precise models. Economics provides a framework for recasting the field.
More precise models reveal basic identification problems that plague measurement in psychology. Such
analyses show that, at an empirical level, “cognitive” and “noncognitive” traits are not easily separated.
Personality psychologists typically present correlations—not causal relationships. Many contemporaneously measured relationships suffer from the problem of reverse causality. Econometric tools can be used
to define and estimate causal mechanisms and to understand the causes of effects. Psychological measures
have substantial measurement error. Econometric tools account for measurement error, and doing so makes
a difference. Economists can formulate and estimate mechanisms of investment—how traits can be changed
for the better.
There are major challenges in linking the traits of psychology with the preferences, constraints and
expectation mechanisms of economics. Developing rigorous methods for analyzing causal relationships in
both fields remains to be done. Developing a common language and framework to promote interdisciplinary
exchange is required. There is a danger in assuming that basic questions of content and identification have
been answered by psychologists at the level required for rigorous economic analysis.

31

References
Ackerman, P. L. and E. D. Heggestad (1997). Intelligence, personality, and interests: Evidence for overlapping
traits. Psychological Bulletin 121, 219–245.
Almlund, M., A. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and T. Kautz (2011). Personality psychology and economics. In
E. A. Hanushek, S. Machin, and L. Wößmann (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Education, Volume 4.
Amsterdam: Elsevier. Forthcoming.
Ashton, M. C., S. V. Paunonen, E. Helmes, and D. N. Jackson (1998). Kin altruism, reciprocal altruism,
and the Big Five personality factors. Evolution and Human Behavior 19 (1), 243–255.
Barrick, M. R. and M. K. Mount (1991). The Big Five personality dimensions and job performance: A
meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology 44 (1), 1–26.
Bekkers, R. (2006). Traditional and health-related philanthropy: The role of resources and personality.
Social Psychology Quarterly 69 (4), 349–366.
Binet, A. and T. Simon (1916). The development of intelligence in children (The Binet-Simon Scale).
Psychological Science. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins Co.
Borghans, L., A. L. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and B. ter Weel (2008, Fall). The economics and psychology
of personality traits. Journal of Human Resources 43 (4), 972–1059.
Borghans, L., B. H. Golsteyn, J. J. Heckman, and H. Meijers (2009, April). Gender differences in risk
aversion and ambiguity aversion. Journal of the European Economic Association 7 (2-3), 649–658.
Borghans, L., B. H. H. Golsteyn, J. J. Heckman, and J. E. Humphries (2011). IQ, achievement, and
personality. Unpublished manuscript, University of Maastricht and University of Chicago (revised from
the 2009 version).
Borghans, L., H. Meijers, and B. ter Weel (2008, January). The role of noncognitive skills in explaining
cognitive test scores. Economic Inquiry 46 (1), 2–12.
Carroll, J. B. (1993). Human Cognitive Abilities: A Survey of Factor-Analytic Studies. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Cervone, D. and L. A. Pervin (2009). Personality: Theory and Research (11th ed.). Hoboken: John Wiley
and Sons, Inc.

32

Costa, P. T. and R. R. McCrae (1992). Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO PI-R) and the NEO
Five-Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI) professional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2007, May). The technology of skill formation. American Economic Review 97 (2), 31–47.
Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2009, April). The economics and psychology of inequality and human
development. Journal of the European Economic Association 7 (2-3), 320–364. Presented as the Marshall
Lecture, European Economics Association, Milan, Italy, August 29, 2008.
Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, L. J. Lochner, and D. V. Masterov (2006). Interpreting the evidence on life
cycle skill formation. In E. A. Hanushek and F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Education,
Chapter 12, pp. 697–812. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. M. Schennach (2010, May). Estimating the technology of cognitive and
noncognitive skill formation. Econometrica 78 (3), 883–931.
Daly, M., L. Delaney, and C. P. Harmon (2009). Psychological and biological foundations of time preferences.
Journal of the European Economic Association 7 (2-3), 659–669.
Dohmen, T., A. Falk, D. Huffman, and U. Sunde (2008). Representative trust and reciprocity: prevalence
and determinants. Economic Inquiry 46 (1), 84–90.
Dohmen, T., A. Falk, D. Huffman, and U. Sunde (2010). Are risk aversion and impatience related to cognitive
ability? American Economic Review 100 (3), 1238–1260.
Duckworth, A. L. (2007). Unpublished dataset. University of Pennsylvania, Department of Psychology.
Eckel, C. C. and P. J. Grossman (2002). Sex differences and statistical stereotyping in attitudes toward
financial risk. Evolution and Human Behavior 23 (4), 281–295.
Epstein, S. (1979). The stability of behavior: I. on predicting most of the people much of the time. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 37 (7), 1097–1126.
Goldberg, L. R. (1993). The structure of phenotypic personality traits. American Psychologist 48 (1), 26–34.
Gough, H. G. and A. B. Heilbrun (1983). The Adjective Check List Manual. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting
Psychologists Press.
Hansen, K. T., J. J. Heckman, and K. J. Mullen (2004, July–August). The effect of schooling and ability on
achievement test scores. Journal of Econometrics 121 (1-2), 39–98.
33

Heckman, J. J. and B. E. Honoré (1990, September). The empirical content of the Roy model. Econometrica 58 (5), 1121–1149.
Heckman, J. J., J. E. Humphries, S. Urzúa, and G. Veramendi (2011). The effects of educational choices on
labor market, health, and social outcomes. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department
of Economics.
Heckman, J. J., L. Malofeeva, R. Pinto, and P. A. Savelyev (2011). Understanding the mechanisms through
which an influential early childhood program boosted adult outcomes. Unpublished manuscript, University
of Chicago, Department of Economics (first draft, 2008). Under revision, American Economic Review.
Heckman, J. J. and D. V. Masterov (2007). The productivity argument for investing in young children.
Review of Agricultural Economics 29 (3), 446–493.
Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, P. A. Savelyev, and A. Q. Yavitz (2010, February). The rate of return
to the HighScope Perry Preschool Program. Journal of Public Economics 94 (1-2), 114–128.
Heckman, J. J. and G. L. Sedlacek (1985, December). Heterogeneity, aggregation, and market wage functions:
An empirical model of self-selection in the labor market. Journal of Political Economy 93 (6), 1077–1125.
Heckman, J. J., J. Stixrud, and S. Urzua (2006, July). The effects of cognitive and noncognitive abilities on
labor market outcomes and social behavior. Journal of Labor Economics 24 (3), 411–482.
John, O. P. and S. Srivastava (1999). The big five trait taxonomy: History, measurement and theoretical
perspectives. In L. A. Pervin and O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research,
Chapter 4, pp. 102–138. New York: The Guilford Press.
Lejuez, C. W., W. M. Aklin, M. J. Zvolensky, and C. M. Pedulla (2003). Evaluation of the Balloon Analogue
Risk Task (BART) as a predictor of adolescent real-world risk-taking behaviours. Journal of Adolescence 26 (4), 475–479.
Mischel, W. (1968). Personality and Assessment. New York: Wiley.
Osinski, J. (2009). Kin altruism, reciprocal altruism and social discounting. Personality and Individual
Differences 47 (4), 374–378.
Poropat, A. E. (2009). A meta-analysis of the five-factor model of personality and academic performance.
Psychological Bulletin 135 (2), 322–338.
Roberts, B. W. (2006). Personality development and organizational behavior. In B. Staw (Ed.), Research
on Organizational Behavior, Volume 27, Chapter 1, pp. 1–41. Oxford, UK: Elsevier Science/JAI Press.
34

Roberts, B. W. (2009). Back to the future: Personality and assessment and personality development. Journal
of Research in Personality 43 (2), 137–145.
Roberts, B. W., N. R. Kuncel, R. L. Shiner, A. Caspi, and L. R. Goldberg (2007, December). The power of
personality: The comparative validity of personality traits, socioeconomic status, and cognitive ability for
predicting important life outcomes. Perspectives in Psychological Science 2 (4), 313–345.
Roberts, B. W. and D. Mroczek (2008). Personality trait change in adulthood. Current Directions in
Psychological Science 17 (1), 31–35.
Roberts, B. W., K. E. Walton, and W. Viechtbauer (2006). Patterns of mean-level change in personality
traits across the life course: A meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. Psychological Bulletin 132 (1), 1–25.
Schmidt, F. L. and J. Hunter (2004). General mental ability in the world of work: Occupational attainment
and job performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 86 (1), 162–173.
Terman, L. M. and M. A. Merrill (1960). Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale: Manual for the Third Revision
Form L-M. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Thaler, R. H. (2008, July). A short course in behavioral economics. Edge Master Class, Sonoma, CA, July
25-27, 2008.
Zuckerman, M. (1994). Behavioral Expressions and Biosocial Bases of Sensation Seeking. New York: Cambridge University Press.

35

