                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               A FISCAL UNION FOR THE EURO:
                               SOME LESSONS FROM HISTORY

                                         Michael D. Bordo
                                       Agnieszka Markiewicz
                                           Lars Jonung

                                        Working Paper 17380
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17380


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2011




We have received constructive comments from many. We would like to thank in particular Iain Begg,
Michael Bergman, Daniel Heymann, Sven Langedijk, Paul van den Noord, Jakob von Weizsäcker
and Guntram Wolff. Michael Bordo started this paper in 2006 when he was a visiting scholar at DGECFIN
in Brussels. The original research was funded by DGECFIN from a grant to him in 2006-2007. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Michael D. Bordo, Agnieszka Markiewicz, and Lars Jonung. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Fiscal Union for the Euro: Some Lessons from History
Michael D. Bordo, Agnieszka Markiewicz, and Lars Jonung
NBER Working Paper No. 17380
September 2011
JEL No. H10,H70,H73

                                              ABSTRACT

The recent financial crisis 2007-2009 was the longest and the deepest recession since the Great Depression
of 1930. The crisis that originated in subprime mortgage markets was spread and amplified through
globalised financial markets and resulted in severe debt crises in several European countries in 2010
and 2011. Events revealed that the European Union had insufficient means to halt the spiral of European
debt crisis. In particular, no pan-European fiscal mechanism to face a global crisis is available at present.
The aim of this study is to identify the characteristics of a robust common fiscal policy framework
that could have alleviated the consequences of the recent crisis. This is done by using the political
and fiscal history of five federal states; Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Germany and the United States.


Michael D. Bordo                                      Lars Jonung
Department of Economics                               Knut Wicksell Centre of Financial Studies
Rutgers University                                    School of Economics and Management
New Jersey Hall                                       Lund 8niversity
75 Hamilton Street                                    Box 7080
New Brunswick, NJ 08901                               220 07 Lund
and NBER                                              Sweden
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu                                Lars.Jonung@ehl.lu.se

Agnieszka Markiewicz
Erasmus University, Rotterdam
markiewicz@ese.eur.nl
A fiscal union for the euro: Some lessons from history


Introduction

The euro area is a unique form of a monetary union – with no historical precedence. The member
states of the euro area have assigned the framing of monetary policy to a common monetary
authority, the European Central Bank (ECB), set up as a highly independent central bank to insure that
it will be able to carry out a policy of price stability. Fiscal policy within the European Union (EU)
remains the task of the national governments under a set of rules given in the Maastricht Treaty and
the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP). These rules, pertaining to the Economic and Monetary Union
(EMU), cover euro area member states as well as member states that have not adopted the euro.
They are monitored centrally by the Commission in a policy dialogue with the member states. This
system represents the existing fiscal policy framework of the euro area that complements the
monetary union and its single currency, the euro.

Ever since the plans for a single European currency were launched about twenty years ago, the
institutional system for framing fiscal policies and for preserving the fiscal sustainability of the
monetary union has been the subject of a heated debate – among economists as well as among
policy‐makers.2 The recent global financial crisis and mainly the European debt crisis have added new
impulses to the debate about the proper fiscal policy arrangements within the European Union.

Several views exist. According to one camp, the monetary union should be supplemented with an
extended supranational or pan‐European fiscal union to be viable and sustainable. In short, the EU
should have access to a larger budget in order to design and carry its own central fiscal policies. Some
experts, like De Grauwe (2006) go further and promote the idea of a deeper political union, to ensure
the success of the euro. The present debt crisis within the EMU has inspired a number of proposals
for strengthening the fiscal power of EU.

Others argue that such an extension of the fiscal powers of "Brussels" would not be accepted
politically by EU citizens, threatening the political support for the monetary union in some member
states, in particular in Germany. Instead, it is argued that the present institutional set‐up is roughly
the proper one. Some commentators propose that the monetary union is not in need of any central
fiscal coordination across the member states, or at least of less coordination than presently. For
them, like Mckay (2005), the fiscal policy framework should be solely the business of the member
states. Another school recommends improvements in the quality of the fiscal policy process and the
fiscal institutions across the EU as a promising way to improve fiscal policy governance in the EU.3

So far the debate has shown no signs of an emerging consensus.4 Rather, it is getting more heated
due to the present crisis. One reason for the lack of unanimity is that the euro area represents a new
type of monetary union. More precisely, the euro area is the first monetary union where monetary
policy is set up at the central (European) level while fiscal policy is carried out at the sub‐central
(national) levels. Thus, the economics profession lacks historical cases to use as guidance for
theoretical and empirical work. Instead, many contributions are based on either theoretical
considerations or econometric calibrations and tests on data, in some cases originating prior to the
launch of the euro.

The aim of our study is to contribute to this debate by turning to the political and fiscal history of five
federal states for an answer to the question: Would the adoption of a fiscal union similar to the fiscal

2
  For early surveys of this debate, see for example Buti and Sapir (1998) and Hallet et al (1999). More recently, Buti and Franco
(2005), Korkman (2005) and Wierts (2006) among others deal with fiscal policy issues of the EMU. See also European Economy
(2008) on the record of the first 10 years of the EMU.
3
  See for example Wyplosz (2005) and Jonung and Larch (2006).
4
  The debate about the Stability and Growth pact before its reform in 2005 is a striking illustration of the widely divergent views
– more than 100 separate contributions ‐ within the economics profession on the role of fiscal policy in the euro area. For a
survey of these views on the proper design of the SGP, see Jonung et al (2008).



                                                                2
arrangements currently in place in the federal countries that we study help to avoid some of the
centripetal fiscal forces that threaten the stability of the European monetary union? In short, we try
to bring out the lessons from the past concerning the fiscal arrangements in the euro area of today.
As we are primarily concerned with macroeconomic stability issues, we focus on fiscal policy as an
instrument of stabilisation. We are well aware that fiscal policy making covers many policy areas, in
particular, distributional issues are closely related to questions of macroeconomic stabilization and
insurance.

The recent crisis has highlighted deficiencies in both the fiscal framework and the financial regulatory
framework of the euro area. In this paper, however, we do not analyze the issue whether the euro
area needs a common financial stability authority. We focus solely on fiscal issues relevant for the
stability of the euro area.

We organise our study in the following way. In section 1, we give a brief overview of some key
concepts and central issues. Next, in section 2, we summarize past and current experience of
monetary and fiscal unions in five countries: the United States, Canada, Germany, Argentina, and
Brazil. In section 3, we condense lessons from our account of the evolution of fiscal federalism.
Section 4 contains a comparison between these lessons and the framework for fiscal policy
governance in the EU. Section 5 concludes.


1. Fiscal federalism and fiscal policy in monetary unions

1. 1. The concept of monetary and fiscal unions

A monetary union is commonly defined as a group of states sharing a single currency. In the strictest
sense of the term, a monetary union means complete abandonment of regional or separate national
currencies and full centralisation of monetary authority into a single joint institution. This is the case
of the euro area, a subset of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), which covers all the 27
member states of the EU. 5

The concept of a fiscal union entails fiscal federalism among its members, which could be either sub‐
national (sub‐central or regional) political units or nation states. Fiscal federalism is based on a
cooperative arrangement between the members of the fiscal union regarding the design and
distribution of taxes and public expenditures.

There is no single definition of fiscal federalism. Sorens (2008) for example defines the "ideal type" of
fiscal federalism as consisting of the following four elements: (1) sub‐central political entities enjoy
independence/autonomy to decide taxes and expenditures, (2) these governments face fairly hard
budget constraints, that is a no bail‐out rule is consistent with the ideal type of fiscal federalism, (3)
there is a common market based on free trade and mobility within the fiscal union, thus there is
scope for competition among sub‐central governments, and (4) the system of fiscal federalism is
institutionalized in a set of rules. We would like to add a fifth element to this list: (5) the common
market is based on a common currency, that is, the sub‐central as well as the central fiscal authorities
are members of the same monetary union.

The governance structure of the EU is a challenge to put into the standard framework of fiscal
federalism as there is no similar institutional set‐up anywhere else in the world. The EU is different as
stressed by Begg (2009): "the fact that the EU is set up as a union of citizens and of Member States is
one of its most distinctive features." Its "federal" budget, that is the EU budget, is about 1 % of the
national incomes of the Member States. This is a much smaller ratio than the size of the federal
budgets in the typical federal country. As stressed initially, the centralization of monetary policy in the
ECB and the decentralization of fiscal policy to the Member States of the euro area is another unique
feature of the EU. Still, in our opinion there is much in the history of fiscal federalism that can bear

5
  Presently the euro area includes the following 17 countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Slovakia and Slovenia.



                                                            3
upon the design of EU governance in spite of the fact that EMU and the euro are unique institutions
with no historical precedence.

Musgrave (1959) provides the classical approach concerning the policy tasks of the public sector. His
scheme identifies three basic policy functions: allocation/efficiency, distribution and stabilization.
These functions can be performed by different political entities within a fiscal union according to the
adopted fiscal system.

The study of fiscal federalism, as defined by Oates (1999), is the study of how these roles are assigned
to different levels of government and the ways in which they relate to one another through different
policy instruments. The stabilization function, that is the implementation of monetary and fiscal
policies, is usually the task of the central government and the central bank. The stabilization of
economic activity via fiscal policy can be achieved through two main channels. The first one refers to
the role of automatic stabilizers, smoothing economic activity via the automatic response of taxes and
transfer systems to the business cycle. The second channel consists of discretionary fiscal policy
measures.

In this paper, we will often refer to sub‐national, regional, local or sub‐central political entities within
various federations. We will interchangeably call them jurisdictions and communities. Also, depending
on the federation in question, these regions take different names; states in the United States,
provinces in Canada and Argentina, Länder in Germany, and municipalities in Brazil.

1.2 The normative arguments for fiscal federalism

As stated by Oates (1972), “The traditional theory of fiscal federalism lays out a general normative
framework for the assignment of functions to different levels of the government and the appropriate
fiscal instruments for carrying out these functions”. This theory contends that the central government
should have the basic responsibility for macroeconomic stabilization and income distribution. In
addition to these functions, the central government should provide national public or collective goods
that service the entire population of the country such as defence.

Decentralised or lower levels of government have their raison d’être in the provision of public goods
and services whose production and consumption is limited to their own jurisdictions. The economic
argument for providing public goods at the sub‐national level was originally formulated in a
decentralization theorem that ‘… the level of welfare will always be at least as high if Pareto‐efficient
levels of consumption are provided in each jurisdiction than if any single, uniform level of
consumption is maintained across all jurisdictions’, see Oates (1972).

Thus, fiscal federalism addresses several issues. First, it has as the objective to respond to different
political preferences across a country. Second, it produces positive externalities as it may generate
benefits from intergovernmental competition, improve the fiscal responsibility of government, foster
political participation and a sense of being member of a democratic community, and help to protect
basic liberties and freedoms (Inman and Rubinfeld 1997). Finally, fiscal federalism also provides a way
of maintaining the government share of GDP at a low level (Sorens 2008).

An obvious cost of federalism is the loss of autonomy by the central government. In fact, the benefits
of decentralisation require that the central government’s authority is limited (Rodden 2006). As a
result, in highly decentralised fiscal federations, central governments might find it difficult to
implement coordinated economic and other type of policies and provide federation‐wide collective
goods.

The conclusion that decentralised governments will provide the efficient level of public goods rests on
a number of assumptions. One is that households and firms are freely mobile within the federation to
generate competition between jurisdictions. If free mobility is not the case, competition among sub‐
central governments may lead to suboptimal outcomes. Another assumption is the lack of
interdependencies between the policies of different jurisdictions. When this is not the case,




                                                     4
competition among sub‐national governments may generate negative spillovers or externalities, and
thus suboptimal outcomes.

If there are strong fiscal interdependencies between sub‐national jurisdictions policy‐makers might
face incentives to increase their expenditure while externalising the cost to the others. Rodden (2004,
2006) argues that this incentive is higher if the central government cannot fully commit to a no‐
bailout rule. Furthermore, the central government’s commitment becomes less credible if sub‐central
governments are heavily dependent on transfers from the central authority. Intergovernmental
transfers, as opposed to local taxation, change beliefs about the levels of local expenditure that can
be sustained by creating the perception that the central government will ultimately provide financial
help. Transfer dependent local governments usually face weaker incentives for responsible fiscal
behaviour. For this reason, Rodden (2004, 2006) recommends a principle of sub‐central sovereign
debt within fiscal federations to maintain overall fiscal discipline.

1.3. Fiscal policy in the theory of optimum currency areas

The traditional theory of optimum currency areas (OCA), based on the work by Mundell (1961),
McKinnon (1963) and Kenen (1969), also labelled by McKinnon (2004) as Mundell I, is the standard
approach used by economists to evaluate and study the optimality (and thus the desirability) of
monetary unions, in particular that of the euro area. This approach weighs the benefits for a country
of adopting a common currency against the costs of abandoning its national currency and thus its
independent monetary policy.

The benefits are higher if countries willing to join the monetary union are open economies and their
trade is highly concentrated with other countries willing to join the union. On the other hand, the
costs are higher when macroeconomic shocks are more asymmetric (country specific) and when other
adjustment mechanisms are less effective in offsetting these shocks. These mechanisms include the
flexibility of wages and prices and the mobility of labour and capital. If these mechanisms are not
sufficiently developed, an appropriate fiscal policy could minimize the loss of the exchange rate
channel for adjustment to asymmetric shocks.

Thus, domestic fiscal policy turns into the sole tool of stabilization policy left for a member of a
monetary union where monetary policy is carried out by a common central bank. Fiscal policy may
also be organised and coordinated at the central level of the monetary union, implying a transfer of
both monetary and fiscal policy to common central authorities.

While traditional OCA theory emphasises the trade and adjustment characteristics of regions/nation
states willing to form a currency union, recent developments of the OCA approach, also labelled
Mundell II inspired by Mundell (1973), focuses on the role of financial integration as a source of risk
sharing (insurance) and consumption smoothing.

The OCA approach according to Mundell II suggests that monetary unification triggers financial
market integration and the development of market‐based risk‐sharing mechanisms. These
mechanisms may substitute for fiscal policies as they attenuate the effects of asymmetric shocks. As
Eichengreen (1991, p. 17) notes, ‘Interregional transfers accomplished through federal taxes are
justifiable only if insurance cannot be provided by the market’. The Mundell II OCA‐theory identifies
such a channel of private insurance. It is an empirical issue to what extent this channel may fully
replace fiscal transfers within a monetary union.

In case the private insurance channel is not sufficient, a monetary union requires a system of
interregional and intertemporal transfers which can alleviate the consequences of negative shocks
such as occurred in the financial crisis of 2007‐2009. Increased public spending, necessary during
economic recessions can be financed either by the federal or subnational governments which in turn
could borrow domestically or internationally. The benefits from subnationals’ access to the financial
market are numerous. Yet subnational borrowing, left unregulated, entails the risk of insolvency,
which threatens local service delivery as well as macroeconomic and financial system stability of the
entire monetary union. According to Webb (2004), subnational debt markets have three important


                                                  5
agency problems: (i) subnational borrowers have an incentive not to repay their lenders as principals
if they anticipate bailouts; (ii) subnational borrowers have an incentive not to reveal certain
characteristics about themselves to lenders as principals, resulting in adverse selection; (iii) banks are
implicit agents of the nation, entrusted to maintain the nation’s payment system and
creditworthiness, and they often abuse this trust by lending to not creditworthy subnational
governments with the expectation of bailouts by the federal government in case of trouble.

These agency problems related to subnational borrowing suggest that federal debt is a superior
solution. The empirical literature provides clear evidence that federal bonds are superior to state
bonds because of a lower risk premium (see e.g. Amihud and Mendelson, 1991; Poterba and Rueben,
1997; Lemmen , 1999). The risk premium on federal bonds is lower because the federal government
in a monetary union controls money creation, has tax autonomy and has access to more liquid
markets than do lower levels of government.

A major weakness with the OCA approach, old as well as new, is the lack of attention paid to political
and institutional factors.6 The preferences of the public across the member states of a monetary
union are the major determinant of the sustainability of monetary unification. These preferences are
influenced by many factors, political as well as economic ones. Here the design of the institutional
framework for fiscal policy making – at the national as well as at the union level ‐ comes at the centre.

1.4. Fiscal policy in the euro area

An extensive literature analyzes the macroeconomic consequences of the institutional framework for
monetary and fiscal policy making in the EMU. In particular, it investigates the impact on inflation and
debt accumulation by the existence of many independent national fiscal authorities and one single
central bank.

The theoretical literature on the interaction of fiscal and monetary policies identifies various
mechanisms which may lead to spillover effects (externalities) across member states. For example,
Dixit and Lambertini (2001) show that if monetary and fiscal authorities have different ideal output
and inflation targets, Nash equilibrium output or inflation or both are suboptimal. Similarly, Chari and
Kehoe (2004) find that if the central monetary authority does not commit to a future policy path, the
free rider problem leads to inefficient outcomes, i.e. excessive inflation in the whole monetary union
and excessive debt issued by each member. Uhlig (2002) concludes that the existence of independent
fiscal authorities and one central bank within a simple stochastic model leads, in a non‐cooperative
Nash equilibrium, to higher deficits of the member countries than in the cooperative equilibrium
where they would be set to zero.

In line with the proposition by Rodden (2004, 2006), these studies point out that a setup of a single
monetary authority and numerous fiscal authorities requires binding fiscal policy constraints to avoid
excessive deficits at the sub‐central level, that is on the level of the member states in the case of the
euro area. Default by a subnational government can impose a negative externality upon other
subnational governments or the federal government by increasing the cost of borrowing for all fiscal
units. An important question that arises in these circumstances is the impact of effective discipline on
borrowing that is imposed by the market. These market forces can work efficiently only if subnational
governments have no perceived chance of a bailout by the central government (or the central bank).
Lane (1993) argues that expectations of a bailout are the most important reason for the failure of
market discipline. If a bailout occurs, it might disturb or even destroy completely market forces that
prevent fiscal units from over‐borrowing.


To summarize this literature, the interplay between several fiscal and one monetary authority within
a federation generates free‐riding issues or common pool problems.7 This mechanism works as

6
  For the shortcomings of the OCA approach, see i. a. Goodhart (1998) and Mongelli (2005). The traditional OCA theory has
given a negative bias to the views of US economists on the single currency, see Jonung and Drea (2010).
7
  The common pool problem arises in situations where the costs of an activity, which benefits a small group, are shared among
a wider group of individuals, countries or provinces as in our case of a monetary union.



                                                             6
follows. Each of the individual fiscal authorities sees itself only as a small player who has a little
impact on the common monetary policy. As a result, its fiscal policy choices would be purely driven by
national interests. In equilibrium, each country free‐rides and the outcome is worse than the one that
could be reached in a cooperative equilibrium.


2. The evolution of fiscal federalism within five monetary unions

According to Eichengreen (1991), “if a country is subject to asymmetric shocks, a system of fiscal
federalism can, through regional insurance, attenuate these shocks”. This proposition reflects the
positive impact of fiscal federalism highlighted by theory. The argument is that a monetary union
accompanied by a fiscal union is likely to operate more smoothly than a monetary union without it. A
fiscal union, however, functions smoothly only if a number of assumptions, advanced in the previous
section, are satisfied. History has frequently shown that the necessary conditions may not be in place.
In that case, fiscal centralisation can lead to damaging fiscal policies and result in large
macroeconomic imbalances reflected in high and variable inflation and unsustainable debt
developments.

To isolate the characteristics that were key to the creation of durable fiscal unions , we first present
an account of the historical experiences and then of the recent experience of five fiscal unions. We
focus on two groups of federations: first the US, Canada, and Germany; second Argentina and Brazil.
The first group largely represents cases of successful fiscal unions, as measured by inflation and debt
performance, as demonstrated in Table 1 which covers the period 1980‐2006. The second group of
Argentina and Brazil consists of less successful examples of fiscal unions. These federations are
characterized by a much higher average rate of inflation than the US, Canada, and Germany as
illustrated in Table 1.

We do not aim at delivering an exhaustive description of the histories of these federations. Instead,
we focus on episodes which are particularly relevant for the question under scrutiny. More precisely,
we analyze (i) the circumstances in which the federations were born; (ii) the evolution of the federal‐
sub‐national governments relationships, in particular, their transformation during the Great
Depression; (iii) the debt history of the five federations including the development of bond markets
and bailouts.

2.1 The United States

The United States is a constitutional republic. Its government is based on a congressional system
under a set of powers specified by its Constitution. The United States Congress is a bicameral
legislature. The history of fiscal federalism in the United States dates back to the founding of the
Union in 1789. Prior to the establishment of the federal government, the states had exercised their
powers to levy taxes and provide certain public services. The tenth amendment to the US constitution
explicitly reserves to “the States or to the people” all powers “not delegated to the United States by
the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States”.

2.1.1 Creation of the US federation

During the pre‐federal period, the union that existed under the Articles of Confederation constituted
a league of sovereign states. It did not have the power of national taxation, or the power to control
trade, and it had a comparatively weak executive. It was a “league of friendship” which was opposed
to any type of national authority. Boyd and Fauntroy (1997) argue that the greatest weakness of the
Articles of Confederation was that they only established state sovereignty and only delegated a few
responsibilities to the central authorities. As a result, the majority of the power rested with the states.
More precisely, each state had the authority to collect its own taxes, issue currency, and finance its
own army. The federal government’s main activity was to control foreign policy and conclude treaties.
As Congress, under the Articles, did not have the power to collect taxes, the central government was
unable to balance its finances. It resulted in a debt of $42 million after the Revolutionary War which




                                                    7
weakened considerably the government’s economic credibility. This financial obligation was not paid
off until the early 1800’s.

The United States Declaration of Independence, an act of the Second Continental Congress, was
adopted on July 4, 1776. It declared that the Thirteen Colonies were independent of the Kingdom of
Great Britain. The Articles of Confederation served as a “transition” between the Revolutionary War
and the Constitution. In 1789, the US constitution was ratified and in 1790 the federal government
assumed responsibility for the war debt, which some have called an early form of federal aid. The
Tenth Amendment, added to the Constitution in 1791, protected the rights of the states and declared
that all powers not expressly delegated to the central government by the Constitution were reserved
for the states. This laid the foundation for the concepts of states’ rights, limited national government,
and dual spheres of authority between state and national governments (Boyd and Fauntroy (1997)).

2.1.2 Evolution of the federal‐ states government relationship

The period from 1789 to 1901 has been termed the era of dual federalism.8 It was characterised by
little collaboration between the national and state governments. During this period, in particular
between 1820 and 1840, the states engaged in extensive borrowing to finance their internal activities
and development which resulted in high debts. Instead of introducing new taxes or adjusting their
spending, numerous states demanded bailouts from the federal government. In fact, the states
assumed that their debt implicitly carried a federal guarantee. However, the Congress refused to
bailout indebted states and in 1840 several states defaulted on their debt and had to undertake
painful adjustment measures. Thus, the federal government sent a costly but clear signal regarding
the limits to its commitment to fiscal support to the states.

As a result, in the following decades, the US states developed the fiscal sovereignty that we still
observe today. As Rodden (2006) puts it, states may occasionally dance around the topic of bailouts
but hopes for them are not sufficiently bright that states would actually refuse to adjust while waiting
for debt assumption.
                                                                                           9
Dual federalism was followed by a period of cooperative federalism, from 1901 to 1960. This period
was marked by greater cooperation and collaboration between the various levels of government.

The period from 1960 to 1968 was called Creative Federalism by President Lyndon Johnson's
administration. President Johnson's Creative Federalism, as embodied in his Great Society program,
was an important departure from the past. It further shifted the power relationship between
governmental levels toward the federal government through an expansion of the grant‐in‐aid system
and the increasing use of federal regulations.

2.1.3 Alexander Hamilton and the restructuring of US debt

United States debt history began with the Revolutionary War , which was mostly financed ( 85%) by
the issue of fiat money by the Congress and the states. The Congress had virtually no taxing power,
while that of the states was too limited to pay for more than a small fraction of total expenditure.
Foreign bond finance ‐ deteriorated by uncertainty about the war’s outcome ‐ and domestic bond
issues were limited by a thin bond market. In 1782, the federal government, unable to raise taxes on
its own both before and after the 1783 Articles of Confederation, had to default on both its domestic
debt and debts to France.

The Constitution of 1789 gave the federal government expanded powers in monetary and fiscal
affairs including the ability to raise tax revenues and the sole right to issue currency. Alexander
Hamilton, the Secretary of the Treasury between 1789 and 1795, put together the plan to restructure
the public debt and create deep financial markets. Bordo and Vegh ( 2002) posit that the package
included four elements; (i) funding the national debt,(ii) creation of a Sinking Fund, (iii) securing

8
    The term “dual federalism” was introduced by Corwin (1950).
9
    The term “Cooperative Federalism” was extensively used by Elzar (1966).



                                                               8
sufficient tax revenue, (iv) creation of the Bank of the United States. The central idea of the plan was
to convert outstanding federal and state debt obligations into long‐term bonds and to create
mechanisms to both service and amortize this debt. This would help in creating an effective capital
market and hence to facilitate government borrowing in wartime.

Consequently, Hamilton proposed a plan designed to fund the debt which involved converting
outstanding paper securities of the states and the federal government into specie denominated ‐
securities at the official par of exchange. The debts of various maturities plus arrears were converted
into a debt package that greatly reduced the effective interest rate to well below the 6 per cent rate
stipulated on most securities outstanding in 1789. The issued bonds were similar to British consols
with no specific retirement date. Shortly after successful conversion and funding of the debt, U.S.
government securities became quickly accepted both at home and abroad and yields fell to rates
comparable to bonds of the leading European powers (Perkins, 1994, p. 218)

Following the British example of 1717, Hamilton proposed a sinking fund as a way of ensuring the
credibility of his funding program. The idea was to set aside revenues provided by specific taxes to be
used to purchase public securities on the open market. The interest earned by the sinking fund would
be used to acquire more public securities and eventually pay off the debt. A key feature was that the
revenues accumulated by the fund could not be diverted by the Congress at a later date for other
expenditures. The sinking fund was created by the act of May 8, 1792. An act of March 3, 1795 made
explicit the revenues to be devoted to the fund, including part of import duties, excise taxes, and the
sale of public lands.

Another element of Hamilton’s debt package was to ensure the government’s ability to collect
sufficient tax revenues to continuously service the debt. Debt service was an important ingredient of
the program of creating a well‐functioning, credible long‐term capital market. Hamilton proposed a
national tariff sufficient to generate revenues equal to 10 per cent of import values. Tariff revenues
were to be supplemented by excise taxes, and the sale of public land.

Alexander Hamilton’s debt package had all the elements of a modern stabilization plan. It led to the
creation of a U.S. government bond market which in the future would be key to long‐term
sustainability of the U.S. fiscal union.

2.1.4 US federalism and the Great Depression

The Great Depression played a particularly important role in the reconstruction of the relations
between the central government and the states. The period from 1929 to 1941 was the most serious
economic crisis in US history. Real GDP and prices fell by a third and the unemployment rate rose
above 20 % in 1929‐1933. Recovery to the 1929 level was not achieved until the start of World War II.
The states were unable to respond effectively on their own to the economic consequences of the
Great Depression leading to a major change in fiscal federal arrangements. In 1933, as a major
component of his New Deal, President Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Congress greatly expanded the
federal government’s role in the domestic economy.

The New Deal era represented a turning point in the history of American federalism, particularly in
the area of federal‐state and local relations. The main change in government structure during the
1930s was the shift in expenditures from the local to the state and federal levels. Wallis (1984) argues
that the emergence of "big" government in this period was a result of a change in the relative
importance of federal and sub‐national governments rather than an increase in the growth rate of
government expenditures by itself. He shows that between 1932 and 1940 the shares of government
expenditures originating in federal and local governments were almost exactly reversed. Before 1932
relative shares for each level were roughly 50 % local, 20 % state, and 30 % federal government. After
1940, 30 % of relative shares were local, 24 % state, and 46 % federal. A major part of increasing
government expenditures, 75 %, came in programs administered at the federal level but in
cooperation with state and local governments. Additionally, strong agricultural price supports were
introduced at the federal level and were not matched by any corresponding shift in sub‐national
expenses.


                                                   9
The most important modification of the US federation framework came as a new role for the fiscal
policy of the central government. Before the Great Depression, the U.S. government borrowed in
time of war, and most of the time ran surpluses to pay off accumulated war debt. The possibility of
using the government deficit as a tool of macroeconomic management was never considered. The
Great Depression made it impossible to preserve this pattern. De Long (1996) notes that both the
Hoover and the first Roosevelt administrations wished to maintain the pattern of surpluses of
peacetime, but both found the austerity necessary to achieve surplus in the time of the Great
Depression to be politically impossible. In the end, the US government accepted that large deficits in
time of recession helped to attenuate the business cycle.


2.1.5 Contemporary federalism in the US

Contemporary federalism, the period from 1970 to the present, has been characterised by shifts in
the intergovernmental grant system, the growth of unfunded federal mandates, concerns about
federal regulations, and continuing disputes over the nature of the federal system. There has been
some devolution of programs back to the states, reflecting, in part, dissatisfaction with the economic
effects of several large federal programs.

American states are largely free in their choice of tax bases and rates, subject to only a few limitations
imposed by the federal constitution. On the expenditure side, most major spending functions are
located at the state or local government level, important exceptions being national defence, pensions
and health insurance for the elderly and disabled. Total expenditures of local governments are almost
as large as those of state governments, and the sum of these two, as can be seen in column 1 of Table
2, is roughly equal to central government expenditure, reflecting a high degree of decentralisation in
the US.

Subnational governments in the United States are, in principle, free to borrow without federal
involvement. In reality, however, nearly all States have some kind of constitutional or statutory
balanced‐budget requirement. Indeed, according to Table 2, column 5, the borrowing autonomy of
the sub‐central governments is rather limited. The precise nature of the requirements varies
considerably across states. The U.S. federal government has followed a no‐bailout policy (column 6 in
Table 2).

In the US, there is neither overall federal‐state coordination of fiscal policy nor a “revenue sharing”
system between the federal and state governments (Shah 1995). In fact, at the federal level, there are
no transfers specifically intended to deal with sub‐national imbalances. The most important federal
transfers are those that fund health, education and transport programs administrated by the states.
Although there is an attempt in many of these programs to relate transfers to such indicators of need
as income per capita income, there is no general system of equalisation similar for instance to the
German one. Thus, the US states are not highly dependent on transfers. Accordingly to both measures
reported in Table 2 columns 3 and 4, the transfers based revenue accounts for around 30% of the
total revenue of states.


2.2 Canada

Canada is a constitutional monarchy and a parliamentary democracy with a federal system and strong
democratic traditions. Originally a union of four provinces, Canada is now composed of ten provinces
and three territories. It became a federation in 1867, which makes it the third oldest federation in the
world today, after the United States.

Canada has a two‐tiered, highly decentralised system. It can be characterised as a model of dual
federalism with a coordinating central authority. Whereas federal and provincial governments are
equal partners in the federation, local governments do not enjoy independent constitutional status
and are simply the handmaiden of the provinces (Shah 1995). The distinct functions of the provincial


                                                   10
legislatures and of the Parliament of Canada were established in the British North America Act, which
was later renamed the Constitution Act, 1867.

2.2.1 Creation of the Canadian federation

The evolution of the federal system in Canada contrasts significantly with the evolution of the
American federation. Both the origins of the two systems and their major developments differ. Watts
(1987) argues that the Canadian federation was born in pragmatism rather than from an anti‐imperial
revolution sentiment. The major incentive for the unification of the Canadian colonies in 1867 was the
threat of political, economic and military absorption by the United States.

Two distinctive features marked the federation created by the British North America Act. First, central
powers were highly concentrated. Second, the Canadian political system combined a parliamentary
form of government (similar to the British) with federalism.

2.2.2 Public debt in Canada

Canada had a fairly well‐established financial structure in place before the Bank of Canada opened in
1935. Canada’s legal system and strong ties to Britain during its early years supported the early
development of a bond market (see Nowlan 2001).

The history of Government of Canada bonds in the domestic market dates back to 1868 with the issue
of 6% 10‐year bonds. The Government continued to issue bonds in the domestic market to retire
foreign debt which had been issued by the provinces prior to Confederation in 1867. At the same
time, the Government continued to issue bonds denominated in both sterling and U.S. dollars, in the
London and New York markets.

During the Great Depression, Canada borrowed abroad extensively. In spite the fact that it already
had considerable borrowing from abroad, the risk premium on Dominion bonds sold abroad did not
significantly increase during the 1930s. This suggests that investors did not view Canada as likely to
default, and lend further credence to the view that there was no external debt crisis. Further, during
the first and the second world wars, a well developed bond market allowed the Canadian government
to collect funds domestically at a low cost. During World War II, the Government was able to raise
about $13 billion, all domestically and most of it long term. By the early 1950’s, Canada had a
framework in place for a domestic bond market and had many years of experience from borrowing in
both domestic and international markets. Although there was no real money market by the early
1950’s, short‐term Government of Canada bonds were held in large amounts outside the banking
system and were actively traded.

During the recessions of the 1980s and 1990s several provinces issued excessively high levels of public
debt leading to an increase in risk premia and a downgrading of their bond ratings, and pressure on
the federal government for a bail out. The evolution of the share of provincial debt since the 1970s is
plotted in Figure 1.

Since 1983–84, provincial‐territorial program spending has declined as a share of GDP. As a result,
some provinces issued excessively high levels of public debt leading to an increase in risk premia and
a downgrading of their bond ratings, and pressure on the federal government for a bail out. Due to
the difficult public finance situation a conflict between the federal and provincial levels of the
government arose. Kneebone (1993) provides the province of Ontario as an example of such a
conflict. As a consequence of the overly lax fiscal policy of Ontario, the Bank of Canada had to tighten
its monetary policy. This episode demonstrates how the fiscal choices of one province influenced the
decisions of the central bank and how all the provinces were indirectly affected by the behavior of
this province.

In the early 1990s, Canadian provinces and territories were hit hard by the recession, which caused a
significant increase in spending on social assistance and social services. By the mid‐1990s, increasingly
large deficits and debt burdens, especially those of the federal government, led to fiscal restraint that


                                                  11
culminated in significant reductions across a wide range of federal expenditures, including transfers to
provinces and territories. Hence, Canadian provinces became the main providers of social programs
involving public services, while the federal government is largely restricted to social programs that
involve transfers. The fact that such social programs include a significant proportion of program
spending at both levels of government emphasises the importance of redistribution as an objective of
government policy.


The Great Depression and Canadian federalism

Like the U.S., Canada suffered a major depression from 1929 to 1939. In terms of output loss, it was
similar in both timing and magnitude to the Great Depression in the United States. Between 1929 and
1933, GNP dropped by 43% and exports shrank by 50%. Commodity prices fell dramatically around
the world and therefore the regions and communities dependent on primary industries such as
farming, mining and logging suffered the most. The economy began to recover, slowly, after 1933.
However, the Depression did not end until the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939.

The Great Depression was a turning point for Canadian economic policies. Before 1930, the
government intervened as little as possible, believing the free market would take care of the
economy. During the Depression, the government of Canada became much more interventionist and
proposed legislation that paralleled Roosevelt's New Deal agenda. In particular, it introduced high
tariffs to protect domestic manufacturing, a step that only created weaker demand and made the
Depression worse. It also introduced minimum hourly wages, a standard work week, and programs
such as old age assistance and unemployment insurance. The Bank of Canada was created in 1934 as
a central bank to manage the money supply and bring stability to the country’s financial system.

In 1937, the federal government appointed the Royal Commission on Dominion‐Provincial Relations,
commonly known as the Rowell‐Sirois Commission. Its objective was to examine issues of taxation,
government spending, the public debt, federal grants and subsidies and the constitutional allocation
of revenue sources. Ruggeri (2006) argues that the most important recommendation of the
Commission was the payment to the provinces by the federal government of “national adjustment
grants,” a set of unconditional transfers aimed at equalising provincial fiscal capacity. In return, the
federal government acquired exclusive jurisdiction over personal and corporate income taxes and
succession duties. This new division of responsibilities between different levels of the government
represented a major shift towards fiscal centralisation.

In 1938, following the Commission recommendations, the federal government for the first time
consciously decided to increase spending to counteract a downturn in economic activity. In addition
to fiscal expenditures the government also offered loans to municipalities for local improvements and
passed a National Housing Act to encourage the building of homes. Consistent with this Keynesian
approach, the government also reduced taxes and offered tax exemptions for private investors. The
idea of a static and balanced budget was abandoned. In its place fiscal policy would stimulate
economic recovery via government deficits and economic measures.

The budget of 1938 marks the beginning of a new concept of the role of government in Canada. Until
then the federal government had concentrated on providing public services. It had now undertaken a
new and significantly different responsibility: that of smoothing economic activity. It was a most
radical innovation inspired by the Great Depression.


2.2.3 Recent developments in the Canadian federation

Since the British North American Act of 1867, the provinces have been assigned an increasing number
of taxes. As stressed by Shah (1995), today, they are responsible for tax collection in all areas except
customs, unemployment insurance premiums, and contributions to the Canada Pension Plan.10

10
     Sometimes Canadian provinces share the tax responsibilities with the central government.



                                                               12
Canada has a highly decentralised federal system. Sub‐national expenditures accounted for more than
50 % of total public expenditures during the 1990s (column 1 and 2 in Table 2). As noted by Shah
(1995), in Canada, there are elaborate mechanisms for federal‐provincial fiscal coordination. The
majority of direct program expenditures are at the sub‐national level but Ottawa (i.e. the Canadian
federal government) retains flexibility and achieves fiscal harmonisation through conditional transfers
and tax collection agreements.

In the past several years, provincial concern has emerged over the use of federal spending power
simply as a means of transferring revenues to the provinces. Canada, like almost all federations, is
characterised by a vertical fiscal gap: a mismatch between the revenue means and expenditure needs.
In particular, Canadian federal revenue exceeds what is required by direct and indirect spending
responsibilities of the central government. Regional governments have fewer revenues than their
expenditure responsibilities with the result that excess central revenue being transferred to the
provinces in one form or another. Over time, the size of the vertical gap has gradually decreased,
implying that provinces have gradually become more and more self‐sufficient.

Much of the discipline on public sector borrowing comes from the financial sector ‐ monitoring
deficits and debt at all levels of government. Moreover financial markets, especially bond and stock
markets and provincial electorates impose a strong fiscal discipline at the sub‐national level. The
borrowing autonomy index in Canada is the lowest in the group of countries under study (column 5 in
Table 2). Furthermore, national policies explicitly forbid bailouts of provinces at risk of default
(column 6 in Table 2).

2.3 Germany

The Federal Republic of Germany consists of a federal (Bund) government, 16 Land (state)
governments, and numerous municipal (or local) governments. There is a formal, indirectly elected
head of state, the President of the Federal Republic. All of the federal and Land governments are
organised on the basis of the parliamentary system. All Länder have unicameral legislatures, whose
members are elected directly by popular vote.


2.3.1 Foundation of the German federation

Germany is a relatively recent nation‐state. In the mid nineteenth century, Germany was a collection
of smaller states that were linked together as a German confederation. This confederation was
dominated by Austria, which as an imperial power was politically and economically superior to the
smaller German states. In the 1860's, the dominance of Austria was challenged by Prussia and the
process of unification and codification of German law began.

A gradual process of economic interdependence from the early stages of the Industrial Revolution
through to the mid‐19th century saw the German states move towards economic unification. For
example, the growth of the railway network in Germany led to easier access to different resources
across the confederation. This helped to stimulate economic growth and meant that economic
prosperity was increasingly reliant upon strong links between different member states of the German
confederation.

This led to the introduction of the Zollverein customs union, an agreement amongst the German
states to have preferential customs policies for member states. This economic union excluded Austria,
illustrating a growing German sense of identity and a lesser dependency upon the largest of the
German states.

The final national unification of Germany was achieved in two steps: the creation of the North
German Confederation in 1866–67 and then of the German Reich in 1871. In 1866 a war broke out
between Austria and Prussia, lasting a few weeks. The Prussian victory over the Austrians led to a
clearer division between Austrian and German interests. This new situation also forced the smaller


                                                 13
states to align themselves with the Prussians, with whom they shared more economic ties due to the
common Zollverein customs agreement.

At the same time, between 1866 and 1870, relations between Prussia and France worsened. In 1870,
France declared a war that was won by Prussia. Following victories over France, in January of 1871,
Prussia persuaded other German confederation members that unification was desirable. As a result,
Wilhelm, king of Prussia, was proclaimed Emperor of Germany on January 18, 1871 in Versailles. The
Second German Reich was born.


2.3.2 The evolution of the German federation

With unification, Prussia inherited a set of states with already highly institutionalised governance
structures in place: well‐developed public education systems, effective systems of public finance, and
stable populations, see Ziblatt (2004). After unification, the German Reich increased its spending so
that the share of total government expenditures over GNP rose from 10 % in 1881 to 17.7 % in 1913
while the central government’s share increased from 2.9 to 6.2 %, Hefeker (2001).

World War I ended in defeat for Germany. As the government financed its burgeoning deficits by the
monetary printing press, saddled with enormous war debts and reparations, the economy slid into a
hyperinflation in 1922‐23. The hyperinflation was ended by a stabilisation package based on fiscal
consolidation.

When, after the war, the Weimar Republic was founded, a drive towards a centralized state strongly
dominated separatist tendencies and thus limited the possibilities for development of a federal
system. The Weimar Republic is described as a "decentralised unitary state”, rather than a federal
state.

In early 1928, Germany’s economy slipped into recession, then stabilised before turning down again
in the third quarter of 1929. The decline in German industrial production during the Great Depression
was roughly equal to that in the United States. Lacking adequate sources of finance, the federal
government was forced to cover its budget to a large extent by issuing debt, running ultimately into a
serious debt crisis. The German government did not use activist fiscal policy to attenuate the effects
of the crises.11

In January 1933, Hitler was appointed Reich Chancellor. In terms of economic policy, the Hitler regime
did not represent a radical break with past conservative policies, at least not until 1936. It increased
spending for military purposes. The Nazi regime created a unitary state with all powers held by the
central government while the States were relegated to administrative districts.

After the Second World War, a new type of federalism was imposed on Germany by France, United
Kingdom and the United States. Because of the Nazi totalitarian experience, a unitary structure for
post‐war Germany was ruled out. Instead a federal solution was adopted, founded on the creation of
new Länder that had not existed before. They were conceived as state units, clearly distinct from the
federation. The distribution of powers between the central and Länder governments according to the
German Constitution, the Basic Law (Grundgesetz) of 1949, still reflects some aspects of the Weimar
Republic. However, since World War II, the federal government has been more limited in several
areas. The creation of the structure of federalism continued in 1990 when six new Länder were
established with German reunification.

The system created by the Basic Law did not facilitate cooperative federalism or even the sharing of
political responsibility between federation and state. The rather competitive structure of the German
federation reduced the financial responsibility of the already largely transfer‐dependent Länder. As a
rule, the Länder have strongly defended their authority and financial resources against the central

11
     Cohn (1992) notes that Germany opted for conservative fiscal policies because of its huge national debt.




                                                                14
government. Although the central government officially follows the no‐bailout rule, this commitment
is not fully credible. There is an incentive for the Länder to borrow excessively as their taxing
authority is rather limited. Indeed, the excessive debts of some of the Länder and the financial
security provided by the central government, after the Second World War, demonstrate the lack of
credibility and commitment of the Lander.


2.3.3 German debt and bailouts

Although the German federal government and the Bundesbank are famous for its prudent monetary
and fiscal policies, the fiscal performance of the subnational sector is far less admirable (Rodden
2005).

In the immediate post‐war period, the level of the public debt was rather low and evenly distributed
between the three levels of the German federation. In the 1970s and 1980s, the debts of the central
government and especially of the Länder have risen at a sharp rate. Some of the Länder, which were
particularly indebted and which were also used to receive high amounts of transfers, expected the
central government to bail them out. In order to strengthen its credibility, the central government
could have refused, as the US federal government did in 1840. Instead, in early 1987 the Länder of
Bremen and Saarland began to receive special supplementary transfers form the central government
explicitly aimed at coping with their high debts.

In 1992 the Federal Constitutional Court handed down a decision stipulating that the constitution
required the Bund to make extra transfers to Bremen and Saarland, amounting to around 30 billion
DM over the period from 1994‐2000, see Rodden (2004) and Heppke‐Falk and Wolff (2008).12
Furthermore, these transfers to Bremen and Saarland have never had to be repaid.

The bail‐out provided by the German government was a signal of its lack of commitment,
demonstrating the difficulties to commit in the existing constitutional setting, and created incentives
for further irresponsible fiscal behaviour on the part of the Länder. The huge debts at the Länder level
                                                                                                      13
were largely responsible for Germany’s problem of following the Stability and Growth Pact in 2002.
Also in a federal constitutional court ruling of 2006 on Berlin, no fundamental change of the principle
of solidarity was undertaken and investors continue to price German Länder essentially similarly
(Schulz and Wolff (2009)).

A second, interesting feature of German federalism is that all Länder participate in the German fiscal
equalization system which guarantees a minimum level of annual tax revenues. In practice, the
minimum is very close to the average and some Länder are permanent net recipients while others are
permanent net contributors. This fiscal equalization also affects the markets’ perception of a sub‐
central government’s credit risk, as the central government may find it hard to refuse bail‐outs to
states which are permanent net recipient of equalization grants. Schuknecht, von Hagen and Wolswijk
(2009) find that, German regions, and, in particular, those that were consistently net recipients in the
German equalization scheme, did not pay risk premiums related to their fiscal performance in excess
of the German federal government.

Rodden (2005) argues that the current fiscal federalism in Germany is characterized by structural
weaknesses in the German federal systems that have been present throughout the postwar period.
Specifically, the collaborative intergovernmental system of revenue legislation, collection, and
distribution breaks the link between taxing and spending decisions that is critical for effective
government provision of goods and services. While most spending and policy implementation occurs
at the Land or Gemeinde level, most revenue decisions are made at the Bund level. Rodden (2005)



12
   A ruling by the Federal Constitutional Court in 1992 introduced the notion of extreme emergency as the necessary condition
for support from the federal government.
13
   See Heppke‐Falk and Wolff (2008) for a discussion of the moral hazard problem and the issue of bailout in the German fiscal
federation.



                                                             15
argues that Germany's complex, interdependent, collaborative style of federalism tends to weaken
fiscal accountability and soften budget constraints.


2.3.4 Recent developments in German federalism

The Basic Law divides authority between the federal government and the Länder, with the general
principle governing relations articulated in Article 30: "The exercise of governmental powers and the
discharge of governmental functions shall be incumbent on the Länder insofar as this Basic Law does
not otherwise prescribe or permit." Thus, the federal government can exercise authority only in those
areas specified in the Basic Law. The federal government is assigned a greater legislative role and the
Land governments a greater administrative role. The fact that Land governments employ more civil
servants than federal and local governments combined illustrates the central administrative function
of the Länder.

Originally, the Basic Law divided the federal government's legislative responsibilities into exclusive
powers, concurrent powers, and framework powers. The exclusive legislative jurisdiction of the
federal government extended to defence, foreign affairs, immigration, transportation,
communications, and currency standards. These areas were additionally enlarged by an amendment
to the Basic Law in 1969, which calls for joint action in areas of broad social concern such as higher
education, regional economic development, and agricultural reform. After the reform of federalism in
2006, the federal and Land governments share concurrent powers in several areas.

The Länder retain no significant powers of taxation. The revenue provided by these taxes is very low,
relative to total sub‐national revenue. Indeed, as indicated in column 4 of Table 2, tax rate autonomy
is equal to 0.04, much less than in the US and Canada.

A key aspect of the German federal state is the solidarity between the individual Länder. However
economically weak individual Länder may be, no single Land will have less than 95% of the average
per capita budgetary resources. The Basic Law provides for the establishment of equal living
conditions throughout the country and the maintenance of legal and economic unity in the national
interest. This includes the constitutionally mandated revenue sharing with the Länder from federal
taxes. Virtually all of the major federal tax revenue sources are shared in this way. These constitute
extensive non–discretionary unconditional transfers to the Länder.

Watts and Hobson (2000) note that in addition there are substantial intergovernmental transfers both
from the federal government to the Länder, and among the Länder, which, as a result, are highly,
transfer dependent. When the measure of the latter includes revenue sharing mechanisms, Länder
reach the transfer dependence of 70 % (column 3 in Table 2).

On the other hand, Länder are autonomous in their borrowing activities (column 5 in Table 2).14 The
central government has no power to place numeric restrictions on the borrowing activities of Länder.
Nevertheless, Länder have their own laws imposing adequate restrictions. Most often, these are
based on the golden rule, i.e. the loan is designated for investment purposes. However, as Rodden
(2006) notes, investment is a slippery concept and many of the financial needs can be presented as
investments.

In addition, the investment limits have often been breached with the argument that exceptional
events have triggered expenditure needs. With the currently ongoing financial crisis leading to
massively increasing deficits, the political response has been to impose further strict limits on deficits.
These limits are supposed to apply to the federal as well as to the Länder‐level.




14
     The Länder get individual ratings from rating agencies.



                                                               16
2.4 Argentina

Argentina is a federal republic with 24 provinces. It has a presidential government and a bicameral
legislature consisting of the Chamber of Deputies (257 seats) and the Senate (72 seats). Sturzenegger
and Werneck (2006) note that while the Chamber of Deputies supposedly elects deputies in
proportion to their populations, the Argentine system over‐represents the participation of small
provinces through a minimum number of five deputies per jurisdiction.15 The Senate is represented by
three senators from each province, two from the first majority and a third from the second party.

2.4.1 Creation of the Argentinean Federation

The Argentine state was born out of the union of colonial regions with differing economic and social
characteristics. The revolution of 1810 against Spanish control led to the declaration of independence
of the United Provinces of the Rio de la Plata in 1816. Independence revealed strong regional
disparities which had been hidden by Spanish rule. As a result, the establishment of a national
government and a constitution took almost four decades accompanied by violent struggle. Finally, in
1853 the Constitution established a constitutional federal republic. The changes in the Constitution
introduced in 1860, gave the provinces priority over the central government. The provinces also
gained autonomy in the administration of their territories. Despite some later modifications, the
essential federalist structure of the 1853‐1860 Constitution remains in force today (see Tommasi
(2002)).

By the beginning of the twentieth century, Argentina was one of the most developed countries in the
world. However, after the Great Depression, it entered a path of economic decline largely reflecting a
succession of poor economic policies based on populism.

The Argentinean Federation and the Great Depression

The Great Depression began in Argentina in the late 1920s, even before the date of the start of the
Depression in the core countries of North America and Western Europe following the Wall Street
crash of 1929. Like in many countries of the periphery, Argentina was exposed to commodity price
shocks and, during the 1920s, its terms of trade worsened considerably. By the end of 1929, a balance
of payments crisis developed, and the exchange rate was allowed to float after only two years of
participation in the gold standard. Recovery began in 1931, and by 1934‐35, output had regained its
1929 level.

The Argentine Great Depression was mild and short‐lived by international standards. From its peak
between 1929 and 1932 domestic real output fell by 14 % and by 1935 it had surpassed its 1929 level.
Deflation was about 6 % in the 1929‐32 period. In other gold‐standard countries, such as the United
States and Canada, the decline in real activity reached more than 30% and price levels declined by
more than 20%.

Major monetary policy actions from 1929 to 1935 were responsible for accommodation of the
negative shocks of the 1930’s. In response to the economic difficulties, two major institutional
changes in the conduct of monetary policy took place in the first half of the 1930s. The first was in
1931, when the decision was taken by the Conversion Office (a currency board established in 1910) to
shift the monetary regime from a metallic regime standard based on gold to a fiduciary regime and to
revalue the monetary gold stock and devalue the currency. This resulted in a more flexible monetary
regime which could adapt to the economic crisis. Second, a Banco Central, a central bank, was created
in 1936. This independent institution replaced the Conversion Office and abandoned its nominal
anchor commitment device.16

During the depression, fiscal policies in Argentina remained even more conservative than in countries
like the United States. The Great Depression created a sudden decrease in federal revenues. As a

15
     See for instance Sturzenegger and Werneck (2006).
16
     For the details of the reforms, see Della Paolera and Taylor (1999).



                                                                  17
result, some tax collection responsibilities shifted from the sub‐national to the national level. The
federal government started to collect taxes that were previously assigned to the provinces, invoking
the “critical situation” clause in the Constitution.


2.4.2 Argentinean debt history

The history of excessive Argentinean public debt started early. The revolution from Spain in 1810 led
to the constant expansion of military expenditures and to a drop in trade revenues (result of Spanish
blockade of the Rio de la Plata). As a result, the Buenos Aires authorities had to issue the first
compulsory loan. During the period 1813‐1821, compulsory loans amounted to 2.96 million pesos. In
1819 and 1820, in order to pay the military and public wages, the government issued small‐
denomination notes to be used by the customs (see Bordo and Vegh, 2002). By then the difference
between the public debt and money had disappeared. At that time, the only solution to the problem
was to consolidate the total debt and convert it into long‐term debt. The funding operation was
carried out in 1821. Further bond issues in 1823 and 1824 were necessary to complete the operation.
By the end of the funding operation in 1824, 6.4 million worth of bonds had been issued (see Bordo
and Vegh, 2002).

In 1825, the war with Brazil began. To finance the war, and given that the interest rate charged by the
Banco Nacional was considerably below the open market rate, the Buenos Aires government relied
heavily on credit from the Banco Nacional. As the credit resources of the Banco Nacional fell short of
the government’s borrowing requirements, the Banco Nacional had to start printing money. The
resulting inflation spiral began in 1826 and continued until mid‐1830. At the beginning of 1830, long‐
term government bonds were selling at an average discount of 40 percent.

Bordo and Vegh (2002) argue that two main economic factors would ensure that monetary instability
would continue for the next 40 years. First, the Treasury continued to depend on trade taxes for most
of its revenues. Second, long‐term bond‐financing was becoming difficult as the public became more
reticent to buy additional public debt and a London loan for 5 million gold pesos contracted in 1824
was defaulted on in 1827, and servicing was not permanently restored until 1849.

By the early 1840s, the treasury continued to be heavily dependent on trade taxes and the printing of
money. In a way, the exclusive reliance on money finance after 1840 completed a long process that
began in 1813 with the first compulsory loan. During 1810–1821, government paper became more
and more ‘‘liquid’’. In 1822, paper money was issued and soon became inconvertible. Long‐term bond
financing became increasingly difficult afterwards. In 1840, the Treasury concluded that bond
financing was no longer worth it, and money financing became the only other important fiscal tool (in
addition to trade taxes).

During the next 60 years, Argentina joined and left the Gold Standard several times. On each occasion
convertibility was suspended, mainly in years of political turmoil and rising levels of money‐financed
government deficits. The final convertibility suspension occurred in 1914 at the outbreak of World
War I. In the interwar period Argentina followed conservative monetary and fiscal policies, returned
to gold during 1927–29, and in the 1930s followed mildly expansionary policies (see Della Paolera,
1995; Della Paolera and Taylor, 1997, 1999). A return to high inflation regimes, as in the 19th century,
began with Peron after World War II (see Di Tella and Dornbusch, 1989).

Continuous growth of government in successive decades brought public expenditures to about 50% of
GDP in the second half of the 1990’s. During the 1980s, both levels of government borrowed
extensively, reflecting weak fiscal management. In addition, both levels of government accumulated
large debts on payments for wages and pensions, to suppliers and for debt service. Lack of financial
control prevailed in particular at the provincial level, becoming an important source of financial and
macroeconomic instability.

In the late 1980s, the provinces accounted for roughly 40% of the deficit of the consolidated non‐
financial public sector. These deficits were financed by discretionary transfers and loans from the


                                                  18
federal government, but also by loans from the provincial banks and other parts of the financial
system, see Saiegh and Tommasi (1999). The provinces borrowed from their provincial banks, who
then discounted the debt at the central bank, effectively giving the provinces a share in the
seignorage from inflation. This process led, by the end of the 1980’s, to a hyperinflation.

During the period 1992‐94, the federal government financed special financial rescue operations for
seven provinces. Nicolini et al (2002) argue that one of the main sources of deficits in provincial
finances was the state provincial pension system. Financial aid to provinces in difficulties took the
form of issuing national treasury bonds. Using this ad hoc mechanism, the central government
granted huge loans.

By establishing a currency board arrangement, the Convertibility Law of March 1991 ended
inflationary central bank financing of public sector deficits at all levels. A set of structural reforms was
introduced in the 1990’s, however, a budget policy or a fiscal responsibility law that would control
provincial spending was not developed. The provinces, especially the Province of Buenos Aires, were
spending heavily and financing their expenditures through commercial bank borrowing therefore
causing crowding out.

As shown in Table 3, the public debt grew roughly 40 percent from 1997 until 2001. 64 percent of this
growth was contracted locally, implying that the domestic debt of the government almost doubled.
The domestic debt was also contracted in dollars. The annual public and private external debt service
amounted to 41 percent of total exports, and the total public and private external debt stock was
equivalent to almost 5 times the annual exports. The growth in the debt was not seen as worrying,
partly because of its one‐off nature, and partly because the economy was now believed to be on a
new, higher growth path. But underneath the surface, the debt was becoming unsustainable.

In 1998, the Argentinean economy was struck by a series of shocks which plunged it into recession.
The 1998’s Russian crisis dramatically reduced the inflow of foreign capital available to emerging
countries (see Lischinsky, 2003). The first signs of restricted credit were the high lending rates the
provinces were charged, which did not impede the excessive borrowing. Further, the recession
decreased tax revenues, the basis for servicing debt. In any case, Argentina’s tax collection effort was
not impressive, and the tax system was not capable of generating large additional resources rapidly
(see Mark, 2003). Debt service as a share of exports was high, because the Argentinean economy was
relatively closed, with exports hovering around 10 percent of GDP. With the resulting revision of
growth prospects, Argentina’s future capacity to service its debt began to look more worrisome. Mark
(2003) argues that as this problem became clear to market participants, spreads rose on Argentine
paper and maturities shortened, creating increasing difficulty in rolling over the debt and increasing
debt‐servicing costs. This again worsened the debt dynamics, eventually forcing Argentina to default
on its debt.

This combination of inadequate fiscal adjustment and (external) borrowing in foreign currencies
proved in the end damaging for Argentina’s attempt to maintain the currency board and avoid
default. In addition, Sturzenegger and Werneck (2006) argue that the irresponsible fiscal behaviour of
the provinces leading to run‐ups in the national debt to GDP ratio was a key ingredient in the process
leading to this crisis.


2.4.3 Argentinean federalism today

Provincial governments in Argentina have abundant powers to decide their own rules of governance
as well as taxing and spending decisions, while municipalities report to the provincial governments.
Although the Argentine Constitution establishes substantial room for sub‐national taxation, in
practice, provinces have delegated to the national government the responsibility of raising a large
share of their taxes. Sturzenegger and Werneck (2006) argue that, at the same time, the responsibility
for key social functions is in provincial hands. For example, provinces have exclusive competence in
primary and secondary education and in the provision of most social expenditures on education,
health, poverty programs, and housing. As a result of expenditure decentralisation and tax


                                                    19
centralisation, the Argentinean federal system is characterised by a high degree of vertical fiscal
imbalance gap. This gap, coupled with the relatively large fraction of government services provided at
the sub‐national level, creates a common pool problem across provinces. Tommasi (2002) argues that
as a consequence some of the provincial governments are not aware of any hard budget constraint.
Thus they increase spending and reduce local tax effort compared to the case of having to face
binding budgetary restrictions.

Argentina addresses its large vertical fiscal imbalance gap through a complex and extensive system of
intergovernmental transfers. These transfers and other revenue sharing proceeds account for more
than half of total revenues of the provinces (column 3 in Table 2).17 The most important component
of this transfer system is the tax‐sharing agreement called “Coparticipación”, which refers to the
process by which shares of the taxes collected by the central government are reallocated to the
provinces. Over time, this tax‐sharing system has been often modified and several new amendments
have been added to it. Furthermore, some direct transfers appear to be determined by political
considerations. Its complexity and lack of transparency resulted in its description as the “fiscal
labyrinth”.

Within Argentina’s federal structure, all levels of government are generally permitted to borrow both
domestically and abroad. However, in many provinces, the provincial Constitution imposes some
restrictions on the borrowing ability of the government. These restrictions are very often violated,
and in many provinces they are too loose to be binding. In Table 2, we see that during the 1990s
among the five countries studied, Argentina had the highest degree of borrowing autonomy and
reached almost full borrowing autonomy of sub‐national entities.


2.5 Brazil

Brazil has a complex federation. Three government levels comprise the Union of 26 states plus the
Federal District, and more than 5500 municipalities. The Constitution explicitly considers
municipalities to be members of the federation, giving them a much higher status and autonomy than
is generally observed in other federations, see Sturzenegger and Werneck (2006).

The republic has a presidential regime and a bicameral legislature consisting of the Federal Senate
and the Chamber of Deputies. Each state is equally represented in the upper chamber by three
senators. Representation in the Chamber of Deputies is not strictly proportional to state
constituencies. In fact, the Constitution establishes that no state may have less than 8 deputies and
more than 70. This leads to a disequilibrium similar to the one present in the Argentinean federation.
The unpopulated Northern states are over‐represented and the state of Sao Paulo is under‐
represented.

2.5.1 Creation of the Brazilian federation

The Brazilian Federation was created along with the Republic in 1889. It was born out of the decision
to divide the unitary state that prevailed during the Imperial Regime. Castanhar (2003) notes that the
Federal Regime was convenient mainly for the most developed provinces of the South and Southeast,
in particular São Paulo. These regions were rich in the new agricultural export products at that time.
These provinces would obtain additional revenues from local taxes on these exports. In return, the
less developed regions were granted political representation in the government more than
proportional to their population.

2.5.2 Evolution of the Brazilian federation

This fiscal federal arrangement has undergone substantial changes over Brazil’s history. During most
of the nineteenth century when the country had a parliamentary monarchy a high degree of
centralisation prevailed. The power of provincial governments was weak until 1889 as these

17
     See also Cetrángolo and Jiménez (2004).



                                                 20
governments had little control over fiscal revenues. The provinces were not allowed to collect import
taxes or interprovincial trade taxes, but implicitly they had the right to collect export taxes and in
practice they also collected interstate taxes. In 1889, a republican movement overthrew the emperor
in a peaceful revolution and established a provisional government in charge of drafting a new
constitution. The first draft of the constitution was then created and submitted to the Constitutional
Congress for a final revision and approval. The Constitutional Assembly passed a new Constitution on
February 24, 1891, which provided states with great autonomy, in particular, the right to tax exports,
to set up their own armed forces, and to have independent gubernatorial elections. By not including
any limitations to the amount of debt states could issue, the Constitution implicitly gave states the
right to issue debt domestically and abroad.

After the 1891 Constitution, state revenues from export taxes represented on average around 60% of
total revenue between 1914 and 1916. States such as Espírito Santo and Rio Grande do Norte
collected more than 85% of their revenues from export taxes. São Paulo increased its collection
capacity per capita three times after 1891, collecting almost 40% of what all the states collected with
only half of the total exports and less than one fifth of the population. In contrast, Góias and Rio
Grande do Sul collected only 24% and 29% of their revenues from export taxes. This tax collection
independence of states had large repercussions on the cost of capital. In particular, states with larger
exports per capita and resulting larger tax income were able to sell more debt in international
markets and paid lower interest rates for those loans see Martinez Fritscher and Aldo (2010).

The Great Depression and Brazilian federalism

During the Great Depression, Brazil, like many other commodity dependent economies went into a
deep crisis. The price of coffee (70% of Brazil's exports share during the 1920’s) dropped from 22.5
cents a pound in 1929 to 8 cents in 1931. As in the other federations studied by us, the economic
depression accelerated expansion and consolidation of the center’s power. In 1929, Brazil like
Argentina began to devalue its currency and as a result experienced only a relatively mild downturn
and had largely recovered by 1935.

The central government was strengthened further during the authoritarian Vargas regime between
1930 and 1945. The end of the Vargas dictatorship brought a new constitution. Although the new
constitution did not introduce radical changes to the tax system, it promoted significant efforts of
decentralisation, giving more autonomy as well as sources of revenue to state and local governments.
This decentralisation wave was interrupted by 20 years of military government, from 1964 onwards.
The end of this regime in 1985 led to another decentralisation movement. The interests of sub‐
national governments dominated the redesign of the fiscal federalism arrangement established by the
1988 Constitution.

As a reaction to the earlier dictatorial period, the new constitution delegated a large amount of
revenue and political power towards the sub‐national governments, and in particular towards the
municipalities. Sub‐national governments were directly or indirectly given a much more generous
share of the aggregate taxes collected in the country. Although the Constitution already enhanced the
taxing power of sub‐national governments, it additionally established transfers based on revenue‐
sharing rules, see Sturzenegger and Werneck (2006).

Soon after the approval of the new Constitution and a new tax system in particular, the central
government faced growing financial difficulties. In response, it undertook efforts to increase its tax
revenue. As a result, inefficient taxes were introduced, i.e. various forms of turnover taxes that had
been eliminated from the Brazilian tax system in the 1960’s.

2.5.3 Public debt in Brazil

The Republican Period was marked by difficulties in domestic and external financing and
restructuring. First, the long stretch of time during which outstanding securities could not be
converted (1839‐89) affected its credibility. Second, due to the large diversity of instruments with
different maturities and interest rates the debt was highly fragmented. The last two issues spelled


                                                  21
trouble for domestic debt negotiation and liquidity. In 1902 consolidation tried to solve the problem
of debt fragmentation and succeeded, at least initially. Nearly all outstanding securities were
exchanged for new ones, yielding interest rates of 5% a year. However, the effect of this unification
was also short‐lived. From 1902 to 1956 (the year of a new consolidation), 145 authorizations for
bond issues were granted, but again, they were not standardized and they had different purposes:
e.g., for covering budget deficits, sterilization of excess liquidity, funding civil works, acquiring fixed
assets or companies, and repaying compulsory loans. The latter was crucial in the Republic’s financing
policy, especially for issuing war bonds, which began in 1942, and influenced the evolution of
outstanding funded domestic debt.

The years of not paying interest on outstanding debt and rising inflation forced Brazil to introduce
compulsory public securities. The stagnation of the voluntary issuing of public securities complicated
the financing of growing budget deficits even further, especially as of the mid‐1950s. Since the
government had no public credit and was unable to raise the tax burden, the deficit was mainly
financed by issuing currency, and hence increasing inflation.

In 1965, the Government launched the Government Economic Action Plan to reduce the inflation of
previous years through a restrictive monetary policy and fiscal adjustment. This plan raised the need
for reforms in the domestic financial system and actions that would make the public debt security
market more efficient. The objectives of the plan included: (i) raising additional debt to cover Federal
Government deficits; (ii) encouraging individual savings and (iii) developing a voluntary market for
public securities. In this context, several reforms in the fiscal and financial systems were introduced.

Foreign borrowing was critical to Brazil's economic and political development after 1967. State‐owned
industrial corporations and banks were the biggest borrowers. The overwhelming majority of the
borrowing went, directly or indirectly, to boost industrial production. In order to pay for the country's
increasing debt service, the new industrial facilities were pushed to export a portion of their output.
In principle, the system worked perfectly: foreign capital boosted industrial production, and enough
of this production was exported to cover interest and principal payments. Output more than tripled in
real terms between 1965 and 1980, industrial production quadrupled, per capita GDP doubled, and
exports rose from $1.6 billion to $20.1 billion.

Brazil has experienced three major state‐level debt crises between the end of the 1980s and 2000. In
each of these crises, the same pattern reoccurred. The states facing unstable fiscal situations with
high levels of spending on personnel and interest payments were pushed into debt‐servicing crises by
exogenous shocks. In order to control sub‐national budget deficits, the 1988 Constitution restricts
their borrowing ability which is inspected by the Senate. Despite these provisions, state deficits have
been a persistent concern throughout the post 1988 period. The last state debt crisis of the mid
1990s, triggered by the soaring interest rates following the implementation of the “Plano Real” in
1994, exposed the serious macroeconomic threat posed by the risk of default of the four major
debtor states of Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Minas Gerais and Rio Grande do Sul, and ended up
requiring a bail‐out by the central government. In fact, the federal government authorized the
exchange of state bonds for federal and central bank bonds and thus relieved the states from the
burden of servicing their debt. Rodden (2006) emphasizes that large, indebted states like Sao Paulo
and Minas Gerais were aware of the fact that the center could not let them default because of
negative spillovers onto the Brazilian economy. Of course, the knowledge that the central
government will bail out the states increased moral hazard and generated excessive states’
indebtedness. Accordingly, in each of the crises irresponsible states received bailouts, and the federal
government responded by taking measures to assume the state debts. This led to increases in the
federal debt burden – fuelling a crisis.

Table 4 shows that the State Debt in Bonds, as percentage of GDP, more than doubled between 1990
and 1996, and that more than 90% of it was concentrated in the four biggest states of the country.It is
important to note that during the period between 1990 and 1996, the access of subnational
governments to new debt was almost completely restricted, either by regulations or by credit risk
assessment. Therefore, the increase in the outstanding debt was due, almost entirely, to the




                                                   22
capitalization of very high interest rates that the state debt had to bear. The inflated interest rates
reflected low liquidity but mainly high default risk premia.

In the late 1990s, the regulations of subnational borrowing were strengthened, leading to the unifying
framework in 2000. Statutory controls on subnational borrowing have always existed in Brazil—
controls on new borrowing and the total stock of debt, expressed as percentages of revenue— but
subnational governments had been creative in evading them. The federal government bailed out
subnational debtors in earlier crises, but resolution of the third debt crisis in 1997 was conditioned on
states undertaking difficult fiscal and structural reforms. Unconditional bailouts were avoided in 1997
in order to minimize moral hazard. The strengthened ex ante borrowing regulations were embedded
in the debt‐restructuring agreements between 25 states and the federal government in 1997,
sanctioned by legislation. The 2000 Fiscal Responsibility Law consolidated various pieces of legislation
into one unifying framework (see Webb 2004).

3.5.4 Brazil and present federalism

The decentralisation of the Brazilian federal system, initiated by the Constitution of 1988, resulted in
a mismatch of the assignment of revenue and expenditure functions to sub‐national governments. In
particular, while the assignment of revenue sources across different levels of government is clearly
specified, expenditure functions are not always devolved in a clear and systematic way to sub‐
national governments. There is no clear division of responsibilities across government levels in many
areas like health care, education and social security. Furthermore, Afonzo and De Mello (2000) argue
that, because of significant disparities in institutional capacity at the sub‐national level, even in cases
where expenditure mandates are clearly defined, higher level authorities (states and Federal
government), do not devolve these expenditure functions to lower tiers of governments for fear of
disturbances in service delivery.

Brazil has a gross tax burden of more than 36 % of GDP; a high number for an emerging economy.
Officially, the majority of the taxes are collected by the federal government. The states’ own revenue
corresponds to slightly more than 25 %. Municipalities are left with a share of less than 5 % of the
total tax collection. However, once constitutional transfers are taken into account, the distribution of
the aggregate tax revenue across jurisdictions differs dramatically. After all, the states remain with
roughly 25 % and the central government receives about 60 % of the tax revenues. The great net
beneficiary of the redistribution is the municipalities. Local governments were able to have access to
an amount of resources that roughly tripled their own revenue. Although state‐level governments as
a whole only benefit slightly from the constitutional transfers, individual states, the poorest ones in
particular, have obtained major net gains from the redistribution.

More than three fourths of all federal transfers to sub‐national governments are constitutionally
mandated transfers. Afonzo and De Mello (2000) claim that constitutional requirements on revenue
sharing favour sub‐national governments to the detriment of the federal government without a clear
devolution of expenditure functions to lower levels of government. Particularly important are the
rules governing the sharing of the ICMS, the state‐level value‐added tax, which is the highest yielding
source of revenue in Brazil.

Afonzo and De Mello (2000) state that it has been widely accepted in Brazil that state debt
negotiations with the federal government could be interpreted as a bail‐out operation unless
accompanied by institutional changes aimed at imposing hard budget constraints at all levels of
government.

Since the late 1990s, an important effort took place in order to provide a sound basis for
macroeconomic stability. In particular, it required changes in the fiscal‐federalism arrangement, in
order to impose hard budget constraints on sub‐national governments. The recent changes in the
legislation have laid the foundations for a rules‐based system of decentralised federalism that leaves
little room for discretionary policymaking at the sub‐national level. It remains to be seen how
effective this new system will be.




                                                   23
4. Lessons from the history of fiscal federalism

4.1. General lessons

Our account of the evolution of fiscal federalism in five countries covers also their political history.
The reason for this is that all the fiscal unions evolved in close interaction with the political unions
forming the ultimate basis for fiscal cooperation. Friedrich (1968) notes that federalism is not only a
static pattern or design, characterized by a particular and precisely defined division of powers
between governmental levels. It is a continuous process by which a number of separate political
communities enter into arrangements for working out solutions, adopting joint policies, and making
joint decisions on common problems. Thus, each federation is an evolving entity and its structure is
shaped by economic and political events.

Below we seek to identify the major driving forces behind changes in the fiscal frameworks of the five
federations under study.

First, the historical account demonstrates that most of the countries created their unions for similar
reasons. Many independent regions decided to found a union because of military insecurity and a
consequent need for a common defence or a desire to be independent of foreign powers. This was
the case of the US which was founded in revolution against the British Empire. Similarly, the British
North American Act established the Canadian federation in response to the threat of political,
economic and military absorption by the US. The foundation of the Argentine federation reflected a
desire to gain independence from the Spanish empire. The union of provinces that founded the
Brazilian Federation was mainly driven by potential economic benefits. The creation of the German
federation was driven by both potential economic gains and political reasons.

Franck (1968) argues that although factors such as a common language, similar culture,
complementary economies, and hope of independence, as noted above, have generally triggered the
birth of federations, they are important but not sufficient conditions for the success of a federation.
According to him, far more important is what Friedrich (1968) calls the "federal spirit," i.e. a
commitment to the value of federalism and to compromise and adaptation. Indeed, the Canadian
case shows that in spite of the cultural differences between the original units, in particular different
languages, these entities desired to unite because of such a “federal spirit”.

Second, we note that institutional developments in most of the five federations were driven by
exceptional events, often downturns in economic activity during deep crises. The most prominent
example is the Great Depression of the 1930s which affected in a fundamental way the institutions of
the five federal states. In response to the economic crisis, central governments increased their power.
As a result, during and after the Great Depression, the American, Canadian, Argentine and Brazilian
federations underwent a process of centralisation. In Germany, the depression contributed to the rise
of the National Socialist movement, resulting in an enormous centralization of power. This
centralization made it easier for the governments to either introduce (as in the Canadian case) or
extend (as in the US example) measures aiming at equalization of incomes across regions. Such
measures were part of the stabilization process, since the regions which were more harmed by the
recession received larger financial transfers.

In addition, in Canada and Argentina, the Great Depression resulted in the creation of central banks.
These two central banks were established during the Great Depression to use monetary policy under
a fiat monetary regime to help extricate the economy from the slump. Their establishment also
reflected the general movement in the interwar period for independent states to establish central
banks.

The main policy innovation of the Great Depression was a new role for the fiscal policy of central
governments. Governments increased their spending and/or cut taxes in order to stabilize the
distressed economy. Later on, these policies were given an intellectual foundation by John Maynard




                                                   24
Keynes in the General Theory of Employment Interest and Money. They were formalized as part of the
Keynesian revolution, with its stress on the role of fiscal policy.

In case of an important negative shock like the Great Depression the federal state must be ready to
implement measures necessary to improve the conditions of the most harmed states. History also
suggests that the most appropriate way to finance interregional transfers in distressed times is by
national bond markets. Early Argentinean and US war experiences provide adequate examples of how
the federal states can respond and prepare for the next possible distress. In the nineteenth century
Argentina faced two conflicts which resulted in huge public debts. In both episodes, this debt was
monetised because the federal government had access neither to stable domestic financial markets
nor to adequate tax revenues.

Several decades before, the US experienced its War of Independence, which like in the Argentinean
case was mainly financed by printing money. However, this episode inspired Alexander Hamilton to
introduce a financial plan which helped to repay the debt and to develop domestic bonds markets
that would allow for the financing of future wars. In addition, the plan involved increasing and
securing tax revenue at the federal level. As a result of Hamilton’s program, the Civil War and the
conflict against Mexico were financed by non‐inflationary means: tax revenues and bonds.

Third, we find a clear difference between well‐functioning and poorly functioning federal states
concerning inflation and debt accumulation. Those federal states that have maintained a relatively
strict fiscal discipline among sub‐national units during recent decades like the US, Canada and
Germany have fared better than those that have not, like Argentina and Brazil. As a rule, they have
displayed lower rates of inflation; less inflation variability and less debt accumulation (see Table 1).

Our account of fiscal federalism demonstrates that fiscal discipline has been obtained through several
techniques: explicit or implicit no‐bail‐out clauses, constitutional restrictions and through discipline
exercised by financial markets for government debt.

Once overall budgetary discipline prevails through a no‐bailout rule, considerable revenue and
expenditure independence of sub‐national governments can be maintained. This independence for
regional fiscal units is thus due to a system of rules that “anchor” their budget behaviour at a
sustainable path.

The present system of budgetary discipline in successful fiscal federations is the result of a “learning
by doing” process. In the presence of moral hazard, the federal government has to give a signal of
commitment to the sub‐national authorities. Otherwise, the latter will not learn. For example, the US
government as early as in 1840 gave the lesson that it would not provide bail‐outs to states in
financial trouble. As a result, it gained credibility. Today, virtually all of the U.S. states have their own
balanced budget rules and most importantly they respect them. Today, it is the federal government
that displays high deficits.

Two out of the five federations were not able to learn from their negative fiscal experiences in the
past. In contrast to the US example, the Argentine and Brazilian federations during the 1980s and
1990s experienced several financial crises, which occurred because they followed an undisciplined
fiscal policy. More precisely, irresponsible fiscal behaviour of the sub‐national authorities played a key
factor in these crises. Moreover for them, the lesson has not yet been learnt. On the contrary, in each
of these crises, the central government has bailed‐out sub‐national authorities. Indeed, there is still
no credible mechanism in these federations to impose fiscal disciple.


4.2. Lessons for the euro area

The history of successful fiscal federalism suggests five major policy lessons of relevance for the euro
area today.




                                                    25
The first lesson from history suggests that a no‐bailout clause has helped to avoid pressures leading to
disintegration of the monetary union. This has worked in combination with a system of close
surveillance or monitoring of the fiscal policy and debt accumulation of the members of the monetary
union. This surveillance has been carried out by an institutionalized system as well as by financial
markets. It is important to note that without a strict and credible no‐bailout clause, the financial
market mechanism is likely to fail as an efficient disciplining device on fiscal policy.

As shown by history, weak fiscal institutions contribute to a deficit bias. A main problem of fiscal
policy making in the euro area, undermining budgetary discipline and the workings of the Stability and
Growth Pact, is found in the lack of efficient fiscal governance in a number of member countries.18
The solution to this problem is then to improve weak domestic fiscal institutions through reforms,
increasing their independence, accountability and transparency – much in the spirit behind central
bank reforms in the past decades.

The second lesson from history for the euro area suggests that regional fiscal units can have
considerable revenue and expenditure independence within a system of no‐bailouts by the central
government. This is clearly the case of the euro area where tax and spending decisions rest with the
national governments of the Member States.

The third lesson indicates that the current euro area fiscal arrangement lacks the means to respond to
a rare but economically disastrous event like the recent financial and debt crisis. History suggests that
the creation of a union‐wide bond market with a common bond may prove to be a successful way to
finance increases in public expenditure to prevent the malaise experienced today in Europe. Federal
borrowing has avoided the problems of liquidity and credibility faced by smaller members. Moreover
servicing this debt by taxes collected directly by the federal government ‐ as Alexander Hamilton
instituted in the eighteenth century in the US ‐ avoided problems of free riding. .

A fourth lesson from history is that, in the face of a global crisis like the Great Depression, all the five
countries we studied increased the fiscal capacity of the central government and instituted a system
of transfers and equalization payments. This pattern suggests that the recent global crisis, which is
the most severe one since the 1930s, may contribute to an increase in the central fiscal power of the
EU, paving the way for larger transfers to the member states hardest hit by the crisis. Indeed, the
policy response of the EU since the start of the recent crisis strongly suggests that such a movement
has started concerning inter alia the design of financial regulations, the common EU design of fiscal
policies, the creation of a euro area financial rescue fund, and the use of the EU Globalization Fund.

The fifth lesson from the experience of successful fiscal unions is the importance of learning from and
adapting to changing economic and political circumstances. Such a process has already started in the
EU as witnessed by the reforms and changes in the institutional framework both at the EU‐level and
within several Member States. The future will reveal if these changes will prove to be sufficient to
make the euro area a sustainable monetary union.


5. Conclusions

The euro area is the first case in the history of monetary unions where monetary policy‐making is
centralized under one central bank while fiscal policy‐making is decentralized in the hands of the
national governments of the member states. This institutional framework is new for economists and
policy‐makers alike. Economists are thus venturing into virgin territory, which allows them to hold
widely divergent views about the proper design of the fiscal union for the euro area.

To answer the question raised initially concerning the role of a fiscal union in making the euro a
sustainable currency, we have turned to a study of the experience of five fiscal federations. The
record of these cases provides us with a number of conditions necessary for a fiscal union to function
smoothly and successfully. The first and probably the most important condition is a credible

18
     See Jonung and Larch (2006).



                                                    26
commitment to a no‐bailout rule. The second one is a degree of revenue and expenditure
independence of the members of the fiscal union reflecting their preferences. The third condition is a
well developed transfer mechanism to be used in episodes of distress. This transfer mechanism can
be facilitated by the establishment of a common bond.19 The fourth condition is a capacity to learn
from past mistakes and adapt to new economic and political circumstances.

The euro area was created without an effective fiscal union. The institutions that were established to
serve as a fiscal union (the Maastricht Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact) – that is to discipline
domestic fiscal policies ‐ did not function as planned as revealed by the crises and recession from
2007‐2009 and onwards. The lessons from the historical experience of the five federal states as
surveyed in this paper could be helpful for the euro area to avoid disintegration. History also suggests
that in periods of deep depression the center of a fiscal union gains more control over fiscal affairs.
This process seems to be well underway in the euro area presently.




19
   Such a common bond guaranteed by the members of the EU is already issued by the European
Investment Bank to finance infrastructure investment. A similar arrangement could be made for other
purposes.


                                                  27
Table 1. Inflation, national debt and interest rate performance of five fiscal federations, 1980‐2006.



              Inflation    Inflation    Debt‐to‐ GDP     Debt           Nominal LT rates       Nominal interest
  Country       rate      variability      ratio       variability   for government bonds       rate variability




 USA          3.9         2.6           39.0           6.6           7.6                       2.8
 Canada       3.8         3.0           42.2           9.9           8.4                       3.1
 Germany      2.4         1.7           25.7           8.9           6.4                       1.8
 Argentina    294.9       692.7         66.1           5.5           n.a.                      n.a.
 Brazil       403.1       856.3         40.4           8.0           23.4                      9.6

Sources: OECD, World Bank, National databases.
Comment: Due to lack of data for the debt‐to‐GDP ratio, the statistics are calculated for the period
1989‐2006 for Argentina and 1991‐2006 for Brazil. Long term rates and their variability in Brazil are
calculated for 1995‐2006. These figures are not available for Argentina.


                 Figure 1: Share of provincial debt in Canada between 1977 and 2004
                       Table 2. Characteristics of federalism (averages for the 1990s).

                                                                                                         No
                 Expenditure              Fiscal            Transfer          Tax         Borrowing      bail‐
 Country
               decentralization       decentralisation    dependence       autonomy       autonomy       out
                     (1)                    (2)                (3)            (4)            (5)         rule
                                                                                                           (6)
   USA                0.53                  0.42               0.34           0.32            3.0         yes
  Canada              0.65                  0.51               0.32           0.32            2.7         yes

 Germany              0.45                  0.34               0.70           0.04            4.0         yes

 Argentina            0.44                  0.18               0.56            n.a.           4.5          no
   Brazil             0.41                  0.28               0.36            n.a.           n.a.         no
Sources: Government Finance Statistics (GFS) Yearbook, IMF; Taxing Powers of State and Local Governments, OECD Tax Policy
Studies no. 1, OECD; Paris, Rodden (2006) and Reserve Bank of India (2006).
 Comments: All indices are calculated as averages over the 1990s.
 Column (1): Expenditure decentralisation: sub‐national expenditures/total expenditures.
 Column (2): Fiscal decentralisation: own source sub‐national revenue/total revenue.
 Column (3): Transfer dependence: grants plus revenue sharing/total sub‐national revenue.
 Column (4): Tax autonomy: sub‐national tax revenue/total revenue.
 Column (5): Borrowing autonomy: the index of borrowing autonomy has been constructed by the
 Inter‐American Development Bank. It considers debt authorisation requirements and limits on the use
 of debt imposed by the central government. This variable ranges from 1 to 5. See Rodden (2006) for
 details.
 Column (6): No‐bailout rule: a "yes" implies that the central government is legally constrained by a
 bail‐out rule and a "no" that a no bail‐out rule does not exist.



                                    Table 3: Composition of Argentine Debt




                             Table 4: Brazilian State Debt in Bonds – 1990 and 1996
References

Afonso, José Roberto and Luiz de Mello, (2000), "Brazil: An evolving federation", paper prepared for
the IMF/FAD Seminar on decentralization, Washington, DC, November 20‐21.
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/seminar/2000/fiscal/afonso.pdf

Allen, Mark, (2003), “Some Lessons from the Argentine Crisis: A Fund Staff View”, in: The Crisis That
Was Not Prevented: Argentina, the IMF, and Globalisation, FONDAD.

Amihud, Y., and H. Mendelson, (1991), ‘Liquidity, maturity and the yields on U.S. government
securities,’ Journal of Finance 46, 1411–25.

Begg, Iain, (2009), "Fiscal federalism, subsidiarity and the EU budget review", Swedish Institute for
European Policy Studies, 2009:1, Stockholm, April.

Bordo Michael and Carlos Vegh, (2002), “If Only Alexander Hamilton had been Argentinean: A
Comparison of the Early Monetary Experience of Argentina and the United States” Journal of
Monetary Economics April

Boyd, Eugene and Michael K. Fauntroy, (1997), “American federalism 1776‐2000: significant events”,
CRS Report RL30772.

Buti, Marco and André Sapir, (1998), Economic policy in EMU. A Study, Oxford University, Oxford.

Buti, Marco and Daniele Franco, (2005), Fiscal policy in economic and monetary union. Theory,
evidence and institutions, Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd, Cheltenham.

Castanhar, José Cezar, (2003), “Fiscal federalism in Brazil: Historical trends present controversies and
future challenges”, paper presented at VIII Congreso Internacional del CLAD sobre la Reforma del
Estado y de la Administración Pública, Panamá, 28‐31 Oct. 2003.

Cetrángolo, Oscar and Juan Pablo Jiménez, (2004), "The relations between different levels of
government in Argentina", Cepal Review, 84, 115‐132.

Chari, Varadarajan and Patrick J. Kehoe, (2004), “On the desirability of fiscal constraints in a monetary
union”, NBER Working Paper No. W10232.

Cohn, Raymond L., (1992), “Fiscal policy in Germany during the Great Depression”, Explorations in
Economic History, vol. 29, 318‐348.

Corwin, Edward S., (1950), “The passing of dual federalism”, Virginia Law Review vol. 36, 1‐24.

De Grauwe, Paul, (2006), “On monetary and political union”, University of Leuven. manuscript.

Della Paolera, Gerardo and Alan M. Taylor, (1999), “Economic recovery from the Argentine Great
Depression: Institutions, expectations and the change of macroeconomic regime”, Journal of
Economic History, vol. 59, 567‐599.

De Long, Bradford J., (1996), “Fiscal policy in the shadow of the Great Depression”, in Michael Bordo,
Claudia Goldin and Eugene White, eds., The defining moment: The Great Depression and the American
economy in the twentieth century, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Deroose, Servaas, Sven Langedijk and Werner Roeger, (2004), “Reviewing adjustment dynamics in
EMU: from overheating to overcooling, European Economy. Economic Papers No. 198, European
Commission, Brussels.


                                                  30
Dixit, Avinash and Lambertini Luisa, (2001), “Monetary‐fiscal policy interactions and commitment
versus discretion in a monetary union”, European Economic Review, vol. 45, 977‐87.

Eichengreen, Barry, (1991), “Is Europe an optimum currency area?”, NBER Working Paper no. 3579.

Elzar, Daniel J., (1966), American federalism: A view from the States, Thomas Y. Crowell, New York.

European Economy, (2009), The EU's response to support the real economy during the economic crisis:
An overview of Member States's recovery measures. Occasional Papers 51, July. DG ECFIN, European
Commission, Brussels.

Franck, Thomas M., (1968), Why federations fail: An inquiry into the requisites for successful
federalism, New York, New York University Press.

Friedrich, Carl J., (1968), Trends of federalism in theory and practice, New York: Praeger.

Galiani, Sebastián, Daniel Heymann and Mariano Tommasi, (2003), "Great expectations and hard
times: The Argentine convertibility plan", Economia, 3, 109‐154.

Goodhart, Charles, (1998), “The two concepts of money: implications for the analysis of optimal
currency areas”, European Journal of Political Economy, vol. 14, 407‐432.

Hallet, Andrew H., Michael Hutchison and E. Hougaard, Jensen, (1999), "Fiscal aspects of European
monetary integration", Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Hefeker, Carsten, (2001), “The agony of central power: Fiscal federalism in the German Reich”,
European Review of Economic History, vol. 5, 119‐142.

Heppke‐Falk, Kirsten and Guntram B. Wolff, (2008), “Moral hazard and bail‐out in fiscal federations:
Evidence for the German Länder”, Kyklos, vol. 3, 425‐446.

Inman, Robert P. and Daniel L. Rubinfeld, (1997), “Rethinking federalism”, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, vol. 11, 43‐64.

Jonung, Lars and Eoin Drea, (2010), "The euro: It can’t happen, It’s a bad idea, It won’t last. US
economists on the EMU and the euro, 1989‐2002", vol. 7, 4‐52, Econ Journal Watch.

Jonung, Lars and Martin Larch, (2006), “Improving fiscal policy in the EU. The case for independent
forecasts”, Economic Policy, vol. 21, 491‐534.

Jonung, Lars, Martin, Larch, and Jonas Fischer, (2008), “101 proposals to reform the Stability and
Growth Pact. Why so many? A Survey”, Public Finance and Management, vol. 8, 502‐560.

Kenen, Peter, (1969), “The theory of optimum currency areas: An eclectic view”, pp. 41‐60, in Robert
Mundell and Alexander Swoboda, eds., Monetary problems of the international economy, University
of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Korkman, Sixten, (2005), Economic policy in the European Union, Palgrave Macmillan, New York.

Laubach, Thomas, (2005), “Fiscal relations across levels of government in the United States”, OECD
Economics Department Working Papers no. 462, OECD Economics Department.

Lischinsky, Bernardo, (2003) ” The Puzzle of the Debt Problem”, in: The Crisis That Was Not
Prevented: Argentina, the IMF, and Globalisation, FONDAD.




                                                   31
Martinez, Fritscher, André, C., and Musacchio, Aldo, 2010. “Endowments, fiscal federalism and the
cost of capital for states: evidence from Brazil, 1891–1930”, Financial History Review, vol. 17(01), 13‐
50.

Mckay, David, (2005), “Economic logic or political logic? Economic theory, federal theory and EMU”,
Journal of European Public Policy, vol 12, 528‐544.

McKinnon, Ronald, (1963), “Optimum currency areas”, American Economic Review, vol. 53, 717‐724.

McKinnon, Ronald, (2004), “Optimum currency areas and key currencies: Mundell I versus Mundell
II”, Journal of Common Market Studies, vol. 42, 689–715.

Mongelli, Francesco, (2005), "What is European Economic and Monetary Union telling us about the
properties of optimum currency areas?", Journal of Common Market Studies, vol. 43, 607‐635.

Mundell, Robert, (1961), “A theory of optimum currency areas”, American Economic Review, vol. 51,
509‐17.

Mundell, Robert, (1973), “Uncommon arguments for common currencies”, pp.114‐32 in Harry G.
Johnson and Alexander K. Swoboda, eds., The economics of common currencies, Allen and Unwin,
London.

Musgrave, Richard, A. (1959), The theory of public finance, McGraw Hill, New York.

Nicolini, Juan Pablo, Josefina Posadas, Juan Sanguinetti, Pablo Sanguinetti and Mariano Tommasi,
(2002), “Decentralization, fiscal discipline in sub‐national governments and the bailout problem: The
case of Argentina”, Inter‐American Development Bank, research network working paper R‐467.

Oates, Wallace, (1972), Fiscal federalism, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, New York.

Oates, Wallace, (1999), “An essay on fiscal federalism”, Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 37, 1120‐
49.

Perkins, E.J., (1994), American Public Finance and Financial Services, 1700–1815. Ohio State University
Press, Columbus, OH.

Poterba, J.M. and K.S. Rueben (1997), State Fiscal Institutions and the US Municipal Bond Market,
NBER Working Paper, No. 6237, Cambridge, Massachussets.

Reserve Bank of India (2006), "Fiscal federalism. A comparative cross country analysis, Annex 4 in
State finances. A study of budgets of 2006‐07, published by A. Karunagaran for the Reserve Bank of
India, Mumbai.

Rodden, Jonathan A., (2004), “Achieving fiscal discipline in federations: Germany and the EMU”,
paper prepared for “Fiscal policy in EMU: New Issues and Challenges”, workshop organized by
European Commission, Brussels, 12 November 2004.
http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/events/2004/bxl1104/papers/rodden_en.pdf

Rodden, Jonathan A., (2005), “And the Last Shall Be First: Federalism and Soft Budget constraints in
Germany,” Mimeo.

Rodden, Jonathan A., (2006), Hamilton's paradox. The promise and peril of fiscal federalism,
Cambridge University Press, New York.

Ruggeri, Joe, (2006), “Equalization reform in Canada. Principles and compromises”, paper presented
at the Conference on Fiscal Federalism and the Future of Canada, Selected proceedings, September
28‐29.


                                                  32
http://www.queensu.ca/iigr/working/fiscalImb/Ruggeri.pdf

Saiegh, Sebastian and Mariano Tommasi, (1999), “Why is Argentina’s fiscal federalism so inefficient?
Entering the labyrinth”, Journal of Applied Economics, vol. 2, 169‐209.

Schuknecht, Ludger , von Hagen, Jürgen and Wolswijk, Guido, (2009) "Government risk premiums in
the bond market: EMU and Canada," European Journal of Political Economy, vol. 25(3), 371‐384.

Schulz, Alexander and Guntram B. Wolff (2009), "The German sub‐national government bond market:
structure, determinants of yield spreads and Berlin’s foregone bail‐out", Journal of Economics and
Statistics. vol. 229, 61‐83.

Shah, Anwar, (1995), “Intergovernmental fiscal relations in Canada: An overview”, in Roy Jayanta, ed.,
Macroeconomic management and fiscal decentralization, EDI seminar series, the World Bank,
Washington, D.C.

Sorens, Jason, (2008), “Fiscal federalism: A return to theory and measurement”, working paper,
Department of political science, University of Buffalo, SUNY.
http://www.acsu.buffalo.edu/~jbattist/workshop/Sorens_s09.pdf

Sturzenegger, Federico and Rogério Werneck, (2006), “Fiscal federalism and procyclical spending: The
cases of Argentina and Brazil”, Económica, vol. 52, 151‐194.

Sutherland, Douglas, Robert Price and Isabelle Joumard, (2006),”Fiscal rules for sub‐central
governments: design and impact”, OECD WP(2006)/1.

Tommasi, Mariano, (2002), “Federalism in Argentina and the reforms of the 1990s”, Center for
Research on Economic Development and Policy Reform, working paper no. 147, Stanford.

Uhlig, Harald, (2002), “One money, but many fiscal policies in Europe: What are the consequences?”,
discussion paper 3296. Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.

Wallis, John, (1984), “The birth of the old federalism: Financing the New Deal, 1932‐1940”, Journal of
Economic History, vol. 44, 139‐159.

Watts, L. Ronald, (1987), “The American constitution in comparative perspective: A comparison of
federalism in the United States and Canada”, Journal of American History, vol. 74, 769‐792.

Watts, L. Ronald and Paul Hobson, (2000), “Fiscal federalism in Germany”, mimeo.
http://www.aucc.ca/_pdf/english/programs/cepra/watts_hobson.pdf

Webb, Stephen B. (2004) “Fiscal Responsibility Laws for Subnational Discipline: The Latin American
experiences.” Policy Research Working Paper 3309,World Bank, Washington, DC.

Wierts, Peter, Servaas Deroose, Elena Flores and Alessandro Turrini, (2006), Fiscal policy surveillance
in Europe, Palgrave, Houndmills and New York.

Wyplosz, Charles, (2005), "Fiscal policy: Institutions versus rules", National Institute Economic Review,
no. 191, 70‐84.

Ziblatt, Daniel, (2004), “Rethinking the origins of federalism. Puzzle, theory, and evidence from
nineteenth‐century Europe”, World Politics, vol. 57, 70–98.




                                                  33
