NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOME INCONVENIENT TRUTHS ABOUT CLIMATE CHANGE POLICY:
THE DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF TRANSPORTATION POLICIES
Stephen P. Holland
Jonathan E. Hughes
Christopher R. Knittel
Nathan C. Parker
Working Paper 17386
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17386

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2011

The authors thank Soren Anderson, Severin Borenstein, Meghan Busse, Garth Heutel, Mark Jacobsen,
Randall Walsh, Catherine Wolfram and seminar participants at the Heartland Environmental and Resource
Economics Conference, Iowa State University, the NBER Environmental and Energy Economics spring
meeting, the University of California Energy Institute, and the University of North Carolina at Greensboro,
the University of Texas, and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for helpful comments. Knittel
gratefully acknowledges support from the Institute of Transportation Studies at UC Davis and the
Energy Institute@Haas. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w17386.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Stephen P. Holland, Jonathan E. Hughes, Christopher R. Knittel, and Nathan C. Parker.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

6RPH,QFRQYHQLHQW7UXWKV$ERXW&OLPDWH&KDQJH3ROLF\7KH'LVWULEXWLRQDO,PSDFWVRI7UDQVSRUWDWLRQ
3ROLFLHV
6WHSKHQ3+ROODQG-RQDWKDQ(+XJKHV&KULVWRSKHU5.QLWWHODQG1DWKDQ&3DUNHU
1%(5:RUNLQJ3DSHU1R
6HSWHPEHU
-(/1R++..///
ABSTRACT
,QVWHDGRIHIILFLHQWO\SULFLQJJUHHQKRXVHJDVHVSROLF\PDNHUVKDYHIDYRUHGPHDVXUHVWKDWLPSOLFLWO\
RUH[SOLFLWO\VXEVLGL]HORZFDUERQIXHOV:HVLPXODWHDWUDQVSRUWDWLRQVHFWRUFDS WUDGHSURJUDP
&$7 DQGWKUHHSROLFLHVFXUUHQWO\LQXVHHWKDQROVXEVLGLHVDUHQHZDEOHIXHOVWDQGDUG 5)6 DQG
DORZFDUERQIXHOVWDQGDUG /&)6 2XUVLPXODWLRQVFRQILUPWKDWWKHDOWHUQDWLYHVWR&$7DUHTXLWH
FRVWO\±WRWLPHVPRUHH[SHQVLYH:HSURYLGHHYLGHQFHWKDWWKHSHUVLVWHQFHRIWKHVHDOWHUQDWLYHV
LQVSLWHRIWKHLUKLJKHUFRVWVOLHVLQWKHSROLWLFDOHFRQRP\RIFDUERQSROLF\7KHDOWHUQDWLYHVWR&$7
H[KLELWDIHDWXUHWKDWPDNHWKHPDPHQDEOHWRDGRSWLRQ±DULJKWVNHZHGGLVWULEXWLRQRIJDLQVDQGORVVHV
ZKHUHPDQ\FRXQWLHVKDYHVPDOOORVVHVEXWDVPDOOHUVKDUHRIFRXQWLHVJDLQFRQVLGHUDEO\±DVPXFK
DVSHUFDSLWDSHU\HDU:HFRUUHODWHRXUHVWLPDWHVRIJDLQVIURP&$7DQGWKH5)6ZLWK&RQJUHVVLRQDO
YRWLQJRQWKH:D[PDQ0DUNH\FDS WUDGHELOO+5%HFDXVH:D[PDQ0DUNH\ :0 ZRXOG
ZHDNHQWKH5)6+RXVHPHPEHUVOLNHO\YLHZHGWKHWZRSROLFLHVDVFRPSHWLWRUV&RQGLWLRQDORQDGLVWULFW V
&$7JDLQVLQFUHDVHVLQDGLVWULFW V5)6JDLQVDUHDVVRFLDWHGZLWKGHFUHDVHVLQWKHOLNHOLKRRGRIYRWLQJ
IRU:0)XUWKHUPRUHZHVKRZWKDWFDPSDLJQFRQWULEXWLRQVDUHFRUUHODWHGZLWKDGLVWULFW VJDLQVXQGHU
HDFKSROLF\DQGWKDWWKHVHFRQWULEXWLRQVDUHFRUUHODWHGZLWKD0HPEHU VYRWHRQ:0
6WHSKHQ3+ROODQG
%U\DQ6FKRRORI%XVLQHVVDQG(FRQRPLFV
8QLYHUVLW\RI1RUWK&DUROLQD*UHHQVERUR
32%R[
*UHHQVERUR1&
DQG1%(5
VSKROODQ#XQFJHGX

&KULVWRSKHU5.QLWWHO
6ORDQ6FKRRORI0DQDJHPHQ

-RQDWKDQ(+XJKHV
'HSDUWPHQWRI(FRQRPLFV
8QLYHUVLW\RI&RORUDGRDW%RXOGHU
8&%
%RXOGHU&2
MRQDWKDQHKXJKHV#FRORUDGRHGX

1DWKDQ&3DUNHU
,QVWLWXWHRI7UDQVSRUWDWLRQ6WXGLHV
8QLYHUVLW\RI&DOLIRUQLD'DYLV
QFSDUNHU#XFGDYLVHGX

0DLQ6WUHHW(
&DPEULGJH0$
DQG1%(5
NQLWWHO#PLWHGX

1

Introduction

Economists often point to Pigouvian taxes and cap & trade programs as the preferred policy tools
for reducing externalities. In contrast, to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, policy makers have
relied on a number of alternatives that center around either explicit or implicit subsidies. Given
the inherent ineﬃciency of these alternatives, what explains the persistence of these policies in spite
of their higher costs? We provide evidence that the answer lies in the political economy of climate
change policy.
In the transportation sector, the policies currently in place essentially translate into subsidies
for biofuels, most notably ethanol.1,2 Two major policies exist at the national level: direct subsidies
to ethanol and the Renewable Fuel Standard requiring minimum levels of ethanol consumption
each year, which we show acts as an implicit subsidy for ethanol. In addition, California recently
adopted a Low Carbon Fuel Standard which requires the average greenhouse gas content of fuels to
fall over time; Holland, Hughes, and Knittel (2009) show that a LCFS acts as an implicit subsidy
for any fuel with a greenhouse gas content below the standard and that a LCFS can be highly
ineﬃcient.
We construct a model of advanced biofuels in the transportation sector and compare the equilibrium outcomes across carbon trading (CAT) and the three policy alternatives that currently
exist: direct subsidies for renewable fuels (SUBs); renewable fuel standards (RFSs); and low carbon fuel standards (LCFSs). In particular, for each policy, we simulate prices, quantities, changes
in farming activity, and changes in private surplus at the county level. Our results represent long
run equilibria in the liquid fuels market by exploiting feedstock-specific ethanol supply curves that
solve a GIS-based optimal ethanol plant location problem for the US in 2022. Our simulations
confirm that the alternatives to CAT are quite costly. Under CAT, average abatement costs are
$20 per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent ($/MTCO2 e). Costs under the alternative policies
are substantially higher at $50 to $80 per MTCO2 e.3
While the alternatives to CAT are more expensive, they diﬀer considerably in both their incidence and the variance in the annual per capita gains and losses across counties. We find that
the alternatives to CAT exhibit a feature that make them more amenable to adoption—a right
skewed distribution of annual per capita gains and losses where many counties have small losses,
1

Prominent policies in the electricity sector, also implicitly or explicitly subsidize low carbon fuels.
Ethanol is a biofuel produced by converting corn or other plant material into alcohol. .
3
We constrain the emission reductions under CAT and the LCFS to be equal to those under the RFS. The emission
reductions under SUBs are actually roughly 30 percent lower than these.
2

but a smaller share of counties gain considerably. For example, under SUBs we find that 5 percent
of the counties gain more than $1,250 per capita, while one county gains $6,600 per capita; but,
no county loses more than $100 per capita. In contrast, the 95th percentile county under CAT
gains only $70 per capita, with no county gaining more than $1,015 per capita. Furthermore, the
gains are more concentrated in the sense that the winning-counties are less populated, while small
losses are spread over heavily populated counties. Nationally, the average person loses $30 per
capita under the SUBs, but the average county gains $180 per capita,. Under the RFS, the average
person loses $34, while the average county gains $160. Similar characteristics exist with the LCFS.
This contrasts considerably with CAT, where the average person loses only $11 per year, but the
average county gains less than $3 per capita.
To test whether our simulation results translate into political incentives, we correlate our estimates of county-level gains and losses with Congressional voting on H.R. 2454, better known as
the Waxman-Markey cap & trade bill. One provision in Waxman-Markey was a new accounting
of ethanol carbon emissions that would substantially weaken the RFS. Therefore, House members
likely viewed the two policies as substitutes. We find that, holding a district’s per capita gains CAT
and House member’s party aﬃliation constant, the greater the district’s RFS gains, the less likely
the House member voted for Waxman-Markey. In addition there is some evidence of the opposite
eﬀect, i.e. that holding a district’s per capita gains under the RFS and the House member’s party
aﬃliation constant, the greater the district’s CAT gains, the more likely the House member voted
for Waxman-Markey. The eﬀects are substantial. The probability that a House member votes
for Waxman-Markey falls by 40 percentage points when a district’s gains from the RFS increase
from the first to the fourth quartile. Similar eﬀects exist when correlating voting behavior with
subsidies. The results remain significant even after controlling for measures of House member’s
political ideology, state and district-level carbon emissions from sources other than transportation,
and current corn production.
We also investigate one of the major mechanisms through which the district-level gains and losses
influence voting behavior. In particular, we correlate campaign contributions from organizations
that either supported or opposed WM with our district estimates of the gains and losses from
the RFS and CAT. We find that the greater a district’s gain from the RFS, the more money the
district’s House Member received from organizations opposing Waxman-Markey. Over a two year
period around the Waxman-Markey vote, a Member whose district falls in the upper quartile of
RFS gains and the bottom quartile in terms of CAT gains receives roughly $33,000 more from
organizations opposing Waxman-Markey compared to a member whose district is in the bottom
quartile of RFS gains and the upper quartile of CAT gains. This represents over a fourfold increase
2

from the average member. When we correlate voting behavior with contributions, we find large
reductions in the likelihood of voting for Waxman-Markey with opposition contributions and large
increases with contributions from supporting organizations.
The results with respect to campaign contributions are further supported when we consider how
the policies diﬀer with respect to their incidence across consumers and diﬀerent types of producers.
Consumer surplus losses are largest under CAT at approximately $65 billion per year. However,
this ignores the $59 billion of potential revenue if the permits were auctioned and the revenue
returned to consumers. Under the RFS and LCFS, consumer surplus falls by $27 and $29 billion
per year, respectively. Consumer surplus remains unchanged under subsidies.
Producer surplus increases under all policies (even ignoring any free allocation of permits under
CAT), but the increases vary considerably both across policies and across types of ethanol producers.4 The $2.5 billion increase in producer surplus under CAT comes from changing the marginal
fuel from gasoline to ethanol. By doing so, the price increase more than oﬀsets the increase in costs
associated with fuel production under CAT. In the public discourse surrounding Waxman-Markey
and other cap & trade bills at the national and state levels, firms argued that free permits were
required to “make them whole” in the presence of rising costs; this argument ignores the change
in equilibrium prices arising from increases in costs, that can in principle, more than oﬀset the
aggregate increase in costs.
These arguments underscore one of the other major diﬀerences between cap & trade and its
alternatives. Under the cap & trade programs that have been either proposed or implemented,
including WM, allocation of free permits in the transportation sector have gone to gasoline refiners,
since they are able to point to higher costs under the legislation. Ethanol producers cannot make
such arguments. Therefore, while we simulate that producers gain under all policies, which types
of producers gain varies dramatically across policies
Under subsidies, the RFS and the LCFS, producer surplus increases by approximately $20
billion per year. Therefore, the alternatives to cap & trade not only alter the distribution of net
gains and losses, but they also redirect gains to ethanol producers at the expense of consumers.
Our results add to a large literature analyzing the relationship between policy and the gains
of stakeholders. Both Seltzer (1995) and Kroszner and Strahan (1999) model Congressional voting
behavior as function of both ideology and the interests of legislator’s constituents. Both papers
find strong evidence that both stakeholder gains and ideology correlate with voting behavior. Also
related are papers that model the outcomes of policy changes. For example, Wright (1974) and
4

By assumption, gasoline producers receive no surplus in our model.

3

Fleck (2008) correlate state-level expenditures in the New Deal with Senator influence and economic
variables. They find that the power of the states’ Senators explains gains even when conditioning
on the states’ need. Knittel (2006) models the adoption of state-level electricity regulation during
the beginning of the 20th century and finds that interest group strength explains adoption. More
recently, Cragg and Kahn (2009) correlate voting behavior on anti-carbon legislation with political
ideology and per capita emissions and finds that higher emissions are correlated with a lower
probability of voting for carbon-reducing legislation. Similarly, we find that stakeholder gains are
correlated with voting.
More fundamentally, our analysis relates to research on the private-interest theory of regulation.
This theory characterizes the regulatory process as one in which well-organized groups capture
rents at the expense of more dispersed groups (see Stigler (1971), Peltzman (1976), Becker (1983),
and Kroszner and Strahan (1999)). This theory has been eﬀective in explaining regulations (e.g.,
regulatory barriers to entry) that are diﬃcult to rationalize with the public-interest theory of
regulation in which government interventions correct market failures and maximize social welfare
(see Joskow and Noll (1981)). Kroszner and Strahan (1999) provide evidence that the privateinterest theory also helps explain the removal of regulations in the banking sector. However, in
each of these cases, the test of the private-interest theory rests on correlating whether or not a
regulation is adopted or removed with proxies of interest group gains and losses.
In contrast, our analysis compares Congressional voting behavior with simulated interest group
gains and losses from two alternative regulations with the same public-interest goals: reducing
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. This provides a much more direct test of the private-interest
theory since we control for the level of environmental benefit of the two regulations. Our analysis
shows strong support for the private-interest theory. We find that the regulation with more concentrated private benefits is maintained over the competing regulation with higher social benefits
but with less concentrated private benefits. Moreover, we show evidence that the well-organized
groups are able to use their influence (i.e., campaign contributions) in a manner consistent with
the private-interest theory.
There is considerable uncertainty about the GHG emissions of biofuels. Recent studies argue
that ethanol from corn or herbaceous energy crops has lower lifecycle GHG emissions than gasoline
Liska et al. (2009).5 Others are more cautious, Farrell et al. (2006) and Fargione et al. (2009),
citing the importance of understanding how cultivating energy crops for ethanol production shifts
agricultural activity, so-called indirect land use changes. The magnitudes of these eﬀects are highly
5

Throughout this paper, “GHG emissions” refers to lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions.

4

uncertain. In an influential paper, Searchinger et al. (2008) argue that once indirect land use
changes are taken into account, GHG emissions for ethanol may exceed the GHG emissions of
gasoline. This result is not without controversy. For example, some authors Tyner et al. (2010)
argue that once changes in both international trade and crop yields are accounted for, corn ethanol
results in fewer GHG emissions than gasoline, despite indirect land use changes.
Given the uncertainty in the relative GHG emissions of gasoline and ethanol, policies that promote biofuel production may inadvertently increase GHG emissions. Importantly, the indirect land
use eﬀects, and thus the uncertainty associated with the actual GHG emission reductions from a
given policy, depend crucially on the direct land use eﬀects. We show that land-use eﬀects may
diﬀer substantially for diﬀerent carbon policies. The alternatives to CAT also result in large shifts
in agricultural activity and land use. Other unintended consequences may result from policies with
substantial shifts in agricultural activity. For example, nutrient run-oﬀ, soil erosion, groundwater
contamination, habitat destruction, and aquifer depletion are likely to be exacerbated as biofuel
production increases, especially for feedstocks using cultivated lands. Finally, an increase in cultivated lands devoted to biofuels puts upward pressure on prices for food-related crops, increasing
the regressivity of biofuel policies. Incorporating these additional costs increases average abatement
costs by $1 to $6 per MTCO2 e for the CAT alternatives, but essentially does not increase average
abatement costs for CAT. Furthermore, the risks associated with underestimating biofuel emissions
are substantial for CAT alternatives.
These calculations assume that the lifecycle GHG emissions of the diﬀerent varieties of ethanol
are regulated at their true values. Diﬃculty in measuring emissions of biofuel production processes,
and the politics of setting emissions rates, creates the possibility of errors in the assigned carbon
intensities. This situation can lead to “uncontrolled emissions” if for example indirect land use
eﬀects are larger than assigned. In this case, policies that result in larger land-use changes may
have emissions that exceed the intended level. To quantify these eﬀects, we model a scenario
where the actual carbon intensity of corn ethanol is 10% higher than assigned. Under the LCFS,
uncontrolled emissions are approximately 5% of the stated policy goal. Under the RFS, the fraction
grows to 8%. In contrast, uncontrolled emissions under CAT are only 1% of the target level. This
highlights a desirable feature of carbon trading, namely that emissions are less sensitive to errors
in assigning emissions factors relative to alternative policies.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the current set of
transportation-related GHG policies. Sections 3 & 4 describe our theoretical framework, data and
simulation methodology. Sections 5, 6, 7, & 8 present our main results. Section 9 describes a
number of robustness checks and Section 10 concludes.
5

2

Policy background

A variety of policies exist that either directly or indirectly promote biofuels at both the federal
and state levels. The most relevant direct subsidy is the Volumetric Ethanol Excise Tax Credit
(VEETC). Under this policy, fuel blenders receive a 45 cent tax credit per gallon of ethanol sold.
The VEETC was established in 2004 as a 51 cent tax credit under the JOBS Creation Act and
extended in 2008 via the Farm Bill, dropping the rate to 45 cents once annual sales of ethanol
exceed 7.5 billion gallons, which they now do. Prior to the VEETC ethanol received an implicit
subsidy (relative to gasoline) as it was exempt from the federal fuel-excise tax beginning in 1978.
The 2008 Farm Bill establishes a subsidy for producers of cellulosic ethanol of $1.01 per gallon tax
credit minus the applicable VEETC collected by the blender of the cellulosic ethanol. In addition,
producers with less than 60 million gallons of production capacity are entitled to a Small Ethanol
Producer Tax Credit of $0.10 per gallon.
We note that these figures actually understate the subsidy level because they are on a per-gallon
basis, not on a per-energy basis. One gallon of ethanol has roughly 66 percent of the energy content
of a gallon of gasoline; implying, it requires 1.52 gallons of ethanol to displace one gallon of gasoline.
Therefore, on a per gallon of gasoline equivalent (gge) basis, corn-based ethanol receives a 68 cent
per gge subsidy; 84 cents for a small producer. Cellulosic ethanol receives a $1.53 per gge subsidy.
The other major federal ethanol policy is the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS). The first RFS
was adopted as part of the Energy Policy Act of 2005. The 2005 RFS required 7.5 billion gallons
of ethanol by 2012.6 The Energy Independence and Security Act (EISA) of 2007 expanded the
RFS considerably, known as RFS-2. Not only does the new RFS increase the minimum ethanol
requirements, it also diﬀerentiates ethanol by its feedstock and lifecycle greenhouse gas content;
biomass-based diesel is also included. Four categories are created. Each of the four categories
qualifies as renewable fuel, defined as ethanol and bio-diesel with lifecycle emissions at least 20
percent below those of gasoline. However, the 20 percent requirement only holds for renewable fuel
facilities that commenced construction after December 19, 2007. Existing facilities are grandfathered, therefore, the actual greenhouse gas savings from these facilities are unknown. The second
category is “Advanced Biofuel,” defined as renewable fuel with lifecycle emissions at least 50 percent below those of gasoline. “Biomass-based” diesel is bio-diesel with emissions at least 50 below
petroleum-based diesel. Finally, cellulosic biofuel is a renewable fuel with lifecycle emissions at least
60 percent below gasoline or petroleum-based diesel. When fully implemented in 2022, the new
6

Current gasoline consumption is approximately 138 billion gallons per year. Because of the lower energy content
of ethanol, 7.5 billion gallons displaces roughly 5 billion gallons of gasoline.

6

RFS calls for 36 billion gallons of biofuel, with 21 billion gallons coming from advanced biofuels,
where advanced biofuels have a lower GHG content than corn-based ethanol.
In contrast to the RFS and subsidy policies, a national cap & trade system would price the
carbon emitted by all transportation fuels. The 2009 House of Representatives bill, H.R. 2454 or
the “Waxman-Markey” bill would have established a broad national cap & trade system. The bill
would have set legally binding limits on greenhouse gases with the goal of reducing emissions 17%
below 2005 levels by 2020.7 In addition, the bill contained specific provisions aimed at addressing
leakage and deforestation and supporting research and development for low carbon technologies.
H.R. 2454 would also have severely reduced the benefits to a large number of ethanol producers
under the existing RFS by including indirect land use eﬀects in the lifecycle emissions of ethanol.
While the magnitudes of the EPA-assigned indirect land use eﬀects for each of the ethanols are
unknown, the figures used for recent Californian legislation imply that many corn-based ethanol
producers would no longer qualify as having emissions that are 20 percent below gasoline.
Waxman-Markey’s eﬀect on the RFS-2 and agriculture was clearly in the consciousness of
lawmakers. Just prior to the house vote, House Agriculture Committee Chairman Collin Peterson
(D - MN) and House Energy and Henry Waxman (D - CA) agreed on an amendment to WaxmanMarkey that would prohibit the EPA from imposing indirect land use change adjustments to the
RFS-2 for 5 years. After that period, the Secretaries of Agriculture and Energy along with the EPA
must agree on the indirect land use change calculations.8 With this amendment, the bill passed
the U.S. House of Representatives on June 26, 2009 by a margin of 219 for to 212 against. In July
of 2009, H.R. 2454 was placed on the Senate calendar, though a vote never occurred. On July 22,
2010 Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D - NV) was cited as abandoning the original bill in
favor of a scaled-down version without emissions caps, Chaddock and Parti (2010).
In addition to federal policies, a number of state-level policies exist. Many states have additional
subsidies for biofuels, as well as minimum blend levels of ethanol in gasoline.9 A more recent policy
is the Low Carbon Fuel Standard, adopted in California in 2009 requiring the state to reduce the
average carbon intensity of transportation fuels 10 percent by 2020. The California LCFS has also
been influential at the Federal level. Early versions of the Waxman-Markey Energy Bill would have
created a national LCFS similar to California’s system.
7

Also known as the “American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009.”
http://www.greencarcongress.com/2009/06/peterson-20090626.html.
9
For example, Iowa awards a retail tax credit of 6.5 cents per gallon for ethanol sales above a minimum percentage.
Minnesota requires all gasoline sold contain at least 10% ethanol (E10). Many states have similar policies. For a full
listing, the reader is referred to http://www.afdc.energy.gov/afdc/laws/state.
8

7

3

Theoretical framework

This section builds a common theoretical framework for analyzing the four policies studied in the
paper: SUBs, RFSs, LCFSs, and CAT. Let q1 , q2 . . . , qn−1 be quantities of ethanol fuels, e.g., corn
or cellulosic ethanol, and qn be gasoline where mci (qi ) is the marginal cost of producing the ith
fuel (with mc�i ≥ 0) and βi is its carbon emissions rate. Throughout we assume that all fuels are

measured using energy equivalent units and that fuels are perfect substitutes after controlling for
energy content.10 Let p be the common price of all the substitute fuels, and let D(p) be the market
demand for fuel. For ease of exposition, as in Holland, Hughes, and Knittel (2009), we model a
single, representative, price-taking firm which produces all types of fuels. These market results
hold for heterogeneous firms under trading, which is allowed for by all currently proposed policies.
For welfare calculations, we follow the usual assumptions that consumer and producer surplus
can be calculated from the demand and supply curves. Except for the externality from greenhouse
gas emissions, we assume that there are no additional distortions.11 In particular, for transfers
from the general funds (only required for the ethanol subsidies), we assume that funds can be
raised without additional costs; we also ignore any potential benefits from using permit revenues
to reduce other, distortionary, taxes.12

3.1

Ethanol subsidies

Suppose ethanol fuel i receives an ethanol subsidy si . In an unregulated competitive market, the
firm will produce until the marginal cost of each fuel equals the fuel price. However, the ethanol
fuels are subsidized, and, as is well known, a subsidized firm produces until marginal cost less the
subsidy equals the market clearing price. This implies:
p = mci (qi ) − si

(1)

for each ethanol fuel. For gasoline, the firm produces until marginal cost equals price. These n
equations determine supply from each of the n fuels at a given price. The equilibrium price is
10

Recent studies by Anderson (2010) and Salvo and Huse (2011) provide evidence that consumers may not treat
high-level ethanol blends (e.g. E85 or E100) and gasoline as perfect substitutes. There is little evidence that consumers
perceive low-level ethanol blends as substantially diﬀerent from gasoline.
11
Holland (2009) shows that the relative eﬃciency of policies may change in the presence of additional market
distortions such as incomplete regulation or market power.
12
See Goulder (1995) for a discussion of the double-dividend.

8

determined by market clearing:
D(p) =

n
�

qi .

(2)

i=1

Solving for the equilibrium price and quantities involves solving a system of n + 1 equations. The
equilibrium for a baseline without subsidies can be solved similarly by setting si = 0 for all fuels.

3.2

Renewable fuel standard

A renewable fuel standard (RFS) sets a minimum quantity (or proportion) of “renewable fuel” that
must be produced in a given year, but does not explicitly consider the carbon emissions of the
fuels. However, the current Federal RFS sets diﬀerent standards for three types of renewable fuels
(cellulosic, advanced, and total) in a manner that roughly reflects carbon emissions. Appendix
Table 1 shows the current standards for 2010, 2015, and 2022. The three categories are additive,
i.e., cellulosic fuel is counted toward the advanced requirement and advanced fuel is counted toward
the total requirement. The Federal RFS classifies ethanol produced from agricultural waste and
energy crops, which are expected to have the lowest lifecycle GHG emissions, as cellulosic. Ethanol
produced from food waste (municipal solid waste) is classified as advanced, and total renewable
fuel captures other renewable fuels, e.g., corn ethanol, which have higher emissions than advanced
or cellulosic fuels.
To implement the policy, the EPA translates the volumetric targets into proportional targets
(which we call RFS ratios) by projecting gasoline demand for the upcoming year. Each RFS ratio
is then the volumetric renewable target divided by the projected gasoline demand.13 Let σRF Sj be
the jth RFS ratio with j ∈ {cellulosic, advanced, total}. For each gallon of gasoline produced, the
representative firm would be required to produce σRF Sj gallons of gasoline equivalent (gges) of the

jth type of ethanol. Note that whether or not the regulation meets the volumetric ethanol target
will depend on the accuracy of the EPA’s forecast of gasoline production.14
To allow ethanol production by the least cost firms, Renewable Identification Numbers (RINs)
are created for each gge of renewable fuel.15 These RINs are then freely traded and are used to
demonstrate compliance with the RFS. The RINs (and their market prices) are diﬀerentiated by
the three types of ethanol. Let pRIN j be the price of the jth type of RIN. Since an ethanol producer
can sell a RIN with every gge of ethanol produced, the RINs act as a subsidy to ethanol production.
13

See Federal Register Vol. 75, No. 58; Friday, March 26, 2010; Rules and Regulations.
In the simulations, we endogenously update the ratios so that the volumetric targets are met.
15
In practice, the RINS are for gallons of ethanol and energy volumes are adjusted later. For ease of exposition,
we simply focus on gges.
14

9

Thus in the equilibrium:
p = mci (qi ) − pRIN j ,

(3)

where ethanol i is of type j and pRIN j is the price of a RIN of type j. The RINs also are an implicit
tax on the production of gasoline since production of each gge of gasoline increases the renewable
obligation of each type of ethanol. Thus, in equilibrium, the optimality condition for gasoline is:
p = mcn (qn ) +

�

σRF Sj pRIN j .

(4)

j∈{cellulosic,advanced,total}

These n equations define the quantities of each fuel for given fuel and RIN prices. The equilibrium
fuel and RIN prices are determined by market clearing for fuel as in Equation 2 and for each type
of ethanol, e.g., σRF Stotal qn = q1 + · · · + qn−1 . Note that the market clearing conditions for the

other two ethanol types need not hold with equality due to the additive nature of the constraints.
For example, if cellulosic ethanol is cheap to produce on the margin relative to advanced ethanol,
then the cellulosic constraint might not hold with equality. In this case, the RIN prices would be
equal for these two types of ethanol. Note that since the constraints are additive, the RIN prices
must be such that pRIN cellulosic ≥ pRIN advanced ≥ pRIN total .

3.3

Low carbon fuel standard

Under an LCFS, the average emissions intensity, defined as emissions divided by total energy output,
may not exceed the standard σLCF S Holland, Hughes, and Knittel (2009).16,17 This constraint is
given by:

β1 q1 + β2 q2 + · · · + βn qn
≤ σLCF S .
q 1 + q 2 + · · · + qn

(5)

Firms adjust total fuel output and the relative quantities of fuel produced to comply with the
regulation. The first order condition for profit maximization for fuel i is:
p = mci (qi ) + λLCF S (βi − σLCF S ),

(6)

where λLCF S is the shadow value of the constraint in Equation 5 (or equivalently, the price of carbon
under a LCFS). Notice that if the emission intensity βi is greater than the standard, the last term
in Equation 6 is positive. This implies that fuel i faces an implicit tax equal to λLCF S (βi − σLCF S ).

On the other hand, if the fuel’s emission intensity is below the standard, fuel i faces an implicit
16

A LCFS has been adopted by California and is currently under development by various federal and state policymakers.
17
In our simulations, σLCF S is set to produce the same reduction in emissions as the RFS and CAT systems.

10

subsidy equal to λLCF S (βi − σLCF S ). Note that, under very general conditions, it is impossible to
design a LCFS which results in the eﬃcient allocation of energy production and emissions since

each fuel with positive carbon emissions should be taxed (not subsidized) Holland, Hughes, and
Knittel (2009).
To solve for the equilibrium, the system of equations includes the n first order conditions in
Equation 6, demand equal to supply in the fuel market, and market clearing in LCFS credits
(Equation 5).

3.4

Carbon trading

Consider a cap (σCAT ) on the total emissions of carbon.18 Since the total emissions summed over
all fuels produced must not exceed the cap, the constraint is:
β1 q1 + β2 q2 + · · · + βn qn ≤ σCAT ,

(7)

which simply states that the sum of emissions associated with each fuel type cannot exceed the
carbon cap. The first order conditions of the firm’s profit maximization problem are:
p = mci (qi ) + λCAT (βi ),

(8)

where λCAT is the shadow price of the carbon constraint (or equivalently, the price of a carbon
permit). Note that the carbon cap implicitly taxes production of each carbon-emitting fuel in
proportion to its carbon emissions. By taxing dirtier fuels more, carbon trading achieves a target
level of carbon emissions at least cost, i.e., is cost eﬀective.
To solve for the equilibrium, the system of equations includes the n first order conditions in
Equation 8, demand equal to supply in the fuel market, and market clearing in carbon permits
(Equation 7).

4

Modeling assumptions

To compare the eﬀects of these four policies, we use detailed data on projected U.S. ethanol supply
to simulate the long-run market equilibria. This section outlines the modeling assumptions and
methods. See Appendix A for more details.
18

In our simulations, the cap (σCAT ) is set to produce the same total emissions as the RFS.

11

We use ethanol supply curves for corn ethanol and for six diﬀerent cellulosic ethanol feedstocks:
agricultural residues, orchard and vineyard residues, forest biomass, herbaceous energy crops, municipal solid waste, and municipal solid waste from food. We construct county-level supply curves
using estimates of biomass feedstock availability and aggregate county production to the national
level for our policy simulations. For a given price of ethanol, the model selects optimal biorefinery
locations to minimize costs of feedstock collection, ethanol production, and ethanol distribution.
Reoptimizing the model for a range of ethanol prices provides an estimate of the long-run supply
for each of the seven diﬀerent types of ethanol.
The supply side of the model is completed by aggregating the supply from each type of ethanol
with supply of conventional gasoline. We assume that the long-run gasoline supply is perfectly
elastic at $2.75 in our baseline. The market supply depends on the policy since each policy may
diﬀerentially aﬀect the producer price of each of the types of fuel.
The producer prices under CAT and the LCFS depend directly on the carbon emissions of the
fuels. We use lifecycle carbon emissions for each of the fuels including estimates of indirect land use
eﬀects where appropriate. In light of the great uncertainty and controversy over lifecycle emissions,
we explore the robustness of our results to a variety of assumptions about lifecycle emissions.
The demand side of the model assumes that ethanol and gasoline are perfect substitutes after
adjusting for their diﬀerential energy content. We model fuel demand with a constant elasticity
which we set at 0.5 in our baseline case. The level of demand is calibrated to the U.S. EIA estimate
of annual fuel consumption in 2022 of 140 billion gge and our baseline gasoline price of $2.75.
For each of the policies, we calculate the vector of consumer and producer prices which equates
supply and demand. For BAU, the equilibrium price of $2.75 is determined by the long-run supply
of gasoline. We next simulate the RFS, which requires us to use a series of loops to calculate the
equilibrium fuel price and RIN prices for each of the three types of ethanol.
To compare all policies equally, we calibrate the CAT and LCFS so that each policy attains the
same level of carbon emissions as the RFS. For CAT, we simply set the cap at this level and calculate
the equilibrium price vector which now includes a carbon price. For the LCFS, the equilibrium
price vector also includes a carbon price, and we adjust the carbon intensity required by the LCFS
so that in equilibrium the LCFS leads to the same carbon emissions as the RFS and CAT.
At the national level, we calculate and compare the surplus gains and cost of carbon under each
of the policies. Additionally, we construct estimates of producer surplus at the county-level using
our disaggregate supply curves and the equilibrium prices under each policy. Producer surplus gains
12

at the Congressional district-level are the weighted sum of county-level gains where each county is
assigned an equal weight.
The county-level ethanol production also allows us to calculate and compare the land use changes
required under each of the policies. We then compare the land-use intensities under the various
crops and analyze the net environmental harm from the land-use changes which result under the
diﬀerent policies.

5

Simulation results

We discuss a variety of equilibrium outcomes from our simulations. We begin by comparing equilibrium fuel prices, quantities, and carbon emissions. Then, we estimate the relative eﬃciencies of
the policies. Our measure is the average social cost per unit of GHG abated, which we refer to as
“average abatement costs,” reflecting the impact on consumer and producer surplus and the social
costs associated with changing the fuel mix. We compare these costs to recent estimates for the
social cost of carbon.

5.1

Energy prices, quantities, and emissions

Table 1 below presents energy prices, energy production and emissions under business as usual
(BAU) and the RFS, LCFS, CAT, and subsidy (SUBs) policies. In the preferred specification we
assume a BAU fuel price of $2.75 per gasoline gallon equivalent. Under the RFS, fuel prices increase
to approximately $2.94 per gge and total fuel consumption decrease by approximately 5 billion gge
per year to 135.31 billion gge. We find the RFS leads to a 10.2% reduction in GHG emissions,
relative to BAU. The lower emissions under the RFS are a result of lower total fuel consumption
and greater share of lower carbon cellulosic ethanol required by the advanced and cellulosic RFS
rules.
In our simulations the LCFS and CAT are designed to produce the same reduction in carbon
emissions as the RFS. The two policies diﬀer in the mechanisms by which these reductions are
achieved. Under the LCFS, fuel prices increase to $2.96 per gallon, total fuel consumption is
approximately 134.99 billion gge per year of which approximately 20.07 billion gge are ethanol.
Under CAT, fuel prices are higher at $3.23 per gallon, resulting in lower total fuel consumption
of approximately 129.09 billion gge per year. As a result, less ethanol is required to achieve the
desired 10.2% emissions reduction. We come back to this in Section 5.2.
13

Finally, we also simulate the equilibrium under the current set of subsidies. Under direct
subsidies, fuel prices are unchanged.19 Ethanol production increases from approximately 5.16 billion
gge per year to 23.38 billion gge per year. Carbon emissions fall by approximately 6.9% relative to
BAU.
Table 1 also summarizes ethanol production by three broad categories and by policy. SUBs
and the RFS result in the largest shifts in corn ethanol production, increasing from 0.96 billion
gge per year in the BAU scenario to approximately 9.25 and 9.86 billion gge per year, respectively.
Corn ethanol production is lower at approximately 5.58 billion gge per year under the LCFS with
a larger share coming from waste and cellulosic feedstocks. CAT results in no increase in corn
ethanol production with nearly all the increase utilizing waste feedstocks.

5.2

Costs and relative eﬃciencies

Table 1 summarizes abatement costs under each policy calculated as the sum of changes in consumer
and producer surplus net of any carbon market revenue or subsidy payments. An intuitive metric
for comparison is the average abatement cost calculated as abatement cost divided by the total
reduction in emissions. The average abatement cost for a 10.2% reduction in emissions under CAT
is approximately $19.52 per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent (MTCO2 e). The marginal
cost, or price of an emissions permit, at this level is approximately $40.83 per MTCO2 e as shown
in the bottom panel of Table 1. We note that while consumer surplus falls under CAT by roughly
$65 billion, this calculation ignores the roughly $59 of potential revenue that could be cycled back
to consumers if permits were auctioned. We find that total producer surplus increases even in
the absence of free permit allocation. The intuition behind this result stems from shifting the
price-setting marginal firm from the lower cost gasoline producers to higher cost ethanol firms.
Abatement costs under the alternative policies are much higher; however, producers benefit
more from these policies, while consumers are harmed relative to a CAT program that recycles
revenues from permits back to consumers. Under the RFS, average abatement costs are $57.90 per
MTCO2 e. Producer surplus increases by $17.12 billion per year. Average abatement costs under the
LCFS are $48.58 per MTCO2 e.20 Finally, the average abatement costs under the subsidy programs
are the highest at $82.30 per MTCO2 e despite the fact that abatement is roughly 30 percent lower.
Consumers are unharmed by a SUBs since fuel prices do not change Producer surplus increases by
nearly $18.89 billion. Total government outlays exceed $28 billion.
19

This is a consequence of the perfectly elastic supply curve for gasoline.
We note that this figure is below many of the results in Holland, Hughes, and Knittel (2009) reflecting the long
run nature of our ethanol supply curves.
20

14

Greater substitution to ethanol under the alternatives to CAT creates ineﬃciency in terms of
higher abatement costs and results in larger changes in agricultural production. To see this, Figure 1
shows marginal abatement costs and emissions reduction mechanisms for CAT and a LCFS when we
vary abatement levels. The heavy black line shows the marginal abatement cost under each policy
calculated by running our simulation model for range of carbon prices and determining the level of
carbon emissions. The light line depicts marginal abatement costs assuming zero fuel substitution.21
For a 10.2% reduction in emissions, the marginal abatement costs under CAT and the LCFS are
$40.83 per MTCO2 e and $189.70 per MTCO2 e, respectively. Under CAT, a substantially larger
portion of the emissions reduction comes from reduced fuel demand. Under the LCFS, a much
larger share of abatement comes from fuel substitution, i.e. the horizontal distance between the
light and heavy curves in Figure 1. This finding highlights the main diﬀerence between CAT and
the other policies under consideration, namely that emissions reductions under CAT come from
reduced fuel consumption while direct subsidies, the RFS and LCFS result in more substitution
towards ethanol.
The large variation in average abatement costs brings up the possibility that, for given levels of
marginal damage estimates, some of the policies may reduce welfare. A number of estimates of the
externalities associated with GHGs exist. Tol (2008) provides a meta-study of 211 estimates of the
“social cost of carbon” (SCC). He reports the points of the distribution of estimates after fitting
the results to a parametric distribution. Across the three assumed distributions, for studies written
after 2001, the median SCC ranges from $17 to $62 per MTCO2 e, while the mean ranges from
$61 to $88 per MTCO2 e (in 1995 dollars). More recently, Interagency Working Group on Social
Cost of Carbon, United States Government (2010) estimates the SCC for a variety of assumptions
about the discount rate, relationship between emissions and temperatures, and models of economic
activity. Appendix Table 4 summarizes their results (in 2007 dollars). Because our analysis represents conditions in 2022, we focus on the 2020 estimates. For all but the most pessimistic set
of assumptions, the RFS and LFCS reduce welfare relative to business-as-usual; the current sets
of subsidies reduce welfare even 95th percentile of estimates using a 3 percent discount rate. In
contrast, CAT increases welfare for all of the reported results with discount rates below 5 percent.
21
We calculate this curve by assuming ethanol has the same emissions intensity as gasoline. In this case, carbon
reductions come only from reductions in fuel consumption due to increased fuel prices and the elasticity of fuel
demand.

15

6

The political economy of climate change policy

The obvious question that leads from our results is, given how much more eﬃcient CAT is relative
to the other policies, why have policy makers chosen the VEETC and Renewable Fuel Standard over
CAT? We investigate the distributional impacts of the diﬀerent policies as a potential answer.22
We do this in a number of ways. We first calculate net private surplus changes for each county
and analyze the distributions of these across the diﬀerent policies.23 We then aggregate these to
the Congressional district level and correlate these changes with Congressional voting behavior on
H.R. 2454, better known as the Waxman-Markey Climate Bill (WM). To investigate one potential
mechanism through which private surplus changes aﬀect Congressional behavior, we correlate our
measures of private surplus changes with political contributions from organizations either supporting or opposing WM. Finally, we take our estimates from the House vote and predict the outcome
of WM had it gone to vote in the Senate.
Figure 2 graphically illustrates the geographic variation in net changes in per capita surplus
changes for each policy. Under CAT, the number of counties that benefit from the policy is small
as are the benefits. However, the losses are also small, predominantly coming from the consumer
surplus losses associated with higher fuel prices.24 To see this, Table 2 reports diﬀerent points
in the distribution of county-level and Congressional district-level gains and losses for each of the
policies. Note that because these are not weighted by county populations, the county mean values
will not coincide with our aggregate loss calculations above. Congressional districts on the other
hand, are created with roughly equal populations, and therefore coincide more closely with the
aggregate measures.25
Beginning with the county-level statistics for CAT in Panel A, the largest mean annual county
per capita loss is $20.33, while no county gains more than $1,015 per capita. The median county
loses $14.87, while the county mean is a gain of $2.98. Furthermore, 24 percent of the counties
have a net-positive gain from the policy.
The results from the other policies contrast greatly with the CAT results. The average county
gains considerably across these policies. These average gains range from $160 per capita under the
22

Other possible reasons include the higher fuel prices which would result under CAT; the perception that CAT
is a “tax”; ideological opposition to eﬃcient regulations; and opposition to environmental regulations in general and
climate policy in particular.
23
See Section 4 for a discussion of the aggregation methodology.
24
In determining the consumer surplus loss under CAT, we assume that carbon market revenue is returned to
consumers in a lump sum fashion.
25
Unfortunately, we cannot calculate the distribution of gains within a county.

16

RFS to over $209 per capita under the LCFS. The distribution of gains and losses are quite skewed
as well, as the median county loses in all cases but the LCFS where, the median county gains
substantially less than the mean. No county loses more than $100 under the SUBs, but one county
gains over $6,600 per capita. Under the RFS, the average county gains $160, while 43 percent of
counties gain something. The right tail of the distribution under the RFS is also long. 10 percent
of counties gain over $530 per capita, per year, while 5 percent gain over $1,100. Figure 2 shows
that the gains from these other policies are concentrated in the Midwest, with additional gains in
forest areas and areas that might grow crops such as switchgrass on marginal lands. The positive
mean, despite the negative weighted-mean, and right skew of these distributions suggest that the
gains from these policies are concentrated, but the costs are diﬀuse. This may lead to political
dynamics that lend themselves to passing such policies despite their overall ineﬃciency.
The trends in the district-level data in panel B are quite similar to those discussed above.
The median district loses under every policy, though the magnitude of the loss is greater under
the alternatives to CAT. While the district-level distribution is somewhat less skewed the RFS,
LCFS and SUBs still exhibit a long right tail relative to CAT. Five percent of districts gain around
$100 or more per capita under the RFS, LCFS or SUBs, compared with less than $8 under CAT.
Furthermore, gains in the highest gaining district are an order of magnitude larger compared with
CAT suggesting that the gains under these policies are still quite concentrated when measured at
the district level.

6.1

Determinants of voting in the House

To motivate our empirical work, Table 3 reports a number of points in the distribution of our private
surplus changes and contributions across Democrats and Republicans and their votes on WM.26
The top two panels report district-level per capita annual gains and losses from CAT and the RFS,
respectively. The simple cross-tabs suggest that Democrats who voted against WM tended to be
in districts where the private surplus changes where larger under RFS than under CAT, especially
in the right tail. The gains from the RFS are larger for Republicans that voted against, but we
note statistical power is an issue because only eight Republicans voted for WM.
Contributions also show variation across votes, within a party. We discuss the data on contribution in detail below, but the third panel suggests that Democrats that voted against WM received,
26

The p-values for the median, 75th and 90th percentiles are computed using qreg in Stata and are the p-values
associated with the dummy variable for whether the Congressman voted for WM. Because we have never seen this
reported, we verified that this dummy replicates the actual diﬀerences in these points in the distributions across the
two samples, but have not verified the standard error.

17

on average, nearly $13,000 more from organizations opposing WM, while Republicans voting against
received nearly $6,000 more. The tail of the Democrats’ distribution is also much longer with the
75th and 90th percentiles over $23,000 and $28,000 larger, respectively, for Democrats that voted
against. The tail of this distribution is less clear for Republicans. The contributions from organizations supporting WM do exhibit diﬀerences across Republicans that voted for and against, however.
Those Republicans voting for WM received, on average, over $64,000 more dollars in supporting
contributions. The Republican at the 90th percentile among those that voted for WM received
more than $425,000 more than the Republican at the 90th percentile that voted against WM.27
We next investigate whether our measures of gains and losses have explanatory power for Congressional voting behavior and political contributions. Our cleanest voting “experiment” is for cap
& trade legislation. An LCFS has never come up for a House vote, and the bill that extended the
VEETC was a hodgepodge of disparate legislation. Indeed, the name was “Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010”. Similarly the bill that established
the most recent RFS contained numerous energy related measures. Therefore, we focus on correlating our gain and loss measures with votes on Waxman-Markey (WM)—H.R. 2454, “The American
Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009”—which focused almost exclusively on a CAT program to
reduce GHG emissions. Given these considerations, it seems plausible that Congressional Members
viewed WM and the RFS as substitutes. We center our analysis on these two policies.
The substitutability of CAT and the RFS comes from a controversial provision in WM. Under
WM, so-called indirect land use eﬀects would be included in the lifecycle emissions of ethanol under
both the cap & trade program and the RFS. At current indirect land use estimates, ethanol from
many corn-based ethanol plants would have no longer counted toward the RFS requirements. As
evidence of the importance of this provision, a last-minute compromise between Senators Henry
Waxman and Collin Peterson, the House Agriculture Committee Chairman, delayed this provision
for five years.28
Table 4 shows the marginal impacts of a probit model of whether a House Member voted for
WM.29 Model 1 includes an indicator for whether the Member is a Democrat and our estimated
per capita district-level gain from CAT in natural logarithms.30 We report the marginal eﬀects at
27

The 90th percentile may be driven by outliers since only eight Republicans voted against.
see, http://www.greencarcongress.com/2009/06/peterson20090626.html
29
Results from a linear probability model are qualitatively similar.
30
Because many of the districts experience losses, we shift the district-level gains under each policy by a common
factor of $100 per capita so that the natural logarithm is defined. Since we do not separately value welfare gains due
to reduced carbon emissions, one may interpret this shift as a benefit of $100 per capita from reduced climate change
damages.
28

18

the means of the continuous variables. The Democrat indicator is positive and large suggesting the
probability a Democrat voted for WM is nearly 78 percentage points higher. Without controlling
for gains from the RFS, the coeﬃcient associated with per capita gains from CAT is negative. If
Congressional members viewed WM and RFS as substitutes, insofar as the gains from CAT and
the RFS are correlated, the CAT gain variable is confounding two countervailing eﬀects.
Model 2 includes both the gains from CAT and the gains from the RFS. Once we account
for both, greater gains from CAT are correlated with voting for WM, though the coeﬃcient is not
precisely estimated.31 In contrast, greater gains from the RFS are correlated with a lower likelihood
of voting for WM; this correlation is statistically significant. Model 3 allows for level shifts in voting
behavior due to unobserved factors that vary at the state-level by including state fixed-eﬀects. The
point estimates are consistent with Model 2, though the results are somewhat nosier as a result
of having to omit states where all of the House members either voted for or against WM. Models
4 and 5 investigate the correlation between the relative gains under CAT versus the RFS. Larger
CAT gains, relative to the RFS, are correlated with an increased likelihood of voting for WM even
accounting for state fixed-eﬀects.
The eﬀects from the RFS and CAT are also politically significant. Using Model 2, if a district
moves from the 25th percentile to 75th percentile in terms of RFS gains, the probability its member
votes for WM falls by 13 percentage points. Moving from the minimum to the maximum in RFS
gains, the likelihood of voting for WM falls by 62 percentage points. Using Model 4, if a district
moves from the 25th percentile in terms of the relative gains from the RFS to CAT, to the 75th
percentile, the probability its member votes for WM increases by 60 percentage points.
We next investigate the linearity assumption. Table 5 splits districts into quartiles in terms of
their gains and losses. The results suggest that the relationship may be non-linear. Model 1 again
includes only the gains from CAT. Model 2 includes the quartiles from the RFS and Model 3 adds
state fixed-eﬀects. When we include the RFS quartiles, the CAT quartiles are positive, though
only the coeﬃcient on the third quartile is statistically significant. The RFS quartiles, in contrast,
suggest the negative correlation in the linear model is being driven by the large winners from the
RFS with the parameter estimate increasing in magnitude for the higher quartiles. The estimated
eﬀects are substantial. Holding a district’s gains under CAT constant, a House member’s likelihood
of voting for Waxman-Markey falls by 18 percentage points if the district is in the second quartile
of gains from the RFS relative to if they were in the bottom quartile. However the probability falls
31
A regression of the net gains from CAT on the net gains from the RFS yields a slope of 0.09 and an R-squared
of 0.61. Identification of the two coeﬃcients is obviously coming from deviations in the linear fit.

19

by over 39 percentage points moving from the first to the fourth quartile.32
Of course, the transportation sector was not the only sector to be regulated under WM. The
eﬀect of WM on for example, electricity generation, may also have influenced voting behavior.
Furthermore political ideology, either party aﬃliation or ideology more broadly defined, may help
explain Representative’s votes. Indeed, Cragg and Kahn (2009) find that district-level per capita
GHG emissions is strongly correlated with Congressional voting on GHG-reducing legislations more
broadly. To investigate the influence of these factors, Table 6 presents estimates of the base model
controlling for those variables included in Cragg and Kahn (2009)—various measures of district
carbon emissions and the political ideology of the district’s Representative. Model 1 adds indicator
variables for whether the Member is a Democrat and whether the district is in a top-10 coal
producing state.33 Model 2 replaces the Democrat indicator variable with DW-nominate, a measure
of political ideology based on a comparison of roll-call votes of House members.34 A higher score
indicates a more conservative voting record. Model 2 also adds district-level per capita carbon
dioxide emissions and average power plant carbon emissions rate. Model 3 adds corn production
and Model 4 adds state-fixed eﬀects.
The results in Table 6 are remarkably similar to the base model. Increasing RFS gains conditional on CAT gains are associated with a lower likelihood of the Member voting for WM all
else equal, though the estimated coeﬃcients by quartile are generally smaller in magnitude. The
emissions per capita and ideology controls have the appropriate signs and are in general statistically
significant. In Model 1, the probability that a Democratic Member voted for WM is 75 percentage
points higher. The probability that a Member in a top-10 coal producing state voted for WM
is approximately 7 percentage points lower, though this parameter is imprecisely estimated. In
Models 2 through 4, the coeﬃcient on DW-nominate indicates that Representatives with more conservative voting records were less likely to vote for WM as were Members from districts with higher
per capita emissions. Controlling for district-level gains and per capita carbon emissions, neither
the coeﬃcients on electricity plant emissions nor corn production are statistically significant. The
parameters of interest do not change substantially with the addition of state fixed-eﬀects.
We next investigate one of the mechanisms of these correlations—political contributions. We
collected data on donations to Representatives from MapLight.org (2011). MapLight reports contributions for individual donors giving $200 or more to one candidate collected from Federal Election
32

The quartiles across CAT and RFS are obviously correlated, however 8 percent of the districts in the upper RFS
quartile are in the bottom two CAT quartiles. Appendix Figure 2 illustrates the source of identification.
33
Similar results are obtained for top-5 coal producing states or controlling for coal consumption.
34
DW-nominate is the voteview.org measure of political ideology based on all roll-call votes, not simply votes on
environmental issues.

20

Committee filings. Donors are categorized into political interest groups according to the industry or
occupation of the donor. For major pieces of legislation, MapLight.org researchers classify political
interest groups as being in support of or opposed to a bill using Congressional hearing testimony,
news databases and trade association web sites to assign interests.35 We assume that donors from a
given interest group share this group’s position on H.R. 2454. Because political donation patterns
follow election cycles, we focus on donations during a two-year period from January 1, 2009 to
December 31, 2010.36 One may worry that this period is too broad to capture donations specific
to H.R. 2454. As a robustness check, we limit our data to a 60-day window around the House vote.
These results are qualitatively similar to those presented below.
Table 7 shows the results of a linear regression of contributions from organizations opposing and
supporting WM on party aﬃliations, our CAT and RFS quartiles and in columns 2 and 4, state
fixed-eﬀects. We measure contributions in logs.37 The first two columns focus on contributions
from opposing donors. Greater district-level gains from CAT are correlated with less contribution
dollars from donors opposing WM. Moving from the 1st to the 4th quartile is associated with a
1.97 reduction in the log of contributions. In contrast, higher RFS gains are correlated with more
money from opposition donors. A move from the 1st to the 4th quartile is associated with a 4.74
increase in the log of opposition contributions. These results are qualitatively similar with state
fixed eﬀects. There is less evidence that contributions from donors supporting WM are correlated
with our simulated gains and losses.
Next, we include the contribution variables in the voting model to see whether the correlations
between voting and gains/losses are working through contributions or through gain/losses more
generally. Column 1 of Table 8, which includes only the contributions data, shows that greater
contributions from donors supporting WM are correlated with an increase in the probability of
voting for WM and that greater contributions from donors opposing WM are correlated with a
decrease in the probability of voting for WM. When we include both the contribution variables and
our gain/losses variables we find that the RFS quartile indicators still have explanatory power and
are still politically significant. This is true even when we include fixed state eﬀects in Model 3.
Taking the Model 2 point estimates, a one standard deviation increase in the log of contributions
supporting WM is associated with an 3 percentage point increase in the likelihood of voting for WM,
while a one standard deviation increase in the log of contributions opposing WM is associated with
a 3 percentage point decrease in the likelihood of voting for WM. Models 4 and 5 add the additional
35

A list of opposing and supporting organizations, as well as the documentation of this categorization by Maplight.org is available at: http://maplight.org/us-congress/bill/111-hr-2454/371786/total-contributions.table
36
Recall the House vote on H.R. 2454 occurred on June 26, 2009.
37
We add one to allow us to account for observations with zero contributions.

21

ideology, carbon emissions controls and state fixed-eﬀects. The point estimates for contributions in
support of and opposed to WM decrease in magnitude slightly but remain statistically significant,
but so do the RFS quartile dummies. We note that the RFS, Quartile 4 coeﬃcient in Model 4 is
statistically significant, but loses significance when we calculate the marginal eﬀect.38 Based on
these results, it appears as though the gains and losses from the policies aﬀect voting through more
than just the contribution channel.

6.2

Predicting voting in the Senate

We next use our estimates from the House vote to predict how the Senate would have voted. This
requires a number of assumptions. Because the relationship between gains and voting may change
considerably between the House and the Senate, we focus on the specifications that include the
gains and losses quartiles and indicators for Democrat, “Top 10 Coal State” (Model 1 in Table 6).
By doing so, we categorize Senators into 64 bins. We aggregate up the gains and losses to the state
level and then reconstruct these variables.
We present the results in two ways. First, we calculate the fitted probability of voting for WM
and assume each Senator votes for WM if their predicted value is greater than 0.5 to predict positive
votes. Second, we simulate 1,000 diﬀerent votes using the fitted values. In particular, we take the
fitted value of the latent variable and bootstrap the error term, which by definition has a normal
distribution with mean zero and standard deviation of one. For each bootstrap, we calculate the
number of votes and plot the distribution of votes across all bootstraps.
Using only the fitted probability and the 0.5 rule, we end up with 53 votes. Interestingly, this
is enough votes to pass WM, if it were to go to a vote. However, during this time period many bills
that would have had a majority did not make it to vote because of filibustering. The 0.5 voting
rule suggests that WM would not have had enough votes to break a filibuster.
Figure 3 plots the distribution of voting probabilities. This distribution is as we would expect
given the large coeﬃcient associated with party aﬃliation, and all 53 of the Senators with voting
probabilities greater than 0.5 are Democrats. We do, however, find that five Democrats have
probabilities less than 0.5. These are all in high corn and coal states—Illinois (Dick Durbin and
Roland Burris—Barack Obama’s former seat), Indiana (Evan Bayh), and North Dakota (Kent
Conrad and Byron Dorgan). The Senators have fitted probabilities of 0.45 coming from being in a
state in the 4th quartile of RFS and CAT gains and in a coal mining state.
38

The p-value for the point estimate is 0.08.

22

On the other side of the 0.5 cut-oﬀ are 5 Senators with fitted probabilities of 0.62. These are
all Democrats—two from Arkansas, one from Iowa, one from Maine and one from South Dakota.
These states are all in the 4th quartiles of RFS and CAT gains, but not in coal mining states. In
addition, there are 4 Democratic Senators from Montana and New Mexico with fitted probabilities
of 0.67. Both states are in the 2nd quartile of RFS gains and the 1st quartile of CAT gains but are
top-10 coal states. As Figure 3 illustrates, there is little hope that WM could have passed filibuster
and our simulations bear this out. While it is conceivable for the five Democrats to change their
votes, the next highest fitted probability is 0.23. Indeed, we find that the maximum number of votes
WM receives across our 1,000 draws is 59; this occurred one time. Figure 4 plots the distribution of
these draws. Interestingly, on average WM garners 50 votes in the Senate. The reason why this is
below our estimated number is that while the change in voting probabilities are symmetric, because
we are adding a normal draw to the fitted Xβ, the change in votes is not symmetric. Basically,
it is easier to get Senators to switch their votes from Aye to Nay than it is to switch from Nay to
Aye. To see this, we point to the nine Senators with fitted probabilities of 0.62 and 0.67, but there
are only five Senators close to this on the other side of the 0.5 cut-oﬀ (each with a probability of
0.45).

7

Environmental outcomes

Next, we turn to environmental outcomes under each policy. We begin by comparing land use
changes across the policies. Because we have information on the type of land used, we also report
this separately for cultivated and uncultivated lands. Given estimates of the externalities associated
with land use changes, we calculate what these changes imply for non-GHG externalities. We
report the land use externalities on a per GHG-abated basis allowing the reader to adjust the
average-abatement-cost measure to include the additional externalities. Finally, we investigate the
robustness of each policy to errors in assigning carbon emission intensities to each fuel.

7.1

Land use and non-carbon costs

The land-use impacts largely mirror the distributional results. Land area used in agricultural
production of crops for ethanol are illustrated in Appendix Figures 3 and 4. Appendix Figure 3
shows the total land use under the 2022 RFS, LCFS, CAT, and SUBs systems that each reduce
GHG emissions 10.2% relative to BAU. We plot the county-level “land-use intensity,” calculated
as the total acreage in energy crop production, herbaceous energy crops and corn, divided by total
23

land area. The CAT system uses relatively little land in energy crop production, primarily in the
Midwest.39 In stark contrast, the LCFS and RFS result in substantial amounts of land dedicated to
energy crop production. Land area used under direct subsidies is quite similar to the RFS, though
the emissions reduction is considerable smaller.
Perhaps a more important metric than total area is land area used in the production of cultivated
energy crops. Cultivated crops, such as corn, are more likely to result in negative impacts due to
increased fertilizer use, irrigation, and competition for agricultural land compared to herbaceous
crops grown on marginal land with few inputs. Appendix Figure 4 shows the land intensity for the
production of corn under each policy. The RFS shows the largest number of acres of corn dedicated
to ethanol production due to substantial ethanol production in the Midwest. The LCFS also results
in large areas dedicated to corn production. In contrast, the CAT system results in relatively little
land used in corn production.
The land-use changes relative to BAU, for each policy, are summarized in Table 9. The 2022 RFS
results in 39.0 million additional acres of energy crop production relative to BAU. Approximately
27.7 million additional acres are used for corn production. Under SUBs, the land use change are
quite similar at 37.8 million addition total acres and 25.7 additional corn acres relative to BAU. For
comparison, total cropland in the U.S. is approximately 442 million acres Lubowski et al. (2006).
The land use changes under the LCFS are smaller, though still substantial. Land-use changes are
smallest under the CAT system, with approximately 1.2 million addition energy crop acres and
essentially no increase in corn production relative to BAU.
Finally, we estimate the additional costs due to land use changes under each of the policies.
We use lower and upper bounds of $10 and $25 per additional acre of corn production. Additional
information on the calculation of these costs is discussed in Section A.8. We estimate costs per
ton of CO2 e in order to compare with our average abatement cost estimates. Under CAT, land
use change costs are approximately zero. Under the RFS, LCFS and SUBs systems, costs range
between $0.89 and $2.31 per MTCO2 e for the low cost scenario and between $2.22 and $5.77 per
MTCO2 e for the high cost scenario . While these eﬀects are modest in size, they further increase
the cost disparity between CAT and the alternative policies.

7.2

Mistakes in carbon intensities

As discussed in Section 4, the life-cycle emissions of advanced ethanol production technologies
are highly uncertain. In addition, carbon emissions associated with direct and indirect land use
39

Land use under BAU is quite similar to that which results under CAT.

24

changes resulting from shifts in agriculture are controversial. This situation creates the possibility
of errors in estimating the carbon intensities of diﬀerent biofuel pathways. Furthermore, emissions
intensities under any transportation sector carbon policy are likely to be set as part of a political
process. In light of this, we investigate the sensitivity of actual emissions under each policy to
errors in the emissions intensity.
We focus on emissions related to corn ethanol production and associated land use changes. As
shown in Appendix Table 2, recent estimates of the emissions intensity range from 0.79 to greater
than those of conventional gasoline at 1.04. Because corn is a food crop and because land used
for the cultivation for corn is also a substitute for other crops, direct and indirect land use eﬀects
are also likely to be large. Imagine a scenario where the emissions intensity of corn ethanol is
larger than expected. Specifically, assume a value of σcorn = 0.90 compared to the baseline value
of σcorn = 0.80.40 We then re-run our simulations to estimate fuel production and emissions under
for each policy using the new emissions intensity.
Table 10 summarizes carbon emissions under each scenario. Consider “uncontrolled” emissions
as the additional carbon emitted because the true emissions intensity is larger than the emissions
intensity specified by policy makers. An intuitive metric of environmental eﬀectiveness then is the
quantity of uncontrolled emissions as a fraction of the stated reduction in carbon. The eﬀect of the
higher emissions intensity is smallest under CAT at approximately 0.7%. Under the RFS, LCFS,
and SUBs the eﬀects are 7.1%, 4.0%, and 9.9%, respectively. As this example illustrates, errors or
biases in the true greenhouse gas content of biofuels are exacerbated when relying on performance
standards and subsidies, compared to more eﬃcient policies.

8

Innovation incentives

Without new technologies for producing low-carbon fuels, reducing carbon emissions will be quite
costly. Thus one of the key features of any carbon policy will be how well it provides incentives
for innovation. Unfortunately innovation incentives can be insuﬃcient since consumers generally
receive some of the benefits from innovation (through lower prices) but producers must pay for the
innovation through licensing or funding of R&D. If consumers receive a substantial portion of the
benefits from innovation, then producers may not receive suﬃcient surplus to fund socially eﬃcient
40

For simplicity we imagine an error which underestimates emissions. From a welfare perspective, an overestimate
could also be costly if it resulted in a level of ethanol production that was ineﬃciently too low. However, given the
existence of other negative externalities associated with land use changes, the welfare implications are likely to be
asymmetric.

25

innovation. In this section, we analyze the distribution of the gains from innovation between
consumers and producers under the diﬀerent policies.
The importance of innovation is highlighted by the fact that the primary low-carbon fuels
analyzed in this paper, cellulosic ethanols, are not currently produced on a commercial scale. To
estimate the benefits from innovation in cellulosic ethanol, we analyze the counterfactual in which
these technologies are not available. The gain from innovation is the additional social surplus when
the technology is available. Since the additional social surplus depends on the carbon policy, we
calculate the gains from innovation under each of the carbon policies. Finally, we analyze the
distribution of those gains across consumers and producers to estimate the incentive to innovate.
Table 11 shows the results of calculating surplus with and without our six types of cellulosic
ethanol under BAU, LCFS, CAT, and SUBs.41 To make the carbon policies comparable, we set
the LCFS and CAT such that they each result in the same carbon emissions (1453 MMTCO2 e) as
the RFS.
The first column of Table 11 shows that the benefits from innovation with no carbon policy
are $0.91 billion. This benefit arises because we estimate that some cellulosic ethanol would be
produced even in the absence of carbon policy. Note that the entire benefit accrues to the producers
of cellulosic ethanol since the additional ethanol simply displaces gasoline and does not lower the
price of fuel. In his case, private innovation incentives exactly match the social incentives.
With a carbon policy the story is quite diﬀerent. For the LCFS (shown in the second column of
Table 11) the fuel price would need to rise to $3.48 to reduce carbon suﬃciently in the absence of
innovation. However, with innovation in cellulosic ethanol, the fuel price would only rise to $2.96.
Thus consumers as well as cellulosic ethanol producers benefit from innovation. However, corn
ethanol producers are harmed by innovation under the LCFS. Recall that the LCFS has an implicit
subsidy to fuels with relatively low carbon intensities. In the absence of innovation in cellulosic
ethanol, corn ethanol is the low carbon fuel and as such receives a subsidy. Corn ethanol loses this
subsidy when cellulosic ethanol is commercialized.42
The gains from innovation to cellulosic ethanol producers under the LCFS are quite substantial
($20.56 billion). Note that this implies that cellulosic ethanol producers would be willing to pay
(e.g., in licensing fees) more than the entire social benefit from innovation ($2.61 billion). Thus the
private innovation incentives under the LCFS are too large and could result in investment beyond
41

We cannot analyze the RFS since the RFS explicitly requires production of cellulosic ethanol.
It is worth noting that corn ethanol producers gain under the LCFS even with innovation (see Table 1) they just
don’t gain as much as they would have in the absence of innovation.
42

26

the socially eﬃcient level.43
The social benefits from innovation are largest ($4.38 billion) under the eﬃcient carbon policy,
CAT. Since with innovation the fuel price does not need to increase as much, consumers also benefit.
However, much of the increase in consumer surplus is oﬀset by a loss in carbon market revenue
(which drops from $102 billion to $59 billion). Even if we assume producers receive none of the
carbon market revenue, cellulosic ethanol producers capture all of the social benefits of innovation.
Producer surplus to corn ethanol producers decreases with innovation due to lower fuel prices.
Thus the private incentive to innovate for cellulosic ethanol producers may be too small, but the
gap between the private and socially eﬃcient incentives is relatively small.
Under the subsidy policy (SUBs), the benefits from innovation accrue entirely to the producers
of cellulosic ethanol. The subsidies provide quite a strong private incentive for innovation, but
it would be cheaper to give the cellulosic ethanol producers the $17.29 billion directly since the
subsidy payments exceed this amount by $4.45 billion.
Comparing the average abatement costs shows that an eﬃcient carbon policy benefits greatly
from innovation. For the CAT, the abatement costs are reduced by over a third through commercialization of cellulosic ethanol. This result highlights again the importance of innovation for
successful carbon policy.44

9

Robustness

Appendix B investigates the robustness of our results to changes in the preferred scenario parameters. Specifically we vary: the baseline fuel price; the emissions intensities of corn and cellulosic
ethanol; and the elasticity of fuel demand. Finally, we relax our assumption that corn prices are
not substantially aﬀected by shifts in ethanol production. We briefly summarize the results of these
robustness checks here. The reader is referred to the Appendix for a more detailed discussion.
The main results are all quite robust to these eight alternate parameters scenarios. The cost advantage of CAT over the alternative policies is very robust. Across all scenarios, average abatement
costs are at least 2 times as large as CAT and can be nearly 7 times greater. Average abatement
43

This result is akin to the business-stealing eﬀect which can lead to excess entry beyond the socially optimal level
of entry.
44
It is surprising that average abatement costs increase with innovation under the LCFS. This is likely an artifact
of our assumption that the supply of corn ethanol is perfectly inelastic at high prices. In future work, we plan to
extend the corn ethanol supply beyond the current sample of prices.

27

costs under the LCFS and RFS are consistently around 2.5 to 4 times greater than CAT. Average
abatement costs under subsidies are 3 to 7 times larger than CAT.
Producer surplus gains, and gains to corn ethanol producers in particular, can be quite concentrated as shown in Table 2 and Figure 2. We find that across our scenarios, the relative gains to
ethanol producers under the RFS compared with CAT are fairly constant. A possible exception to
this trend is the case of high baseline fuel prices. Higher prices result in higher levels of ethanol
production absent policy intervention. In our high baseline fuel price ($3.25 per gallon) scenario,
surplus gains to corn ethanol producers fall from approximately $3.2 billion per year to approximately $2 billion, relative to our $2.75 baseline fuel price scenario. Gains to corn ethanol producers
increase slightly under CAT. We note that fuel prices at the time of the final vote on H.R. 2454
were approximately $2.60 per gallon, and below our preferred baseline fuel price of $2.75.45
To test the robustness of our political economy results, we run Model 1 of Table 6 under each of
these eight alternative parameter scenarios. (See Appendix B for details.) The results are remarkably consistent across all scenarios: i.e., neither the point estimates nor standard errors change
much. In particular: the RFS quartile coeﬃcients are all negative and statistically significant; the
CAT quartile coeﬃcients are all positive although some are not statistically diﬀerent from zero;
and the Democrat and coal-state indicators are of the expected sign and significant.

10

Conclusion

We analyze equilibrium outcomes for carbon cap & trade and three alternative policies aimed at
promoting low carbon transportation fuels. To do this we numerically simulate the market for
transportation fuel for the U.S. in 2022. Our simulations exploit feedstock-specific ethanol supply
curves developed from detailed agricultural feedstock data and engineering ethanol production
models.
We find that the 2022 Federal RFS reduces carbon emissions by approximately 10.2% relative to
BAU levels. Our analysis shows that the alternatives to CAT are quite costly. Average abatement
costs range from $49 per MTCO2 e for the LCFS to $82 per MTCO2 e for subsidies, compared with
only $20 per MTCO2 e under CAT. The RFS, LCFS and subsidies all results in larger shifts in
agricultural activity and land use compared to CAT. The RFS results in large shifts in agricultural
production including approximately 24 billion gge of ethanol production and 39 million acres of
45

Recent research by Anderson, Kellogg, and Sallee (2010) suggests that current fuel prices are a reasonable proxy
for consumers’ expectations about future fuel prices. It seems reasonable to extend this result to the constituents of
Congressional districts.

28

addition land for energy crop production relative to the BAU scenario. The LCFS and subsidies
result in similar shifts. In contrast, an equivalent CAT system results in only 9 billion gge per
year of ethanol production and increases land used to grow energy crops by only 1 million acres.
Accounting for environmental cost due to the land use changes further increases the cost disparity
among policies, adding an additional $0.89 to $5.77 per MTCO2 e to the average abatement cost for
the alternative to CAT. These results are robust to a variety of assumptions about the modeling
parameters including: business as usual fuel prices, the elasticity of fuel demand and the emissions
characteristics of the various fuel pathways.
Overall, producer surplus increases under each of the policies, with the largest changes occurring
under direct subsidies at approximately $19 billion per year. Consumer surplus decreases under the
RFS, LCFS and CAT systems relative to BAU. The change in consumer surplus is largest under
the CAT system at approximately $65 billion per year. However, auctioning of permits would
create nearly $59 billion in carbon market revenue which could be distributed to consumers. Under
subsidies, consumer surplus in unchanged.
Given the higher costs of alternatives to CAT, we investigate one possible explanation for the
popularity of ethanol subsidies and the RFS. Specifically, we generate county-level estimates for
the producer and consumer surplus changes under each policy. These estimates suggest an unequal
distribution of the gains and loses. Under the alternative to CAT, the median county experiences
a small gain or loss. However, gains in some counties can be greater than $6,600 per capita. Under
the RFS, five percent of counties gain more the $1,100 per capita and no county loses more than
$95 per capita. In contrast, under CAT fewer counties experience gains as result of the policy
and these gains are smaller in magnitude than under the alternatives policies. The 95th percentile
surplus change under CAT is $73 per capita per year and no county gains more than $1,015 per
capita.
We test whether these results translate into political incentives by correlating surplus changes
at the Congressional district level with voting behavior on the Waxman-Markey H.R. 2454 cap
& trade bill. We argue that under this bill, the RFS and CAT are likely viewed as substitutes.
Conditional on a Representative’s party aﬃliation and the district’s predicted gains under the RFS,
gains under CAT are positively correlated with voting for Waxman-Markey. Similarly, greater RFS
gains are negatively correlated with a vote for Waxman-Markey.
We provide evidence that political contributions are the mechanism by which these political
incentives are translated into voting behavior. Greater district level gains are associated with fewer
donations by groups opposed to H.R. 2454. Higher RFS gains are associated with more contribu29

tions from groups opposed to WM. Contributions from groups who support WM are associated
with an increased probability of a yes vote. Contributions from groups opposed to the bill are
associated with a decreased probability of a yes vote.
Taken together, these results strongly support the private-interest theory of regulation. We find
that regulation with more concentrated private benefits, the RFS, is maintained over a CAT system
which would oﬀer larger social benefits but with less concentrated private benefits. The pattern of
campaign contributions around the vote on H.R. 2454 is consistent with political interest groups
eﬀectively influencing carbon regulation in a manner consistent with private interest theory.

30

References
Aden, A., M. Ruth, K. Ibsen, J. Jechura, K. Neeves, J. Sheehan, B. Wallace, L. Montague,
and A. Slayton. 2002. “Lignocellulosic biomass to ethanol process design and economics utilizing co-current dilute acid prehydrolysis and enzymatic hydrolysis for corn stover.” Tech. Rep.
NREL/TP-510-32438, National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
Anderson, Soren T. 2010. “The Demand for Ethanol as a Gasoline Substitute.” Working Paper
16371, National Bureau of Economic Research. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w16371.
Anderson, Soren T., Ryan Kellogg, and James M. Sallee. 2010. “What do Consumers Believe About
Future Gas Prices?” Unpublished .
Becker, Gary S. 1983. “A Theory of Competition among Pressure Groups for Political Influence.”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 98 (3):371–400.
Biomass Research and Development Board. 2009. “Increasing Feedstock Production for Biofuels:
Economic Drivers, Environmental Implications, and the Role of Research.” Tech. rep.
Butzen, S. and T. Hobbs. 2002. “Corn processing III. Wet milling.” Crop Insights 12:1–6.
California Air Resources Board. 2009. “Proposed Regulation to Implement the Low Carbon Fuel
Standard: Volume I.” Tech. rep.
Chaddock, Gail R. and Tarin Parti. 2010. “Harry Reid: Senate will abandon cap-and-trade energy
reform.” Christian Science Monitor, July 22, 2010.
Cragg, Michael I. and Matthew E. Kahn. 2009. “Carbon Geography: The Political Economy
of Congressional Support for Legislation Intended to Mitigate Greenhouse Gas Production.”
Working Paper 14963, National Bureau of Economic Research. URL http://www.nber.org/
papers/w14963.
Fargione, Joseph, Jason Hill, David Tilman, Stephen Polasky, and Peter Hawthorne. 2009. “Land
Clearing and the Biofuel Carbon Debt.” Science 326 (5952):527–528.
Farrell, Alex E., Richard J. Plevin, Brian T. Turner, Andrew D. Jones, Michael O’Hare, and
Daniel M. Kammen. 2006. “Ethanol Can Contribute to Energy and Environmental Goals.”
Science 311 (5760):506–508.
Fleck, Robert K. 2008. “Voter Influence and Big Policy Change: The Positive Political Economy
of the New Deal.” Journal of Political Economy 116 (1):1–37.
31

Gallagher, P. W., H. Brubaker, and H. Shapouri. 2005. “Plant size: capital cost relationships in
the dry mill ethanol industry.” Biomass and Bioenergy 28 (6):565–571.
Gallagher, P. W. and H. Shapouri. 2005. “USDA’s 2002 Ethanol Cost-of-Production Survey.” .
Gardner, Bruce. 2007. “Fuel Ethanol Subsidies and Farm Price Support.” Journal of Agricultural
and Food Industrial Organization 5 (4):1–20.
Goulder, Larry H. 1995. “Environmental Taxation and the Double Dividend: A Reader’s Guide.”
International Tax and Public Finance 2 (3):157–183.
Graham, R. L., R. Nelson, J. Sheehan, R. D. Perlack, and L. L. Wright. 2007. “Current and
Potential U.S. Corn Stover Supplies.” Agronomy Journal 99 (1):1.
Hamelinck, Carlo N., Geertje van Hooijdonk, and Andr? P. C. Faaij. 2005. “Ethanol from lignocellulosic biomass: techno-economic performance in short-, middle- and long-term.” Biomass and
Bioenergy 28 (4):384–410. 0961-9534 doi: DOI: 10.1016/j.biombioe.2004.09.002.
Hansen, LeRoy. 2007. “Conservation Reserve Program: Environmental Benefits Update.” Agricultural and Resource Economics Review 36 (2):267–280.
Holland, Stephen P. 2009. “Taxes and Trading versus Intensity Standards: Second-Best Environmental Policies with Incomplete Regulation (Leakage) or Market Power.” Working Paper 15262,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Holland, Stephen P., Jonathan E. Hughes, and Christopher R. Knittel. 2009. “Greenhouse Gas
Reductions under Low Carbon Fuel Standards?” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
1 (1):106–46.
Hu, Patricia, Timothy Reuscher, Richard Schmoyer, and Shih-Miao Chin. 2007. “Transferring 2001
National Household Travel Survey.” Tech. rep., Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
Idaho National Laboratory. 2010. “Uniform-Format Solid Feedstock Supply System: A CommodityScale Design to Produce an Infrastructure-Compatible Bulk Solid from Lignocellulosic Biomass.”
Tech. rep.
Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon, United States Government. 2010. “Appendix
15A:Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis Under Executive Order 12866.” Tech.
rep., Council of Economic Advisers, Council on Environmental Quality, Department of Agriculture, Department of Commerce, Department of Energy, Department of Transportation, Environmental Protection Agency, National Economic Council Oﬃce of Energy and Climate Change,
32

Oﬃce of Management and Budget, Oﬃce of Science and Technology Policy, Department of the
Treasury.
Joskow, Paul L. and Roger G. Noll. 1981. “Regulation in Theory and Practice: An Overview.”
In Studies in Public Regulation, NBER Chapters. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc,
1–78.
Knittel, Christopher R. 2006. “The Adoption of State Electricity Regulation: The Role of Interest
Groups.” Journal of Industrial Economics 54 (2):201–222.
Kroszner, Randall S. and Philip E. Strahan. 1999. “What Drives Deregulation? Economics and
Politics of The Relaxation Of Bank Branching Restrictions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
114 (4):1437–1467.
Liska, Adam J., Haishun S. Yang, Virgil R. Bremer, Terry J. Klopfenstein, Daniel T. Walters,
Galen E. Erickson, and Kenneth G. Cassman. 2009. “Improvements in Life Cycle Energy Eﬃciency and Greenhouse Gas Emissions of Corn-Ethanol.” Journal of Industrial Ecology 13 (1):58–
74.
Lubowski, Ruben N., Marlow Vesterby, Shawn Bucholtz, Alba Baez, and Michael J. Roberts. 2006.
“Major Uses of Land in the United States, 2002.” Tech. rep., U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Economic Research Service.
MapLight.org. 2011. “H.R. 2454 - American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009.” URL http://
maplight.org/us-congress/bill/111-hr-2454/371786/contributions-by-vote. Accessed,
March 11, 2010.
McAloon, A., F. Taylor, W. Yee, K. Ibsen, and R. Wooley. 2000. “Determining the cost of producing ethanol from corn starch and lignocellulosic feedstocks.” Tech. Rep. NREL/TP-580-28893,
National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
National Agricultural Statistics Service. 2009. “2007 Census of Agriculture.”
Nelson, Richard. 2010. “National Biomass Resource Assessment and Supply Analysis.”
Oﬃce of the Chief Economist, World Agricultural Outlook Board, United States Department of
Agriculture. 2010. “USDA Agricultural Projections to 2019.” Tech. Rep. OCE-2010-1.
Oil Price Information Service. 2007. “Petroleum Terminal Encyclopedia.”

33

Peltzman, Sam. 1976. “Toward a More General Theory of Regulation.” Journal of Law & Economics
19 (2):211–40.
Renewable Fuels Association. 2009. “Biorefinery Locations.”
Roberts, Michael J. and Wolfram Schlenker. 2010. “Identifying Supply and Demand Elasticities of
Agricultural Commodities: Implications for the U.S. Ethanol Mandate.” NBER Working Paper
No. 15921 .
Salvo, Alberto and Cristian Huse. 2011. “Is Arbitrage Tying the Price of Ethanol to that of
Gasoline? Evidence from the Uptake of Flexible-Fuel Technology.” Energy Journal 32 (3):119–
148.
Searchinger, Timothy, Ralph Heimlich, R. A. Houghton, Fengxia Dong, Amani Elobeid, Jacinto
Fabiosa, Simla Tokgoz, Dermot Hayes, and Tun-Hsiang Yu. 2008. “Use of U.S. Croplands
for Biofuels Increases Greenhouse Gases Through Emissions From Land-Use Change.” Science
319 (5900):1238–1240.
Seltzer, Andrew J. 1995. “The Political Economy of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938.” Journal
of Political Economy 103 (6):1302–42.
Simmons, P., N. Goldstein, S. Kaufman, N. Themelis, and J. Thompson Jr. 2006. “The State of
Garbage in America.” BioCycle 47 (3):26–43.
Small, Kenneth and Cliﬀord Winston. 1999. “The Demand for Transportation: Models and Applications.” In Essays in Transportation Economics and Policy, edited by Jose Gomez-Ibanez,
William B. Tye, and Cliﬀord Winston. Brookings Institute.
Stigler, George J. 1971. “The Theory of Economic Regulation.” Bell Journal of Economics 2 (1):3–
21.
Tol, Richard S. J. 2008. “The Social Cost of Carbon: Trends, Outliers and Catastrophes.” Economics 2 (2008-25).
Tyner, Wally, Farzad Taheripour, Qianlai Zhuang, Dileep Birur, and Uris Baldos. 2010. “Land Use
Changes and Consequent CO2 Emissions due to U.S. Corn Ethanol Production: A Comprehensive Analysis.” GTAP Resource 3288.
U.S. Energy Information Administration. 2010. “Annual Energy Outlook.” URL http://www.
eia.doe.gov/oiaf/aeo/.
34

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2007. “2006 MSW Characterization Report.”
Wooley, R., M. Ruth, J. Sheehan, K. Ibsen, H. Majdeski, and A. Galvez. 1999. “Lignocellulosic
biomass to ethanol process design and economics utilizing co-current dilute acid prehydrolysis and
enzymatic hydrolysis current and futuristic scenarios.” Tech. rep., National Renewable Energy
Laboratory.
Wright, Gavin. 1974. “The Political Economy of New Deal Spending: An Econometric Analysis.”
The Review of Economics and Statistics 56 (1):30–38.
Wullschleger, E. B., E. B. Davis, M. E. Borsuk, C. A. Gunderson, and L. R. Lynd. 2010. “Biomass
Production in Switchgrass across the United States: Database Description and Determinants of
Yield.” Agronomy Journal 102:1158–1168.

35

Figures
Figure 1: Marginal abatement cost curves and emissions reduction mechanisms for CAT and
LCFS systems.

!"#$%"#&'$"(&
)*+,$-./*+&

'$"(&
0$1,/2$/*+&

! 3&46<=789):;"&

!"#$%"#&'$"(&
)*+,$-./*+&

'$"(&
0$1,/2$/*+&

! 3&456789):;"&

36

37

!+',!!'$-./01234$

(&'$

!"#$

')*'$

%!&'$

Figure 2: County-level surplus changes (∆P S + ∆CS) under a CAT, a LCFS, the 2022 RFS and subsidies.

0

5

Number of Senators
10
15

20

Figure 3: Distribution of the Senate-vote probabilities.

0.00

0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
Probability of Voting for Waxman-Markey

38

1.00

0

50

Frequency

100

150

Figure 4: Histogram of simulated Senate-vote outcomes.

40

45

50
Number of Senate $\H Votes

39

55

60

Tables
Table 1: Equilibrium outcomes under alternate policies.
BAU

RFS

LCFS

CAT

SUBS

$2.75

$2.94

$2.96

$3.23

$2.75

140

135.31

134.99

129.09

140

Gasoline Quantity (bn. gge)

134.84

111.64

114.92

120.11

116.62

Ethanol Quantity (bn. gge)

5.16

23.67

20.07

8.98

23.38

Corn Ethanol

0.96

9.86

5.58

0.96

9.25

Herb. Energy Crops

0.09

4.43

4.62

0.59

4.57

Waste Feedstocks

4.11

9.37

9.87

7.43

9.57

Emissions (MMTCO2e)

1619

-10.2%

-10.2%

-10.2%

-6.9%

!CS ($ bn.)

-$26.69

-$28.59

-$65.07

$0.00

!PS ($ bn.)

$17.12

$20.56

$2.49

$18.89

!PS Corn Ethanol ($ bn.)

$3.19

$0.91

$0.09

$2.50

Fuel Price ($/gge)
Fuel Quantity (bn. gge)

Carbon Market Revenue ($ bn.)

$59.35

Subsidy Payments ($ bn.)

$28.05

Carbon Permit Price ($/MTCO2e)

$189.70

$40.83

Abatement Cost ($ bn.)

-$9.57

-$8.03

-$3.23

-$9.16

Avg. Abatement Cost ($/MTCO2e)

$57.90

$48.58

$19.52

$82.30

40

Table 2: The distribution of county- and district-level gains and losses across the diﬀerent policies.
Panel A: County-level distributions

Mean
Percentage>0
Minimum
25th Percentile
Median
75th Percentile
90th Percentile
95th Percentile
Maximum

CAT
$2.98
24%
-$20.33
-$20.33
-$14.87
$0.14
$34.98
$73.21
$1,015.28

LCFS
$209.42
49%
-$101.60
-$68.07
$11.26
$209.70
$688.43
$1,363.58
$6,786.71

RFS
$159.85
43%
-$94.85
-$71.93
-$16.30
$133.19
$537.34
$1,109.67
$6,596.38

SUBS
$186.83
46%
-$99.67
-$72.03
-$5.12
$166.53
$625.59
$1,252.99
$6,618.38

LCFS
-$29.10
18%
-$101.60
-$82.03
-$68.79
-$25.87
$50.86
$134.07
$1,080.16

RFS
-$34.33
14%
-$94.85
-$80.30
-$70.09
-$39.29
$24.27
$97.45
$1,101.95

SUBS
-$32.97
15%
-$99.67
-$82.86
-$71.49
-$36.28
$33.09
$111.81
$1,129.85

Panel B: District-level distributions

Mean
Percentage>0
Minimum
25th Percentile
Median
75th Percentile
90th Percentile
95th Percentile
Maximum

CAT
-$11.49
9%
-$20.33
-$17.22
-$15.04
-$11.05
-$1.72
$7.69
$110.44

41

42
90.69
70.51
112.65
156.41

90.25
74.84
104.95
182.55

16.14
12.00
26.60
36.95

-20.02
-37.81
11.71
60.27

Voted Against
(43)
-8.58
-11.46
-1.65
5.50

-0.44
4.33
-7.70
26.14

12.68
11.50
23.25
27.95

31.71
38.84
72.32
73.80

+Against
4.82
4.39
11.34
12.92

0.971
0.690
0.731
0.397

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.039
0.000
0.000
0.115

P-value of
Difference
0.003
0.000
0.000
0.067

143.65
137.25
143.35
581.86

10.25
1.00
9.50
64.85

-78.81
-81.87
-74.05
-68.25

Voted For
(8)
-16.95
-17.07
-14.63
-14.43

79.48
58.03
90.40
156.76

16.03
7.55
18.85
36.45

-13.63
-56.67
-28.23
60.22

Voted Against
(171)
-9.56
-14.08
-9.69
-0.44

-64.17
-79.22
-52.95
-425.10

5.78
6.55
9.35
-28.40

65.18
25.20
45.82
128.47

+Against
7.39
2.99
4.94
13.99

Republicans

0.071
0.000
0.051
0.000

0.559
0.195
0.284
0.077

0.239
0.165
0.230
0.289

P-value of
Difference
0.200
0.129
0.238
0.359

Notes: This table lists points in the distribution across Democrats and Republicans that voted for and against H.R. 2454. 211
Democrats voted for the policy, while 43 voted against. 8 Republicans voted for the policy, while 169 voted against. The standard
errors are calculated via Stata’s req and qreg commands and are the standard errors associated with the indicator variable for
whether the member voted for the policy. Gains from CAT is average per capita benefits across the district from a cap & trade
program that reduces GHG emissions by 10 percent. Gains from RFS is average per capita benefits across the district from the
current federal RFS program in 2022. Political Contributions Against is the amount of political contributions received by the
House member from organizations opposing H.R. 2454, measured in $1000s. Political Contributions For is the amount of political
contributions received by the House member from organizations supporting H.R. 2454, measured in $1000s.

Mean
Median
75th
90th

3.46
0.50
3.35
9.00

Political
Mean
Contributions
Median
Against ($1,000s) 75th
90th

Political
Contributions
For ($1,000s)

-51.73
-76.65
-60.61
-13.53

Mean
Median
75th
90th

Gains from RFS
($/per capita)

Voted For
(211)
-13.40
-15.85
-12.99
-7.42

Statistic
Mean
Median
75th
90th

Variable
Gains from CAT
($/per capita)

Democrats

Table 3: Points of the distribution for key co-variates across party and voting on Waxman-Markey, H.R. 2454.

Table 4: Probit model correlating voting behavior for Waxman-Markey with estimated gains and
losses: Linear terms.

Democrat
ln(Per Capita Benefits from CAT)

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

Model 5

0.777***
(0.028)
-0.530***
(0.137)

0.749***
(0.019)
0.319
(0.222)
-0.114***
(0.026)

0.720***
(0.019)
0.154
(0.249)
-0.110***
(0.031)

0.752***
(0.019)

0.720***
(0.019)

0.094***
(0.016)
No
431
333.64
0.000
-131.87
0.56

0.105***
(0.021)
Yes
394
340.52
0.000
-102.66
0.62

ln(Per Capita Benefits from RFS)
ln(Benefits from CAT) - ln(Benefits from RFS)
State Fixed Effects
Observations
Chi-Square Statistic
P-Value
Log-Likelihood
Pseudo-R2

No
431
315.11
0.000
-141.13
0.53

No
431
334.66
0.000
-131.36
0.56

Yes
394
340.56
0.000
-102.64
0.62

Notes: The dependent variable equals one if the House member voted for H.R. 2454. The
reported coeﬃcients are the average of marginal coeﬃcients taken at each observations level
of the righthand side variables. For indicator variables, the coeﬃcient represents the average
change in the probability of voting yes from changing the indicator from zero to one. Democrat
is an indicator equal to one if the House member is a Democrat. Per Capita Benefits from
Cap & Trade is average per capita benefits across the district from a cap & trade program that
reduces GHG emissions by 10 percent. Per Capita Benefits from RFS is average per capita
benefits across the district from the current federal RFS program in 2022. We simulate that
this leads to a 10 percent reduction in GHG emissions. Natural logarithms are calculated by
adding $100 per capita to gains under each policy. ***, **, and * denotes statistical significance
at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses.

43

Table 5: Probit model correlating voting behavior for Waxman-Markey with estimated gains and
losses: Quartile indicators.

Democrat
Per Capita Benefits from Cap & Trade, Quartile 2
Per Capita Benefits from Cap & Trade, Quartile 3
Per Capita Benefits from Cap & Trade, Quartile 4

Model 1
0.774***
(0.029)
-0.0230
(0.042)
-0.0270
(0.043)
-0.191***
(0.050)

Per Capita Benefits from RFS, Quartile 2
Per Capita Benefits from RFS, Quartile 3
Per Capita Benefits from RFS, Quartile 4
State Fixed Effects
Observations
Chi-Square Statistic
P-Value
Log-Likelihood
Pseudo-R2

No
431
322
0.000
-137.60
0.54

Model 2
0.755***
(0.031)
0.0510
(0.042)
0.111**
(0.045)
0.0710
(0.057)
-0.182***
(0.050)
-0.254***
(0.060)
-0.393***
(0.069)
No
431
351
0.000
-123.15
0.59

Model 3
0.724***
(0.037)
0.095**
(0.047)
0.124**
(0.056)
0.0730
(0.066)
-0.165***
(0.053)
-0.264***
(0.067)
-0.358***
(0.080)
Yes
394
355
0.000
-95.37
0.65

Notes: The dependent variable equals one if the House member voted for H.R. 2454. The
reported coeﬃcients are the average of marginal coeﬃcients taken at each observations level
of the righthand side variables. For indicator variables, the coeﬃcient represents the average
change in the probability of voting yes from changing the indicator from zero to one. Democrat
is an indicator equal to one if the House member is a Democrat. The Per Capita Benefits from
Cap & Trade quartile indicators are the quartiles of the average per capita benefits across the
district from a cap & trade program that reduces GHG emissions by 10 percent. Per Capita
Benefits from RFS quartile indicators are the quartiles of the average per capita benefits across
the district from the current federal RFS program in 2022. We simulate that this leads to a 10
percent reduction in GHG emissions. ***, **, and * denotes statistical significance at the 1, 5,
and 10 percent levels, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses.

44

Table 6: Correlating voting behavior for Waxman-Markey with estimated gains and losses, other
GHG-related variables, and political ideology: Quartile model.
Model 1
Democrat
Per Capita Benefits from Cap & Trade, Quartile 2
Per Capita Benefits from Cap & Trade, Quartile 3
Per Capita Benefits from Cap & Trade, Quartile 4
Per Capita Benefits from RFS, Quartile 2
Per Capita Benefits from RFS, Quartile 3
Per Capita Benefits from RFS, Quartile 4
Top 10 Coal Producing State

0.752***
(0.031)
0.043
(0.042)
0.106**
(0.045)
0.065
(0.057)
-0.174***
(0.049)
-0.234***
(0.061)
-0.383***
(0.070)
-0.068*
(0.036)

DW-Nominate
ln(Per Capital CO2 Emissions)
ln(Average Power Plant CO2 Rate)

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

0.007
(0.039)
0.033
(0.043)
0.002
(0.054)
-0.123***
(0.044)
-0.120**
(0.054)
-0.150**
(0.076)
-0.032
(0.030)
-0.426***
(0.014)
-0.097***
(0.023)
0.035
(0.028)

0.017
(0.041)
0.042
(0.045)
0.014
(0.057)
-0.130***
(0.046)
-0.136**
(0.061)
-0.177**
(0.089)
-0.035
(0.031)
-0.427***
(0.015)
-0.101***
(0.024)
0.034
(0.027)
0.002
(0.003)
No
424
408.47
0.000
-89.54
0.70

0.047
(0.050)
0.065
(0.057)
0.04
(0.067)
-0.145***
(0.052)
-0.183**
(0.073)
-0.219**
(0.101)

ln(Corn Production)
State Fixed Effects
Observations
Chi-Square Statistic
P-Value
Log-Likelihood
Pseudo-R2/R2

No
431
354.90
0.000
-121.24
0.59

No
424
408.00
0.000
-89.77
0.69

-0.421***
(0.021)
-0.090***
(0.029)
0.03
(0.038)
0.001
(0.004)
Yes
386
390.94
0.000
-72.00
0.73

Notes: The dependent variable equals one if the House member voted for H.R. 2454. The reported coeﬃcients are the
average of marginal coeﬃcients taken at each observations level of the righthand side variables. For indicator variables, the
coeﬃcient represents the average change in the probability of voting yes from changing the indicator from zero to one. The
Per Capita Benefits form Cap & Trade quartile indicators are the quartiles of the average per capita benefits across the
district from a cap & trade program that reduces GHG emissions by 10 percent. Per Capita Benefits from RFS quartile
indicators are the quartiles of the average per capita benefits across the district from the current federal RFS program in
2022. We simulate that this leads to a 10 percent reduction in GHG emissions. DW-nominate is the voteview.org measure
of political ideology for the House member. Per capita CO2 emissions is the Purdue University Vulcan estimate of district’s
annual per capita CO2 emissions. Average power plant CO2 rate is the EIA measure of the average CO2 emission rate of
power plants within the district. Corn production is the district’s total corn production in 2007. ***, **, and * denotes
statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses.

45

Table 7: Correlating campaign contributions by groups in support of or opposed to WaxmanMarkey with estimated gains and losses: Quartile model.

ln(Contributions ln(Contributions ln(Contributions ln(Contributions
Opposing WM) Opposing WM) Supporting WM) Supporting WM)
Democrat
Per Capita Benefits from Cap & Trade, Quartile 2
Per Capita Benefits from Cap & Trade, Quartile 3
Per Capita Benefits from Cap & Trade, Quartile 4
Per Capita Benefits from RFS, Quartile 2
Per Capita Benefits from RFS, Quartile 3
Per Capita Benefits from RFS, Quartile 4
State Fixed Effects
Observations
R2

-2.180***
(0.347)
-1.508***
(0.525)
-1.679***
(0.627)
-1.966**
(0.764)
1.574***
(0.552)
2.819***
(0.638)
4.741***
(0.773)
No
430
0.23

-1.746***
(0.360)
-1.914***
(0.611)
-1.960***
(0.720)
-2.488***
(0.882)
1.568***
(0.585)
3.081***
(0.718)
5.004***
(0.898)
Yes
430
0.37

0.372***
(0.122)
0.213
(0.185)
0.134
(0.221)
-0.055
(0.269)
0.016
(0.195)
0.061
(0.225)
0.3690
(0.272)
No
430
0.03

0.399***
(0.125)
0.321
(0.213)
0.330
(0.251)
0.082
(0.307)
-0.129
(0.204)
-0.131
(0.250)
0.276
(0.313)
Yes
430
0.23

Notes: All models are estimated via OLS. The dependent variable in the first two columns is the amount
of political contributions received by the House member from organizations opposing H.R. 2454, measured in
$1000s. The dependent variable in the columns three and four is the amount of political contributions received
by the House member from organizations supporting H.R. 2454, measured in $1000s. Democrat is an indicator
equal to one if the House member is a Democrat. The Per Capita Benefits form Cap & Trade quartile indicators
are the quartiles of the average per capita benefits across the district from a cap & trade program that reduces
GHG emissions by 10 percent. We simulate that this leads to a 10 percent reduction in GHG emissions. Per
Capita Benefits from RFS quartile indicators are the quartiles of the average per capita benefits across the district
from the current federal RFS program in 2022. ***, **, and * denotes statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10
percent levels, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses.

46

Table 8: Correlating voting behavior for Waxman-Markey with estimated gains and losses, other
GHG-related variables, and contributions: Quartile model.

Democrat

Model 1
0.689***
(0.042)

Per Capita Benefits from Cap & Trade, Quartile 2
Per Capita Benefits from Cap & Trade, Quartile 3
Per Capita Benefits from Cap & Trade, Quartile 4
Per Capita Benefits from RFS, Quartile 2
Per Capita Benefits from RFS, Quartile 3
Per Capita Benefits from RFS, Quartile 4
ln(Contributions Supporting Waxman-Markey)
ln(Contributions Split on Waxman-Markey)
ln(Contributions Opposing Waxman-Markey)

0.034**
(0.014)
0.005
(0.004)
-0.031***
(0.005)

Model 2
0.670***
(0.043)
0.024
(0.041)
0.081*
(0.044)
0.027
(0.057)
-0.154***
(0.047)
-0.185***
(0.056)
-0.256***
(0.077)
0.036***
(0.014)
0.001
(0.004)
-0.023***
(0.004)

Model 3
0.640***
(0.051)
0.056
(0.047)
0.094*
(0.054)
0.047
(0.066)
-0.142***
(0.051)
-0.201***
(0.064)
-0.246***
(0.086)
0.033**
(0.016)
-0.002
(0.004)
-0.021***
(0.005)

Top 10 Coal Producing State
DW-Nominate
ln(Per Capital CO2 Emissions)
ln(Average Power Plant CO2 Rate)
ln(Corn Production)
State Fixed Effects
Observations
Chi-Square Statistic
P-Value
Log-Likelihood
Pseudo-R2/R2

No
427
349.32
0.000
-121.26
0.59

No
427
375.89
0.000
-107.97
0.64

Yes
391
373.20
0.000
-84.27
0.69

Model 4

Model 5

0.013
(0.042)
0.027
(0.046)
0.003
(0.057)
-0.122***
(0.045)
-0.110*
(0.057)
-0.131
(0.081)
0.020*
(0.012)
0.005
(0.004)
-0.009**
(0.004)
-0.031
(0.030)
-0.409***
(0.020)
-0.088***
(0.024)
0.036
(0.026)
0.001
(0.003)
No
420
412.59
0.000
-84.71
0.71

0.038
(0.050)
0.057
(0.057)
0.037
(0.067)
-0.134***
(0.052)
-0.152**
(0.069)
-0.159*
(0.095)
0.025*
(0.015)
0.003
(0.005)
-0.010**
(0.005)

-0.395***
(0.025)
-0.072**
(0.030)
0.041
(0.044)
0.000
(0.004)
Yes
383
394.75
0.000
-68.04
0.74

Notes: The dependent variable equals one if the House member voted for H.R. 2454. The reported coeﬃcients are the
average of marginal coeﬃcients taken at each observations level of the righthand side variables. For indicator variables, the
coeﬃcient represents the average change in the probability of voting yes from changing the indicator from zero to one. The
Per Capita Benefits form Cap & Trade quartile indicators are the quartiles of the average per capita benefits across the
district from a cap & trade program that reduces GHG emissions by 10 percent. Per Capita Benefits from RFS quartile
indicators are the quartiles of the average per capita benefits across the district from the current federal RFS program in
2022. We simulate that this leads to a 10 percent reduction in GHG emissions. DW-nominate is the voteview.org measure of
political ideology for the House member. Political Contributions Opposing is the amount of political contributions received
by the House member from organizations opposing H.R. 2454, measured in $1000s. Political Contributions Supporting is
the amount of political contributions received by the House member from organizations supporting H.R. 2454, measured in
$1000s. Per capita CO2 emissions is the Purdue University Vulcan estimate of district’s annual per capita CO2 emissions.
Average power plant CO2 rate is the EIA measure of the average CO2 emission rate of power plants within the district.
Corn production is the district’s total corn production in 2007. ***, **, and * denotes statistical significance at the 1, 5,
and 10 percent levels, respectively. The coeﬃcient for Per Capita Benefits from RFS, Quartile 4 in Model 4 is significant
at the 10 percent level, but the marginal eﬀect p-values are slightly greater than 0.10.

47

Table 9: Land use changes under alternate policies.

BAU

RFS

LCFS

CAT

SUBS.

Land Use Changes (1000s of Acres)
Total Acres

3,121

+38,979

+27,479

+1,158

+37,779

Corn Acres

2,892

+27,708

+14,708

+8

+25,708

Low Scenario ($10 per corn acre)

$

1.68

$

0.89

< $0.01

$

2.31

High Scenario ($25 per corn acre)

$

4.19

$

2.22

< $0.01

$

5.77

Land Use Change Cost ($/MTCO2e)

Table 10: Uncontrolled emissions due to errors in estimating carbon intensity.

RFS
LCFS
CAT
SUBS
Measured Emissions (MMTCO2e)
1454
1454
1454
1508
Actual Emissions (MMTCO2e)
1465
1460
1455
1519
Uncontrolled as % of stated reduction
7.1%
4.0%
0.7%
9.9%
Notes: "Measured emissions" assumes the emissions intensity for corn ethanol is
sest.= 0.80. "Actual emissions" assumes regulators set corn emissions at sest.= 0.80,
while the true emissions intensity is sact.= 0.90. This error results in "uncontrolled
emissions" above the level targeted by the policy.

48

Table 11: Innovation incentives under alternate policies.

BAU

LCFS

CAT

SUBS

$0.91

$2.61

$4.38

-$4.43

!"CS

$0.00

$67.08

$43.44

$0.00

! PS

$0.91

-$64.47

$3.24

$17.29

! PS (Corn Ethanol)

$0.00

-$85.03

-$0.07

$0.00

! PS (Cellulosic Ethanol)

$0.91

$20.56

$3.31

$17.29

Without Innovation

$2.75

$3.48

$3.58

$2.75

Base Case (With Innovation)

$2.75

$2.96

$3.23

$2.75

Without Innovation

$47.43

$32.66

$194.45

Base Case (With Innovation)

$48.58

$19.52

$82.30

! Social Surplus ($ bn.)

Fuel Price ($/gge)

Avg. Abatement cost ($/MTCO2e)

Notes: The change in surplus is the additional surplus from including our six types of cellulosic ethanol (With Innovation) relative to the counterfactual which excludes cellulosic ethanol
(Without Innovation).

49

Appendices
A

Modeling assumptions

Using data on biofuel supply and emissions intensity, we simulate fuel production, emissions, and
land use in the U.S. under ethanol subsidies, RFS, LCFS, CAT, and SUBs systems. The simulation
model captures the key characteristics of the market for transportation fuels in a simple framework
that enables us to iteratively solve for market outcomes under each policy. In the sections that
follow we describe our simulation model, key assumptions, and data.

A.1

Simulation methodology and data

We limit our analysis to a transportation fuel market consisting of gasoline and ethanol fuels.
Because ethanol, and to a lesser extent gasoline, are likely to have very diﬀerent emissions characteristics based on the feedstocks and technologies used in fuel production, we define a unique
fuel as the combination of feedstock and production technology leading to a finished transportation
fuel. For example, gasoline, ethanol produced by fermentation of corn, and ethanol produced from
lignocellulosic forest biomass are considered distinct fuels.46 It is worth noting that while our biofuel supply data focus on the U.S., other nations such as Brazil are likely to be important suppliers
of biofuels in the future. Because we lack reliable data on these regions, we focus our analysis on
domestic production.
We assume that on an energy basis these fuels are perfect substitutes and can be represented by
a single demand equation for transportation fuel. This approach can be thought of as combining
gasoline and ethanol fuels into a single blended fuel where the volume fraction of ethanol depends
on the relative aggregate supply of each fuel. This simplification seems reasonable since modern
gasoline vehicles can operate on blends containing up to, perhaps, 20% ethanol by volume and fuel
economy, once adjusted for energy content, does not vary substantially for gasoline and ethanol
fuels.47
46

Similarly, gasoline produced from light sweet crude and gasoline produced from tar sands would be considered
distinct fuels. However, since the focus of this paper is on biofuel production, we limit our analysis to gasoline
produced from conventional oil resources.
47
One limitation of this approach is that it ignores any utility consumers have for fuels that have environmental
benefits, i.e. “warm glow.”

50

A.2

Fuel demand

Baseline consumption of 140 billion gge per year is taken from the U.S. Department of Energy
estimate for motor fuel consumption in 2022 U.S. Energy Information Administration (2010). This
estimate includes the eﬀect of policies such as the new Corporate Average Fuel Economy standards
on future fuel consumption. We use a BAU retail price of $2.75 per gallon.48 Because future fuel
prices are uncertain, we rerun our simulations using high and low price scenarios with retail prices
of $2.25 per gallon and $3.25 per gallon. To put these numbers in perspective, the mean retail
U.S. average price for gasoline in 2005 dollars from 2005 - 2009 was approximately $2.45 per gallon
with 25th and 75th percentiles of approximately $2.20 and $2.85 per gallon. Compared with recent
prices, our base case BAU price is relatively high. However, this value is conservative in the sense
that it favors higher BAU ethanol production and smaller changes in ethanol production and land
use due to the adoption of carbon policy.
For our main analysis we assume that demand has constant elasticity, i.e., D(p) = Ap−� , where
the elasticity � is 0.5 and A is determined by the baseline consumption of 140 billion gge at a price
of $2.75. In our sensitivity analysis, we solve for diﬀerent As at fuel prices of $2.25 per gallon
and $3.25 per gallon. This long-run elasticity of 0.5 is consistent with recent estimates from the
literature, for example Small and Winston (1999). The long-run demand elasticity is meant to
capture both the short-run (e.g., driving less) and long-run (e.g., purchasing a more fuel eﬃcient
vehicle) behavior of consumers in response to changes in the price of fuel. We test the sensitivity
of our results to the demand elasticity assumption below.

A.3

Gasoline supply

We assume that gasoline supply is perfectly elastic in the long run. Gasoline supply is primarily
limited by refinery capacity in the short-run. Since each policy studied here serves to reduce gasoline
consumption, it is unlikely that capacity constraints will be important in the long run. Violations
of this assumption would come from an upward sloping long run average cost curve. This could
occur, for example, if the refinery locations vary in their quality in terms of either access to inputs
or demand.
The assumption of perfectly elastic supply at $2.75 per gallon (retail) means that gasoline is
always the marginal fuel and the fuel price is always determined by the eﬀects of the policies on
48

We convert ethanol wholesale prices to retail prices by adding $0.63 per gge to the wholesale price. This figure,
meant to capture fuel taxes and distribution costs, is taken from the average diﬀerence between retail and wholesale
gasoline prices from 2000 to 2009.

51

the cost of gasoline production. Furthermore, the assumption of perfectly elastic supply implies
that gasoline production is determined by the demand for transportation fuel and the total level
of ethanol production as discussed previously.
Finally, we assume that real state and federal fuel excise taxes in 2022 are unchanged from
today’s levels and that no additional taxes are levied on transportation fuel. The net U.S. average
state and federal gasoline tax is approximately $0.48 per gallon. Taking the average diﬀerence
between retail and wholesale prices of $0.63 described above, implies distribution and retail costs
(and, possibly, mark ups) of approximately $0.15 per gallon. This approach assumes that gasoline
and ethanol are treated the same on a energy equivalent basis. However, this assumption implies
changes in the structure of fuel taxes to take the energy content of fuels into account.

A.4

Ethanol supply curves

We construct ethanol supply curves using cost estimates for biomass feedstocks, conversion, and
ethanol distribution. We consider grain and lignocellulosic ethanol produced from: corn (grain);
agricultural residues, such as rice straw and corn stover; orchard and vineyard waste; forest biomass,
including waste and farmed trees; herbaceous energy crops, such as switchgrass; and municipal solid
waste.49 Feedstock costs are based on county-level geographic information system (GIS) data on
agricultural production in the United States. Conversion costs are based on engineering models for
ethanol production facilities. Transportation costs are based on GIS data for existing truck, rail,
and marine facilities.
These data are combined with a simplified model for the biofuel refining industry in a mixed
integer linear optimization program. The industry is modeled as a set of competitive firms with
perfect information. Firms choose plant location and plant size (output) to maximize profit conditional on the price of fuel, biomass resources, and transportation costs. The model explicitly
accounts for the trade-oﬀ between economies of scale in the conversion of biomass to fuels and the
feedstock collection costs. Supply curves are constructed by varying the price of fuel and calculating the profit maximizing level of biofuel production. Diﬀerent prices correspond to diﬀerent
levels of plant production as well as diﬀerent industry configurations in terms of the number, size
and location of production facilities. Therefore, the supply curves represent estimates of long-run
biofuel supply. The resulting supply curves are shown in Appendix Figure 1.
49

Given that ethanol and gasoline are substitutes for low level ethanol blends, we focus on ethanol production
pathways. Future work may explore implications of carbon policy on diesel and biodiesel supply.

52

Biomass resource estimates are constructed as follows. National corn production and price
projections Oﬃce of the Chief Economist, World Agricultural Outlook Board, United States Department of Agriculture (2010) are disaggregated to county level by assuming future production
matches the historical geographic distribution of production National Agricultural Statistics Service
(2009). Total corn ethanol production is constrained at 15 billion gallons per year in compliance
with the RFS.
Herbaceous energy crop resource (switchgrass) estimates are take from Wullschleger et al.
(2010). We assume that herbaceous energy crop production is limited to marginal land, defined as
cropland that was idle or in pasture (not pastureland) in the 2007 Census of Agriculture National
Agricultural Statistics Service (2009). In this case, our results can be interpreted as a lower bound
on the projected land use changes. In reality, high energy prices may cause farmers to switch
production of herbaceous energy crops to land previously used for other types of agriculture.
Sustainably removable quantities of agricultural residues − corn stover, wheat straw, orchard

and vineyard prunings − are estimated based on historical yields, land areas, and production

practices with binding constraints on wind erosion, water erosion and organic matter in the soil
Graham et al. (2007); Nelson (2010). The cost of harvesting, storing and transporting agricultural
residues comes from a feedstock logistics model developed by Idaho National Laboratory Idaho
National Laboratory (2010).
Forest residue resource assessments are taken from Biomass Research and Development Board
(2009). Production of biomass from farmed trees is modeled using pulpwood supply curves obtained from the U.S. Forest Service.50 Finally, the municipal solid waste resource is estimated
by projecting the organic fraction of municipal solid waste using state-level per capita waste production statistics Simmons et al. (2006) and the composition of wastes currently landfilled U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (2007). A fraction of the gross waste landfill is assumed to be
available for fuels production. The cost of sorting waste biomass for use in an ethanol production
facility is assumed to be $30/ton.
We model grain and cellulosic ethanol production technologies. The engineering economic
models represent future technology costs in the year 2017. Given that new ethanol plants operating
in 2022 will include a mix of facilities built both immediately prior to 2022 and a number of years
before, 2017 seems a reasonable approximation for plant vintage.
For grain ethanol, both wet and dry-mill corn ethanol technology are considered. Production
costs are taken from Gallagher, Brubaker, and Shapouri (2005); Gallagher and Shapouri (2005);
50

Obtained via personal communication with Ken Skog at the USFS.

53

Butzen and Hobbs (2002). All dry mill facilities are modeled with natural gas for process heat and
dry distillers grains as a co-product. We assume conversion eﬃciencies of 2.8 gallons per bushel
for dry mill facilities and 2.5 gallons per bushel for wet mill facilities. Existing ethanol plants are
modeled with zero capital cost. The locations and capacities of existing plants are fixed Renewable
Fuels Association (2009). Due to the relative cost of the technologies, all new facilities use dry mill
technology.
The conversion of cellulosic feedstocks to ethanol uses a dilute acid enzymatic hydrolysis and
fermentation technology. Cost and performance are taken from Wooley et al. (1999); Hamelinck,
Hooijdonk, and Faaij (2005); Aden et al. (2002); McAloon et al. (2000). The technology cost and
performance reflect nth of a kind facilities and represent significant advances from the current state
of the industry. Conversion eﬃciencies are dependent on composition of the feedstock and range
from 70 gallons per dry ton to 90 gallons per dry ton. For all technologies, capital cost are converted
to levelized costs of conversion using a 20-year economic life and a 12.3% annual discount rate.
Finally, finished ethanol fuel is distributed to existing gasoline distribution terminals Oil Price
Information Service (2007) in proportion to the fraction of national vehicle miles traveled (VMT)
within each terminal service area Hu et al. (2007). Distribution costs are based on the highway
distance between ethanol plants and gasoline distribution terminals.

A.5

GHG emissions intensities

The distinguishing feature of biofuels, compared to other fuels, is the fact that growing plants
remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. The combustion of fuel produced from biomass feedstocks releases this carbon back into the atmosphere, where in principle, a roughly equivalent
quantity is absorbed by the next generation of biomass. Therefore, overall carbon emissions can
be limited within this cycle. In practice however, the cultivation, collection, conversion, and distribution of biomass feedstock and ethanol fuel create additional carbon emissions. Unfortunately,
for many developing technologies, production scale facilities do not currently exist. As a result,
engineers rely on techniques of life-cycle analysis to estimate the average emissions characteristics
of diﬀerent ethanol pathways.
Life-cycle analysis assigns emissions factors to the various stages of ethanol production such as
feedstock collection, conversion, and fuel combustion. Diﬀerences in emissions for fuel pathways
arise from variation in ethanol yield and energy input requirements for alternate feedstocks and
production processes. In addition to direct process emissions, the cultivation of biomass feedstocks

54

may result in carbon emissions due to indirect land use changes. The emissions intensities used
here are intended to capture both direct and indirect emissions.
Recent work Searchinger et al. (2008); California Air Resources Board (2009); Fargione et al.
(2009) suggests that switching land to energy crop production emits large quantities of sequestered
carbon. The argument is that increased biofuel consumption can lead to new land being put into
production either directly, by growing energy crops, or indirectly by displacing other agricultural
activity. Carbon sequestered in the soil and in existing vegetation is released into the atmosphere
when the new land is cleared and tilled. While considerable uncertainties exist, one recent study
estimated that accounting for these eﬀects increases the emissions associated with corn and cellulosic
ethanol production by 30 g/MJ and 18 g/MJ, respectively California Air Resources Board (2009).
Eﬀects of this magnitude represent increases of approximately 44% and 98% of model estimates for
corn and cellulosic ethanol emissions excluding land use changes.51
Unfortunately, there is no single study or research group that provides estimates of life-cycle
GHG emissions for all the fuels considered here and, as noted, for studies that overlap, there is
substantial variation in the parameter values. Appendix Table 2 summarizes the life-cycle GHG
estimates for various subsets of the ethanol fuels in this paper. The results are presented as
normalized emissions intensities where the intensity of each ethanol fuel is divided by the emission
intensity of gasoline. This leads to a more intuitive interpretation. For example, a normalized
intensity of 0.90 means that GHG emissions are 90% of GHG emissions of conventional gasoline.
Due to the considerable variability in these estimates, we adopt baseline values that fall conservatively in the range of those presented in Appendix Table 2. We construct a series of scenarios
to gauge the sensitivity of our results to changes in these parameters. The base case emissions
intensities and scenario parameters are presented in Appendix Table 3.

A.6

County-level surplus calculations

To understand the distributional impacts of transportation carbon policies across the U.S., we first
estimate changes in consumer and producer surplus under each policy at the county level. To
do this we calculate the change in producer surplus relative to BAU for corn ethanol, the seven
cellulosic fuels, and gasoline for each county using the equilibrium producer fuel prices from our
national model and our county-level ethanol supply curves. Because we lack detailed data on fuel
consumption or driving at the county level, we assign changes in consumer surplus to counties based
51
In the case of corn ethanol, indirect land use eﬀects of this magnitude would result in CO2 e emissions exceeding
those of conventional gasoline.

55

on population.52 County-level surplus changes are then calculated as the diﬀerence in producer and
consumer surplus changes under each policy. Because counties may be of substantially diﬀerent
size, we report changes per capita.
Our analysis of Congressional voting behavior requires aggregating the county-level surplus
data to Congressional Districts. We assign counties to Congressional districts based on the 110th
Congress. When a district contains more than one county, each county’s contribution to the district
surplus change is weighted equally by one 1/nj , where nj is the number of counties in district j.
Despite the concentration of agricultural activity in the U.S. Midwest, there is substantial
variation in county-level gains and loses across policies. Appendix Figure 2 compares county-level
gains under the RFS and CAT. Deviations for the dotted line identify the RFS and CAT gains
parameters in Tables 4 through ??.

A.7

Land use calculations

The land areas used to grow energy crops for ethanol production are calculated using county-level
geographic information system (GIS) data on biomass resources. In our data, the feedstocks with
the largest potential for large land-use shifts are corn and herbaceous energy crops. For simplicity,
we assume that there are no land use eﬀects associated with the use of waste biomass for ethanol
production.53 This assumption seems reasonable given collection costs and the relatively small
quantity of waste biomass available.
Each ethanol supply curve is based on production at discrete plants optimally sited across the
U.S. by our linear optimization model. The quantity of biomass required to produce a gallon of
ethanol is determined by ethanol conversion eﬃciency factors assigned to each production technology described above. For each ethanol plant and each fuel type, the total quantity of biomass
consumed is known for every point on the supply curve. To calculate the total amount of land
required to supply biomass to each plant, we use county-level crop yield data to convert biomass
tons to acres planted.
Corn yields are estimated by increasing the current county-level yields National Agricultural
Statistics Service (2009) uniformly at the rate projected for the national average Oﬃce of the Chief
Economist, World Agricultural Outlook Board, United States Department of Agriculture (2010).
Switchgrass yields were modeled by Oak Ridge National Laboratory for both lowland and upland
52

Weights were derived based on population from the 2000 U.S. Census.
For example, farmers that sell orchard and vineyard waste to ethanol plants do not expand their orchards as a
result of the reduced cost of waste disposal.
53

56

varieties of switchgrass. Our calculations use upland yields as these more closely approximate yields
for switchgrass grown on marginal lands.
To graphically illustrate land use shifts we calculate “land use intensities” for both corn and
total energy crop production, corn plus herbaceous energy crops and corn alone. Herbaceous energy
crops are assumed to be grown on land not used for production of food or other cultivated crops.
This distinction is useful for two reasons. First, farmland used for corn production is a substitute
for land used for food crops. Therefore, one would expect food price and indirect land use eﬀects to
be larger than for crops grown on marginal land. Second, corn may be raised using more intensive
farming practices leading to more fertilizer use, irrigation, erosion, etc., compared to herbaceous
crops.
We define land use intensity as the total number of acres used in energy crop production divided
by total land area in a given county. This approach provides a consistent basis for comparison across
counties and highlights the regions where land use shifts are occurring. Using total land area as
the basis for comparison also illustrates the tradeoﬀs that occur when marginal lands are put into
production.54

A.8

Environmental costs per acre of cropland

Land-use changes have important implications for indirect carbon emissions, food prices, run-oﬀ,
erosion and habitat loss. Because diﬀerent transportation carbon policies are likely to result in
vastly diﬀerent land-use changes, we consider these costs an important part of any policy evaluation.
We incorporate indirect carbon emissions directly in our baseline emissions intensity parameters.
Because fuel price eﬀects are controversial, for example see Roberts and Schlenker (2010), we leave
food price eﬀects for future analysis. Instead, we focus on environmental costs due to erosion and
habitat loss.
One of the potential benefits of herbaceous energy crops, such as switchgrass, are the low
environmental costs of cultivation. Our supply curves assume switchgrass is grown on marginal
agricultural lands without irrigation or application of chemical fertilizers. We imagine that these
farming practices do not substantially increase, and potentially reduce, erosion. Furthermore,
we assume that when land is converted to switchgrass farming, these fields oﬀer similar wildlife
habitat to the fallow land being replaced. Under these circumstances, we conservatively estimate
the environmental costs of additional lands devoted to herbaceous energy crop production as zero.
54

As opposed to comparisons based on the number of arable acres within the county, for example.

57

Cultivated crops such as corn are likely to have more serious environmental costs. Land used for
increased corn production comes from a combination of existing agricultural land previously used
for other cultivated crops, and new lands being brought into production. To a first approximation,
we assume the environmental costs of corn and other cultivated crops are similar. Therefore, we
ignore the fraction of land coming from crop substitution. To model new lands, we assume any
additional acres come from the Conservation Reserve Program (CRP). Hansen (2007), studies the
benefits of CRP in terms of reduced erosion and habitat preservation. He estimates an annual
benefit of approximately $1.3 billion for the approximately 36 million acres in CRP for an average
annual benefit of approximately $36 per acre per year. Benefits vary substantially by region. In
the nation’s corn belt, Hansen (2007) estimates CRP benefits of over $80 per acre. We use $36 per
acre and $80 per acre as lower and upper bounds on the range of potential costs.
To estimate the fraction of new acres planted per additional acre of corn produced we refer
to previous work on land use changes due to biofuel production. Searchinger et al. (2008) model
global land-use changes under the Federal RFS. The authors find that for a 56 billion liter (15
billion gallon) increase in U.S. corn ethanol production, corn acreage increases by approximately
7,864 thousand hectares and total cropland increases by 2,245 thousand hectares (29%). In our
analysis, we assume that 30% of all additional corn acres come from CRP land. Based on these
assumptions, we model a range of environmental costs due to land-use change in a range between
$10 and $25 per additional acre of corn production.

A.9

Numerical simulation algorithm

Given the theoretical framework described above, the equilibrium under each of the four policies
could be solved analytically for continuous functional forms. However, our detailed ethanol supply
curves are discontinuous, which necessitates a numerical simulation. The code for the calculations
is available on the web. Here we briefly describe the algorithm.
In the baseline case with no carbon policy, the fuel price is simply determined by the marginal
cost of gasoline. Fuel demand is then found from the demand curve, and supply of each type of
ethanol is determined by the ethanol supply curves. Gasoline production is simply the residual
after subtracting total ethanol production from the quantity demanded.
For the case with ethanol subsidies, the calculation is quite similar except now supply of each
type of ethanol is determined by Equation 1. As above, the price is determined by the marginal
cost of gasoline.

58

The RFS simulation is somewhat more complicated since the fuel price is now determined by
the optimality condition for gasoline in Equation 4 which in turn depends on the RIN prices. The
equilibrium is calculated with a series of nested loops. For a given vector of RIN prices, the supply
of each type of ethanol can be calculated from Equation 3. Since the fuel price is determined by
Equation 4, the fuel demand is determined and again gasoline fills the residual demand. However,
given these prices, the cellulosic RIN price may not satisfy the RFS ratio for cellulosic ethanol. By
raising the cellulosic RIN price if there is too little cellulosic ethanol and lowering it if there is too
much cellulosic ethanol, the cellulosic RIN price can be adjusted so that the RFS ratio for cellulosic
ethanol is exactly satisfied.55 However, now the RFS ratio for advanced ethanol may not hold. By
using a nested loop, the RIN prices can be adjusted so that both the cellulosic and advanced RFS
ratios hold. Adding another nested loop ensures that all three RFS ratios hold.56
For the LCFS, for a given λLCF S , the fuel price is determined by Equation 6 for gasoline. With
this price and λLCF S , the quantities of each ethanol and of gasoline can be calculated. However, the
LCFS constraint in Equation 5 may not be satisfied. By looping over λLCF S , the LCFS equilibrium
can be calculated.
Finally for carbon trading, the fuel price is determined for a given λCAT by Equation 8 for
gasoline. The supply of each type of ethanol can then be determined by Equation 8 for each type
of ethanol. As above, the carbon price can be increased if carbon emissions exceed the cap or
can be decreased otherwise until Equation 7 holds with equality. This yields the carbon trading
equilibrium.
To make the policies comparable, the LCFS standard and carbon cap are set so that they each
yield the same emissions reductions as the RFS.

B

Robustness

In this section, we investigate the robustness of our results to changes in the preferred simulation
parameters. In the following scenarios we vary; the baseline fuel price; the emissions intensities of
corn and cellulosic ethanol; and the elasticity of fuel demand. Finally, we relax our assumption
that corn prices are not substantially aﬀected by shifts in ethanol production.
55

Actually, the algorithm starts with upper and lower bounds for the price and then calculates new upper and
lower bounds by evaluating the midpoint of the interval. Note that changing the cellulosic RIN price requires that
all the equilibrium values be recalculated.
56
We add three additional loops to ensure that the RFS ratios indeed hit the volumetric targets.

59

B.1

Gasoline price scenarios

The fuel price scenarios in Appendix Table 5 highlight the eﬀect of our BAU fuel price assumption
on equilibrium prices, average abatement costs, consumer and producer surplus changes. Because
ethanol and gasoline are substitutes, we expect higher baseline levels of ethanol production during
periods of high fuel prices. Therefore at higher BAU prices, the RFS results in lower changes in
ethanol production and lower predicted emissions reductions. As a result, consumer and producer
surplus changes as well as average abatement costs are lower with higher BAU fuel prices. Because
the LCFS and CAT systems are designed to achieve the same reduction in emissions as the RFS,
changes under these policies also decrease with higher baseline fuel prices.
Average abatement costs continue to vary substantially across policies. At $2.25 per gallon,
abatement costs under the RFS are more than three times those under CAT, while abatement
costs under the LCFS are more than two times greater. Increasing the baseline fuel price to $3.25
reduces average abatement costs for all of the policies, though the relative levels remain fairly
constant. Abatement costs under the RFS and LCFS continue to be over two and a half times
those of CAT.
Producer surplus gains to ethanol producers decreases with higher baseline fuel prices under
the RFS, LCFS and CAT systems. However, the diﬀerences between gains under CAT and the
alternatives remains large. Under subsidies, producer surplus gains increase with higher BAU fuel
prices. Approximately half of this gain ($3.79) goes to corn ethanol producers.
Because the diﬀerence in producer surplus gains between the RFS and CAT systems decreases
with high baseline fuel prices, we re-estimate our empirical model with data from the high fuel price
scenario. With high baseline fuel prices, gains to producers under the RFS fall from approximately
$17 billion per year to approximately $12.5 billion per year. However, county-level gains under
the alternatives to CAT are still large and concentrated. Appendix Table 6 shows points on the
distribution of gains and loses under each of the policies. Under the RFS and subsidies, the top
5% of counties gain more than $953 and $2,076 per capita, respectively. No county loses more than
$105 per capita. Under CAT, the top 5% of counties gain more than $146 per capita. No county
gains more than $789. Correlations between gains, loses, voting behavior, and contributions are
very similar to results using our preferred simulation parameters.

60

B.2

GHG emissions intensities scenarios

In our baseline simulation, we used emissions intensities for the diﬀerent ethanol feedstocks that
fall conservatively in the range of those presented in Appendix Table 2 and conduct a series of
scenarios to gauge the sensitivity of our results to changes in these parameters. The base case
emissions intensities and scenario parameters are presented in Appendix Table 3. The “High
Indirect Land Use” scenario is meant to capture the case where emissions due to indirect land
use changes are higher than initially estimated. “Waste Zero Emissions” captures the case where
ethanol produced from waste biomass is assigned zero emissions.57 Finally, the “Existing Corn”
scenario represents the case where future corn ethanol technologies fail to realize fewer emissions
than current technology.
Appendix Table 7 presents simulation results under the base case and the three emissions
intensity scenarios. Fuel prices and production are unchanged under the RFS and subsidies as
these policies do not take into account the carbon emissions characteristics of fuels. Similarly,
producer and consumer surplus changes under the RFS and subsidies are unaﬀected by changes in
emissions parameters. Under the LCFS and CAT systems, energy prices and consumer surplus loses
decrease, and producer surplus gains increase, under the high indirect land use scenario. Producer
surplus gains to ethanol producers are largest under the scenario where waste biomass is assigned
an emissions intensity of zero.
Abatement costs also move in expected ways. Under the “High Indirect Land Use” and “Existing
Corn” scenarios average abatement costs increase for the RFS and SUBs policies. This is because
the higher emissions intensities of fuels in these scenarios decreases the total emissions reduction
under policies that don’t take carbon production into account. The mechanism varies by policy,
however. In the scenarios where emissions intensities increase, under the RFS and SUBs the change
in private surplus from the regulations is unaltered, but abatement is reduced, leading to an increase
in average abatement costs. Under the LCFS and CAT, there are two competing eﬀects. For one,
the required abatement under these policies is reduced since this is set by abatement under the
RFS. Second, because the emission intensities of some fuels has increased, it is more costly to meet
a given level of abatement. We find the first eﬀect dominates, leading to an decrease in abatement
costs. Under the “Waste Zero Emissions” scenario, the availability of “zero carbon” fuels results in
lower average abatement costs in all scenarios. In all cases the relative abatement cost diﬀerences
across policies remains large.
57
Though in reality these feedstock may generate emissions, due to the uncertainty in estimating emissions policy
makers may be inclined to give these fuels a “free pass.”

61

B.3

Fuel demand price elasticity scenarios

Appendix Table 8 presents simulation results for a range of price elasticities of gasoline demand. Our
base case simulations use a price elasticity of -0.50. In addition, we simulate less elastic and more
elastic demand with elasticities of -0.30 and -0.70, respectively. The land use estimates are very
robust to changes in the demand elasticity. There are no changes in equilibrium outcomes under
subsidies as fuel prices under the policy are unchanged. Under CAT, fuel price increases are smaller
with more elastic demand. Fuel price changes under the RFS and LCFS are essentially unchanged
across the scenarios. Under CAT, consumer surplus loses decrease substantially when demand is
assumed to be more elastic. Surplus to gains to ethanol producers vary slightly depending on the
assumed demand elasticity, though the large diﬀerences across policies remain. In particular, the
large gains to corn ethanol producers under the RFS compared with CAT are essentially unchanged.

B.4

Corn price elasticity scenario

Corn represents a substantial fraction of the cost of producing corn ethanol, in our simulations
approximately $2.00 per gasoline gallon equivalent. We set corn prices under the 2022 RFS to
$3.64 per bushel, consistent with production of 10 billion gge per year of corn ethanol Oﬃce of
the Chief Economist, World Agricultural Outlook Board, United States Department of Agriculture
(2010). At these levels, corn used in ethanol production represents a substantial share of U.S. corn
production. However, substantially less corn ethanol is produced under BAU and CAT. In these
cases, we may expect lower prices reflecting a decreased demand for corn. To gauge the sensitivity
of our results to endogenous changes in corn prices, we adjust our corn ethanol supply curve using
a elasticity of corn prices with respect to corn consumption for ethanol production of 0.12 (Gardner
(2007)). Supply curves for corn ethanol with and without corn price eﬀects are shown in Appendix
Figure 5. The upper supply curve is our base case. The lower supply curve shows the adjustment
to marginal costs from decreased corn prices at lower production levels. The horizontal line in
Appendix Figure 5 shows the marginal cost of production plus the carbon charge under CAT. The
intersection of the horizontal line with the supply curves gives the levels of ethanol production in
each case. Because corn supply is relatively elastic, small shits in prices result in large changes in
corn ethanol production.
Appendix Table 9 shows the simulation results for each policy in the base case and accounting for
corn price eﬀects. Equilibrium outcomes are quite similar to the base case. Energy price increases
are essentially unchanged under the RFS, LCFS and CAT policies when changes in corn prices are
taken into account. Producer surplus gains for corn ethanol producers are slightly larger under
62

all policies with endogenous corn prices. As a result, average abatement costs decrease modestly.
However, the overall cost diﬀerence across policies remains large.

B.5

Political economy

Finally, we investigate the robustness of our political economy results to changes in our simulation
parameters. We focus on the specification used to predict the Senate vote, i.e. the model which
includes gains and losses quartiles and indicators for Democrat and “Top 10 Coal State. For each
column, we vary our simulation parameters according to the scenarios described above, re-run our
simulations, and construct the Congressional district-level estimates for gains and losses under
each policy in the same manner as before. Table 10 demonstrates that the correlations between
surplus changes and voting behavior are remarkably robust to changes in our simulation parameters.
The RFS quartiles estimate in particular have similar sign, magnitude and significance as those
presented in Table 6.

63

0
AgRes
MSW

2

Corn
MSW food

4
6
Ethanol (billion gge)

Appendix Figure 1: Biomass supply curves for corn based and cellulosic ethanol.

Appendix Figures

6
Retail Price ($/gge)
3
4
5
2
1

64

Forest
Orch

8

HEC

10

0

Net Gains from CAT (in logs)
1
2
3
4

5

Appendix Figure 2: Comparison of net district-level gains from CAT and from the RFS.

0

2

4
Net Gains from RFS (in logs)

65

6

8

66

%+,-$.,/0,12/3$

(&'$

!"#$

')*'$

%!&'$

Appendix Figure 3: Total energy crop land intensity (% of total land) used in ethanol production from corn and switchgrass under
CAT, a LCFS, the 2022 RFS and subsidies.

67

%+,-$.,/0,12/3$

(&'$

!"#$

')*'$

%!&'$

Appendix Figure 4: Corn land intensity (% of total land) used in ethanol production under CAT, a LCFS, the 2022 RFS and
subsidies.

1

2

3

$/gge

4

5

6

Appendix Figure 5: Corn ethanol supply curves with and without corn price eﬀects.

0

2

4
6
Quantity Ethanol (bn. gge)

Corn Ethanol Supply
Marginal Cost Under CAT

68

8

10

Supply w/ Endog. Corn Prices

Appendix Tables
Appendix Table 1: Federal Renewable Fuel Standard for 2010, 2015 and 2022.

2010

2015

2022

Cellulosic (bn. gal./year)

0.1

5.5

16

Advanced (bn. gal./year)

1

3

21

Total Renewable Fuel (bn. gal./year)

12

20.5

36

69

70

Waste Biomass
Ag. Residues
Orchard and Vineyard
Forest
Muni. Solid Waste

Herb. Energy Crops

Corn

0.02 to 0.22

0.91 to 1.04

CARB (2009)

-0.29

-0.10

0.79

EPA (2010)

-0.06 to 0.19
0.042

-0.09 to 0.16

1.04

Zhang et al. (2010)

0.16 to 0.35

0.16

0.24

Kalogo et al. (2007) Spatari et al. (2005)

Appendix Table 2: Lifecycle GHG emission estimates for corn and cellulosic ethanol pathways.

Appendix Table 3: Baseline emissions intensities and emissions scenario parameters.

Base Case High Indirect Waste Zero Existing Corn
Land use
Emissions
Corn

0.80

1.00

0.80

0.90

Herb. Energy Crops

0.25

0.40

0.25

0.25

0.00

0.20

Waste Biomass
0.20
0.20
Notes: Emission intensities are relative to gasoline.

Appendix Table 4: Externality estimates from the Interagency Working Group on Social Cost
of Carbon (2010).

Year
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
2035
2040
2045
2050

5%
Average
4.7
5.7
6.8
8.2
9.7
11.2
12.7
14.2
15.7

Discount Rate
3%
2.5%
Average Average
21.4
35.1
23.8
38.4
26.3
41.7
29.6
45.8
32.8
50.0
36.0
54.2
39.2
58.4
42.1
61.7
44.9
65.0

71

3%
95th Percentile
64.9
72.8
80.7
90.9
100.0
109.7
119.3
127.8
136.2

Appendix Table 5: Equilibrium outcomes under carbon policies for three fuel price scenarios.

BAU
Fuel Price ($/gge)
Low Fuel Price: $2.25
Base Case: $2.75
High Fuel Price: $3.25

$
$
$

2.25 $
2.75 $
3.25 $

RFS
2.54 $
2.94 $
3.35 $

LCFS
2.57 $
2.96 $
3.36 $

CAT
2.92 $
3.23 $
3.49 $

SUBS
2.25
2.75
3.25

!CS ($ bn.)
Low Fuel Price: $2.25
Base Case: $2.75
High Fuel Price: $3.25

-$39.23
-$26.69
-$14.52

-$43.14
-$28.59
-$14.63

-$87.86
-$65.07
-$33.18

$0.00
$0.00
$0.00

!PS Ethanol ($ bn.)
Low Fuel Price: $2.25
Base Case: $2.75
High Fuel Price: $3.25

$18.48
$17.12
$12.53

$27.96
$20.56
$12.65

$1.18
$2.49
$2.26

$11.11
$18.89
$26.53

!PS Corn Ethanol ($ bn.)
Low Fuel Price: $2.25
Base Case: $2.75
High Fuel Price: $3.25

$3.67
$3.19
$1.99

$0.67
$0.91
$1.71

$0.13
$0.09
$0.30

$0.66
$2.50
$6.29

$84.79
$57.90
$25.92

$62.08
$48.58
$25.65

$27.78
$19.52
$9.85

$79.95
$82.30
$50.60

Avg. Abatement Cost ($/MTCO2e)
Low Fuel Price: $2.25
Base Case: $2.75
High Fuel Price: $3.25

72

Appendix Table 6: Points in the distribution of net gains and losses from the diﬀerent policies
with baseline fuel price of $3.25 per gallon.

Mean
Percentage>0
Minimum
25th Percentile
Median
75th Percentile
90th Percentile
95th Percentile
Maximum

CAT
$21.82
42%
-$10.71
-$8.73
-$1.97
$17.20
$61.98
$146.32
$788.92

LCFS
$150.18
52%
-$51.97
-$34.17
$10.56
$128.07
$484.72
$937.57
$4,707.69

73

RFS
$151.47
51%
-$51.61
-$34.34
$9.10
$122.98
$496.12
$952.96
$5,019.16

SUBS
$339.58
52%
-$105.13
-$67.17
$28.10
$276.93
$1,085.57
$2,076.31
$12,328.45

Appendix Table 7: Equilibrium outcomes under carbon policies for diﬀerent emissions intensity
scenarios.

BAU
Fuel Price ($/gge)
Base Case
High Indirect Land use
Waste Zero Emissions
Existing Corn

$
$
$
$

2.75
2.75
2.75
2.75

RFS
$
$
$
$

2.94
2.94
2.94
2.94

LCFS
$
$
$
$

2.96
2.93
2.96
2.95

CAT
$
$
$
$

3.23
3.15
3.23
3.20

SUBS
$
$
$
$

2.75
2.75
2.75
2.75

!CS ($ bn.)
Base Case
High Indirect Land use
Waste Zero Emissions
Existing Corn

-$26.69
-$26.69
-$26.69
-$26.69

-$28.59
-$24.30
-$28.54
-$28.11

-$65.07
-$53.46
-$64.82
-$60.56

$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00

!PS Ethanol ($ bn.)
Base Case
High Indirect Land use
Waste Zero Emissions
Existing Corn

$17.12
$17.12
$17.12
$17.12

$20.56
$18.27
$20.74
$21.43

$2.49
$1.83
$3.22
$2.22

$18.89
$18.89
$18.89
$18.89

!PS Corn Ethanol ($ bn.)
Base Case
High Indirect Land use
Waste Zero Emissions
Existing Corn

$3.19
$3.19
$3.19
$3.19

$0.91
$0.00
$0.60
$0.23

$0.09
$0.00
$0.09
$0.04

$2.50
$2.50
$2.50
$2.50

$57.90
$70.15
$53.84
$61.86

$48.58
$44.24
$43.90
$43.14

$19.52
$15.97
$19.09
$18.17

$82.30
$109.49
$73.73
$90.28

Avg. Abatement Cost ($/MTCO2e)
Base Case
High Indirect Land use
Waste Zero Emissions
Existing Corn

74

Appendix Table 8: Equilibrium outcomes under carbon policies for diﬀerent demand elasticity
scenarios.

BAU
Fuel Price ($/gge)
Less Elastic: Elast. = -0.30
Base Case: Elast. = -0.50
More Elastic: Elast. = -0.70

$
$
$

2.75 $
2.75 $
2.75 $

RFS
2.94 $
2.94 $
2.95 $

LCFS
2.96 $
2.96 $
2.96 $

CAT
3.37 $
3.23 $
3.17 $

SUBS
2.75
2.75
2.75

!CS ($ bn.)
Less Elastic: Elast. = -0.30
Base Case: Elast. = -0.50
More Elastic: Elast. = -0.70

-$26.51
-$26.69
-$26.88

-$29.04
-$28.59
-$28.40

-$84.19
-$65.07
-$55.64

$0.00
$0.00
$0.00

!PS Ethanol ($ bn.)
Less Elastic: Elast. = -0.30
Base Case: Elast. = -0.50
More Elastic: Elast. = -0.70

$17.12
$17.12
$17.12

$21.08
$20.56
$20.25

$3.44
$2.49
$2.07

$18.89
$18.89
$18.89

!PS Corn Ethanol ($ bn.)
Less Elastic: Elast. = -0.30
Base Case: Elast. = -0.50
More Elastic: Elast. = -0.70

$3.19
$3.19
$3.19

$0.95
$0.91
$0.88

$0.12
$0.09
$0.08

$2.50
$2.50
$2.50

$65.64
$57.90
$51.90

$55.78
$48.58
$43.31

$24.78
$19.52
$16.87

$82.30
$82.30
$82.30

Avg. Abatement Cost ($/MTCO2e)
Less Elastic: Elast. = -0.30
Base Case: Elast. = -0.50
More Elastic: Elast. = -0.70

75

Appendix Table 9: Equilibrium outcomes under carbon policies incorporating corn price eﬀects.

BAU
Fuel Price ($/gge)
Base Case
Endogenous Corn Prices

$
$

2.75
2.75

RFS
$
$

2.94
2.94

LCFS
$
$

2.96
2.95

CAT
$
$

3.23
3.23

SUBS
$
$

2.75
2.75

!CS ($ bn.)
Base Case
Endogenous Corn Prices

-$26.69
-$26.64

-$28.59
-$28.14

-$65.07
-$64.31

$0.00
$0.00

!PS Ethanol ($ bn.)
Base Case
Endogenous Corn Prices

$17.12
$18.06

$20.56
$20.76

$2.49
$2.47

$18.89
$19.87

!PS Corn Ethanol ($ bn.)
Base Case
Endogenous Corn Prices

$3.19
$4.14

$0.91
$1.64

$0.09
$0.11

$2.50
$3.49

$57.90
$51.97

$48.58
$44.68

$19.52
$19.42

$82.30
$74.16

Avg. Abatement Cost ($/MTCO2e)
Base Case
Endogenous Corn Prices

Notes: The base case and ethanol supply reflect corn price eﬀects.

76

77

High Price
0.741***
(0.031)
-0.09
(0.087)
0.126
(0.108)
0.144
(0.117)
-0.041
(0.083)
-0.308**
(0.134)
-0.497***
(0.115)
-0.061*
(0.035)
No
431
362.01
0.000
-117.69
0.61

Low Price
0.739***
(0.032)
0.097***
(0.037)
0.139***
(0.041)
0.135***
(0.044)
-0.173***
(0.047)
-0.210***
(0.053)
-0.370***
(0.052)
-0.079**
(0.037)
No
431
359.17
0.000
-119.10
0.60

High iLUC
0.755***
(0.031)
0.046
(0.042)
0.102**
(0.043)
0.051
(0.054)
-0.176***
(0.049)
-0.220***
(0.060)
-0.368***
(0.067)
-0.069*
(0.036)
No
431
354.79
0.000
-121.30
0.59

Waste Pass
0.754***
(0.031)
0.041
(0.044)
0.144***
(0.047)
0.106*
(0.060)
-0.188***
(0.052)
-0.279***
(0.064)
-0.438***
(0.068)
-0.068*
(0.036)
No
431
359.42
0.000
-118.98
0.60

Old Corn
0.752***
(0.031)
0.045
(0.042)
0.105**
(0.045)
0.063
(0.056)
-0.175***
(0.049)
-0.232***
(0.061)
-0.381***
(0.070)
-0.069*
(0.036)
No
431
354.81
0.000
-121.29
0.59

Less Elastic
0.753***
(0.031)
0.037
(0.045)
0.158***
(0.048)
0.096
(0.062)
-0.187***
(0.052)
-0.289***
(0.064)
-0.430***
(0.072)
-0.067*
(0.036)
No
431
361.79
0.000
-117.79
0.61

More Elastic
0.754***
(0.031)
0.041
(0.042)
0.109**
(0.044)
0.047
(0.055)
-0.176***
(0.049)
-0.226***
(0.060)
-0.366***
(0.070)
-0.071**
(0.036)
No
431
355.68
0.000
-120.85
0.60

Endog. Corn
0.755***
(0.030)
0.057
(0.043)
0.117**
(0.046)
0.081
(0.057)
-0.186***
(0.051)
-0.230***
(0.061)
-0.405***
(0.067)
-0.070*
(0.036)
No
431
357.70
0.000
-119.84
0.60

Notes: The dependent variable equals one if the House member voted for H.R. 2454. The reported coeﬃcients are the average of marginal coeﬃcients taken at each
observations level of the righthand side variables. For indicator variables, the coeﬃcient represents the average change in the probability of voting yes from changing
the indicator from zero to one. The Per Capita Benefits form Cap & Trade quartile indicators are the quartiles of the average per capita benefits across the district
from a cap & trade program that reduces GHG emissions by 10 percent. Per Capita Benefits from RFS quartile indicators are the quartiles of the average per capita
benefits across the district from the current federal RFS program in 2022. We simulate that this leads to a 10 percent reduction in GHG emissions. ***, **, and *
denotes statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses.

State Fixed Effects
Observations
Chi-Square Statistic
P-Value
Log-Likelihood
Pseudo-R2/R2

Top 10 Coal Producing State

Per Capita Benefits from RFS, Quartile 4

Per Capita Benefits from RFS, Quartile 3

Per Capita Benefits from RFS, Quartile 2

Per Capita Benefits from Cap & Trade, Quartile 4

Per Capita Benefits from Cap & Trade, Quartile 3

Per Capita Benefits from Cap & Trade, Quartile 2

Democrat

Appendix Table 10: Correlating voting behavior for Waxman-Markey with estimated gains and losses, coal production, and
political ideology: Robustness to changes in simulation parameters.

