                                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




ESTIMATING THE IMPACT OF RESTRUCTURING ON ELECTRICITY GENERATION EFFICIENCY:
                THE CASE OF THE INDIAN THERMAL POWER SECTOR

                                                Kabir Malik
                                              Maureen Cropper
                                             Alexander Limonov
                                                Anoop Singh

                                            Working Paper 17383
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w17383


                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        September 2011




    This research was supported by grants from the World Bank and Resources for the Future. The findings
    and conclusions of this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the
    World Bank and its affiliated organizations, the Executive Directors of the World Bank, the governments
    they represent, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

    NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
    reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
    NBER publications.

    © 2011 by Kabir Malik, Maureen Cropper, Alexander Limonov, and Anoop Singh. All rights reserved.
    Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
    that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Estimating the Impact of Restructuring on Electricity Generation Efficiency: The Case of
the Indian Thermal Power Sector
Kabir Malik, Maureen Cropper, Alexander Limonov, and Anoop Singh
NBER Working Paper No. 17383
September 2011, Revised July 2013
JEL No. L43,L94,O13,O25,Q4

                                             ABSTRACT

We examine the impact of electricity sector restructuring on the operating efficiency of coal-fired
power plants in India. Between 1995 and 2009, 85 percent of coal-based generation capacity owned by
state governments was unbundled from vertically integrated State Electricity Boards into state generating
companies. We find that generating units in states that unbundled before the Electricity Act of 2003
experienced reductions in forced outages of about 25% and improvements in availability of about
10%, with the largest results occurring 3-5 years after restructuring. We find no evidence of improvements
in thermal efficiency at state-owned power plants due to reform.


Kabir Malik                                         Alexander Limonov
Department of Agricultural and                      Resources for the Future
 Resource Economics                                 1616 P Street NW
University of Maryland                              Washington, DC 20036
College Park, MD 20742                              limonov@rff.org
kmalik@arec.umd.edu
                                                    Anoop Singh
Maureen Cropper                                     Department of Industrial Management
Department of Economics                             and Engineering
University of Maryland                              Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
College Park, MD 20742                              Kanpur-208 016 India
and NBER                                            anoops@iitk.ac.in
cropper@econ.umd.edu
1 Introduction

        During the past 30 years, over two dozen countries, including the US,
have attempted to reform their electricity sectors.                   Vertically integrated
monopolies have been broken into companies that generate electricity and those
that distribute it, in an attempt to attract independent power producers into the
industry and promote competition. Cost-of-service regulation has been replaced
by incentive-based regulation and, in some cases, by competitive wholesale power
markets. The ultimate goal of these reforms is to improve both technical and
allocative efficiency in electricity generation and to pass these savings onto
consumers.

        This paper examines the impact of electricity sector restructuring on the
operating efficiency of thermal power plants in India. Between 1996 and 2009, 85
percent of the coal-based generation capacity owned by state governments was
unbundled from vertically-integrated State Electricity Boards (SEBs) into newly
created state generation companies. The restructuring sought to expand generation
capacity and reduce costs by encouraging the entry of independent power
producers and by “corporatizing” unbundled generation companies. Although
government owned, these companies were granted formal autonomy in technical,
financial and managerial decisions.           We examine whether greater managerial
discretion and specialization in generation increased operating reliability and
thermal efficiency at unbundled power plants.

        A growing literature has documented the impacts of restructuring on the
performance of power plants in the United States.1 Fabrizio et al. (2007) find that,

1
 A related empirical literature evaluates the impact of reforms on plant dispatch order (Douglas
2006) and competitive behavior in wholesale power markets (Borentstein, Bushnell,and Wolak
2002; and Hortacsu, and Puller 2011).
in the short term, the restructuring did not improve technical efficiency at thermal
power plants, but did reduce expenditure per kWh on non-fuel inputs. Knittel
(2002) suggests that power plants facing compensation schemes with performance
incentives were more efficient than plants compensated on a traditional cost-plus
basis. Davis and Wolfram (2012) find that the selling of nuclear reactors to
independent power producers led to a decrease in forced outages at nuclear power
plants and a corresponding increase in electricity production.

       To investigate the impact of reforms in the Indian electricity sector we
construct a panel data set of coal-based electricity generating units (EGUs) for the
years 1988–2009. The variation in the timing of reforms across states allows us to
estimate the impact of unbundling on EGU reliability and plant thermal
efficiency. Our difference-in-difference specification assumes that conditional on
control variables—EGU/plant characteristics, EGU and year fixed effects, and
state-specific linear time trends—the assignment of the timing of reforms
(including not to reform) is exogenous. Under this assumption, these models
identify the effect of reforms from a comparison of the performance of plants in
states that unbundled with plants in states that had not yet unbundled.

       To eliminate the possibility of state-year shocks affecting our estimates of
average treatment effects, we also present results from a triple-difference
specification that uses EGUs operated by central government owned generation
companies as an additional control group. These companies operate outside the
purview of state governments and thus were not directly affected by the
reorganization of the SEBs.

       Our results suggest that the gains from unbundling of generation from
transmission and distribution were limited to the states that reformed before the
Electricity Act of 2003. In these states, on average, EGUs at state-owned plants




                                         3
experienced a 5 percentage point reduction in forced outages as result of
unbundling—roughly a 25 percent reduction compared to the 1995 average. The
decrease in forced outages was accompanied by a 6 percentage point increase in
availability. These results are driven largely by the improvements in operating
reliability at EGUs with lower nameplate capacity. Our results are not driven by
the decommissioning of old and inefficient EGUs or a commissioning of new
more efficient ones, thus representing an improvement at existing capacity. This
is an important distinction as increasing reliability at existing units can likely be
achieved more cheaply than by installing new capital equipment.2

           On average, there is no evidence of an improvement in capacity utilization
due to restructuring, although the results suggest a statistically significant increase
at some EGUs. For states that unbundled prior to 2003, we find that unbundling
led to a significant improvement in electricity generation at smaller generating
units—a 9.4 percentage point increase in capacity utilization at 110/120 MW
units. Importantly, our results show no evidence that unbundling of SEBs led to
the improvement in thermal efficiency at state-owned power plants.

           In summary, our analysis points to modest gains from reform. Operating
reliability increased at EGUs in states that unbundled prior to 2003; but there is no
evidence of an improvement in thermal efficiency. Our failure to find a larger
impact from restructuring than reported in the US may also reflect the path that
reform has taken in India thus far. In the United States unbundling resulted in
independent power producers (IPPs) entering the market for generation. This has
not yet occurred on a large scale in India.

           The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides
background on the Indian power sector and the nature of reforms. Section 3

2
    We cannot state this with certainty as we do not have data on operating costs for power plants.




                                                   4
describes the empirical approach taken. In section 4, we discuss econometric
issues. Section 5 describes the data used in the study and section 6 our results.
Section 7 concludes.

2 Background

2.1 Overview of the Indian Power Sector

        Most generating capacity in India is government owned. The 1948
Electricity Supply Act created State Electricity Boards (SEBs) and gave them
responsibility for the generation, transmission, and distribution of power, as well
as the authority to set tariffs. SEBs operated on soft budgets, with revenue
shortfalls made up by state governments. Electricity tariffs set by SEBs failed to
cover costs, generating capacity expanded slowly in the 1960s and 1970s, and
blackouts were common. To increase generating capacity, the Government of
India in 1975 established the National Hydroelectric Power Corporation and the
National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC), which built generating capacity
and transmission lines that fed into the SEB systems. In 1990, prior to reforms,
63 percent of installed capacity in the electricity sector in India was owned by
SEBs, 33 percent by the central government, and 4 percent by private companies
(Tongia 2003).

        Our analysis focuses on coal-fired power plants, which have, for the past
two decades, provided approximately 70% of the electricity generated in India.3
Coal-fired power plants in India are, in general, less efficient than their
counterparts in the US. Over the period 1988-1995 the average operating heat
rate—the heat input (in kcal) required to produce a kWh of electricity—of state-

3
  In 2009-10 (CEA 2010) 53% of installed capacity connected to the grid was coal-fired, 11%
fired by natural gas, 23% hydro, 3% nuclear and the remainder renewables; however 70% of
electricity was generated by coal-fired power plants.




                                               5
owned plants was 30 percent higher than the average operating heat rate of
comparable plants in the United States during the period 1960–1980 (Joskow and
Schmalensee 1987).4

        The higher average operating heat rates of Indian plants are due in part to
the poor quality of Indian coal, but also to inefficiencies in management. The
design heat rate of generating units that use coal with high moisture and/or high
ash content is higher than for units with low moisture and ash content (MIT
2007). The ash content of Indian coal is between 30 and 50% (Khanna and
Zilberman 1999). This implies that Indian plants will require more energy to
produce a kWh of electricity than comparable plants in the US. The operating heat
rate of the plant may be higher than the design heat rate if the plant is poorly
maintained or experiences frequent outages.5 Pre-reform, operating heat rates at
state-owned plants were, on average, 31% higher than design heat rates (Cropper
et al. 2011).

        State plants have, historically, been operated less efficiently than plants
owned by the central government: they have had higher forced outages and lower
capacity utilization. Figure 1 illustrates trends in the average percent of time state
and central plants were available to generate electricity (plant availability), the
average percent of time plants were shut down due to forced outages, and the
average percent of time the plant was used to generate electricity (capacity
utilization). State power plants have, on average, had lower availability and
capacity utilization than central-government-owned plants and higher forced
outages throughout the 1988-2009 period.

4
  See Table 3B. We focus on the operating heat rate of state-owned plants, as data on operating
heat rate of central-government-owned plants are often not reported in the Central Electricity
Authority’s Thermal Power Reports (various years).
5
  Whenever a plant is started up after an outage, more coal is burned than during the normal
operation of the plant.




                                                6
2.2 History of Power Sector Reforms

       Electricity sector reforms in India were prompted by the poor performance
of state-owned power plants, by large transmission and distribution losses, and by
problems with the SEBs’ tariff structure. The tariff structure, which sold
electricity cheaply to households and farmers and compensated by charging
higher prices to industry, prompted firms to generate their own power rather than
purchasing it from the grid, an outcome that further reduced the revenues of
SEBs. The result was that most SEBs failed to cover the costs of electricity
production. Reform of the distribution network was necessary because of the
extremely large power losses associated with the transmission and distribution of
electric power—both technical losses and losses due to theft (Tongia 2003).

       Beginning in 1991, the Government of India instituted reforms to increase
investment in power generation, reform the electricity tariff structure, and
improve the distribution network. Under the Electricity Laws Act of 1991, IPPs
were allowed to invest in generating capacity. They were guaranteed a fair rate of
return on their investments, with tariffs regulated by Central Electricity Authority.
The Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act of 1998 made it possible for the
states to create State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs) to set
electricity tariffs. States were to sign memoranda of understanding with the
federal government, agreeing to set up SERCs and receiving, in return, technical
assistance to reduce transmission and distribution losses and other benefits. The
Electricity Act of 2003 made the establishment of SERCs mandatory and required
the unbundling of generation, transmission, and distribution (Singh 2006).

       There were two distinct waves of unbundling reforms in India.Table 1
shows the year in which the SERC became operational in each state and the year




                                         7
in which generation, transmission, and distribution were unbundled.6 The first
wave, between 1996 and 2002, took place prior to the Electricity Reform Act of
2003. The second wave began in 2004 and continued through the end of our
sample period (2009).7 We refer to these as Phase 1 (unbundling prior to 2003)
and Phase 2 (unbundling between 2004 and 2009) states. The remaining states
(Phase 3 states) unbundled either outside of our sample period or have not
unbundled as of 2012.

        Why did certain states restructure their electricity sectors before others? A
plot of Table 1 on a map suggests that there is no particular geographic pattern to
unbundling. Whether a state restructured its electricity sector is also unrelated to
the financial losses it was suffering prior to reform or to its electricity deficit—the
difference between electricity supply and peak electricity demand. Figure 2 plots
states that unbundled before and after the 2003 Electricity Act (i.e., Phase 1 v.
Phase 2 and 3 states) against various factors that might have influenced the timing
of unbundling. Panels A and B of Figure 2 show that there is no evidence of a
relationship between either the electricity deficit in the state, pre-reform or the
losses suffered by the SEB (the ratio of revenues to costs) and the timing of
unbundling. Panel C suggests that states with a higher proportion of renewable
electricity generation did unbundle earlier. Renewable capacity is largely hydro
power and is thus determined by exogenous geographical features. Panel D shows




6
  Table 1 lists only those states containing thermal power plants. Our study focuses on coal- and
lignite-fueled plants.
7
  Assam unbundled in 2004, but its only coal-fired power plant was decommissioned in 2001-02.
We retain Assam in the dataset; however, for Phase 2 plants, the first year of unbundling is,
effectively, 2005, the year in which Maharashtra unbundled.




                                                8
that states with lower subsidies to agricultural consumers (a higher ratio of
agricultural to industrial tariffs) were also more likely to unbundle earlier.8

2.3 Impacts of Electricity Sector Reforms

        It is important to ask how unbundling reforms might affect the operating
reliability of plants or their thermal efficiency. The separation of generation from
transmission and distribution services could improve generation efficiency in
several ways. Unbundling may result in an increase in generator efficiency from
“corporatization”—plant managers being given greater discretionary powers to
minimize costs and having to face hard budget constraints. Unbundling may also
improve efficiency by reducing diseconomies of scope—allowing managers to
focus on decisions related solely to generation. This may result in more timely
maintenance decisions and lead to increase generator reliability through reduced
breakdowns and forced outages.

        The scope for such performance improvements is illustrated by comparing
management practices at state and central government owned power plants
(ESMAP 2009). The differences in plant availability and capacity utilization at
central-government owned plants pre-reform (Table 3A) are due to greater forced
outages and more time spent on planned maintenance at state plants, although
capital equipment at both sets of plants is, on average, of the same age. Time
spent on planned maintenance can be reduced by better scheduling of
maintenance and better inventory management. Better management of




8
  We also check whether state economic well-being (per capita income and electricity
consumption) drives reform. We find no evidence to suggest that either of these determined the
timing of unbundling reforms.




                                                9
information can help address and avoid technical problems that result in forced
outages.9

        Differences in fuel efficiency can also be driven by factors related to
manpower. At the plant-level, Bushnell and Wolfram (2007) document
differences in plant operator skill and effort levels that lead to significant
differences in plant efficiency. While some processes are automated, activities
such as controlling the rate at which pulverized coal is fed to burners, adjusting
the mix of air and fuel in the mills, and operating soot blowers in boilers crucially
depend on the plant operator’s skill and effort levels.

        The incentives for improving fuel efficiency and maintaining equipment to
prevent breakdowns depends on how plants are compensated. Under the 2003
Electricity Act SERCs are to follow the Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission’s (CERC’s) guidelines in compensating generators. The CERC
compensates the power plants under its jurisdiction based on performance.
Compensation for energy used in generation is paid based on scheduled
generation and depends on operating heat rate. Compensation for fixed costs
(depreciation, interest on loans and finance charges, return on equity, operation
and maintenance expenses, interest on working capital, and taxes) is based on
plant availability.

        How have SERCs actually compensated power plants? There is evidence
that SERCs have set compensation for fuel use based on very high estimates of
operating heat rate, suggesting that this may not provide much of an incentive for
plants to improve thermal efficiency (Crisil Ltd. 2010). Compensation for fixed
costs based on availability has occurred and is meant to prevent plants from
9
 The main technical problems at state plants identified by ESMAP (2009) include poor condition
of boiler pressure parts due to overheating and external corrosion, poor water chemistry, poor
performance of air pre-heaters and poor performance of the milling system.




                                              10
supplying excess electricity to the grid, as was the case historically when plants
were compensated based on capacity utilization.

         Another avenue through which reforms could influence plant reliability
and thermal efficiency is through investment in new equipment. Between 1995
and 2009 coal-fired generation capacity in India increased by 31 percent. It
increased by 45% in Phase 1 states, by 30% in Phase 2 states and by 5% in Phase
3 states. An important policy question is the extent to which reforms improved the
performance of EGUs installed pre-reform versus impacts that occurred through
the installation of new equipment. We test this by estimating models using only
EGUs in operation pre-reform as well as using all EGUs.

3 Empirical Strategy

         To examine the impact of restructuring on the operating efficiency of state
owned power plants, we use EGU-level data on measures of operating reliability
and plant-level data on thermal efficiency as outcome variables. Operating
reliability is measured by the percentage of time in a year an EGU is available to
generate electricity (unit availability), and the percentage of time a unit is forced
to shut down due to equipment failures (forced outage).10 Thermal efficiency is
measured by coal consumption per kWh and by operating heat rate. We also
estimate the impact of reform on the capacity utilization of the EGU (percent of
time the EGU generates electricity).

         The time variation in restructuring across states allows us to use a
difference-in-difference (DD) estimator. Figure 3 shows the proportion of EUGs
in states that have restructured, by year. With data at the EGU-level, we estimate
the impact of unbundling on generation efficiency controlling for time-invariant

10
  The percentage of time a unit is available equals the 100 percent minus the percent of time spent
on planned maintenance and the percent of time lost due to forced outages.




                                                11
characteristics of EGUs, year fixed effects and linear time trends specific to each
state. The baseline model is estimated using the following specification,


                ∅1
                                                                                        … (1)

where       is the measure of generation efficiency for EGU i in state s in year t. In
the thermal efficiency models, i refers to the plant, as data for operating heat rate
and specific coal consumption are available only at the plant level. The variable of
interest is 1                  , a policy indicator that takes a value of 1 starting in
the year after state s unbundles its SEB; ∅ thus estimates the average effect of the
policy. A positive and statistically significant estimate of ∅ for unit availability
and capacity utilization and a significant negative estimate for forced outage,
specific coal consumption and heat rate is evidence of an average improvement in
the efficiency of generation as a result of reform.

        All baseline specifications estimate the impact of reforms controlling for
EGU/plant fixed effects,         , and year fixed effects,       . The inclusion of fixed
effects controls for all time-invariant characteristics that affect the generation
performance of an EGU or plant. The inclusion of year dummies captures
macroeconomic conditions and changes in electricity sector policy that affect
generation in the country as a whole.11 The upward trend in operating reliability at
both state and central plants throughout the sample period (see Figure 1) implies
that without year fixed effects estimates of the impact of unbundling would be
overestimated. Estimates of the effects of unbundling may also be biased due to


11
  In 2003 an Unscheduled Interchange charge was instituted throughout the country to
compensate (penalize) plants supplying unscheduled electricity to the grid when there is excess
demand (supply).




                                              12
differing pre-reform trends between states that restructured their SEBs and those
that did not. To control for this, the baseline specifications include state-specific
time trends,               .

        The estimated models also control for EGU and plant level characteristics
that directly affect generation performance. The EGU models include a quadratic
age term.12 The thermal efficiency regressions include average unit capacity in the
plant, the heating content of coal (gross calorific value per kg), the average design
heat rate and a quadratic term in average plant age.

        To examine whether the impact of unbundling varies with the phase of
unbundling, we estimate a variant of (1) that interacts the unbundled variable with
indicators for Phase 1 and Phase 2 states,


                ∅ .1
            ,
                                                                                         … (2)

1                      takes the value of 1 after unbundling of the SEB in state
belonging to group k (k = Phase 1, Phase 2) and ∅ is the estimate of the impact
of unbundling for state-group k relative to the counterfactual of not having
unbundled by 2009—the last year of the data.

        In addition to examining heterogeneous treatment effects, we test for
persistence in reform impacts over time. To do this, we interact the unbundled
variable with a set of biennial dummy variables post reform; these measure the
impact of reform 1-2 years after reform, 3-4 years after reform, and so on.
Estimation of dynamic duration effects is of interest for two reasons. First, it is


12
  Other characteristics such as capacity, vintage and make of boiler/EGU also impact generation
performance, but are time-invariant and thus subsumed by the EGU fixed-effects.




                                               13
important to check whether reforms result in a persistent change in operating
efficiency at unbundled power plants. A temporary increase in efficiency
followed by a reversion to the mean may still yield a positive, significant average
treatment effect in the short-term.

        Second, Wolfers (2006) points out the potential for bias in estimating
average treatment effects when panel-specific trends are included in a difference-
in-difference analysis. Since the average treatment effect captures the average
deviation from trends in the post-treatment period, incorrectly estimated pre-
treatment trends cause the estimate to be biased. This problem is most severe
when the estimation sample contains a relatively short pre-treatment period. In
this case, a reversal of the trend in the post-treatment period would have a
disproportionate effect on estimates of the trend coefficients. Allowing full
flexibility in post treatment impacts enables the trend slope coefficients to be
determined by the pre-treatment period trends and allows us to examine the
evolution of efficiency increases after unbundling reform.

        The estimate of dynamic effects of reform relies on the following
specification,


                        ∅ 1
          , , ,..   ,


                                                                            … (3)

In equation (3) the unbundling variable is multiplied by a set of indicator
variables that represent the number of years since the reform.      = 1 if between
  and       1 years have elapsed since the reform and ∅ estimates the average
impact for the same time period.




                                        14
4 Econometric Issues and Identification

       An obvious concern in estimating the impacts of reform is that the
adoption of reforms across states may be endogenous, thus biasing estimated
impacts. Endogeneity may result from state officials explicitly considering
potential efficiency improvements in deciding when to implement reforms, or
from unobserved heterogeneity across states that drives both the decision to
reform and improvements in power plant performance. If states where power
plants were likely to gain most from reform were more likely to reform first, the
estimated coefficient on the reform dummy would be biased upward.
Alternatively, states with greater institutional capacity may be quicker to reform
and more likely to benefit from it—also resulting in a positive bias. Although it is
impossible to rule out all sources of bias, our estimation strategy and the
institutional context of power sector reforms in India should reduce endogeneity
concerns.

       First, the inclusion of EGU fixed effects controls for any time-invariant
differences across EGUs, including factors such as state location (vis-à-vis coal
mines and the transmission grid) and institutional capacity (which may be
regarded as fixed over the sample period). The inclusion of state-specific time
trends controls for any linear time-varying unobserved differences across states
and addresses the concern that adoption of reform may be associated with pre-
existing trends in power plant performance.

       Second, the adoption of reform was a decision taken at the state level by
bureaucrats and politicians. It is more likely that political factors determined the
decision to restructure state electric utilities than beliefs about generation
efficiency. Tongia (2003) cites opposition from the agricultural sector as a factor
that delayed the adoption of reforms by some states, given that one objective of




                                        15
reforms was to reduce subsidies to agricultural consumers.                            The political
importance of agricultural constituencies may have delayed the adoption of even
the initial stages of reform (i.e., unbundling);13 however, this is unlikely to bias
estimates of generation efficiency.

         A third econometric concern is that the coefficient on unbundling may be
capturing non-linear time-varying factors that are specific to the state but not
related to unbundling. To account for this possibility we take advantage of the
presence of power plants owned by the central government that operate in many
states across the country. These power plants are owned and operated by the
National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) and the Damodar Valley
Corporation (DVC). They operate outside the structure of the SEBs and are thus
not directly affected by restructuring.14

         To account for state-specific non-linear year shocks, we employ a triple-
difference (DDD) specification that includes central power plants and uses state-
year dummy variables,

                   ∅1

                                                                                                ... (4)

In equation (4),            is the outcome at EGU             in state     under ownership          in
year .          represents the full set of ownership (state/central) year effects and
       represents the full set of state-year effects. The specification thus controls
for time effects in each state and time effects for each ownership type. The

13
   It is not surprising that Orissa was the first state to reform, given the (un)importance of farming
in the state.
14
   To confirm this, we conduct a falsification test to estimate the impact of state SEB unbundling
on operating reliability of central EGUs using equations (1) and (2). The impact is statistically
indistinguishable from zero.




                                                  16
estimate of the impact of unbundling, ∅, is identified by the variation in
ownership-state-year (as compared to state-year variation that identifies the
estimate in the DD specification).

         The DDD estimate takes the following form,

            ∅             Δ           Δ                     Δ           Δ


                                                                                              … (5)

where ∆ Y         is the change in the outcome post reform for states that unbundle
and Δ           is the corresponding change for non-reforming states. The difference
of these values for center-owned EGUs is subtracted from the difference for state-
owned EGUs to obtain the estimate of the impact of unbundling reform.

5 Data

We use data from the Central Electricity Authority of India’s Performance
Review of Thermal Power Stations (CEA various years) to construct an
unbalanced panel of 385 EGUs for the years 1988–2009.15 Of the 385 EGUs, 270
operate in 60 state-owned generation plants and 115 are in 23 central-
government-owned plants. The units in the dataset constitute 83 percent of the
total installed coal-fired generation capacity in the country in the year 2009–
2010.16 Additional information on the date that the SERCs were established, the
date of the unbundling reforms for each state and ownership information for each
power plant was obtained from the websites of the individual SERCs and the
CEA.

15
   The CEA reports are not available for the years 1992 and 1993. These years are thus omitted
from our data. A year in the dataset is an Indian fiscal year. Thus, 1994 refers to the time period
April 1, 1994, through March 30, 1995.
16
   Nine percent of coal-fired generation capacity in 2009-10 was privately owned.




                                                 17
        Tables 2A and 2B present summary statistics that compare state EGUs
(Table 2A) and plants (Table 2B) by phase of reform in the period prior to
restructuring (1988–1995) and at the end of the sample period (2006–2009).
Tables 3A and 3B present similar comparisons between state and central EGUs
(Table 3A) and plants (Table 3B).

        Prior to the first unbundling reforms in 1996, Phase 1 states were
performing slightly worse than other states. The EGUs in these states were older,
smaller, had higher forced outages, slightly lower availability and lower thermal
efficiency compared to Phase 2 states. This pattern was reversed by 2006-09:
Phase 1 states were now statistically indistinguishable in terms of performance
measures—forced outages, availability, capacity utilization—from Phase 2
states.17 Operating heat rate at plants in Phase 1 states was also slightly below
operating heat rate in Phase 2 states by 2006-09, although the difference is not
statistically distinguishable. This suggests that between 1996 and 2006 the states
that unbundled early (Phase 1 states) outperformed the states that were just
beginning to unbundle their SEBs in 2004 (Phase 2 states). The tables also show a
drop in the average design heat rate of plants in Phase 1 states, which implies that
at least a part of the gains in average performance measures are due to the
addition of newer and more efficient units.

        The comparison between state and central plants In Tables 3A and 3B
confirms that central plants were significantly more efficient than state plants
throughout the sample period. Over the years 1988–1995, the average capacity
utilization of state EGUs was about 10 percentage points lower than EGUs at
centrally owned plants. Coal consumption per kWh was about 7 percent higher at
state plants. A comparison of operating heat rates at state and central plants is

17
  Average forced outage was lower in Phase 1 states compared to Phase 2 in the period 2006-09;
however, the difference in means is not statistically significant.




                                              18
more difficult, as data are often missing for plants operated by the National
Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC).

       During the sample period, both state and central plants improved in
reliability, but showed little improvement in thermal efficiency. Table 3 indicates
that EGUs in both sets of plants have experienced large gains in capacity
utilization (an average increase of 19 percentage points for state and 25
percentage points for central plants) and smaller gains in plant availability (an
average increase of 13 percentage points for both central and state plants). Forced
outages also decreased substantially at both sets of plants. There was, in contrast,
little change in coal consumption per kWh.

6 Results

   6.1 Difference-in-Difference Results for Thermal Efficiency

       We measure the impacts of unbundling on thermal efficiency using both
specific coal consumption (kg/kWh) and operating heat rate (kcal/kWh). The
models are estimated using plant-level data.        Plants owned by the central
government cannot be used as controls since data on thermal efficiency are often
missing for these plants.

       Coal burned per kWh depends on the design heat rate of the boiler (e.g.,
boilers designed to burn high-ash coal have higher design heat rates and thus
require more coal), the heating value of the coal burned, and the age and capacity
of the boiler (Joskow and Schmalensee 1987). Coal consumption per kWh should
decrease with the heating value of the coal and capacity of the boiler and should




                                        19
increase with boiler age.18 In estimating models of coal consumption we treat the
heating value of the coal as exogenous to the plant. Given the structure of the
Indian coal market, plant managers cannot choose coal quality. Power plants are
linked to coal mines by a central government committee and thus have little
leeway in determining the quality of the coal received.19

         Operating heat rate (OPHR) is the sum of coal burned per kWh, multiplied
by the heating value of the coal, plus oil burned per kWh, multiplied by the
heating value of the oil. Although OPHR captures oil as well as coal usage, we
expect the impact of unbundling on operating heat rate to be similar to its impact
on coal consumption per kWh.20 One way in which restructuring could reduce
coal consumption and operating heat rate are through the purchase of newer
generating equipment. This should improve thermal efficiency because boilers
generally deteriorate as they age and, new boilers embody technical
improvements. It is also possible to improve thermal efficiency by pulverizing
coal before it is burned and by performing regular maintenance of boilers. By
holding equipment age constant in our thermal efficiency models we focus on the
change in efficiency due to managerial factors.

         Table 4 indicates that after controlling for plant characteristics, year
dummy variables and state-level trends, there is no evidence to support the
hypothesis that unbundling improved the thermal efficiency of state-owned power
plants. Plant characteristics have the expected signs; however, average treatment

18
   Because our models are estimated at the plant level, variables measured at the level of the EGU
(such as age) have been aggregated to the plant level by weighting each unit by its nameplate
capacity. The average nameplate capacity is a simple average of EGU capacity in the plant.
19
   The use of washed (beneficiated) coal, which has a higher heating value, is also mandated
through regulation and not determined by plant managers.
20
   Because coal constitutes most of the kcal used to generate electricity, OPHR ≈ (Coal per
kWh)*(Heating Value of Coal). It follows that the coefficient of ln(Heating Value of Coal) in the
ln(OPHR) equation should approximately equal 1 plus the coefficient of ln(Heating Value of
Coal) in the ln(Coal Consumption per kWh) equation. Our results confirm this.




                                                20
effects in columns [1] and [2] show no significant impact of unbundling on
operating heat rate and a significant positive impact on specific coal consumption.
Examining the heterogeneous impacts in column [3] and [4] reveals that plants in
Phase 2 states experience a statistically significant worsening in thermal
efficiency post unbundling reforms—this is also what drives the average impact
of specific coal consumption in column [2]. This result is consistent with large
increases in specific coal consumption observed in Gujarat and Maharashtra
beginning in 2005. These increase could be due to idiosyncratic shocks to the
quality of coal (e.g., to its ash and moisture content) for which we do not have
data.

        Our results, which show no significant improvement in thermal efficiency
as a result of restructuring, are consistent with the results of Hiebert (2002) and
Fabrizio et al. (2007). Hiebert find mixed effects of restructuring on the technical
efficiency of coal-fired power plants in US states that restructured their electricity
sectors (improvements in 1996 but not in 1997). Fabrizio et al. (2007) find no
improvement in fuel input usage at plants in states that restructured their
electricity sectors. It should, however, be noted that both studies look at the
impacts of restructuring shortly after states separated generation from distribution.
Our panel follows plants in Phase 1 states for an average of 10 years after
unbundling.

   6.2 Difference-in-Difference Results for Operating Reliability

        Columns [1] and [2] of Table 5 show the average effect of unbundling of
SEBs on unit availability and forced outage. Availability is the percentage of
hours in a year that the EGU is available to produce electricity; forced outage is
the percentage of time that the EGU is forced to shut down due to breakdowns
and mechanical failures. The results in Column [1] and [2] indicate that the




                                         21
average impact of unbundling on state EGUs is statistically insignificant from
zero.

        Columns [3] and [4], however, show that states that unbundled prior to the
Electricity Act of 2003 experienced a statistically significant improvement in
operating reliability: average EGU availability increased by 6.8 percentage points.
This increase represents a 10 percent increase over 1995 levels. The
improvements in availability were largely driven by a reduction in forced outages.
The unbundling of generation resulted in a 5.1 percentage point reduction in the
time lost from breakdowns, a 25 percent reduction from average forced outage for
these states in 1995.

        Column [3] shows a decline in EGU availability in Phase 2 states due to
unbundling that is significant at the 10 percent level, but no statistically
significant impact on forced outages. Because plant availability, forced outages
and planned maintenance must sum to 100 percent, this implies that the reduction
in availability is due to increased plant maintenance. This is a very different
outcome than an increase in forced outages and need not represent a decline in
efficiency.

        Table 6 presents robustness checks for the operating reliability models.
These indicate that the reduction in forced outages in Phase 1 states is robust to
sample specification and representation of time trends. For Phase 1 states the
increase in EGU availability and reduction in forced outages is affected only
slightly by dropping Phase 2 states from the models (i.e., to using only states that
did not restructure during the sample period as a control group). This is also the
case when state time trends are replaced by time trends for the three phases of
unbundling.




                                        22
       Table 6 also investigates the impact of the decommissioning and
commissioning of EGUs on our results. Columns [5] and [6] re-estimate the
models dropping observations for the EGUs that were shut down during the
sample period. This eliminates the possibility that units that were shut down are
driving the results in Table 5. This slightly reduces the impact of unbundling on
forced outages and plant availability, to -3.7 and 4.9 percentage points,
respectively. To test whether it is new EGUs that are driving the results we
estimate the models using EGUs that were installed pre-reform and remain in the
dataset through 2009 (columns [7] and [8]). Columns [7] and [8] suggest that
unbundling significantly improved the performance of existing equipment in
Phase 1 states, reducing forced outages by about 5 percentage points and
increasing availability by about 6 percentage points.

       As is the case for Phase 1 states, results for Phase 2 states are also robust
to choice of sample. The reduction in availability at Phase 2 plants remains
statistically significant and is associated with increased restoration and
maintenance of EGUs, rather than an increase in forced outages.

6.3 Triple-difference Estimates of Operating Reliability

       The triple-difference (DDD) specifications include EGUs at central power
plants as an additional control group. The validity of central power plants as a
control group rests partly on SEB reforms having no impact on the operating
reliability of these plants. To test this, we estimate a model of the impacts of SEB
restructuring on EGUs at central power plants. The results, presented in the
Appendix, show that there is no evidence of unbundling reforms on operating
availability or forced outages at central EGUs—the magnitude of the coefficients
is small and the standard errors are large.




                                         23
        Table 7 presents the results from the DDD estimation of the impact of
unbundling, by phase. The results in Table 7 are qualitatively similar to those in
Table 5 for the DD specification. The coefficient estimates in columns [1] and [2]
show a statistically significant increase in availability of 6 percentage points—
equivalent to an additional 700 MW becoming available for electricity
production—and a decrease in forced outage for EGUs in Phase 1 states of 5
percentage points. These results are robust to dropping from the sample units that
were shut down (columns [3] and [4]). Results for Phase 2 states, although
qualitatively similar to Table 5, are no longer statistically significant. When the
DDD model is estimated using EGUs that were installed pre-reform and remain in
the dataset through 2009, the impact of unbundling on forced outages is
unaffected, suggesting that reforms improved existing cacpity; however, the
impact on availability is estimated less precisely.

6.4 Dynamic Effects of the Impact of Unbundling

        The average treatment effects for units in Phase 1 states could reflect an
initial impact of restructuring that declined over time. Our analysis of the dynamic
impacts of restructuring suggests that this is not the case. Using equation (3), we
estimate the impact of unbundling by interacting a series of biennial dummy
variables with the unbundling variables. Figures 4A to 4D plot the estimated
coefficients of time dummy variables that represent two-year intervals after
reform for Phase 1 states.21

        Figures 4A and 4B show a similar pattern of the impact on forced outage
for both DD (Figure 4A) and DDD (Figure 4B) specifications. The DD

21
  The dummy year categories are 1-2 years, 3-4 years, 5-6 years, 6-7 years and 9+ years since
unbundling. The last category captures up to 13 years after unbundling in the case of Orissa. We
combine years greater than 9 into one dummy because the number of observations is too low to
estimate finer categories.




                                               24
coefficients are, however, less precisely estimated. The DDD estimates in Figure
4B suggest a lag in the reduction of forced outages after unbundling for Phase 1
states. The impact is significant starting 3 years after unbundling, and is largest 3,
5 and 9 (or more) years after reform.

            Figures 4C and 4D plot the results from a more flexible specification of
the DDD model. Here, we allow both the pre- and post-reform time effects for
state-owned EGUs to vary non-parametrically.22            Figure 4C shows that the
flexible estimation of the pre-reform trend in forced outage at state-owned EGUs
yields a flat trend, conditional on covariates. The evolution of the impact after
unbundling is the same as in figure 4B above. Figure 4D indicates that the
significant reform impacts on availability for Phase 1 states persist for the
duration of the sample.

       6.5 Impacts on Capacity Utilization

            Did the reductions in forced outages and increases in availability at EGUs
in Phase 1 states result in greater electricity production? Table 8 suggests that, on
average, increases in availability were not reflected in increased capacity
utilization of state-owned EGUs. Column [1] and column [2] report the impacts,
by phase, from the DD and DDD specifications. We find no evidence to suggest
that, on average, unbundling generation from transmission and distribution led to
an increase in capacity utilization at state EGUs.

            This result is at variance with the results of Sen and Jamasb (2012) who,
using state-level data, find that unbundling resulted in a 26 percentage point
increase in capacity utilization at state-owned power plants.           Interestingly,
average capacity utilization at state-owned EGUs increased by roughly 25

22
     This is similar to an event study specification.




                                                    25
percentage points from 1991 to 2009 (see Figure 1C). However, once we control
for plant and year fixed effects and state time trends, this result is unrelated to
unbundling.

         One reason why increases in availability did not result in greater
electricity generation may be that they occurred at higher cost plants. If these
plants were not able to underbid lower cost plants in the merit dispatch order,
increased availability would not necessarily result in increased capacity
utilization. Alternatively, it could also be that there was heterogeneity in the
impacts of unbundling on capacity utilization which caused the average effect to
be estimated noisily. We note that the sign of the impact of unbundling on
average capacity utilization in Table 8 is positive but insignificant for Phase 1
states, suggesting this possibility.23 We examine the nature of heterogeneity in the
impact of reforms by estimating models that allow for differential impacts by
EGU size.

         Table 9 presents difference-in-difference models which interact the Phase-
specific unbundling variable with categorical variables for 4 EGU size
categories—EGUs less than 100 MW, 110/120 MW, 210/220/250 and 500 MW.24
The results show that 110/120 MW units experienced a significant positive
increase in operating reliability in Phase 1 states: operating availability increases
by about 12 percentage points, largely driven by a 9 percentage point reduction in
time lost due to forced outages. The increase in operating availability translated
into a roughly 9 percentage point increase in capacity utilization at these EGUs.



23
   The magnitude of the average term may be reduced due to gains in capacity utilization (or
reliability) at some generators and possible deterioration at others—e.g. due to adjustment costs of
restructuring.
24
   We define each group based on a range of nameplate capacities that is largely composed of
these capacities.




                                                26
Indeed, the results in Tables 5-8 appear to be driven by reductions in forced
outages at small (100 MW and 110/120 MW) plants.

          The estimates for Phase 2 states suggest that the impact of unbundling was
to decrease EGU reliability. There is a statistically significant decline in
availability which leads to a decline in capacity utilization. The estimates also
show that the deterioration associated with reforms at EGUs in Phase 2 states is
not due to an increase in forced outage. Thus an increase in maintenance is
driving the observed decreases in availability and capacity utilization. As argued
above, it is questionable whether this captures a reduction in efficiency due to
reform.

7 Conclusions

          This paper examines the impact of reforms in the Indian electricity sector
on the generation performance of state-owned power plants. Our results show that
unbundling resulted in a statistically significant increase in the average
availability of EGUs in states that restructured their SEBs prior to the Electricity
Act of 2003. We find that the increase in availability at these EGUs is mainly
driven by a corresponding reduction in forced outages. There is no evidence of an
impact of restructuring on average capacity utilization or improvements in
thermal efficiency. In fact, the results show a statistically significant increase in
coal consumption per kWh and in operating heat rate at state plants in states that
unbundled between 2005 and 2009.

          Results from a triple difference specification suggest a 5.9 percentage
point increase in average unit availability and a 4.9 percentage point reduction in
forced outages in Phase 1 states. The reduction in forced outages represents a 25
percent reduction from the mean for these states in 1995. Examination of the




                                          27
duration of reform impacts, using a full set of pre and post time dummies, shows
that the improvements in generation reliability are not reversed in the short to
medium term. Robustness checks confirm that our baseline results are not
sensitive to changes in model and sample specifications.

        The estimation of the average impact of unbundling hides the considerable
heterogeneity in the impact of reform by EGU characteristics. Smaller EGUs
experienced a significant increase in operating reliability due to reform in Phase 1
states. In Phase 1 states, 110/120 MW EGUs experienced a 9.4 percentage point
increase in capacity utilization driven largely by a reduction in the time lost due to
forced outage. The increase in capacity utilization represents a 24 percent increase
above the 1995 average (39 percent) at 110/120 MW EGUs and implies an
additional 2083 GWh of electricity production per year from these units.25

        For Phase 2 states, our results suggest that the initials years following
reforms were associated with a reduction in availability and capacity utilization,
especially at 110/120 MW EGUs, and a decrease in thermal efficiency. The
estimated coefficients are unstable and often insignificant, but suggest a
worsening in generation performance across various specifications. The estimated
deterioration in performance may be due to initial adjustment costs to
restructuring in the states that were forced to unbundle. It should also be noted
that the reductions in availability at EGUs are due to increases in planned
maintenance rather than increases in forced outages.

        The offsetting deterioration in Phase 2 states implies that, on average, the
impact of reforms has been modest in magnitude. It is safe to say that the gains
from unbundling reforms have thus far been limited to an improvement in

25
  State-owned thermal power plants generated 240.8 TWh (103 GWh) of electricity in 2005 (CEA
2006). This figure includes gas-fired plants.




                                            28
operating reliability and capacity utilization for the most inefficient plants in the
states that unbundled prior to 2003.

       To the extent that we find modest impacts of restructuring on operating
reliability due to a reduction in forced outages—and no improvements in thermal
efficiency—our results are comparable to those of Fabrizio et al. (2007) and
Davis and Wolfram (2011) for the US. Fabrizio et al. (2007) do not find evidence
of the impact of restructuring on the thermal efficiency of power plants, although
they do find significant reductions in non-fuel expenditures. Davis and Wolfram
(2011) find that deregulation and consolidation in ownership led to a 10
percentage point increase in operating efficiency nuclear power plants—driven
largely by reductions in forced outages.

       Our results disagree with those of Sen and Jamasb (2012) who, using
state-level data for India, find that unbundling increased average capacity
utilization by 26 percentage points—an extremely large effect. One possible
explanation for the difference is that the Sen and Jamasb (2012) may not
adequately control for the strong upward trend in the capacity utilization at Indian
power plants during the period of their study (see Figure 1C).

       The failure to find more widespread impacts from restructuring may
reflect the nature and progress of electricity reform in India thus far. Ruet (2005)
argues that unbundling and subsequent corporatization has failed to increase the
technical and financial autonomy of power plant managers to the extent envisaged
at the start of reforms. Executive orders from state governments continue to drive
some of the important decisions of generation companies, which may be contrary
to cost-minimization objectives.




                                           29
       Bacon and Besant-Jones (2001) emphasize that separating generation from
transmission and distribution is likely to be most successful when it is
accompanied by tariff reform and when it induces competition in generation.
Tariff reform that promotes cost recovery in the electricity sector is needed to
make generation profitable. Although tariff reform has begun, in 2006 only 3 of
the 10 states that had unbundled were making positive profits (The Energy and
Resources Institute 2009, Table 1.80). Another way in which unbundling may
increase generation efficiency is through increased competitive pressure from the
entry of IPPs into the electricity market. Such an effect followed the restructuring
of the US electricity sector, but has not yet occurred on a large scale in India.




                                        30
References

Bacon, R.W., and J. Besant-Jones. 2001. Global Electric Power Reform,
Privatization, and Liberalization of the Electric Power Industry in Developing
Countries. Annual Review of Energy and the Environment 26: 331–59.

Borenstein, Severin, James B. Bushnell, and Frank A. Wolak. 2002. Measuring
Market Inefficiencies in California’s Restructured Wholesale Electricity Market.
American Economic Review 92 (5): 1376–1405.

Bushnell, James B. and Catherine Wolfram. 2007. The Guy at the Controls: Labor
Quality and Power Plant Efficiency. NBER Working Paper 13215, July 2007.

CEA. 2006. All India Electricity Statistics, General Review 2006. Central
Electricity Authority, New Delhi, India.

CEA. Various years. Review of Performance of Thermal Power Stations. Central
Electricity Authority, Ministry of Power, New Delhi, India.

Crisil Risk and Infrastructure Solutions, Ltd. 2010. Study on Analysis of Tariff
Orders and Other Orders of State Electricity Regulatory Commissions.

Cropper, Maureen L., Kabir Malik, Alex Limonov and Anoop Singh. 2011.
Estimating the Impact of Restructuring on Electricity Generation Efficiency: The
Case of the Indian Thermal Power Sector. NBER Working Paper 17383,
September 2011.

Davis, Lucas and Catherine Wolfram. 2012. Deregulation, Consolidation and
Efficiency: Evidence from Nuclear Power. American Economics Journal:
Applied Economics 4: 194.225.

Douglas, Stratford, 2006. Measuring Gains from Regional Dispatch: Coal-Fired
Power Plant Utilization and Market Reforms. The Energy Journal 27(1): 119-138.

ESMAP, 2009. Strengthening Operations and Maintenance Practices In State-
Sector Coal-Fired Power Generation Plants in India. Sustainable Development
Network, World Bank, Washington D.C.

Fabrizio, Kira R., Nancy L. Rose, and Catherine D. Wolfram. 2007. Do Markets
Reduce Costs? Assessing the Impact of Regulatory Restructuring on U.S. Electric
Generation Efficiency. American Economic Review 97(4): 1250–77.




                                        31
Hiebert, L. Dean. 2002. The Determinants of the Cost Efficiency of Electric
Generating Plants: A Stochastic Frontier Approach. Southern Economic Journal
68(4): 935–46.

Hortacsu, Ali, and Steven L. Puller. 2008. Understanding Strategic Bidding in
Multi-unit Auctions: A Case Study of the Texas Electricity Spot Market. RAND
Journal of Economics 39 (1): 86–114.

Joskow, Paul L., and Richard Schmalensee. 1987. The Performance of Coal-
Burning Electric Generating Units in the United States: 1960–1980. Journal of
Applied Econometrics 2(2): 85–109.

Khanna, M., and D. Zilberman. 1999. Barriers to Energy-Efficiency in Electricity
Generation in India. Energy Journal 20(1): 25–41.

Knittel, Christopher R. 2002. Alternative Regulatory Methods and Firm
Efficiency: Stochastic Frontier Evidence from the U.S. Electricity Industry. The
Review of Economics and Statistics 84(3): 530–40.


MIT. 2007. "The Future of Coal: An Interdisciplinary MIT Study," Cambridge,
MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology,

Ruet, Joel. 2005. Privatising Power Cuts? New Delhi, India: Centre de Sciences
Humaines.

Sen, A., and T. Jamasb. 2012. Diversity in Unity: An Empirical Analysis of
Electricity Deregulation in Indian States. The Energy Journal 33(1): 83-130.

Singh, Anoop. 2006. Power Sector Reform in India: Current Issues and Prospects.
Energy Policy 34(16): 2480–90.

The Energy and Resources Institute. 2009. TERI Energy Data Directory and
Yearbook. New Delhi, India: The Energy and Resources Institute.

Tongia, R. 2003. The Political Economy of Indian Power Sector Reforms.
Program on Energy and Sustainable Development working paper no. 4. Stanford
University.
Wolfers, Justin, 2006. Did Unilateral Divorce Laws Raise Divorce Rates? A
Reconciliation and New Results. American Economic Review 96 (5): 1802–20.




                                       32
    Table 1. Timeline of Reforms by States under the 1998 and 2003 Electricity
                                  Reform Acts
Unbundling Phase           State                 SERC operational   SEB unbundled
                           Orissa                     1995               1996
                           Andhra Pradesh             1999               1998
                           Haryana                    1998               1998
                           Karnataka                  1999               1999
         Phase 1
                           Uttar Pradesh              1999               1999
                           Rajasthan                  2000               2000
                           Delhi                      1999               2002
                           Madhya Pradesh             1998               2002
                           Assam                      2001               2004
                           Maharashtra                1999               2005
         Phase 2           Gujarat                    1998               2006
                           West Bengal                1999               2007
                           Chhattisgarh               2000               2008
                           Punjab                     1999               2010
                           Tamil Nadu                 1999               2010
                           Bihar                      2005                a

                           Jharkhand                  2003                a
a
    Reform not implemented by 2012.




                                            33
                    Table 2A. Variable Means, State-owned EGUs, by Unbundling Phase (EGU Data)
                                           Phase-I                       Phase-II                       Phase-III
                                        1988 - 1995                   1988 - 1995                     1988 - 1995
                                      Mean       Std. dev.          Mean        Std. dev.          Mean        Std. dev.            Diff. in means
                                       [1]          [2]              [3]           [4]              [5]            [6]            [1]-[3]      [1]-[5]
Nameplate capacity (MW)                117          73               146           74               131            60             -29***      -14***
Generation (GWh)                       534         489               686          498               561           465            -152***         -27
Age (yrs.)                            14.8          8.0             13.5           8.2             12.9            7.5             1.3**       1.8***
Forced outages (%)                    21.5         20.4             16.8          20.4             17.6           17.2            4.6***        3.9**
Planned maintenance (%)               12.2         18.7             14.2          18.7             18.3           27.4               -2       -6.1***
Availability (%)                      66.3         23.4             69.0          23.8             64.1           26.4             -2.6*         2.2
Capacity utilization (%)              50.0         21.2             49.8          20.7             46.0           24.0              0.2         3.9**
                                        2006 - 2009                   2006 - 2009                     2006 - 2009
Nameplate capacity (MW)                164          91               172           86               159            61                -8             4
Generation (GWh)                      1062         750              1052          656              1038           664                10            24
Age (yrs.)                            23.0         12.2             24.6          11.7             24.7            9.3             -1.6*         -1.7*
Forced outages (%)                    10.8         14.7             12.6          16.3             13.3           18.4              -1.8          -2.5
Planned maintenance (%)                8.2         15.6              6.1           9.8             12.6           23.1             2.1**        -4.4**
Availability (%)                      81.0         19.8             81.4          18.0             74.2           27.6              -0.3        6.9***
Capacity utilization (%)              69.1         23.7             68.1          20.1             66.1           30.0               1              3
Notes: Phase 1 (pre-2003): Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Karnataka, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, and Madhya Pradesh. Phase 2 (post-2003): Gujarat,
Maharashtra, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh and Assam. Phase 3 (out-of-sample): Bihar, Punjab, Tamil Nadu and Jharkhand. GWh, gigawatt-hours; MW,
megawatts. 1988-1995 does not contain data for 1992 and 1993. Difference in means according to a two-sample t-test with unequal variances*** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1. Number of observations (1988-1995): Phase 1- 466, Phase 2- 461, Phase 3- 217. Number of observations (2006-2009): Phase 1- 399, Phase 2-
370, Phase 3- 155.
                     Table 2B. Variable Means, State-owned Plants, by Unbundling Phase (Plant Data)
                                            Phase-I                        Phase-II                        Phase-III
                                           1988-1995                      1988-1995                       1988-1995
                                       Obs Mea       Std.             Obs Mea       Std.              Obs Mea        Std.
                                        .    n      Dev.               .    n       Dev.               .     n       Dev.               Diff. in means
                                       [1]  [2]      [3]              [4]  [5]       [6]              [7]   [8]       [9]             [2]-[5]    [2]-[8]
No. of operating units                 117 3.98     3.03              118 3.91      1.67              50   4.34      2.41               0.08      -0.36
Nameplate capacity (MW)                115  473      421              117  574      383               49   580       285               -100*      -107*
Heating value of coal
(kcal/kg)                               58     4203         617        67      4307        604         32     3809         380         -104       394***
Design heat rate (kcal/kWh)             36     2633         194        41      2438        148         12     2486          70        195***      147***
Operating heat rate
(kcal/kWh)                              59     3478         950        69      3135        537         32     3210         664        342**         268
                                                                                                                                      0.11**
Specific coal cons. (kg/kWh)            98     0.83    0.15            103     0.72    0.12            49      0.82    0.13              *          0.01
                                              2006-2009                       2006-2009                       2006-2009
                                                                                                                                                  1.12**
No. of operating units                  86     4.64        2.76        93         3.98     1.90        44      3.52       1.73         0.66*         *
Nameplate capacity (MW)                 86     760         551         93         685      509         44      561        347          74.4        199**
Heating value of coal                                                                                                                                -
(kcal/kg)                               48     3547         386        45      3673        493         29     3773         334         -125       226***
Design heat rate (kcal/kWh)             53     2405         177        66      2423        201         29     2383         110         -18.2        21.9
Operating heat rate
(kcal/kWh)                              53     2901        642         65      2932        323         29     2777        456          -31.9        123
Specific coal cons. (kg/kWh)            76     0.82        0.13        63      0.78        0.09        41     0.78        0.15        0.04**        0.04
Notes: Phase 1 (pre-2003): Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Karnataka, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, and Madhya Pradesh. Phase 2 (post-2003): Gujarat,
Maharashtra, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh and Assam. Phase 3 (out-of-sample): Bihar, Punjab, Tamil Nadu and Jharkhand. GWh, gigawatt-hours; MW,
megawatts; kcal/kWh, kilo-calories/kilowatt-hours. 1988-1995 does not contain data for 1992 and 1993. Difference in means according to a two-sample t-test
with unequal variances*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                             35
                                          Table 3A. Variable Means, by Sector (EGU Data)
                                                            CENTER                                  STATE
                                                           1988 - 1995                            1988 - 1995
                                                      Mean           St Dev                  Mean           St Dev              Diff. in means
                                                       [1]             [2]                    [3]             [4]                       [1]-[3]
Nameplate capacity (MW)                                194             132                    131              72                      62.80***
Generation (GWh)                                      1046             917                    602             493                      443.6***
Age (yrs.)                                            13.5            10.7                   13.9             8.0                        -0.36
Forced outages (%)                                    14.9            16.8                   18.7            19.7                      -3.82***
Planned maintenance (%)                                9.4            13.9                   14.2            20.7                      -4.79***
Availability (%)                                      75.7            19.9                   67.1            24.1                      8.623***
Capacity utilization (%)                              59.5            21.1                   49.2            21.5                      10.23***
                                                           2006 - 2009                            2006 - 2009
Nameplate capacity (MW)                                259             155                    166              85                     93.01***
Generation (GWh)                                      1928            1281                   1054             699                     873.4***
Age (yrs.)                                            20.2            12.2                   23.9            11.6                     -3.72***
Forced outages (%)                                     5.6             9.6                   11.9            16.0                     -6.36***
Planned maintenance (%)                                5.8             5.5                    8.1            15.4                     -2.28***
Availability (%)                                      88.7            10.5                   80.0            20.8                     8.642***
Capacity utilization (%)                              84.7            14.2                   68.2            23.6                     16.49***
Notes: GWh, gigawatt-hours; MW, megawatts. 1988-1995 does not contain data for 1992 and 1993. Difference in means between State and Central plants
according to a two-sample t-test with unequal variances*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Number of observations (1988-1995): Center- 404, State- 1141.
Number of observations (2006-2009): Center- 435, State- 924.




                                                                           36
                                          Table 3B. Variable Means, by Sector (Plant Data)
                                                          CENTER                                         STATE
                                                          1988-1995                                    1988-1995
                                             Obs.       Mean        Std. Dev.             Obs.        Mean       Std. Dev.             Diff. in means
                                             [1]         [2]           [3]                [4]          [5]          [6]                   [2]-[5]
No. of operating units                        92        4.39          2.26                285         4.01         2.44                     0.38
Nameplate capacity (MW)                       90         872           601                281         534           386                   338***
Heating value of coal (kcal/kg)               42        4092           543                157         4167          598                      -75
Design heat rate (kcal/kWh)                   12        2530           164                 89         2523          185                     6.73
Operating heat rate (kcal/kWh)                43        2984           387                160         3276          751                  -293***
Specific coal cons. (kg/kWh)                  67        0.73          0.12                250         0.78         0.14                  -0.05***
                                                          2006-2009                                    2006-2009
No. of operating units                        87        5.00          2.17                 223        4.14         2.28                   0.86***
Nameplate capacity (MW)                       87        1297           854                 223        689           502                    608***
Heating value of coal (kcal/kg)               11        4323           267                 122        3647          424                    676***
Design heat rate (kcal/kWh)                   23        2505           137                 148        2409          178                     96***
Operating heat rate (kcal/kWh)                23        3138           398                 147        2890          486                     247**
Specific coal cons. (kg/kWh)                  74        0.71          0.07                 180        0.80         0.12                   -0.08***
Notes: GWh, gigawatt-hours; MW, megawatts; kcal/kWh, kilo-calories/kilowatt-hours. 1988-1995 does not contain data for 1992 and 1993. Difference in
means between State and Central plants according to a two-sample t-test with unequal variances*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                          37
                                Table 4: Thermal Efficiency - Impact of Unbundling on State Plants
                                                             [1]                     [2]                                      [3]                    [4]
                                                             Log                     Log                                      Log                    Log
                                                           Heat rate          Specific Coal Cn.                             Heat rate         Specific Coal Cn.

[Unbundled]                                                  0.0320                0.0356*
                                                            (0.0201)               (0.0189)
[Phase-I*Unbundled]                                                                                                         -0.0183                -0.0107
                                                                                                                            (0.0229)               (0.0179)
[Phase-II*Unbundled]                                                                                                       0.0820***              0.0818***
                                                                                                                            (0.0223)               (0.0207)
ln(Design Heat Rate)                                        0.491***                0.483***                                0.448***                0.444***
                                                             (0.157)                 (0.138)                                 (0.133)                 (0.117)
ln(Heating value of Coal)                                  0.514***                -0.451***                                0.508***               -0.457***
                                                            (0.0890)                (0.0869)                                (0.0834)                (0.0824)
Average Age                                               0.00578**               0.00786**                                0.00711**              0.00908**
                                                           (0.00261)               (0.00347)                               (0.00259)               (0.00339)
Average Age^2                                            0.000139***                8.20e-05                              0.000120**                6.46e-05
                                                          (4.35e-05)              (5.04e-05)                               (4.45e-05)             (4.91e-05)
Average Nameplate Capacity                                 -0.000953               -0.000572                               -0.000872               -0.000498
                                                          (0.000698)              (0.000677)                              (0.000659)              (0.000644)

Time Trend                                                    State                   State                                    State                  State
Plant FE                                                      Yes                     Yes                                      Yes                    Yes
Year FE                                                       Yes                     Yes                                      Yes                    Yes
Observations                                                  478                     478                                      478                    478
Notes: Std. errors in parentheses, clustered at state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All equations control for a quadratic for plant age, average capacity,
design heat rate, heat content of coal, year and plant fixed effects and state time trends. Number of observations=478 (46 Plants).
                              Table 5: Operating Reliability - Impact of Unbundling on State EGUs
                                                            [1]                [2]                                         [3]               [4]
                                                               Average Impacts                                            Heterogeneous Impacts
                                                       Availability      Forced Outages                                Availability    Forced Outages

[Unbundled]                                                0.743                      -1.824
                                                          (1.885)                     (1.352)
[Phase-I*Unbundled]                                                                                                      6.793**                  -5.110***
                                                                                                                         (2.819)                   (1.726)
[Phase-II*Unbundled]                                                                                                     -5.559*                    1.599
                                                                                                                         (2.993)                   (2.467)

Time Trend                                                 State                       State                               State                     State
Unit FE                                                    Yes                         Yes                                 Yes                       Yes
Year FE                                                    Yes                         Yes                                 Yes                       Yes
Notes: Std. errors in parentheses, clustered at state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All equations control for a quadratic for EGU age, year and plant
fixed effects and state time trends. Number of observations=4298 (270 Units).




                                                                               39
                               Table 6: Robustness Checks - Impact of Unbundling on State EGUs
                                    [1]        [2]                  [3]         [4]                  [5]        [6]                 [7]        [8]
                                    Drop Phase 2                     Phase Trends                  Drop Shutdown                  Drop Enter/Exit
                                             Forced                           Forced                          Forced                         Forced
                                Availability                    Availability                     Availability                   Availability
                                             Outages                          Outages                         Outages                        Outages

1[Phase-I*Unbundled]it             5.983**        -3.885**        6.711**         -5.258***         4.943*        -3.698**         6.141*        -5.134**
                                   (2.512)         (1.447)        (2.870)          (1.740)         (2.359)         (1.421)         (3.163)        (2.047)
1[Phase-II*Unbundled]it                                          -6.656**           1.754          -5.415*          0.987         -8.501**         1.434
                                                                  (3.097)          (2.350)         (2.949)         (2.583)         (3.013)        (2.378)

Time Trend                          State           State          Phase            Phase           State           State           State          State
Observations                        2,605           2,605          4,298            4,298           3,859           3,859           2,895          2,895
Number of id                         166             166            270              270             236             236             147            147
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses clustered at state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All equations control for a quadratic for EGU age, and EGU and
Year fixed effects. Columns [1]-[2] drop Phase 2 states from the estimation sample. Columns [3]-[4], substitute phase-wise trends instead of state-specific
trends. Columns [5]-[6] drop units that were decommissioned during the sample period. Columns [9]-[10] drop units that were either commissioned or
decommissioned during the sample period.




                                                                             40
                     Table 7: Triple Difference Estimates (DDD) - Impact of Unbundling on State EGUs
                                          [1]                    [2]                  [3]            [4]                        [5]            [6]
                                                                                        Drop Shutdown                            Drop Enter/Exit
                                     Availability        Forced Outages           Availability     Forced                   Availability     Forced

[Phase-I*Unbundled]                     5.959*               -4.938**                6.284*              -4.435**                7.398              -5.088**
                                         (3.12)               (1.818)                (3.175)              (1.709)              (4.500)               (2.203)
[Phase-II*Unbundled]                    -3.684                 3.104                  -3.620               2.711                -4.239                1.679
                                        (2.233)               (2.447)                (2.285)              (2.419)              (5.589)               (6.400)

Observations                             6054                   6054                  5,541                5,541                4,024                 4,024
Number of Units                           385                    385                   344                  344                  203                   203
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses clustered at state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All equations control for a quadratic for EGU age, and a full set
of state year, ownership year and EGU fixed effects.




                                                                               41
                               Table 8. Capacity Utilization Factor – Impact of Unbundling on EGUs
                                                                                                        [1]                                      [2]
                                                                                                                  Capacity Utilization
                                                                                                        DD                                     DDD

[Phase-I*Unbundled]                                                                                    3.955                                   1.101
                                                                                                      (3.475)                                 (2.789)
[Phase-II*Unbundled]                                                                                  -4.039                                   0.571
                                                                                                      (3.281)                                 (2.133)

Observations                                                                                           4,298                                   6,054
Number of EGUs                                                                                          270                                     385
Notes: Std. errors in parentheses, clustered at state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. ) Estimations in both column [1] and [2], respectively, control for all
the same controls as the earlier estimations for DD and DDD.




                                                                                 42
                                            Table 9: Operating Reliability by Size of EGU
                                                                              [1]                       [2]                            [3]
                                                                                                Dependent Variable
Interaction Variable                                                    Availability              Forced Outages             Capacity Utilization
Phase-I
[Phase-I*Unbundled] * Less than 100 MW                                     4.239                       -5.564**                      2.141
                                                                          (3.265)                       (2.168)                     (5.033)
[Phase-I*Unbundled] * 110/120 MW                                         12.26***                      -9.313**                     9.415**
                                                                          (3.041)                       (3.518)                     (4.214)
[Phase-I*Unbundled] * 200/210 MW                                           6.466                        -2.913                       2.812
                                                                          (4.279)                       (1.748)                     (4.049)
[Phase-I*Unbundled] *500 MW                                                1.169                        -0.192                       1.716
                                                                          (2.178)                       (2.224)                     (3.057)
Phase-II
[Phase-II*Unbundled] * Less than 100 MW                                    -6.098                        3.706                        1.013
                                                                           (4.998)                      (4.003)                      (4.129)
[Phase-II*Unbundled] * 110/120 MW                                         -7.492**                       2.764                      -7.851**
                                                                           (3.275)                      (4.793)                      (3.482)
[Phase-II*Unbundled] * 200/210 MW                                          -4.396                        0.325                       -3.514
                                                                           (2.565)                      (1.487)                      (3.366)
[Phase-II*Unbundled] * 500 MW                                            -10.13***                     4.658***                    -14.57***
                                                                           (2.358)                      (1.413)                      (2.825)
Notes: Number of observations for all specifications=4298 (270 EGUs). Each column in Panel A and Panel B represents coefficients from a single DD
estimation. Less than 100MW: all EGUs <100MW; 110/120MW: between 100MW and <150MW; 200/210/250MW: between 150MW and 300MW; and
500MW: 490 MW and above. All equations control for a quadratic for EGU age, year and EGU fixed effects and state time trends. Standard errors in
parenthesis clustered at the state level. . *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                         43
Figure 1: Trends in Outcome Variables

Figure 1A: Trend in Availability for State and Center Owned EGUs

                        100

                        80
  % EGU Availability




                        60


                        40

                        20


                             0



                                 AVL(state)   AVL(center)



Figure 1B: Trend in Forced Outage for State and Center Owned EGUs

                        50
                        45
                        40
  % EGU Forced Outage




                        35
                        30
                        25
                        20
                        15
                        10
                        5
                        0



                                 FO (state)   FO (center)
Figure 1C: Trend in Capacity Utilization for State and Center Owned EGUs

                               100
  % EGU Capacity Utilization



                               80

                               60


                               40

                               20


                                 0



                                     PLF (state)        PLF(center)




                                                   45
                              Figure 2: Correlates of the Year of Unbundling across States


Panel A: Energy deficit at peak demand in 1996
                                                                   Peak deficit in 1996
              0




                                                    RJ
                                                              DL
                                                                              MH                            PN
              -10




                                                                                            WB
                                   OR
                                        HR                                          GJ                      TN
             -20
     Deficit(%)




                                             UP

                                        AP


                                             KN
    -30




                                                              MP
              -40




                                                                                                                 BH
              -50




                            1995                  2000                      2005                          2010        2015
                                                                     Year of Unbundling

                                                             peak_def              Fitted values




Panel B: Financial well-being of SEB prior to reform
                                                         Revenue to cost ratio (1992-1995)
               100




                                                                              MH
                                                                                                            TN
                                             KN
                       80




                                        AP                    MP
    Sales-cost ratio (%)




                                   OR                         DL                            WB
                                                                                    GJ
                                             UP     RJ
                                                                                                                 BH
                                                                                                            PN
             60




                                        HR
                                                                         AS
    40         20




                            1995                  2000                      2005                          2010        2015
                                                                     Year of Unbundling

                                                          salestocost92_95                Fitted values




Note: 1. Jharkhand and Bihar have not unbundled as of 2012. We set 2013 as their arbitrary
unbundling date to plot the averages.
2. The red line represents the Electricity Act of 2003 which divides the first and second phase of
reforms.
                                                                    Figure 2: Correlates of the Year of Unbundling across States


Panel C: Renewable energy capacity in 1997(Hydro and Wind)
                                                                                           Presence of Renewable Energy Sources
                 1
  (%) Renewable Capacity in 1997
                            .8




                                                                         OR
                                                                                     KN
                  .6




                                                                               HR
                                                                               AP                                                                           PN
                                                                                           RJ
                                                                                                                                                            TN
           .4




                                                                                     UP
                                                                                                         MP
    .2




                                                                                                                            MH
                                                                                                                                    GJ
                                                                                                                                                                      BH
                                                                                                                                              WB
                                                                                                         DL            AS
                 0




                                          1995                                        2000                                2005                            2010              2015
                                                                                                                   Year of Unbundling

                                                                                                     renewable_instcap                    Fitted values




Panel D: Cross-subsidy to agriculture in 1997
                                                                                           Relative Tariffs: Cross subsidy to agriculture
                                                             .4
                 Agricultural Tariff/Industrial Tariff in 1997
                                                  .3




                                                                          OR
                                       .2




                                                                                HR
                                                                                      UP
                                                                                                RJ
                           .1




                                                                                                                                               WB
                                                                                                                               MH        GJ
                                                                                AP                                                                                     BH
                                                                                      KN
                                                                                                              MP
                                                                                                                                                                 TN
                                                                                                                                                                 PN
                 0




                                                                  1995                    2000                              2005                           2010              2015
                                                                                                                     Year of Unbundling

                                                                                                         crossub_avg                     Fitted values




Note: 1. Jharkhand and Bihar have not unbundled as of 2012. We set 2013 as their arbitrary
unbundling date to plot the averages.
2. The red line represents the Electricity Act of 2003 which divides the first and second phase of
reforms.




                                                                                                                         47
Figure 3: Units Operating in Unbundled State-owned Generation Plants by
                                 year

             250

             200
 # of EGUs




             150


             100


             50


               0



                     Units Operating in Unbundled States




                                     48
                                        Figure 4A: Post Treatment Flexible Duration Estimates from DD
                                                                Specification

                                                            Forced Outages: Phase-I States
                                          4
                                          2
                                          0
                    Forced Outage (%)




                                         -2 0           1                3               5              7       9
                                         -4
                                         -6
                                         -8
                                        -10
                                        -12
                                        -14
                                                                     Years Since Unbundling




                                        Figure 4B: Post Treatment Flexible Duration Estimates from DDD
                                                                 Specification

                                                            Forced Outage : Phase-I States
                        5


                        0
Forced Outage (%)




                                        0           1                3               5              7       9
                    -5


         -10


         -15

                                                                FO           "95% Conf. Interval"
         -20




                                                                             49
  Figure 4C: Pre and Post Treatment Flexible Duration Estimates from DDD
                               Specification

                                            Forced Outage : Phase-I States
                    20
                    15
Forced Outage (%)




                    10
                     5
                     0
                         -14   -12   -10   -8      -6         -4   -2        0     1     3   5   7       9
                    -5
            -10
            -15
            -20
                                                        FO              95% Conf. Int.



  Figure 4D: Pre and Post Treatment Flexible Duration Estimates from DDD
                               Specification

                                                Availability : Phase-I States
                    30

                    20
Availability (%)




                    10

                     0
                         -14   -12   -10   -8      -6         -4   -2       0     1      3   5   7   9
           -10

           -20
                                                        Avl             95% Conf. Int.




                                                                   50
  Appendix Table 1: Falsification - Impact of Unbundling on Central EGUs
                                [1]              [2]                    [3]              [4]
                                               Forced                                  Forced
                           Availability                            Availability
                                               Outages                                 Outages

[Unbundled]                    -1.516           -1.504
                              (2.276)           (2.407)
[Phase-I*Unbundled]                                                    -1.845            -2.175
                                                                      (3.306)           (3.193)
[Phase-II*Unbundled]                                                   -0.681             0.196
                                                                      (2.104)           (2.515)

Time Trend                     State             State                 State             State
Unit FE                        Yes               Yes                   Yes               Yes
Year FE                        Yes               Yes                   Yes               Yes
Notes: Std. errors in parentheses, clustered at state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All
equations control for a quadratic for EGU age, year and plant fixed effects and state time trends.
Number of observations=1756 (119 Units).




                                                51
