                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        FISCAL STIMULUS IN A MONETARY UNION:
                             EVIDENCE FROM U.S. REGIONS

                                           Emi Nakamura
                                           Jón Steinsson

                                        Working Paper 17391
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17391


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2011




We thank Nicolas Crouzet, Shaowen Luo and Thuy Lan Nguyen for excellent research assistance.
We thank Steve Davis, Gauti Eggertsson, Jordi Gali, Erik Hurst, Karel Mertens, Marcelo Moreira,
James Stock, Ivan Werning, Michael Woodford, Pierre Yared, Motohiro Yogo and seminar participants
at various institutions for helpful comments and conversations. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Emi Nakamura and Jón Steinsson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from U.S. Regions
Emi Nakamura and Jón Steinsson
NBER Working Paper No. 17391
September 2011, Revised June 2013
JEL No. E32,E62

                                              ABSTRACT

We use rich historical data on military procurement spending across U.S. regions to estimate the effects
of government spending in a monetary union. Aggregate military build-ups and draw- downs have
differential effects across regions. We use this variation to estimate an "open economy relative multiplier"
of approximately 1.5. We develop a framework for interpreting this estimate and relating it to estimates
of the standard closed economy aggregate multiplier. The closed economy aggregate multiplier is
highly sensitive to how strongly aggregate monetary and tax policy "leans against the wind." In contrast,
our open economy relative multiplier "differences out" these effects because different regions in the
union share a common monetary and tax policy. Our estimates provide evidence in favor of models
in which demand shocks can have large effects on output.


Emi Nakamura
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 820
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
enakamura@columbia.edu

Jón Steinsson
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1026 International Affairs Building
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jsteinsson@columbia.edu
1        Introduction

The effect of government spending on output is often summarized by a multiplier—the percentage
increase in output that results when government spending is increased by 1 percent of GDP. There
is a wide range of views about this statistic in the literature. On the one hand, the recent American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA)—perhaps the largest fiscal stimulus plan in U.S. history—
was motivated by a relatively high estimate of the multiplier of 1.6 (Romer and Bernstein, 2009).
Other studies argue that the multiplier is substantially smaller and potentially close to zero. In par-
ticular, if the determination of output is dominated by supply-side factors, an increase in government
purchases to a large extent “crowds out” private sector consumption and investment.
        The wide range of views on the multiplier arises in part from the difficulty of measuring it.
Changes in government spending are rarely exogenous, leading to a range of estimates depending
on the estimation approach.1 Two main approaches have been used to estimate the multiplier in
the academic literature. The first is to study the output effects of increases in military spending
associated with wars, which are plausibly unrelated to prevailing macroeconomic conditions (Ramey
and Shapiro, 1998; Edelberg, Eichenbaum and Fisher, 1999; Burnside, Eichenbaum and Fisher, 2004;
Ramey, 2011; Barro and Redlick, 2011; Fisher and Peters, 2010). This approach faces the challenge
that large wars are relatively infrequent. Another challenge is confounding variation associated
with tax increases, price controls, patriotism, and other macroeconomic shocks.2 The second main
approach used to identify the multiplier is the structural VAR approach (Blanchard and Perotti,
2002; Perotti, 2007; Mountford and Uhlig, 2008; Ilzetzki, Mendoza and Vegh, 2013). This approach
relies on structural assumptions about output and fiscal policy dynamics to estimate the multiplier.
        The wide range of views on the multiplier also arises from contrasting results in the theoretical
literature. The government spending multiplier is not a deep structural parameter like the elasticity
of labor supply or the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. Different models, therefore, differ in
their implications about the multiplier depending on what is assumed about preferences, technology,
government policy and various “frictions.” Simple versions of the Neoclassical model generally imply
a small multiplier, typically smaller than 0.5 (see, e.g., Baxter and King, 1993). The multiplier is
sensitive to how the spending is financed—smaller if it is financed by distortionary taxes than lump
    1
     For surveys of the existing evidence, see for example Perotti (2007), Hall (2009), Alesina and Ardagna (2009) and
Cogan et al. (2010).
   2
     Most of the evidence from this approach derives from the U.S. experience during WWII and the Korean War, when
changes in U.S. military spending were largest and most abrupt as a fraction of total output. Hall (2009) and Barro
and Redlick (2011) emphasize that it is not possible to draw meaningful inference using aggregate data on military
spending after 1955 because there is insufficient variation in military spending in this period.

                                                          1
sum taxes.3 In New Keynesian models, the size of the multiplier depends critically on the extent to
which monetary policy “leans against the wind.” Strongly counter-cyclical monetary policy—such
as that commonly estimated for the Volcker-Greenspan period—can generate quite low multipliers—
comparable to those for the Neoclassical model. However, when monetary policy is less responsive—
e.g., at the zero lower bound—the multiplier can exceed two.4 Clearly, there is no “single” government
spending multiplier. This is likely one contributing factor for the wide range of empirical estimates
of the multiplier discussed above, since different identification schemes implicitly put different weight
on periods when different policy regimes were in place.
    We analyze the effects of government spending in a monetary and fiscal union—the United States.
We estimate the effect that an increase in government spending in one region of the union relative
to another has on relative output and employment. We refer to this as the “open economy relative
multiplier.” We use variation in regional military procurement associated with aggregate military
build-ups and draw-downs to estimate these effects.
    The “open economy relative multiplier” we estimate differs conceptually from the more familiar
“closed economy aggregate multiplier” that one might estimate using aggregate U.S. data. At first
glance, this might seem to be a pure disadvantage, since much interest is focused on the closed
economy aggregate multiplier. We show, however, that the open economy relative multiplier has
important advantages. These advantages stem from the fact that relative policy is precisely pinned
down across regions in the United States: The Federal Reserve cannot raise interest rates in some
states relative to others, and federal tax policy is common across states in the union. We show that
this property makes the open economy relative multiplier a powerful diagnostic tool for distinguishing
among competing macroeconomic models.
    Military spending is notoriously political and thus likely to be endogenous to regional economic
conditions (see, e.g., Mintz, 1992). We, therefore, use an instrumental variables approach to estimate
the open economy relative multiplier. Our instruments are based on two characteristics of military
spending. First, national military spending is dominated by geopolitical events. Second, when
national military spending rises by 1 percentage point of GDP, it rises on average by more than 3
percentage points in states that receive a disproportionate amount of military spending—such as
California and Connecticut—but by less than one-half of one percent in states that don’t—such as
   3
     See, e.g., Baxter and King (1993), Ohanian (1997), Corsetti, Meier, and Muller (2011), and Drautzburg and Uhlig
(2011).
   4
     At the zero lower bound, fiscal stimulus lowers real interest rates by raising inflation (Eggertsson, 2010; Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Rebelo, 2011).


                                                             2
Illinois. We use this heterogeneity in the response of regional spending to national military build-
ups and draw-downs to identify the effects of government spending on output.5 Our identifying
assumption is that the U.S. does not embark on military buildups—such as those associated with the
Vietnam War and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan—because states that receive a disproportionate
amount of military spending are doing poorly relative to other states. This assumption is similar—
but weaker than—the common identifying assumption in the empirical literature on the effects of
national military spending, that variation in national military spending is exogenous to the U.S.
business cycle. By including time fixed effects, we control for aggregate shocks and policy that
affect all states at a particular point in time—such as changes in distortionary taxes and aggregate
monetary policy.
    We estimate the open economy relative multiplier to be roughly 1.5. In other words, when relative
per-capita government purchases in a region rises by 1 percent of regional output, relative per-capita
output in that region rises by roughly 1.5 percent. We develop a theoretical framework to help us
interpret our estimate of the open economy relative multiplier and assess how it relates to the closed
economy aggregate multiplier for the United States. Using this framework, we show that our estimate
for the open economy relative multiplier favors models in which demand shocks can have large effects
on output. Our estimates line up well with the open economy relative multiplier implied by an open
economy New Keynesian model in which consumption and labor are complements.6 This model
generates a large closed economy aggregate multiplier when monetary policy is unresponsive, such
as when the nominal interest rate is at its zero lower bound. The “plain-vanilla” Neoclassical model,
however, yields a substantially lower open economy relative multiplier, regardless of the monetary
response.
    The relative monetary policy across regions—fixed relative nominal rate and exchange rate—is
more accommodative than “normal” monetary policy in the U.S.—which raises the real interest
rate substantially in response to inflationary shocks such as government spending shocks. Our
open economy relative multiplier is thus akin to a closed economy aggregate multiplier for a more
accommodative monetary policy than the one seen in the U.S. under Volcker and Greenspan. This
implies that our estimate of 1.5 for the open economy relative multiplier is perfectly consistent with
   5
     Since regional variation in military procurement is much larger than aggregate variation, this approach allows us
to overturn the conclusion from the literature that focuses on aggregate data that little can be learned about fiscal
multipliers from the post-1960 data. Data from this period has the advantage that it is less affected by unusual factors
such as price controls, rationing, patriotism and large changes in taxes than data from the WWII and Korean War
experiences (Perotti, 2007).
   6
     Another potential approach to matching our multiplier estimate would be to consider a model with “hand-to-
mouth” consumers as in Gali, Lopez-Salido, and Valles (2007).

                                                           3
much lower existing estimates of the closed economy aggregate multiplier (e.g., those of Barro and
Redlick, 2011).
    Since the nominal interest rate is fixed across regions in our setting, one might think that our
open economy relative multiplier would be akin to the closed economy aggregate multiplier when
nominal interest rates are fixed at the zero lower bound, in which case the New Keynesian model
generates large multipliers (Eggertsson, 2010; Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo, 2011). We show
that this is not the case. This simple intuition ignores a crucial dynamic aspect of price responses
in a monetary union. Since transitory demand shocks do not lead to permanent changes in relative
prices across regions and the exchange rate is fixed within the monetary union, any increase in prices
in the short run in one region relative to the other must eventually be reversed in the long run.
This implies that even though relative short-term real interest rates fall in response to government
spending shocks in our model, relative long-term real interest rates don’t (in contrast to the zero
lower bound setting). It is the fall in long-term real interest rates that generates a high multiplier
in the zero lower bound setting. The absence of such a fall in our setting explains why the open
economy relative multiplier generated by the baseline New Keynesian model is much lower than the
closed economy aggregate multiplier at the zero lower bound.
    The intuition for why the open economy relative multiplier is larger than the closed economy
aggregate multiplier for normal monetary policy is similar to the intuition for why the government
spending multiplier is larger under a fixed than a flexible exchange rate in the Mundell-Fleming
model. In fact, we show that the open economy relative multiplier is exactly the same as the aggregate
multiplier in a small open economy with a fixed exchange rate. Our estimate can, therefore, be
compared with other estimates of multipliers in open economies with fixed exchange rates. Based on
data from 44 countries, Ilzetzki, Mendoza, and Vegh (2013) estimate a multiplier of 1.5 for countries
that operate a fixed exchange rate regime, but a much lower multiplier for countries operating a
flexible exchange rate regime.7
    An important difference between our open economy relative multiplier and the closed economy
aggregate multiplier is that the regions that receive spending don’t have to pay for it. Could this
perhaps explain the “large” relative multiplier we estimate? In this respect, it is important to keep
in mind that in a Neoclassical model, an increase in wealth shifts labor supply in and thus reduces
the multiplier. With sticky prices and home bias, an increase in wealth also increases aggregate
demand for home goods, which acts to increase the multiplier. In our baseline model, we assume
   7
     Kraay (2012) estimates a government spending multiplier of about 0.5 for 29 aid-dependent developing countries
using variation in World Bank lending.

                                                        4
that financial markets are complete across regions. Thus any increase in wealth associated with the
government spending is fully shared with the rest of the economy. Following Farhi and Werning
(2012), we consider a version of our model in which financial markets are incomplete across regions.
We use this model to compare the effects of federally financed government spending and locally
financed government spending. For our baseline parameters, the open economy relative multiplier is
only slightly larger for federally financed spending than locally financed spending.
       The theoretical framework we describe helps to interpret recent and ongoing research on the
effects of other forms of local government spending (Acconcia et al., 2011; Chodorow-Reich et al.,
2012; Clemens and Miran, 2012; Cohen et al., 2011; Fishback and Kachanovskaya, 2010; Serrato
and Wingender, 2010; Shoag, 2010; Wilson, 2011). In general, these studies appear to estimate open
economy relative multipliers of a similar magnitude as we do. There are, however, a few potentially
important differences between our study and these. Some of these studies focus on windfall transfers
rather than purchases.8 One advantage of our focus on military purchases is that it seems reasonable
to assume that they are separable from other forms of consumption, as is typically assumed in
macroeconomic models.
       Our empirical approach builds on previous work by Davis, Loungani, and Mahidhara (1997), who
study several drivers of regional economic fluctuations, including military procurement.9 Several
other studies on the impact of regional defense spending are surveyed in Braddon (1995). The most
important difference in our empirical methodology relative to these studies is our use of variation
in aggregate military spending in creating instruments to account for potential endogeneity of local
procurement spending as well as measurement error. Our work is also related to Canova and Pappa
(2007), who study the price effects of fiscal shocks in a monetary union. Our theoretical analysis is
related to earlier work on monetary and fiscal policy in a monetary union by Benigno and Benigno
(2003) and Gali and Monacelli (2008).
       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 described the data we use. Section
3 presents our empirical results. Section 4 presents the model we use to interpret these empirical
results. Section 5 presents our theoretical results. Section 6 concludes.
   8
     Our open economy relative multiplier is not a “windfall” or “manna form heaven” multiplier. Rather, the spending
we study is akin to a foreign demand shock. Agents are getting paid to product goods that are “exported” for use in
defense of the union as a whole.
   9
     Similarly, Hooker and Knetter (1997) estimate the effects of military procurement on subsequent employment
growth using a somewhat different specification.




                                                         5
2         Data

Relative to other forms of federal government spending, the geographical distribution of military
spending is remarkably well documented, perhaps because of the intense political scrutiny surround-
ing these purchases. Our main source for military spending data is the electronic database of DD-350
military procurement forms available from the US Department of Defense. These forms document
military purchases of everything from repairs of military facilities to the purchase of aircraft carriers.
They cover purchases greater than $10,000 up to 1983 and greater than $25,000 thereafter.10 These
data are for the federal government fiscal year.11 We have used the DD-350 database to compile
data on total military procurement by state and year for 1966-2006.12
         The DD-350 forms list prime contractors and provide information on the location where the
majority of the work was performed. An important concern is the extent of inter-state subcontracting.
To help assess the extent of such subcontracting, we have compiled a new dataset on shipments to
the government from defense oriented industries. The source of these data are the Annual Survey of
Shipments by Defense-Oriented Industries conducted by the US Census Bureau from 1963 through
1983. In section 3.2, we compare variation in procurement spending with these shipments data.
         Our primary measure of state output is the GDP by state measure constructed by the U.S.
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), which is available since 1963. We also make use of analogous
data by major SIC/NAICS grouping.13 We use the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) payroll survey
from the Current Employment Statistics (CES) program to measure state-level employment. We
also present results for the BEA measure of state employment which is available since 1969. We
obtain state population data from the Census Bureau.14
         Finally, to analyze price effects, we construct state and regional inflation measures from several
sources. Before 1995, we rely on state-level inflation series constructed by Marco Del Negro (1998)
    10
     Purchases reported on DD-350 forms account for 90 percent of military purchases. DD-1057 forms are used to
summarize smaller transactions but do not give the identity of individual sellers. Our analysis of census shipment data
in section 3 suggests DD-350 purchases account for almost all of the time-series variation in total military procurement.
  11
     Since 1976, this has been from October 1st to September 30th. Prior to 1976, it was from July 1st to June 30th.
  12
     The electronic military prime contract data file was created in the mid-1960’s and records individual military
prime contracts since 1966. This occurred around the time Robert McNamara was making sweeping changes to the
procurement process of the U.S. Department of Defense. Aggregate statistics before this point do not appear to
be a reliable source of information on military purchases since large discrepancies arise between actual outlays and
procurement for the earlier period, particularly at the time of the Korean War. See the Department of Defense
Greenbook for aggregate historical series of procurement and outlays.
  13
     The data are organized by SIC code before 1997 and NAICS code after 1997. BEA publishes the data for both
systems in 1997, allowing the growth rate series to be smoothly pasted together.
  14
     Between census years, population is estimated using a variety of administrative data sources including birth and
death records, IRS data, Medicare data and data from the Department of Defense. Since 1970, we are also able to
obtain population by age group, which allows us to construct estimates of the working age population.

                                                           6
for the period 1969-1995 using a combination of BLS regional inflation data and cost of living
estimates from the American Chamber of Commerce Realtors Association (ACCRA).15 After 1995,
we construct state-level price indexes by multiplying a population-weighted average of cost of living
indexes from the American Chamber of Commerce Realtors Association (ACCRA) for each region
with the US aggregate Consumer Price Index. Reliable annual consumption data are unfortunately
not available at the state level for most of the time period or regions we consider.16


3        Measurement of the Open Economy Relative Multiplier

3.1      Empirical Specification and Identification

We use variation in military procurement spending across states and regions to identify the effects
of government spending on output. Our empirical specification is
                                  Yit − Yit−2               Git − Git−2
                                              = αi + γt + β             + it ,                                     (1)
                                     Yit−2                     Yit−2
where Yit is per-capita output in region i in year t, Git is per-capita military procurement spending in
region i in year t, and αi and γt represent state and year fixed effects.17 The inclusion of state fixed
effects implies that we are allowing for state specific time trends in output and military procurement
spending. The inclusion of time fixed effects allows us to control for aggregate shocks and aggregate
policy—such as changes in distortionary taxes and aggregate monetary policy. All variables in the
regression are measured in per capita terms.18 We regress two-year changes in output on two-year
changes in spending, as a crude way of capturing dynamics in the relationship between government
spending and output.19 We use annual panel data on state and regional output and spending for
    15
     See Appendix A of Del Negro (1998) for the details of this procedure.
    16
     Retail sales estimates from Sales and Marketing Management Survey of Buying Power have sometimes been used as
a proxy for state-level annual consumption. However, these data are constructed by using employment data to impute
retail sales between census years, rendering them inappropriate for our purposes. Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor (2005)
study the longer run effects of New Deal spending on retail sales using Census data.
  17
     We deflate both regional output and military procurement spending using the national CPI for the United States.
  18
     A potential concern with normalizing on both sides of the regression by state-level output and population is that
measurement error in these variables might bias our results. However, we use instrumental variables that are based on
variation in national government spending and thus uncorrelated with this measurement error. This should eliminate
any bias due to measurement error. We have also run a specification where we regress the level of output growth on
the level of government spending. This yields slightly larger multipliers.
  19
     An alternative approach would be to use one-year changes in output and government spending and include lags
and leads of government spending on the right hand side. We have explored this and found that our biannual regression
captures the bulk of the dynamics in a parsimonious way. The sum of the coefficients in the dynamic specification is
somewhat larger. This is mostly due to positive coefficients on the first three leads, suggesting that there may be some
anticipatory affects. However, the standard errors on each coefficient in this specification are large and dynamic panel
regressions with fixed effects should be analyzed with care since they are in general inconsistent. Also, there may be
measurement error in the timing of the procurement spending variable we use and some of the work may actually be
carried out in the year after (or before) the year the procurement spending is recorded.
                                                           7
1966-2006 and account for the overlapping nature of the observations in our regression by clustering
the standard errors by state or region. The regional data are constructed by aggregating state-level
data within Census divisions. We make one adjustment to the Census divisions. This is to divide
the “South Atlantic” division into two parts because of its large size.20 This yields ten regions made
up of contiguous states. Our interest focuses on the coefficient β in regression (1), which we refer to
as the “open economy relative multiplier.”
    An important challenge to identifying the effect of government spending is that government
spending is potentially endogenous since military spending is notoriously political.21 We therefore
estimate equation (1) using an instrumental variables approach. Our instruments are based on two
characteristics of the evolution of military spending. Figure 1 plots the evolution of military pro-
curement spending relative to state output for California and Illinois as well as military procurement
spending relative to total output for the U.S. as a whole.22 First, notice that most of the variation in
national military spending is driven by geopolitical events—such as the Vietnam War, Soviet invasion
of Afghanistan and 9/11. Second, it is clear from the figure that military spending in California is
systematically more sensitive to movements in national military spending than military spending in
Illinois. The 1966-1971 Vietnam War draw-down illustrates this. Over this period, military procure-
ment in California fell by 2.5 percentage points (almost twice the national average), while military
procurement in Illinois fell by only about 1 percentage point (about 2/3 the national average). We
use this variation in the sensitivity of military spending across regions to national military build-ups
and draw-downs to identify the effects of government spending shocks. Our identifying assumption
is that the U.S. does not embark on a military build-up because states that receive a dispropor-
tionate amount of military spending are doing poorly relative to other states. This assumption is
similar—but weaker than—the common identifying assumption in the empirical literature on the
effects of national military spending, that variation in national military spending is exogenous to the
U.S. business cycle.
    We employ two separate approaches to constructing instruments that capture the differential
sensitivity of military spending across regions to national military build-ups and draw-downs.23 Our
baseline approach is to instrument for state or region military procurement using total national
  20
     We place Delaware, Maryland, Washington DC, Virginia and West Virginia in one region, and North Carolina,
South Carolina, Georgia and Florida in the other.
  21
     See Mintz (1992) for a discussion of political issues related to the allocation of military procurement spending.
  22
     Below, we will sometimes refer to spending relative to GDP simply as spending and the change in spending divided
by GDP simply as the change in spending, for simplicity.
  23
     Murtazashvili and Wooldridge (2008) derive conditions for consistency of the fixed effects instrumental variables
estimator we employ for a setting in which the multiplier varies across states.

                                                          8
procurement interacted with a state or region dummy. The “first stage” in the two-stage least
squares interpretation of this procedure is to regress changes in state spending on changes in aggregate
spending and fixed effects allowing for different sensitivities across different states. This yields scaled
versions of changes national spending as fitted values for each state. Table 1 lists the states for which
state procurement spending is most sensitive to variation in national procurement spending. We also
employ a simpler “Bartik” approach to constructing instruments (Bartik, 1991). In this case, we
scale national spending for each state by the average level of spending in that state relative to state
output in the first five years of our sample.24
       We estimate the effects of military spending on employment and inflation using an analogous
approach. For employment, the regression is analogous to equation (1) except that the left-hand
side variable is (Lit − Lit−2 )/Lit−2 —where Lit is the employment rate (employment divided by
population). For the inflation regression, the left-hand side variable is (Pit − Pit−2 )/Pit−2 , where Pit
is the price level.
       U.S. states and regions are much more open economies than the U.S. as a whole. Using data
from the U.S. Commodity Flow Survey and National Income and Product Accounts, we estimate
that roughly 30 percent of the consumption basket of the typical region we use in our analysis is
imported from other regions (see section 4.4 for details). Even though a large majority of goods are
imported, the overall level of openness of U.S. regions is modest because services account for a large
fraction of output and are much more local. This estimate suggests that our regions are comparable
in openness to mid-sized European countries such as Spain.


3.2      Subcontracting of Prime Military Contracts

An important question with regard to the use of prime military contract data is to what extent the
interpretation of these data might be affected by subcontracting to firms in other states. Fortunately,
a second source of data exists on actual shipments to the government from defense oriented industries.
These data were gathered by the Census Bureau over the period 1963-1983 as an appendage to the
Annual Survey of Manufacturers. They have rarely been used, perhaps because no electronic version
previously existed. We digitized these data from microfilm.
       Figure 2 illustrates the close relationship between these shipment data and the military procure-
ment data for several states over this period—giving us confidence in the prime military contract
  24
    Nekarda and Ramey (2011) use a similar approach to instrument for government purchases from particular in-
dustries. They use data at 5 year intervals to estimate the share of aggregate government spending from different
industries.

                                                       9
data as a measure of the timing and magnitude of regional military production. To summarize this
relationship, we estimate the following regression of shipments from a particular state on military
procurement,
                                          M Sit = αi + βM P Sit + it ,                                           (2)

where M St is the value of shipments from the Census Bureau data and M P Sit is military procurement
spending. This regression yields a point estimate of β = 0.96, indicating that military procurement
moves on average one-for-one with the value of shipments. The small differences between the two
series probably indicate that they both measure regional production with some error. As we discuss
below, one advantage of the instrumental variables approach we adopt is that it helps adjust for this
type of measurement error.


3.3      Effects of Government Spending Shocks

The first row of Table 2 reports the open economy relative multiplier β in regression (1) for our
baseline instruments. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered by states or regions.25 In
the second row of Table 2, we present an analogous set of results using a broader measure of military
spending that combines military procurement spending with compensation of military employees for
each state or region. We present results for output both deflated by national CPI and our measure
of state CPI.26
       The point estimates of β for the output regression range from 1.4 to 1.9, while the point estimates
of β for the employment regression range from 1.3 to 1.8. The estimates using regional data are,
in general, slightly larger than those based on state data, though the differences are small and
statistically insignificant. The standard errors for the state regressions range from 0.3-0.4, while
those for the region regressions range from 0.6-0.9. As is clear from Figure 1, the variation we use
to estimate the multiplier is dominated by a few military build-ups and draw-downs.
       These results control for short-term movements in population associated with government spend-
ing by running the regressions on per-capita variables. The last column of Table 2 looks directly at
population movements by estimating an analogous specification to equation (1) where the left-hand
side variable is (P opit − P opit−2 )/P opit−2 and the right-hand side government spending variable is
constructed from the level of government spending and output rather than per-capita government
  25
     Our standard errors thus allow for arbitrary correlation over time in the error term for a given state or region.
They also allow for heteroskedasticity.
  26
     When deflating by our measure of state CPI in Table 2 we impute the state CPI’s for the first two years using our
baseline instrumental variables regression of state CPI on procurement spending.

                                                         10
spending and output. We find that the population responses to government spending shocks are
small and cannot be distinguished from zero for the two year time horizon we consider.27 We also
present estimates of the effects of military spending on consumer prices. These are statistically
insignificantly different from zero, ranging from small positive to small negative numbers.
       Figure 3 gives a visual representation of our main specification for output. The figure plots aver-
ages of changes in output against predicted military spending (based on our first-stage regression),
grouped by 30 quantiles of the predicted military spending variable. Both variables are demeaned
by year and state fixed effects. The vast majority of points in the figure are located in the NE and
SW quadrants, leading to a positive coefficient in our IV regression. To assess the robustness of our
results to outliers, we have experimented with dropping states and regions with especially large or
small estimated sensitivity of spending to national spending and this slightly raises the estimated
open economy relative multiplier.28
       In Table 3, we report results for the simpler “Bartik” approach to constructing instruments. For
output, this approach yields an open economy relative multiplier of roughly 2.5 for the states and 2.8
for the regions. For employment, this approach also yields larger open economy relative multipliers
than our baseline specification—1.8 for states and 2.5 for regions. Our estimates using the Bartik-
type instruments are somewhat less precise than those using our baseline instruments. This arises
because in constructing this instrument, we use the level of spending in each state as a proxy for the
sensitivity of state spending to national spending—but it is an imperfect proxy.
       Table 3 also reports a number of alternative specifications for the effects of military procurement
on output and employment designed to evaluate the robustness of our results. We report the output
multiplier when per-capita output is constructed using a measure of the working age population as
opposed to the total population.29 We add the price of oil interacted with state dummies as controls
to our baseline regression. We add the real interest rate interacted with state dummies as controls to
our baseline regression. We estimate the employment regression using the BEA’s employment series
(available from 1969) instead of BLS payroll employment. Table 3 shows that these specifications
all yield similar results to our baseline estimates.
  27
     Our estimates appear consistent with existing estimates of regional population dynamics. Blanchard and Katz
(1992) show that population dynamics are important in determining the dynamics of unemployment over longer hori-
zons.
  28
     MO and CT have substantially higher estimated sensitivity of spending to national spending than other states and
ND has a substantially negative estimated sensitivity (alone among the states). Dropping any combination of these
states from our baseline regression slightly raises our multiplier estimate. Dropping all three yields 1.88 (0.57).
  29
     State-level measures of population by age-group are available from the Census Bureau starting in 1970. We define
the working age population as the population between the ages of 19 and 64.


                                                         11
       We have extensively investigated the small-sample properties of our estimation approach using
Monte Carlo simulations. These simulations indicate that neither the regional regressions nor the
regressions using the Bartik-type instruments suffer from bias associated with weak or many instru-
ments. However, our estimates of the state regressions using our baseline instruments are likely
to be conservative in the sense of underestimating the open economy relative multiplier for states
by roughly 10 percent (implying that the true state-level open economy relative multiplier is 1.65
rather than 1.43). Intuitively, this downward bias arises because instrumental variables does not
fully correct for endogeneity in small samples when instruments are weak or when many instruments
are used—i.e., IV is biased in the direction of OLS.30 Table 3 also reports results using the LIML es-
timator, which is not affected by the presence of many instruments. This yields an output multiplier
of roughly 2.0.31 Our Monte Carlo simulation also allows us to assess the small sample properties
of the standard errors we report. Our simulations imply that the asymptotic standard errors for the
region regressions are slightly smaller than their small-sample counterparts: the standard 95 percent
confidence interval based on the standard errors reported in Table 2 is in fact a 90 percent confidence
interval. This adjustment arises from the well-known small-sample bias in clustered standard errors
in the presence of a small number of clusters. This does not apply to the state-level regressions
for which the asymptotic standard errors almost exactly replicate the small sample results from our
simulations.
       A potential concern with interpreting our results would arise if states receiving large amounts of
military spending were more cyclically sensitive than other states. We have compared the cyclical
sensitivity of states that receive large and small amounts of military spending. The standard deviation
of output growth is almost identical in states with above-median military spending and in states
with below-median military spending, indicating that a difference in overall cyclical sensitivity is not
  30
     See Stock, Wright, and Yogo (2002) for an overview of this issue. The concern is that the first-stage of the IV
procedure may pick up some of the endogenous variation in the explanatory variable in the presence of a large number
of instruments. In contrast to the canonical examples discussed in Stock, Wright, and Yogo (2002), this actually
biases us away from finding a statistically significant result in small samples, since the OLS estimates in our case
are close to zero. Our Monte Carlo analysis is roughly consistent with the asymptotic results reported in Stock and
Yogo (2005). The partial R-squared of the excluded instruments, a statistic frequently used to gauge the “strength” of
instruments is 12 percent for the state regressions and 18 percent for the region regressions. However, because we use
a large number of instruments in our baseline case—one for each state or region—the Cragg-Donald (1993) first stage
F-statistic suggested by Stock and Yogo (2005) is roughly 5 for our baseline specification of the state-level regressions
and 8 for the region-level regressions. For the simpler Bartik-type instrument specification it is 106 for the state-level
regression and 53 for the region-level regression. Our Monte Carlo analysis indicates that while the large number of
instruments in the state-level specification leads to a slight downward-bias in the coefficient on government spending,
the standard error on this coefficient is unbiased because of the high R-squared of our instruments taken as a whole.
We thank Marcelo Moreira, James Stock and Motohiro Yogo for generous advice on this issue.
  31
     See Stock and Yogo (2005) for a discussion of the LIML estimator’s properties in settings with many instruments.
The disadvantage of LIML is that its distribution has fat tails and, thus, yields large standard errors.


                                                           12
driving our results.32
    Davis, Loungani, and Mahidhara (1997) finds smaller employment multipliers when using data
from the Current Population Survey (CPS) than when using CES data. They argue that this may
be due to shifts in employment between the self-employed sector and more formal sectors, since
self-employment is only measured in the CPS. We have run regression (1) with CPS data. In this
case, the sample period is 1976-2006 and we use the Bartik-type instruments to avoid the difficulties
associated with the many instrument problem discussed above given this short sample period. The
point estimates using CPS data are 1.4 (0.5). Using CES data for the same sample period yields 1.8
(0.4). The estimate based on CPS data is, thus, smaller, though not significantly so. This provides
some suggestive evidence of shifts between self-employment and the more formal sector.
    Ramey (2011) argues that news about military spending leads actual spending by several quarters
and that this has important implications for the estimation of fiscal multipliers. When we add future
spending as a regressor in regression (1), the coefficient on this variable is positive and the sum of the
coefficients on the government spending rises somewhat. This suggests that our baseline specification
somewhat underestimates the multiplier by ignoring output effects associated with anticipated future
spending.
    Table 3 also presents OLS estimates of our baseline specification for output. The OLS estimates
are substantially lower than our instrumental variables estimates. One potential explanation for this
is that states’ elected officials may find it easier to argue for spending at times when their states
are having trouble economically. Another potential explanation is that our instruments correct for
measurement error in the data on state-level prime military contracts that does not arise at the
national level. Such measurement error causes an “attenuation bias” in the OLS coefficient toward
zero. We can assess the importance of measurement error in explaining the difference between our
IV and OLS estimates by using the shipments data discussed in section 3.2 above as an instrument
for the prime military contract data.33 For the 1966-1982 sample period for which we have the
shipments data, this IV procedure yields an open economy relative multiplier of 1.3 (0.5), OLS yields
0.2 (0.2), and IV with the Bartik-type instrument yields 2.0 (0.4). This suggests that measurement
error explains a substantial fraction of the difference between our IV and OLS estimates.
  32
     Furthermore, suppose we regress state output growth ∆Yit on scaled national output growth si ∆Yt , where the
scaling factor si is the average level of military spending in each state relative to state output, as well as state and
time fixed effects. If state with high si are more cyclically sensitive, this regression should yield a positive coefficient
on si ∆Yt . In fact, the coefficient is slightly negative in our data. In contrast, when si ∆Yt is replaced with si ∆Gt , this
regression yields a large positive coefficient.
  33
     Since the shipments data are an independent (noisy) measure of the magnitude of spending, they will correct for
measurement error. But they will not correct for endogeneity due to countercyclicality of spending.

                                                             13
    Table 4 presents the results for equation (1) estimated separately by major SIC/NAICS groupings.
An important point evident from Table 4 is that increases in government sector output contribute
negligibly to the overall effects we estimate. The table also shows that increases in relative pro-
curement spending are not associated with increases in other forms of military output. Effects on
measured output in the government sector are less easily interpretable than effects on output in the
private sector since much of government output is measured using input costs. Transfers associated
with increases in public sector wages are therefore difficult to distinguish from changes in actual
output. Statistically significant output responses occur in the construction, manufacturing, retail
and services sectors.


3.4    Government Spending at High Versus Low Unemployment Rates

We next investigate whether the effects of government spending on the economy are larger in periods
when the unemployment rate is already high. There are a variety of reasons why this could be the
case. Most often cited is the idea that in an economy with greater slack, expansionary government
spending is less likely to crowd out private consumption or investment.34 A second potential source
of such differences is the differential response of monetary policy—central bankers may have less
incentive to “lean against the wind” to counteract the effects of government spending increases if
unemployment is high. We show in section 5, however, that this second effect does not affect the
size of the open economy relative multiplier since aggregate policy is “differenced out.”
    To investigate these issues, we estimate the following regression,

                  Yit − Yit−2                Git − Git−2                 Git − Git−2
                              = αi + γt + βh             + (βl − βh )Iit             + it ,                         (3)
                     Yit−2                      Yit−2                       Yit−2

where Iit is an indicator for a period of low economic slack, and the effects of government spending in
high and low slack periods are given by βh and βl respectively. We define high and low slack periods
in terms of the unemployment rate at the start of the interval over which the government spending
occurs. We present two sets of results; one with slack defined using the national unemployment rate
and the other with slack defined using the state unemployment rate.35
    Table 5 presents our estimates of equation (3). For output, the point estimates support the view
   34
      This might arise, for example, if unemployment leads to a higher labor supply elasticity (Hall, 2009) or because of
tighter capacity constraints in booms (Gordon and Krenn, 2010).
   35
      When we base our low slack indicator Iit on the national unemployment rate, we set Iit = 1 for all states in years
when the national unemployment rate is below its median value over our sample. When we base Iit on the state
unemployment rate, we set Iit = 1 for state i in years when its unemployment rate is below its median over our sample
period. When we define slack using the state unemployment rate, we interact the year and state fixed effects with the
dummy.

                                                           14
that the effects of government spending are larger when unemployment is high. Depending on the
specification, the open economy relative multiplier lies between 3.5 and 4.5 in the high slackness
periods, substantially above our estimates for the time period as a whole. Given the limited number
of business cycles in our sample, we are not, however, able to estimate these effects with much
statistical precision. The difference in the multiplier in the high and low spending periods is only
moderately statistically significant (with a P-values of 0.06 and 0.07). For employment the multiplier
estimates for the high slack periods are close to those for the period as a whole and the difference
in the multiplier between the high and low spending periods is relatively small and statistically
insignificant.36


4     A Model of Government Spending in a Monetary Union

In this section, we develop a framework to help us interpret the “open economy relative multiplier”
that we estimate in section 3, and relate is to the “closed economy aggregate multiplier,” which has
been the focus of most earlier work on government spending multipliers. Many of the issues that
arise in interpreting the open economy relative multiplier also arise in the international economics
literature. The model we develop, therefore, draws heavily on earlier work on open economy business
cycle models (Obstfeld and Rogoff, 1995; Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan, 2002), and, in particular,
the literature on monetary unions (Benigno and Benigno, 2003; Gali and Monacelli, 2008). Our
model and some of our results are closely related to the analysis of Corsetti, Kuester, and Muller
(2011), who discuss government spending in a small open economy with a fixed exchange rate.
    The model consists of two regions that belong to a monetary and fiscal union. We refer to the
regions as “home” and “foreign.” Think of the home region as the region in which the government
spending shock occurs – a U.S. state or small group of states – and the foreign region as the rest
of the economy. The population of the entire economy is normalized to one. The population of the
home region is denoted by n. Household preferences, market structure and firm behavior take the
same form in both regions. Below, we describe the economy of the home region.


4.1    Households

The home region has a continuum of household types indexed by x. A household’s type indicates
the type of labor supplied by that household. Home households of type x seek to maximize their
  36
     Other recent papers that find evidence for larger multipliers during recessions include Auerbach and Gorodnichenko
(2012) and Shoag (2010).

                                                          15
utility given by
                                                            ∞
                                                            X
                                                       E0             β t u(Ct , Lt (x)),                                            (4)
                                                            t=0
where β denotes the household’s subjective discount factor, Ct denotes household consumption of a
composite consumption good, Lt (x) denotes household supply of differentiated labor input x. There
are an equal (large) number of households of each type.
      The composite consumption good in expression (4) is an index given by
                                                                                                η
                                                                      η−1            η−1
                                                           1                    1
                                                                                           
                                                                                               η−1
                                                            η          η         η    η
                                           Ct = φH CHt + φF CF t                                     ,                               (5)

where CHt and CF t denote the consumption of composites of home and foreign produced goods,
respectively. The parameter η > 0 denotes the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign
goods and φH and φF are preference parameters that determine the household’s relative preference
for home and foreign goods. It is analytically convenient to normalize φH + φF = 1. If φH > n,
household preferences are biased toward home produced goods.
      The subindices, CHt and CF t , are given by
                                hR                          i    θ                          hR                      i    θ
                                   1             θ−1            θ−1                              1         θ−1          θ−1
                        CHt =          cht (z)         dz               and CF t =                                                   (6)
                                                                                                0 cf t (z)
                                                  θ                                                         θ dz
                                   0


where cht (z) and cf t (z) denote consumption of variety z of home and foreign produced goods, re-
spectively. There is a continuum of measure one of varieties in each region. The parameter θ > 1
denotes the elasticity of substitution between different varieties.
      Goods markets are completely integrated across regions. Home and foreign households thus face
the same prices for each of the differentiated goods produced in the economy. We denote these prices
by pht (z) for home produced goods and pf t (z) for foreign produced goods. All prices are denominated
in a common currency called “dollars.”
      Households have access to complete financial markets. There are no impediments to trade in
financial securities across regions.37 Home households of type x face a flow budget constraint given
by
                                                                                                         Z    1
               Pt Ct + Et [Mt,t+1 Bt+1 (x)] ≤ Bt (x) + (1 − τt )Wt (x)Lt (x) +                                    Ξht (z)dz − Tt ,   (7)
                                                                                                          0

where Pt is a price index that gives the minimum price of a unit of the consumption good Ct , Bt+1 (x)
is a random variable that denotes the state contingent payoff of the portfolio of financial securities
held by households of type x at the beginning of period t + 1, Mt,t+1 is the stochastic discount factor
that prices these payoffs in period t, τt denotes a labor income tax levied by the government in period
 37
      Section 5.4 discusses a version of our model without incomplete financial markets across regions.
                                                                            16
t, Wt (x) denotes the wage rate received by home households of type x in period t, Ξht (z) is the profit
of home firm z in period t and Tt denotes lump sum taxes.38 To rule out Ponzi schemes, household
debt cannot exceed the present value of future income in any state of the world.
       Households face a decision in each period about how much to spend on consumption, how many
hours of labor to supply, how much to consume of each differentiated good produced in the economy
and what portfolio of assets to purchase. Optimal choice regarding the trade-off between current
consumption and consumption in different states in the future yields the following consumption Euler
equation:
                                          uc (Ct+j , Lt+j (x))   Mt,t+j Pt+j
                                                               =                                                     (8)
                                             uc (Ct , Lt (x))     βj     Pt
as well as a standard transversality condition. Subscripts on the function u denote partial derivatives.
Equation (8) holds state-by-state for all j > 0. Optimal choice regarding the intratemporal trade-off
between current consumption and current labor supply yields a labor supply equation:

                                           u` (Ct , Lt (x))             Wt (x)
                                                            = (1 − τt )        .                                     (9)
                                           uc (Ct , Lt (x))              Pt

Households optimally choose to minimize the cost of attaining the level of consumption Ct . This
implies the following demand curves for home and foreign goods and for each of the differentiated
products produced in the economy:
                                                         −η                                   −η
                                                  PHt                                     PF t                      (10)
                            CH,t = φH Ct           Pt           and CF,t = φF Ct           Pt          ,

                                                         −θ                                     −θ
                                                 pt (z)                                   pt (z)
                           cht (z) = CHt         PHt            and cf t (z) = CF t       PF t             ,        (11)

where
                                hR                    i    1                 hR                      i    1
                                   1                      1−θ                    1 ∗                     1−θ
                                                                                                                    (12)
                       PHt =      0    pt (z)1−θ dz             and PF t =      0 pt (z)
                                                                                         1−θ dz                ,

and
                                               h                   i 1
                                                    1−η
                                                        + φF PF1−η
                                                                    1−η
                                           Pt = φH PHt          t       .                                           (13)

       As we noted above, the problem of the foreign household is analogous. We therefore refrain
from describing it in detail here. It is, however, useful to note that combining the home and foreign
consumption Euler equations to eliminate the common stochastic discount factor yields

                                                    uc (Ct∗ , L∗t (x))
                                                                       = Qt ,                                       (14)
                                                    uc (Ct , Lt (x))
  38
    The stochastic discount factor Mt,t+1 is a random variable over states in period t + 1. For each such state it equals
the price of the Arrow-Debreu asset that pays off in that state divided by the conditional probability of that state. See
Cochrane (2005) for a detailed discussion.
                                                                 17
where Qt = Pt∗ /Pt is the real exchange rate. This is the “Backus-Smith” condition that describes
optimal risk-sharing between home and foreign households (Backus and Smith, 1993). For simplicity,
we assume that all households—in both regions—initially have an equal amount of financial wealth.


4.2   The Government

The economy has a federal government that conducts fiscal and monetary policy. Total government
spending in the home and foreign region follow exogenous AR(1) processes. Let GHt denote govern-
ment spending per capita in the home region. Total government spending in the home region is then
nGHt . For simplicity, we assume that government demand for the differentiated products produced
in each region takes the same CES form as private demand. In other words, we assume that
                                                      −θ
                                                                                      pf t (z) −θ
                                                                                            
                                            pht (z)
                       ght (z) = GHt         PHt            and gf t (z) = GF t        PF t         .   (15)

   The government levies both labor income and lump-sum taxes to pay for its purchases of goods.
Our assumption of perfect financial markets implies that any risk associated with variation in lump-
sum taxes and transfers across the two regions is undone through risk-sharing. (See section 5.4 for
an alternative case.) Ricardian equivalence holds in our model. We describe the policy for labor
income taxes in section 5.
   The federal government operates a common monetary policy for the two regions. This policy
consists of the following augmented Taylor-rule for the economy-wide nominal interest rate:

                             r̂tn = ρr r̂t−1
                                         n
                                             + (1 − ρi )(φπ π̂tag + φy ŷtag + φg ĝtag ),              (16)

where hatted variables denote percentage deviations from steady state. The nominal interest rate is
denoted r̂tn . It responds to variation in the weighted average of consumer price inflation in the two
regions π̂tag = nπ̂t + (1 − n)π̂t∗ , where π̂t is consumer price inflation in the home region and π̂t∗ is
consumer price inflation in the foreign region. It also responds to variation in the weighted average
of output in the two regions ŷtag = nŷt + (1 − n)ŷt∗ . Finally, it may respond directly to the weighted
average of the government spending shock in the two regions ĝtag = nĝt + (1 − n)ĝt∗ .


4.3   Firms

There is a continuum of firms indexed by z in the home region. Firm z specializes in the production
of differentiated good z, the output of which we denote yt (z). In our baseline model, labor is the
only variable factor of production used by firms. Each firm is endowed with a fixed, non-depreciating
                                                             18
stock of capital.39 The production function of firm z is

                                                    yt (z) = f (Lt (z)).                                             (17)

The function f is increasing and concave. It is concave because there are diminishing marginal
returns to labor given the fixed amount of other inputs employed at the firm. Labor is immobile
across regions. Our model yields very similar results to a model in which labor and capital are
assumed to be equally mobile and the government spending shock is to per capita spending.40 We
follow Woodford (2003) in assuming that each firm belongs to an industry x and that there are many
firms in each industry. The goods in industry x are produced using labor of type x and all firms in
industry x change prices at the same time.
       Firm z acts to maximize its value,
                                     ∞
                                     X
                                Et         Mt,t+j [pt+j (z)yt+j (z) − Wt+j (x)Lt+j (z)].                             (18)
                                     j=0

Firm z must satisfy demand for its product. The demand for firm z’s product comes from three
sources: home consumers, foreign consumers and the government. It is given by

                                                             pht (z) −θ
                                                                   
                                                ∗
                      yt (z) = (nCHt + (1 − n)CHt + nGHt )              .                                            (19)
                                                              PHt

Firm z is therefore subject to the following constraint:

                                                        pht (z) −θ
                                                              
                                          ∗
                       (nCHt + (1 − n)CHt + nGHt )                 ≤ f (Lt (z)).                                     (20)
                                                         PHt

       Firm z takes its industry wage Wt (x) as given. Optimal choice of labor demand by the firm is
given by
                                                Wt (x) = f` (Lt (z))St (z),                                          (21)

where St (z) denotes the firm’s nominal marginal cost (the Lagrange multiplier on equation (20) in
the firm’s constrained optimization problem).
       Firm z can reoptimize its price with probability 1 − α as in Calvo (1983). With probability α
it must keep its price unchanged. Optimal price setting by firm z in periods when it can change its
  39
     Section 5.5 discusses two extensions of our baseline model with investment.
  40
     If labor and capital are equally mobile, factor movements simply affect the relative size of the regions. For example,
a positive shock to the home region causes inward migration of both labor and capital and this makes the home region
larger. But in per capita terms the model is identical to a model without factor mobility (save a slight change in home
bias) as long as the government spending shock is defined in per-capita terms and the open economy relative multiplier
is thus virtually identical. In contrast, if labor is more mobile then capital, inward migration in response to a positive
government spending shock will lower the capital-labor ratio in the home region and through this channel lower the
per-capita government spending multiplier (and vice versa if capital is more mobile than labor).
                                                            19
price implies
                                                ∞
                                        θ          αj M    yt+j (z)
                                                  P∞ t,t+j
                                              X
                            pt (z) =       Et                             St+j (z).                                 (22)
                                       θ−1      Et k=0 αk Mt,t+k yt+j (z)
                                                j=0

Intuitively, the firm sets its price equal to a constant markup over a weighted average of current and
expected future marginal cost.


4.4    Calibration of Preferences and Technology

We consider the following two forms for the utility function:
                                                             −1                 −1
                                                    C 1−σ     Lt (x)1+ν
                                    u(Ct , Lt (x)) = t −1 − χ           ,                                           (23)
                                                    1−σ        1 + ν −1
                                                                   −1                  −1
                                              (Ct − χLt (x)1+ν /(1 + ν −1 ))1−σ
                             u(Ct , Lt (x)) =                                               .                       (24)
                                                            1 − σ −1
In the first utility specification, consumption and labor enter separably. They are therefore neither
complements nor substitutes. The second utility function is adopted from Greenwood, Hercowitz,
and Huffman (1988). We refer to this utility function as representing GHH preferences. Consumption
and labor are complements for households with GHH preferences. Recently, Monacelli and Perotti
(2008), Bilbiie (2011), and Hall (2009) have emphasized the implications of consumption-labor com-
plementarities for the government spending multiplier.
    For both specifications of utility, we must specify values for σ and ν (χ is irrelevant when utility
is separable and determined by other parameters in the GHH case). In both cases, ν is the Frisch-
elasticity of labor supply. We set ν = 1. This value is somewhat higher than values estimated
in microeconomic studies of employed workers, but relatively standard in macroeconomics. The
higher value is meant to capture variation in labor on the extensive margin—such as variation in
unemployment and retirement (Hall, 2009; Chetty, et al., 2011). As Hall (2009) emphasizes, assuming
a high labor supply elasticity raises the government spending multiplier. For the separable utility
specification, σ denotes the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES). There is little agreement
within the macroeconomics literature on the appropriate values for the IES. Hall (1988) estimates
the IES to be close to zero, while Bansal and Yaron (2004), Gruber (2006) and Nakamura, et al.
(2013) argue for values above 1. We set σ = 1, which yields balanced growth for the model with
separable preferences, σ = 1. We set the subjective discount factor equal to β = 0.99, the elasticity
of substitution across varieties equal to θ = 7 and the elasticity of substitution between home and
foreign goods to η = 2.41 Larger values of η yield more expenditure switching between regions in
  41
     This is the same value for η as is used by Obstfeld and Rogoff (2005), and only slightly higher than the values used
by Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1994) and Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2002).
                                                           20
response to regional shocks and thus lower open economy relative multipliers.
   We assume the production function f (Lt (z)) = Lt (z)a and set a = 2/3. Regarding the frequency
with which firms can change their prices, we consider two cases: α = 0 (i.e., fully flexible prices)
and α = 0.75 (which implies that firms reoptimize there prices on average once a year). Rigid prices
imply that relative prices across regions respond sluggishly to regional shocks. We set the size of the
home region to n = 0.1. This roughly corresponds to the size of the average region in our regional
regressions (where we divide the U.S. into 10 regions). The value of the open economy relative
multiplier in our model is relatively insensitive to the size of n. We set the steady state value of
government purchases as a fraction of output to 0.2. We log-linearize the equilibrium conditions of
the model and use the methods of Sims (2001) to find the unique bounded equilibrium. By doing
this we rule out the types of non-linearities we find suggestive evidence for in section 3.4.
   We use data from the U.S. Commodity Flow Survey (CFS) and the U.S. National Income and
Product Accounts (NIPA) to set the home-bias parameter φH . The CFS reports data on shipments
of goods within and between states in the U.S. It covers shipments between establishments in the
mining, manufacturing, wholesale and retail sectors. For the average state in 2002, 38 percent of
shipments were within state and 50 percent of shipments were within region. However, roughly 40
percent of all shipments in the CFS are from wholesalers to retailers and the results of Hillberry
and Hummels (2003) suggest that a large majority of these are likely to be within region. Since the
relevant shipments for our model are those from manufacturers to wholesalers, we assume that 83
percent of these are from another region (50 of the remaining 60 percent of shipments).
   To calculate the degree of home bias, we must account for the fact that a substantial fraction
of output is services, which are not measured in the CFS. NIPA data indicate that goods repre-
sent roughly 30 percent of U.S. GDP. If all inter-region trade were in goods—i.e., all services were
local—imports from other regions would amount to 25 percent of total consumption (30*0.83 =
25). However, for the U.S. as a whole, services represent roughly 20 percent of international trade.
Assuming that services represent the same fraction of cross-border trade for regions, total inter-
region trade is 31 percent of region GDP (25/0.8 = 31). We therefore set φH = 0.69. This makes
our regions slightly more open than Spain and slightly less open than Portugal. We set φH ∗ so
that overall demand for home products as a fraction of overall demand for all products is equal to
the size of the home population relative to the total population of the economy. This implies that
φH ∗ = (n/(1 − n))φF .
   We have so far calibrated the “fundamentals”—i.e., preferences and technology—for our model

                                                  21
economy. We leave the detailed description of government policy to the next section. We wish
to draw a clear distinction between fundamentals and government policy. The former determine
constraints on the potential effects of government policy. In contrast, monetary and fiscal policy are
under the government’s control and therefore “choice variables” from the perspective of an optimizing
government, making it relevant to consider not only the policies that have persisted in the past but
also the potential effects of alternative government policies.


5         Theoretical Results

In this section, we analyze the effects of government spending shocks in the model presented in section
4. We consider several different specifications for the economy’s “fundamentals” (separable vs. GHH
preferences, flexible vs. sticky prices) as well as different specifications for aggregate monetary and
tax policy. In the Neoclassical (flexible price) versions of the model, money is neutral implying that
the specification of monetary policy is irrelevant. Tax policy is, however, important and we consider
two specifications for tax policy described below. In the New Keynesian (sticky price) versions of the
model, monetary policy is important and we consider three specifications of monetary policy within
the class of interest rate rules described by equation (16).
         The monetary policies we consider are: 1) a “Volcker-Greenspan” policy, 2) a“ fixed real-rate”
policy and 3) a “fixed nominal-rate” policy. These policies are designed to imply successively less
“leaning against the wind” by the central bank in response to inflationary government spending
shocks. The “Volcker-Greenspan” policy is meant to mimic the policy of the U.S. Federal Reserve
during the Volcker-Greenspan period. For this case, we set the parameters in equation (16) to
ρ = 0.8, φπ = 1.5, φy = 0.5 and φg = 0.42 This specification of monetary policy implies that the
monetary authority aggressively raises the real interest rate to curtail the inflationary effects of a
government spending shock.
         Under the “fixed real-rate” policy, the central bank maintains a fixed real interest rate in response
to government spending shocks. However, to guarantee price-level determinacy, the central bank
responds aggressively to the inflationary effects of all other shocks. Under the “fixed nominal-rate
policy,” the central bank maintains a fixed nominal interest rate in response to government spending
shocks. But as with the fixed real-rate policy, it responds aggressively to the inflationary effects of
all other shocks. We describe the details of how the fixed real-rate and fixed nominal-rate policies
    42
    Many recent papers have estimated monetary rules similar to the one we adopt for the Volcker-Greenspan period
(see, e.g., Taylor, 1993 and 1999; Clarida, Gali and Gertler, 2000).

                                                        22
are implemented in appendix A. The fixed nominal-rate policy is a close cousin of the zero lower
bound scenario analyzed in detail in Eggertsson (2010), Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011),
and Mertens and Ravn (2010). It is, in a sense, the opposite of the aggressive “leaning against the
wind” embodied in the Volcker-Greenspan policy because an inflationary shock generates a fall in
real interest rates (since nominal rates are held constant). The fixed real-rate policy charts a middle
ground.
       We consider two specifications for tax policy. Our baseline tax policy is one in which government
spending shocks are financed completely by lump sum taxes. Under this policy, all distortionary taxes
remain fixed in response to the government spending shock. The second tax policy we consider is a
“balanced budget” tax policy. Under this policy, labor income taxes vary in response to government
spending shocks such that the government’s budget remains balanced throughout:
                                                               Z
                            nPHt GHt + (1 − n)PF t GF t = τt       Wt (x)Lt (x)dx,                        (25)

This policy implies that an increase in government spending is associated with an increase in distor-
tionary taxes. We assume that the government spending shocks follow an AR(1) process and estimate
the persistence of this process using data on aggregate military procurement spending. This yields
a quarterly AR(1) coefficient of 0.933.43 We also in some cases consider the implications of more
transitory government spending shocks.
       We present results for both the closed economy aggregate multiplier that has been studied in
much of the previous literature and the open economy relative multiplier that we provide estimates
for in section 3 and has been the focus of much recent work using sub-regional data (Acconcia et
al., 2011; Chodorow-Reich et al., 2012; Clemens and Miran, 2012; Cohen et al., 2011; Fishback
and Kachanovskaya, 2010; Serrato and Wingender, 2010; Shoag, 2010; Wilson, 2011). We begin in
sections 5.1 and 5.2 by describing results for the case of additively separable preferences. We then
consider the case of GHH preferences in section 5.3. Finally, in section 5.5, we consider an extension
of our model that incorporates investment.


5.1      The Closed Economy Aggregate Multiplier

We define the closed economy aggregate multiplier analogously to the previous literature on multi-
pliers (e.g., Barro and Redlick, 2011) as the response of total output (combining home and foreign
  43
    Our aggregate military procurement spending data is annual. We use a simulated method of moments approach
to estimate the persistence of our quarterly AR(1) process. We describe this procedure in detail in appendix B.


                                                      23
production) to total government spending, i.e., β in the regression,

                                    Ytagg − Yt−2
                                              agg
                                                          Gagg
                                                           t   − Gagg
                                                                   t−2
                                          agg     = α + β      agg     + t ,                                       (26)
                                        Yt−2                 Yt−2

where Ytagg denotes aggregate output and Gagg
                                          t   denotes aggregate government spending. This re-
gression is identical to the one we use to measure the open economy relative multiplier—equation
(1)—except that we are using aggregate variables and have dropped the time fixed effects. We calcu-
late this object by simulating quarterly data from the model described in section 4, time-aggregating
it up to an annual frequency, and running the regression (26) on this data.
       The first column of table 6 reports results on the closed economy aggregate multiplier. These
results clearly indicate that the closed economy aggregate multiplier is highly sensitive to aggregate
monetary and tax policy – a point emphasized by Woodford (2011), Eggertsson (2010), Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011), and Baxter and King (1993). In the New Keynesian model with
a Volcker-Greenspan monetary policy, it is quite low—only 0.20. The low multiplier arises because
the monetary authority reacts to the inflationary effects of the increase in government spending
by raising real interest rates. This counteracts the expansionary effects of the spending shock. For
monetary policies that respond less aggressively to inflationary shocks, the closed economy multiplier
can be substantially larger. For the constant real-rate policy, the multiplier is one (Woodford, 2011).
Intuitively, since the real interest rate remains constant rather than rising when spending increases
there is no “crowding out” of consumption, implying that output rises one-for-one with government
spending. For the constant nominal-rate policy, the multiplier is larger than one and can become very
large depending on parameters. It is 1.70 if the government spending shock is relatively transient
(half-life of one-year, ρg = 0.85). With more persistent government spending shocks (ρg = 0.933) it
becomes infinite. However, it should be kept in mind that the case we are considering is effectively
assuming that the economy stays at the zero lower bound indefinitely. If the economy is expected
to revert to, e.g., a Volcker-Greenspan monetary policy before some fixed future point the multiplier
is finite.44 The intuition for the large multipliers with a constant nominal rate policy is that the
government spending shock raises inflationary expectations, which lowers the real interest rate and
thereby “crowds in” private demand.
       The second panel of Table 6 presents results for the Neoclassical model. These results clearly
indicate that the closed economy aggregate multiplier also depends on the extent to which the
government spending is financed by contemporaneous distortionary taxes. If the spending is financed
  44
    Similar issues regarding the finiteness of the zero lower bound multiplier arise in Eggertsson (2010) and Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011).
                                                           24
by an increase in distortionary taxes in such a way as to maintain a balanced budget period-by-period
(as opposed to by lump sum taxes), the multiplier falls by about a fourth to 0.32. If distortionary
taxes are reduced in concert with an increase in government spending the aggregate multiplier can
be substantially higher (though we do not report this in the table).
   It is useful to pause for a moment to consider why price rigidity—the feature that distinguishes
the New Keynesian and Neoclassical models we consider—matters so much in determining effects
of government spending. For concreteness, consider a transitory shock to government spending at
the zero lower bound. This shock puts pressure on prices to rise. In the Neoclassical model with
a constant money supply, prices immediately jump up and begin falling. This implies that the real
interest rate rises on impact (because prices are falling) and crowds out private spending. In the New
Keynesian model, however, prices rise only gradually since many are rigid in the short run. This
implies that the real interest rate falls on impact and thus boosts private spending. It is this difference
in the response of the real interest rate to government spending shocks—caused by a difference in
the flexibility of prices—that explains the difference in the multiplier across these models.
   The sensitivity of the closed economy aggregate multiplier to aggregate monetary and tax policy
probably explains some of the wide range of estimates in the empirical literature. Most economists
agree that the extent to which the Federal Reserve has “leaned against the wind” has varied sub-
stantially over the last century (see, e.g., Clarida et al., 2000). This sensitivity carries over to other
variables. Much recent work on the effects of fiscal policy has focused on consumption, real wages
and markups (Ramey, 2011; Perotti, 2007). In our New Keynesian model with Volcker-Greenspan
monetary policy, the closed economy aggregate multiplier is negative for all three of these variables,
while it is positive for more accommodative monetary policy.
   The enormous variation in possible values for the closed economy aggregate multiplier depending
on the policy environment underscores the difficulty of using the closed economy aggregate multiplier
to distinguish among alternative views of how government spending affects the economy. Under
“normal” monetary policy (i.e., the Volcker-Greenspan policy), it may be exceedingly difficult to
distinguish between the Neoclassical and New Keynesian models. Both frameworks predict little
effect of government spending on output. Yet this does not imply that the models have similar
implications overall. While the Neoclassical model continues to generate a low aggregate multiplier
in the fixed nominal-rate scenario that we use to proxy for the zero lower bound, the New Keynesian
model can generate extremely large multipliers in this environment. In the next section, we illustrate
that the open economy relative multiplier has important advantages when it comes to distinguishing

                                                    25
between different views of how government spending affects the economy, because it is not sensitive
to the specification of aggregate monetary and tax policy but rather to the relative policies across
regions—which are precisely pinned down in a monetary and fiscal union.


5.2      The Open Economy Relative Multiplier

Contrast the wide range of different closed economy aggregate multipliers produced by our model
for different monetary policies with the complete stability of the open economy relative multiplier
reported in the second column of Table 6. The open economy relative multiplier is calculated by
estimating equation (1) using the regional data from the model—the same specification we use in our
empirical analysis.45 For all three specifications of monetary policy we consider, the open economy
relative multiplier is 0.83. Furthermore, the fifth and sixth row of Table 6 present result for the
different specifications of tax policy in the Neoclassical model and illustrate that the open economy
relative multiplier is also completely insensitive to aggregate tax policy. The open economy relative
multiplier is sensitive to economic fundamentals (e.g., the degree of price rigidity) and to region-
specific policies (e.g., the persistence of the regional government spending shock) as we discuss below.
       Intuitively, the open economy relative multiplier is independent of aggregate policy because we
“difference out” aggregate shocks and aggregate policy by including time fixed effects in the re-
gression. In a monetary union, the monetary authority cannot respond to a shock in one region
by making monetary policy tighter in that region alone. The relative monetary policy between
the two regions is, therefore, held fixed by the monetary union in a very precise way, regardless
of the stance of aggregate monetary policy. In this sense, the open economy relative multiplier is
akin to the closed economy aggregate multiplier for a relatively accommodative aggregate monetary
policy—more accommodative than U.S. monetary policy under Volcker and Greenspan.
       The open economy relative multiplier is smaller than one for a wide range of parameters in our
model. This is most easily seen by considering the “Backus-Smith” risk-sharing condition ct − c∗t =
σqt . An increase in home government spending will increase the relative price of home goods and
therefore decrease the “real exchange rate” (Qt = Pt∗ /Pt ). By the Backus-Smith condition, this
implies that home consumption must fall relative to foreign consumption. In other words, government
spending “crowds out” private spending in relative terms implying a relative multiplier that is smaller
than one.
       Since the relative nominal interest rate is constant in response to a regional government spending
  45
    Specifically, we take a linear approximation of the dependent and independent variations equation (1) and run the
regression using these approximate variables. See appendix C for details.
                                                         26
shock, it is tempting to think that this situation is analogous to the zero lower bound, where the
nominal interest rate is fixed at zero in response to government spending shocks. As in the zero
lower bound case, an increase in relative government spending in the home region can raise expected
inflation, lowering relative short-term real interest rates. However, unlike the zero lower bound case,
the relative long-term real interest rate does not fall in response to a fiscal shock. The fiscal shock
leads to an immediate rise in relative prices and expectations of further increases in the short term.
This lowers the relative short term real interest rate. However, since a transitory shock to spending
does not lead to a permanent change in relative prices and the exchange rate is fixed within the
monetary union, any short term increase in prices in one region relative to the other region must be
undone by a fall in relative prices in that region later on.46 In fact, after their initial jump, relative
prices are anticipated to fall more in the long run than they are anticipated to rise further in the
short run. This implies that the relative long-term real interest rate actually rises slightly in the
home region in response to an increase in government spending.47
    To more clearly see the intuition for this result, Figure 4 presents the impulse response of the price
level and the real interest rate in the home region relative to the foreign region after a government
spending shock in our model. The home price level rises for several periods, but then falls back to its
original level. This movement in prices implies that the real interest rate in the home region initially
falls, but then rises above its steady state level for a prolonged period. Figure 5 shows what happens
to consumption in the home region relative to the foreign region after a government spending shock.
Despite the short-run fall in the real interest rate, consumption falls. This is because households
anticipate high real rates in the future—equivalently, they face a high current long-term real interest
rate—and therefore cut their consumption.
    Since the relevant interest rate for consumption decisions—the long-term real interest rate—
actually rises slightly in response to an increase in government spending irrespective of the persistence
of the shock and other parameters, the fixed relative nominal interest rate policy in a monetary union
is fundamentally different from a zero lower bound setting in a closed economy in which the long-
term real interest rate falls in response to a government spending shock. The response of relative
long-term real interest rates in our setting is closest to the fixed real interest rate case in the closed
economy setting. Table 6 shows that the open economy relative multiplier is, in fact, 0.83 for
   46
      Parsley and Wei (1996) present evidence for rapid convergence of relative prices following regional shocks using
data for U.S. regions.
   47
      Corsetti, Kuester, and Muller (2011) show that the same logic holds for the case of a small open economy with a
fixed exchange rate.


                                                         27
our baseline parameter values. This is far below the zero lower bound multipliers emphasized by
Eggertsson (2010) and Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011), but just slightly lower than the
closed economy aggregate multiplier for a fixed real rate monetary policy.


5.3      Model with GHH Preferences

The models we have considered so far have generated predictions for the open economy relative
multiplier substantially below the point estimate of roughly 1.5 that we obtained in section 3. We
next consider a model with GHH preferences that is capable of fitting this feature of our empirical
estimates.48 GHH preferences imply that consumption and labor are complements. This comple-
mentarity is intended to represent the extra consumption on food away from home, clothing, gas and
the like that often arises in the context of work (Aguiar and Hurst (2005) and Aguiar, Hurst, and
Karabarbounis (2012) present empirical evidence for such complementarities).49
       Previous work by Monacelli and Perotti (2008), Bilbiie (2011) and Hall (2009) has shown that
allowing for complementarities between consumption and labor can have powerful implications for the
government spending multiplier. The basic intuition is that, in response to a government spending
shock, households must work more to produce the additional output. This raises consumption
demand since consumption is complementary to labor. But to be able to consume more, still more
production must take place, further raising the effects on output.
       The second column of table 7 presents estimates of the open economy relative multiplier for the
model with GHH preferences. The New Keynesian model with GHH preferences can match our
empirical findings in section 3 of an open economy multiplier of roughly 1.5 (assuming a quarterly
persistence of ρg = 0.933 as in the military spending data). As in the model with separable prefer-
ences, this statistic is entirely insensitive to the specification of aggregate policies. For the case of
more transitory government spending shocks (ρg = 0.5), the open economy relative multiplier rises
to 2.0. The Neoclassical model, however, continues to generate a low multiplier (0.3) in this model.
       Figure 6 plots relative output and consumption in the New Keynesian model with GHH prefer-
ences after a positive shock to home government spending. Both output and consumption rise on
impact by a little more than twice the amount of the shock. They then both fall more rapidly than
  48
     Models with hand-to-mouth consumers of the type studied by Gali, Lopez-Salido, and Valles (2007) may also have
the potential to generate large open economy relative multipliers.
  49
     Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2012) estimate a rich business cycle model with Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009)
preferences—which nests GHH and King and Rebelo (1988) preferences as special cases. The values that they es-
timate for the preference parameters of their model are those for which Jaimovich-Rebelo preferences reduce to GHH
preferences.


                                                        28
the shock. The fact that the initial rise in consumption is as large as the rise in output—which is
partly fulfilling increased orders from the government—implies that the home region responds to the
shock by running a trade deficit in the short run. Consumption eventually falls below its steady state
level for a period of time. During this time, the home region is running a trade surplus. Intuitively,
the complementarity between consumption and labor implies that home households want to shift
their consumption towards periods of high work effort associated with positive government spending
shocks.
    How does the introduction of GHH preference affect the closed economy aggregate multiplier?
The first column of Table 7 reports the closed economy aggregate multiplier in our model with GHH
preferences. Under certain circumstances—in particular, the case of a fixed nominal rate rule meant
to proxy for the zero lower bound—this model can generate an extremely large closed economy
aggregate multiplier. However, if monetary policy is highly responsive to output as in the case of
Volcker-Greenspan policy, the New Keynesian model with GHH preferences implies a low closed
economy aggregate multiplier, just as the Neoclassical model does.
    Table 7 makes clear that the introduction of GHH preferences does not generically increase the
closed economy aggregate multiplier. In the Neoclassical model, introducing GHH preferences lowers
the closed economy aggregate multiplier (to zero) by eliminating the wealth effect on labor supply.50
The introduction of GHH preferences also lowers the closed economy aggregate multiplier in the
New Keynesian model when monetary policy responds aggressively to the inflationary effects of
government spending shocks—as in the case of the Volcker-Greenspan policy rule. For this policy,
the endogenous increase in real interest rates chokes off the chain of increases in output, employment
and consumption that otherwise generates a large multiplier in the GHH model. A key reason why
the introduction of GHH preferences raises the open economy relative multiplier when compared to
the case of separable preferences is thus that the monetary union implies an accommodative “relative”
monetary policy—sufficiently accommodative not to choke off the increase in relative output.
    Summing up our results thus far, our estimates of equation (1) based on the military procurement
data yield an open economy relative multiplier of roughly 1.5. This lies far above the open economy
relative multipliers for the Neoclassical model—which are below 0.5 for both separable preferences
and GHH preferences. Our empirical estimate of 1.5 is also substantially higher than the open
economy relative multiplier of 0.83 implied by the New Keynesian model with separable preferences.
  50
     In the New Keynesian model, government spending shocks affect the markup of prices over marginal costs and
therefore affect output by shifting labor demand. Similarly, the open economy relative multiplier in the Neoclassical
model with GHH preferences is non-zero because the government spending shock shifts the labor supply curve as
function of the real product wage.
                                                         29
The New Keynesian model with GHH preferences, however, is able to match the open economy
relative multiplier we estimate in the data. Our results are thus consistent with a model in which
demand shocks can have large effects on output—if monetary policy is sufficiently accommodative
(as it is at the zero lower bound).


5.4   Model with Incomplete Financial Markets

The model we develop in section section 4 features complete financial markets across regions of
the economy. This implies that all risk associated with differential taxes and labor income across
regions—possibly arising from government spending shocks—is perfectly shared. In a recent paper,
Farhi and Werning (2012) have shown that in a monetary union with incomplete financial mar-
kets across regions, regional government spending multipliers can differ substantially depending on
whether the spending is financed by local taxes or federal taxes. Table 8 presents open economy
relative multipliers for a version of our model in which the only financial asset that is traded across
regions is a non-contingent bond. For this model, we present results for two assumptions about how
spending is financed: locally financed spending and federally financed spending.
   Table 8 shows that these two versions of the incomplete markets model yield similar results about
the open economy relative multiplier to the baseline complete markets model. In the case of federally
financed spending, the open economy relative multiplier rises to 0.90 when prices are sticky. The
intuition for this is that home agents are wealthier as a result of the government spending (they
receive labor income far in excess of the extra taxes they must pay). Since their preferences are
home-biased, their increased wealth increases home demand. In the long run, the increased wealth
reduces labor supply. But the first of these effects outweighs the latter implying that the multiplier
increases.
   What is perhaps more surprising is that even in the case of locally financed spending the in-
complete markets model yields a slightly larger open economy relative multiplier than the complete
markets model when prices are sticky. In this case, home agents are not wealthier due to the govern-
ment spending shock. However, they are wealthier than they would have been had they shared all
risk. The reason is that the government spending shock leads to an increase in the relative price of
home goods. Since home households have a stronger preference for home goods than foreign house-
holds, it is efficient for them to purchase state contingent assets that pay out when home goods are
cheap and require them to pay when home goods are expensive. A home government spending shock
therefore leads to a negative transfer for home agents under complete markets.

                                                  30
   When prices are flexible, the open economy relative multiplier is slightly lower in the incomplete
markets model than it is with complete markets. With flexible prices, the increase in wealth asso-
ciated with the government spending reduces labor supply, whereas it does not lead to a Keynesian
increase in aggregate demand. This reduction in labor supply decreases the open economy relative
multiplier.
   The effects of changes in wealth on the open economy relative multiplier are sensitive to the
elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods. Our baseline value for this parameter is
2. If we instead assume that this elasticity is 1, the open economy relative multiplier rises to 1.05 for
federally financed spending. To be able to generate an open economy relative multiplier of 1.5, we
must assume that this elasticity is below 0.6. This is a substantially lower value than most empirical
studies suggest.


5.5   Models with Variable Capital

The model we develop in section 4 abstracts from investment and capital accumulation. In appendixes
D and E we incorporate investment and capital accumulation into our model in two different ways.
The specification presented in appendix D follows closely the setup in Woodford (2003, 2005). In
this model capital is firm-specific in that each firm owns its capital stock and faces convex investment
adjustment costs at the firm level. Our baseline model is a limiting case of this model when the capital
share goes to zero. This setup has been used, e.g., by Eichenbaum and Fisher (2007) and Altig et
al. (2011). The specification presented in appendix E largely mirrors Christiano, Eichenbaum, and
Evans (2005). In this case, households own the capital stock and firms rent capital on a period-
by-period basis in a frictionless regional capital market. This specification also allows for variable
capital utilization and investment adjustment costs at the regional level.
   Table 9 presents open economy relative multipliers for these models in the case when households
have GHH preferences. The output multiplier for the firm-specific capital model is slightly larger
than for our baseline model. Since the government spending shock is persistent, firms expect a
high marginal return on capital for some time and increase investment when the shock occurs.
In contrast, the model with regional capital markets yields a smaller multiplier than the baseline
model. This occurs despite investment rising as in the firm-specific capital model. The main reason
for the fall in the multiplier is that the regional nature of the capital market reduces the degree of
strategic complementarity of the price setting decisions across firms relative to the baseline model
(since firms that raise their price can costlessly reduce the amount of capital they rent). Clearly,

                                                   31
the assumption that firms rent the capital that they use each period on frictionless regional capital
markets is unrealistic. Eichenbaum and Fisher (2007) and Altig et al. (2011) show that adopting
the more realistic setting of firm-specific capital helps New Keynesian models with capital match the
sluggish response of prices to aggregate disturbances without resorting to unrealistic assumptions
about the frequency of price adjustment or the indexing of prices. The final row of Table 9 shows
that with flexible prices, the open economy relative multiplier is close to zero in the firm-specific
capital model. Table 9 also presents open economy relative multipliers for CPI inflation. The New
Keynesian models generate small increases in relative inflation. This lines up well with our empirical
findings on relative inflation. In contrast, the model with flexible prices counter-factually implies a
much sharper rise in relative inflation rates.


5.6    Welfare

The welfare consequences of government spending depend not only on the multiplier, but also on the
utility agents derive from the goods and services purchased by the government. Woodford (2011) and
Werning (2012) provide an extensive discussion of the welfare consequences of government spending.
To illustrate the main forces, suppose household utility can be represented by U (Ct , Lt , Gt ) and the
production function is Yt = f (Lt ).51 Household utility may then be written as U (Yt −Gt , f −1 (Yt ), Gt ).
Following Woodford (2011), we can differentiate this and get
                                                
                            dU             −UL dY
                                = UC −                 + (UG − UC ).                                                (27)
                            dG               fL    dG

The first term is the difference between the marginal utility of consumption and the marginal disu-
tility of producing goods (UL is negative), multiplied by the government spending multiplier. In a
frictionless economy, this term is zero since output is chosen optimally to equate the two terms in
the bracket. The second term is the difference between the marginal value of government spending
and the marginal value of private spending. In a frictionless economy, thus, the government should
spend up to a point where the value of an extra dollar of government spending is equal to that of
private spending.
    In an economy with frictions, output might, however, be below its optimal level making the first
term positive. In this case, it may be desirable, other things equal, to increase spending beyond the
point at which the second term is equal to zero. The extent of extra desirable spending will depend
on the size of the multiplier, with a larger multiplier implying that more spending is desirable.
 51
    For simplicity, we abstract from investment, heterogeneous labor markets, and price dispersion due to price rigidity.
And we assume that government spending is financed by lump-sum taxes.
                                                           32
Woodford (2011) argues that monetary policy should be the tool of choice to eliminate such “output
gaps” since there is no cost to using monetary policy, and this allows fiscal policy to focus on
equalizing the marginal value of an extra dollar of government spending and private spending. If
fiscal policy is used to eliminate output gaps, this may interfere with that second objective. Only
when monetary policy is constrained—such as when the nominal interest rate is at its zero lower
bound—should fiscal policy be used to eliminate output gaps. In an economy with price rigidity,
welfare is also affected by the extent of inefficient price dispersion due to inflation and government
spending can raise welfare to the extent it can help stabilize inflation. Werning (2012) decomposes
optimal stimulus spending into an “opportunistic” part, which reflects the desire of the government
to take advantage of low prices during recessions, and a true “stimulus” part, which reflects additional
spending beyond this benchmark. He argues that an important part of optimal stimulus at the zero
lower bound is “opportunistic” and that “stimulus” spending may optimally be zero or close to zero.


6    Conclusion

We exploit regional variation in military spending in the US to estimate the effect of government
spending on output in a monetary union. We use the fact that when the U.S. embarks upon a
military buildup, there is a systematic tendency for spending to increase more in some states than
others. For example, when aggregate military spending in the US rises by 1 percent of GDP, military
spending in California on average rises by about 3 percent of California GDP, while military spending
in Illinois rises by only about 0.5 percent of Illinois GDP. Under the assumption that the US doesn’t
embark upon military buildups like the Vietnam War because states like California are doing badly
relative to states like Illinois, we can use regional variation associated with these buildups to estimate
the effect of a relative increase in spending on relative output. We find that when relative spending
in a state increases by 1 percent of GDP, relative state GDP rises by 1.5 percent.
    At first glance, this multiplier estimate may seem quite large. However, it pertains to a different
object than the conventional “close economy aggregate multiplier,” in that it measures the effect of a
relative change in government spending in two different states on the relative change in output. We
coin the term the “open economy relative multiplier” for this object and develop a theoretical frame-
work for interpreting how it relates to the more commonly studied aggregate government multiplier.
This framework is useful in interpreting the growing number of studies that attempt to use regional
variation to measure the government spending multiplier (e.g., Acconcia et al., 2011; Chodorow-
Reich et al., 2012; Clemens and Miran, 2012; Cohen et al., 2011; Fishback and Kachanovskaya, 2010;
                                                33
Serrato and Wingender, 2010; Shoag, 2010; Wilson, 2011).
   We show that the open economy relative multiplier is a sharp diagnostic tool in distinguishing
among alternative macroeconomic models. The closed economy aggregate multiplier is highly sensi-
tive to how aggressively monetary and tax policy “lean against the wind” in response to a government
spending shock, with the multiplier being larger if policy is more accommodative. In contrast, since
the open economy relative multiplier focuses on relative changes in government spending and output,
these aggregate factors are “differenced out,” allowing for much sharper theoretical predictions.
   We show that our estimates are much more consistent with New Keynesian models in which
“aggregate demand” shocks—such as government spending shocks—have potentially large effects on
output than they are with the plain-vanilla Neoclassical model. In particular, our results suggest that
government spending should have large output multipliers when the economy is in a liquidity trap,
i.e., the nominal interest rate hits its lower bound of zero and becomes unresponsive to economic
shocks. This scenario is particularly relevant in the context of the near zero nominal interest rates
that have prevailed in many countries in recent years.




                                                  34
A     Constant Real and Nominal Rate Monetary Policies

The paper considers specifications of monetary policy that hold the real or nominal interest rate
constant in response to a government spending shock. Here, we illustrate the method used to solve
for these monetary policy specifications. We do this for the case of separable preference. We use an
analogous approach for the case of GHH preference.
    Consider the closed economy limit of our model. A log-linear approximation of the key equilibrium
conditions of this model are
                                     ĉt = Et ĉt+1 − σ(r̂tn − Et π̂t+1 ),                          (28)

                                  π̂t = βEt π̂t+1 + κζσ −1 ĉt + κζψν ŷt ,                         (29)
                                                  
                                                   C
                                          ŷt =        ĉt + ĝt ,                                  (30)
                                                   Y
where ζ = 1/(1 + ψν θ) and ψν = (1 + ν −1 )/a − 1.
    Using equation (30) to eliminate ŷt from equations (28) and (29) yields

                                     ĉt = Et ĉt+1 − σ(r̂tn − Et π̂t+1 ),                          (31)

                                     π̂t = βEt π̂t+1 + κζc ĉt + κζg ĝt ,                          (32)

where ζy = ζ(σ −1 + (C/Y )ψν ) and ζg = ζψν . Recall that ĝt = ρg ĝt−1 + g,t .


A.1    Fixed Real Rate Monetary Policy

An equilibrium with a fixed real interest rate must satisfy

                                                ĉt = Et ĉt+1 ,                                    (33)

                                     π̂t = βEt π̂t+1 + κζc ĉt + κζg ĝt .                          (34)

    We conjecture a solution of the form ĉ∗t = ac ĝt , π̂t∗ = aπ ĝt . Using the method of undetermined
coefficients, it is easy to verify that such an equilibrium exists with

                                                          g        ζ
                                         ac = 0, aπ = κ 1−βρ g
                                                               .

    This equilibrium can be implemented with the following policy rule

                                    r̂tn = Et π̂t+1 + φπ (π̂t − π̂t∗ )

                                         = aπ ρg ĝt + φπ π̂t − aπ φπ ĝt

                                         = φπ π̂t − aπ (φπ − ρg )ĝt .                              (35)
                                                      35
A.2    Fixed Nominal Rate Monetary Policy

An equilibrium with a fixed nominal interest rate must satisfy

                                          ĉt = Et ĉt+1 + σEt π̂t+1 ,                                (36)

                                     π̂t = βEt π̂t+1 + κζc ĉt + κζg ĝt .                            (37)

    We again conjecture a solution of the form ĉ∗t = ac ĝt , π̂t∗ = aπ ĝt . Using the method of undeter-
mined coefficients, it is easy to verify that such an equilibrium exists with

                                        ρg κζg             ζc            gζ
                                 ac =    Ac ,     aπ = κ 1−βρ g
                                                                ac + κ 1−βρ g
                                                                              .

where Ac = (1 − ρg )(1 − βρg ) − ρg κζc . This solution is however only valid when Ac > 0. For
0 < ρg < 1, Ac is decreasing in ρg . There is a critical point at which Ac = 0. As ρg rises and Ac
falls towards zero, ac → ∞. For values of ρg that are above this point, our solution method breaks
down since ac is infinite. Similar parameter restrictions arise in Eggertsson (2010) and Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011).
    In the valid range, this equilibrium can be implemented with the following policy rule

                                          r̂tn = φπ (π̂t − π̂t∗ )

                                                 = φπ π̂t − aπ φπ ĝt .                               (38)


B     Persistence of the Government Spending Shocks

We use annual data on aggregate military procurement spending to calibrate the persistence of
the government spending shocks that we feed into our model. The first order autocorrelation of
aggregate military procurement spending suggests a great deal of persistence. However, higher order
autocorrelations suggest less persistence. To capture this behavior in a parsimonious way, we estimate
a quarterly AR(1) process by simulated method of moments using the first five autocorrelations as
moments.
    More specifically, our procedure is the following. First, we take the log of aggregate military
procurement spending and detrend it (results are insensitive to this). We then estimate regressions
of the following form:
                                         Gagg
                                          t   = αj + βj Gagg
                                                         t−j + t ,

where Gagg
       t   is detrended log aggregate military procurement spending. We use βj for j = 1, ..., 5
as the moments in our simulated methods of moments estimation. We then simulate quarterly
                                           36
data from AR(1) processes with different degrees of persistence, time aggregate these data to an
annual frequency, and run these same regressions on the simulated data. We then find the value of
the quarterly AR(1) parameter that minimizes the sum of the squared deviations of the empirical
moments from the simulated moments.


C     Linear Approximation of Equation (1) for Model Regressions

To calculate the open economy relative multiplier for simulated data from our model, we must take
a linear approximation of the dependent and independent variables in equation (1) so as to be able
to express the variables in the regression in terms of the variables in our model. For the output
regression, we approximate the specification in which we deflate regional GDP by the regional CPI
(The second specification in Table 2). The linear approximation of the dependent variable is
    PHt Yt   PHt−2 Yt−2
     Pt −        Pt−2          Yt ΠHt ΠHt−1
         PHt−2 Yt−2
                          =                 − 1 = ŷt − ŷt−2 + π̂Ht + π̂Ht−1 − π̂t − π̂t−1 + h.o.t,          (39)
                              Yt−2 Πt Πt−1
           Pt−2

where h.o.t. denotes “higher order terms.” The linear approximation of the independent variable is
           PHt GHt    P     GHt−2
            PtW
                   − Ht−2   W
                          Pt−2          GHt ΠHt ΠHt−1 GHt−2
                 PHt−2 Yt−2
                                     =                    −
                     W
                                        Yt−2 ΠW     W
                                                 t Πt−1     Yt−2
                    Pt−2
                                                         
                                                        C
                                                            π̂Ht + π̂Ht−1 − π̂tW − π̂t−1
                                                                                     W
                                                                                         
                                  = ĝt − ĝt−2 + 1 −                                      + h.o.t.           (40)
                                                        Y


D     A Model with Firm-Specific Capital

This appendix presents a model of investment and capital accumulation that mirrors closely the
specification in Woodford (2003, 2005). In this model, firms own their capital stock and face ad-
justment costs at the firm level in adjusting their capital stock. Household behavior is governed by
the same equations as in our baseline model presented in section 4. As in our baseline model, firms
belong to industries x, which make use of a specific type of labor. The production function of firms
in industry x is
                                           yt (x) = f (Lt (x), Kt (x)).                                       (41)

The demand for the output of firms in industry x is given by
                                                                                                   −θ
                                            ∗                        ∗                    pht (x)
              yt (x) = (nCHt + (1 −      n)CHt   + nIH,t + (1 −   n)IH,t   + nGHt )                       .   (42)
                                                                                           PHt


                                                       37
Firms’ optimal choice of labor demand implies

                                    Wt (x) = f` (Lt (x), Kt (x))St (x).                             (43)

Each firm faces convex adjustment costs for investment. A firm that would like to choose a capital
stock Kt+1 (x) for period t + 1 must invest I(Kt+1 (x)/Kt (x))Kt (x) at time t. For simplicity, assume
that It is a composite investment good given by an index of all the products produced in the economy
analogous to equations (5)-(6) for consumption. We assume that I(1) = δ, I 0 (1) = 1, and I 00 (1) = ψ .
Optimal investment by firms implies
                                                                                  
                 0 Kt+1 (x)               Pt+1     Kt+2 (x)      0 Kt+2 (x)     Kt+2 (x)
               I              + Et Mt,t+1       I             −I
                    Kt (x)                 Pt      Kt+1 (x)          Kt+1 (x) Kt+1 (x)
                                                                     k
                                                              Pt+1 Rt+1 (x) PH,t+1
                                                  = Et Mt,t+1                      ,                (44)
                                                               Pt PH,t+1 Pt+1

where
                                    Rtk (x) = fk (Lt (x), Kt (x))St (x).                            (45)

Firm price setting is given by equation (22). This model has two new parameters relative to our
baseline model. We follow Woodford (2003, 2005) in setting δ = 0.012 and ψ = 3. Our results are
virtually identical if we instead set δ = 0.025 and ψ = 2.5. We assume that the production function
is Cobb-Douglas with a capital share of 1/3.


E     Model with Regional Capital Markets

This appendix presents an extension of the model presented in section 4 that incorporates investment,
capital accumulation and variable capital utilization in a way that mirrors closely the specification
in Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005). An important feature of this model is that firms rent
capital on a period-by-period basis in a regional capital market.


E.1     Households

Household preferences in the home region are given by equations (4)-(6) as before. Household
decisions regarding consumption, saving and labor supply are thus the same as before. However,
in addition to these choices, households own the capital stock, they choose how much to invest and
they choose the rate of utilization of the capital stock. Let K̄t denote the physical stock of capital
available for use in period t and It the amount of investment chosen by the household in period t.
For simplicity, assume that It is a composite investment good given by an index of all the products
                                                 38
produced in the economy analogous to equations (5)-(6) for consumption. The capital stock evolves
according to
                                      K̄t+1 = (1 − δ)K̄t + Φ(It , It−1 ),                          (46)

where δ denotes the physical depreciation of capital and Φ summarizes the technology for trans-
forming current and past investment into capital. Households choose the utilization rate ut of the
capital stock. The amount of capital services provided by the capital stock in period t is then given
by Kt = ut K̄t .
   The budget constraint of households in the home region is given by

                      Pt Ct + Pt It + Pt A(ut )K̄t + Et [Mt,t+1 Bt+1 (x)]
                                                                  Z 1
                                                         k
                           ≤ Bt (x) + Wt (x)Lt (x) + Rt ut K̄t +       Ξht (z)dz − Tt .            (47)
                                                                        0

The differences relative to the model presented in section 4 are the following. First, households spend
Pt It on investment. Second, they incur a cost Pt A(ut )K̄t associated with utilizing the capital stock.
Here A(ut ) denotes a convex cost function. Third, they receive rental income equal to Rtk ut K̄t for
supplying ut K̄t in capital services to firms. Here Rtk denotes the rental rate for a unit of capital
services.
   In addition to equations (8)-(11), (14) and a standard transversality condition, household op-
timization yields the following relevant optimality conditions. Optimal capital utilization sets the
marginal cost of additional utilization equal to the rental rate on capital,

                                                              Rtk
                                                 A0 (ut ) =       .                                (48)
                                                              Pt

Optimal investment and capital accumulation imply

                        Dt Φ1 (It , It−1 ) + βEt [Dt+1 Φ2 (It+1 , It )] = uc (Ct , Lt (x)),        (49)

               Dt = β(1 − δ)Et Dt+1 + βEt [(A0 (ut+1 )ut+1 − A(ut+1 ))uc (Ct+1 , Lt+1 (x))],       (50)

where Dt is the Lagrange multiplier on equation (46) and Φj (·, ·) denotes the derivative of Φ with
respect to its jth argument.


E.2    Firms

The production function of firms in industry x and the demand for the output of firms in industry
x is given by equations (41) and (42) as in the firm-specific capital model presented in appendix D.

                                                        39
Firms’ optimal choice of labor demand yields equation (43). Firms’ optimal capital demand implies

                                     Rtk = fk (Lt (z), Kt (z))St (z).                           (51)

Firm price setting is given by equation (22).


E.3    Calibration

We set the rate of depreciation of capital to δ = 0.025, which implies an annual depreciation rate of
10 percent. The investment adjustment cost function is given by
                                                           
                                                         It
                                Φ(It , It−1 ) = 1 − φ           It ,                            (52)
                                                        It−1

where φ(1) = φ0 (1) = 0 and κI = φ00 (1) > 0. We set κI = 2.5. This is the value estimated by
Christiano et al. (2005). We require that capital utilization ut = 1 in steady state, assume that
the cost of utilization function A1 = 0 and set σa = A00 (1)/A0 (1) = 0.01. Again, this is the value
estimated by Christiano et al. (2005).




                                                   40
References
Acconcia, A., G. Corsetti, and S. Simonelli (2011): “Mafia and Public Spending: Evidence
 on the Fiscal Multiplier from a Quasi-Experiment,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 8305.
Aguiar, M., and E. Hurst (2005): “Consumption versus Expenditure,” Journal of Political Econ-
 omy, 113(5), 919–948.
Aguiar, M., E. Hurst, and L. Karabarbounis (2012): “Time Use During the Great Recession,”
 American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Alesina, A., and S. Ardagna (2009): “Large Changes in Fiscal Policy: Taxes versus Spending,”
 in Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 24, ed. by J. R. Brown, pp. 35–68, Chicago IL. University
 of Chicago Press.
Altig, D., L. J. Christiano, M. Eichenbaum, and J. Linde (2011): “Firm-Specific Capital,
 Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 14, 225–247.
Auerbach, A. J., and Y. Gorodnichenko (2012): “Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal
 Policy,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(2), 1–27.
Backus, D. K., P. J. Kehoe, and F. E. Kydland (1994): “Dynamics of the Trade Balance and
 the Terms of Trade: The J-Curve,” American Economic Review, 84(1), 84–103.
Backus, D. K., and G. W. Smith (1993): “Consumption and Real Exchange Rates in Dynamic
 Economies with Non-Traded Goods,” Journal of International Economics, 35(3–4), 297–316.
Bansal, R., and A. Yaron (2004): “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset
 Pricing Puzzles,” Journal of Finance, 59(4), 1481–1509.
Barro, R. J., and C. J. Redlick (2011): “Macroeconomic Effects from Government Purchases
 and Taxes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1), 51–102.
Bartik, T. J. (1991): Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies? W.E.
 Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, Kalamazoo, MI.
Baxter, M., and R. G. King (1993): “Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium,” American Economic
 Review, 83(3), 315–334.
Benigno, G., and P. Benigno (2003): “Price Stability in Open Economies,” Review of Economic
 Studies, 70(4), 743–764.
Bilbiie, F. O. (2011): “Non-Separable Preferences, Frisch Labor Supply and the Consumption
  Multiplier of Government Spending: One Solution to a Fiscal Policy Puzzle,” Journal of Money,
  Credit and Banking, 43(1), 221–251.
Blanchard, O., and R. Perotti (2002): “An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic Effects
 of Changes in Government Spending,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4), 1329–1368.
Blanchard, O. J., and L. Katz (1992): “Regional Evolutions,” Brookings Papers on Economic
 Activity, 1992(1), 1–75.
Braddon, D. (1995): “The Regional Impact of Defense Expenditure,” in Handbook of Defense
 Economics, ed. by K. Hartley, and T. Sandler, pp. 491–521, Amsterdam. Elsevier Science.
Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and J. Fisher (2004): “Fiscal Shocks and their Consequences,”
 Journal of Economic Theory, 115, 89–117.
Calvo, G. A. (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 12, 383–398.
                                              41
Canova, F., and E. Pappa (2007): “Price Differentials in Monetary Unions: The Role of Fiscal
 Shocks,” The Economic Journal, 117(520), 713–737.
Chari, V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2002): “Can Sticky Price Models Generate
 Volatile and Persistent Real Exchange Rates,” Review of Economic Studies, 69, 533–563.
Chetty, R., A. Guren, D. Manoli, and A. Weber (2011): “Are Micro and Macro Labor Supply
 Elasticities Consistent? A Review of Evidence on the Intensive and Extensive Margins,” American
 Economic Review, 101(3), 471–475.
Chodorow-Reich, G., L. Feiveson, Z. Liscow, and W. G. Woolston (2012): “Does State
 Fiscal Relief During Recessions Increase Employment? Evidence from the American Recovery and
 Reinvestment Act,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(3), 118–145.
Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2011): “When is the Government Spending
 Multiplier Large?,” Journal of Political Economy, 119, 78–121.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and the
 Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1), 1–45.
Clarida, R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler (2000): “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic
 Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 147–180.
Clemens, J., and S. Miran (2012): “Fiscal Policy Multipliers on Subnational Government Spend-
 ing,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(2), 46–68.
Cochrane, J. H. (2005): Asset Pricing. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, second edn.
Cogan, J. F., T. Cwik, J. B. Taylor, and V. Wieland (2010): “New Keynesian Versus Old
 Keynesian Government Spending Multipliers,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 34(3),
 281–295.
Cohen, L., J. Coval, and C. Mallow (2011): “Do Powerful Politicians Cause Corporate Down-
 sizing?,” Journal of Political Economy, 119(6), 1015–1060.
Corsetti, G., K. Kuester, and G. Muller (2011): “Floats, Pegs and the Transmission of Fiscal
 Policy,” in Fiscal Policy and Macroeconomic Performance, ed. by L. F. Cespedes, and J. Gali,
 Santiago, Chile. Central Bank of Chile.
Corsetti, G., A. Meier, and G. J. Muller (2011): “Fiscal Stimulus With Spending Reversals,”
 Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Cragg, J. G., and S. G. Donald (1993): “Testing Identifiability and Specification in Instrumental
 Variable Models,” Econometric Theory, 9(2), 222–240.
Davis, S. J., P. Loungani, and R. Mahidhara (1997): “Regional Labor Fluctuations: Oil
 Shocks, Military Spending, and Other Driving Forces,” Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Del Negro, M. (1998): “Aggregate Risk Sharing Across US States and Across European Coun-
 tries,” Working Paper, Yale University.
Drautzburg, T., and H. Uhlig (2011): “Fiscal Stimulus and Distortionary Taxation,” Working
 Paper, University of Chicago.
Edelberg, W., M. Eichenbaum, and J. D. Fisher (1999): “Understanding the Effects of a
 Shock to Government Purchases,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2, 166–206.
Eggertsson, G. B. (2010): “What Fiscal Policy Is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?,” in NBER
 Macroeconomics Annual 2010, ed. by D. Acemoglu, and M. Woodford, Chicago IL. University of
 Chicago Press.
                                           42
Eichenbaum, M., and J. D. Fisher (2007): “Estimating the Frequency of Price Re-Optimization
  in Calvo-Style Models,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 2032–2047.
Farhi, E., and I. Werning (2012): “Fiscal Multipliers: Liquidity Traps and Currency Unions,”
  Working Paper, Harvard University.
Fishback, P., and V. Kachanovskaya (2010): “In Search of the Multiplier for Federal Spending
  in the States During the New Deal,” NBER Working Paper No. 16561.
Fishback, P. V., W. C. Horrace, and S. Kantor (2005): “Did New Deal Grant Programs Stim-
  ulate Local Economies? A Study of Federal Grants and Retail Sales During the Great Depression,”
  Journal of Economic History, 65(1), 36.
Fisher, J. D. M., and R. Peters (2010): “Using Stock Returns to Identify Government Spending
  Shocks,” Economic Journal, 120(544), 414–436.
Gali, J., D. Lopez-Salido, and J. Valles (2007): “Understanding the Effects of Government
 Spending on Consumption,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 5(1), 227–270.
Gali, J., and T. Monacelli (2008): “Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy in a Currency Union,”
 Journal of International Economics, 76(1), 116–132.
Gordon, R. J., and R. Krenn (2010): “The End of the Great Depression 1939-41: Policy Con-
 tributions and Fiscal Multipliers,” NBER Working Paper No. 16380.
Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and G. W. Huffman (1988): “Investment, Capacity Utilization
 and the Real Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 78(3), 402–417.
Gruber, J. (2006): “A Tax-Based Estimate of the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution,” NBER
 Working Paper No. 11945.
Hall, R. E. (1988): “Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption,” Journal of Political Economy,
 96(2), 339–357.
        (2009): “By How Much Does GDP Rise if the Government Buys More Output?,” Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 183–249.
Hillberry, R., and D. Hummels (2003): “Intranational Home Bias: Some Explanations,” Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 85(4), 1089–1092.
Hooker, M. A., and M. M. Knetter (1997): “The Effects of Military Spending on Economic
 Activity: Evidence from State Procurement Spending,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
 28(3), 400–421.
Ilzetzki, E., E. Mendoza, and C. Vegh (2013): “How Big (Small?) are Fiscal Multipliers?,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(2), 239–254.
Jaimovich, N., and S. Rebelo (2009): “Can News about the Future Drive the Business Cycle?,”
  American Economic Review, 99(4), 1097–1118.
King, R. G., and C. I. P. S. Rebelo (1988): “Production, Growth and Business Cycles: I. The
  Basic Neoclassical Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 21((2/3)), 195–232.
Kraay, A. (2012): “How Large is the Government Spending Multiplier? Evidence from World Bank
 Lending,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2), 829–887.
Mertens, K., and M. Ravn (2010): “Fiscal Policy in an Expectations Driven Liquidity Trap,”
 CEPR Discussion Paper No. 7931.

                                               43
Mintz, A. (ed.) (1992): The Political Economy of Military Spending in the United States. Routledge,
 New York.
Monacelli, T., and R. Perotti (2008): “Fiscal Policy, Wealth Effects, and Markups,” NBER
 Working Paper No. 14584.
Mountford, A., and H. Uhlig (2009): “What are the Effects of Fiscal Policy Shocks?,” Journal
 of Applied Econometrics, 24(6), 960–992.
Murtazashvili, I., and J. M. Wooldridge (2008): “Fixed Effects Instrumental Variables Es-
 timation in Correlated Random Coefficient Panel Data Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 142,
 539–552.
Nakamura, E., J. Steinsson, R. Barro, and J. Ursua (2013): “Crises and Recoveries in
 an Empirical Model of Consumption Disasters,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
 forthcoming.
Nekarda, C. J., and V. A. Ramey (2011): “Industry Evidence on the Effects of Government
 Spending,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3(1), 36–59.
Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogoff (1995): “Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 103(3), 624–660.
        (2005): “Global Current Account Imbalances and Exchange Rate Adjustments,” Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity, 2005(1), 67–146.
Ohanian, L. E. (1997): “The Macroeconomic Effects of War Finance in the United States: World
 War II and the Korean War,” American Economic Review, 87(1), 23–40.
Parsley, D. C., and S.-J. Wei (1996): “Convergence to the Law of One Price Without Trade
  Barriers of Currency Fluctuations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(4), 1211–1236.
Perotti, R. (2007): “In Search of the Transmission Mechanism of Fiscal Policy,” in NBER macroe-
 conomics Annual 2007, ed. by D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoff, and M. Woodford, pp. 169–226, Chicago
 IL. University of Chicago Press.
Ramey, V. A. (2011): “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s All in the Timing,” Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 126(1), 1–50.
Ramey, V. A., and M. D. Shapiro (1998): “Costly Capital Reallocation and the Effects of
 Government Spending,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 48(1), 145–194.
Romer, C., and J. Bernstein (2009): “The Job Impact of the American Recovery and Reinvest-
 ment Plan,” Council of Economic Advisers.
Schmitt-Grohe, S., and M. Uribe (2012): “What’s News in Business Cycles,” Econometrica,
  80(6), 2733–2764.
Serrato, J. C. S., and P. Wingender (2010): “Estimating Local Fiscal Multipliers,” Working
  Paper, University of California at Berkeley.
Shoag, D. (2010): “The Impact of Government Spending Shocks: Evidence on the Multiplier from
  State Pension Plan Returns,” Working Paper, Harvard University.
Sims, C. A. (2001): “Solving Linear Rational Expectations Model,” Journal of Computational
  Economics, 20, 1–20.
Stock, J. H., J. H. Wright, and M. Yogo (2002): “A Survey of Weak Instruments and Weak
  Identification in Generalized Method of Moments,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,
  20(4), 518–529.
                                              44
Stock, J. H., and M. Yogo (2005): “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression,” in
  Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas Rothemberg, ed.
  by D. W. K. Andrews, and J. H. Stock, pp. 80–108, Cambridge, U.K. Cambridge University Press.
Taylor, J. B. (1993): “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference
  Series, 39, 195–214.
        (1999): “Staggered Price and Wage Setting in Macroeconomics,” in Handbook of Macroe-
  conomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, pp. 1009–1050, Amsterdam, Holland. Elsevier.
Werning, I. (2012): “Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” Working Paper,
 MIT.
Wilson, D. J. (2011): “Fiscal Spending Jobs Multipliers: Evidence from the 2009 American Re-
 covery and Reinvestment Act,” American Economics Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming.
Woodford, M. (2003): Interest and Prices. Princton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
         (2005): “Firm-Specific Capital and the New-Keynesian Phillips Curve,” International Jour-
  nal of Central Banking, 1(2), 1–46.
        (2011): “Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier,” American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, 3(1), 1–35.




                                               45
                                  TABLE I
            States Most Sensitive to Aggregate Military Buildups

                                 Missouri
                                Connecticut
                                   Texas
                                 Vermont
                               New Hampshire
                               Massachusetts
                                  Kansas
                                 California
                                  Georgia
                                 Louisiana
The table lists the 10 states for which log state military procurement spending
increases the most when log national military procurement spending increases in
descending order.
                                                            TABLE II
                                                 The Effects of Military Spending
                                                         Output
                                           Output                    Employment          CPI      Population
                                                     defl. State CPI
                                      States Regions States Regions States Regions States Regions   States
                                       1.43       1.85      1.34       1.85      1.28       1.76       0.03      -0.14        -0.12
      Prime Military Contracts
                                      (0.36)     (0.58)    (0.36)     (0.71)    (0.29)     (0.62)     (0.18)    (0.65)       (0.17)

      Prime Contracts plus             1.62       1.62      1.36       1.44      1.39       1.51       0.19      0.13         0.07
      Military Compensation           (0.40)     (0.84)    (0.39)     (0.96)    (0.32)     (0.91)     (0.16)    (0.60)       (0.21)
      Num. Obs.                       1989        390       1989       390       1989       390       1763        360         1989
Each cell in the table reports results for a different regression with a shorthand for the main regressor of interest listed in the far left
column. A shorthand for the dependent variable is stated at the top of each column. The dependent variable is a two year change
divided by the initial value in each case. Output and employment are per capita. The regressor is the two year change divided by
output. Military spending variables are per capita except in Population regression. Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions
include region and time fixed effects, and are estimated by two stage least squares. The sample period is 1966-2006 for output,
employment and population, and 1969-2006 for the CPI. Output is state GDP, first deflated by the national CPI and then by our state
CPI measures. Employment is from the BLS payroll survey. The CPI measure is described in the text. Standard errors are clustered by
state or region.
                                                         TABLE III
                                 Alternative Specifications for Effects of Military Spending
                                     1. Output              2. Employment                3. Output                  4. Output
                                    Level Instr.              Level Instr.           per Working Age                   OLS
                                 States    Regions         States    Regions         States    Regions          States    Regions
     Prime Military               2.48         2.75         1.81         2.51         1.46         1.94         0.16          0.56
     Contracts                   (0.94)       (0.69)       (0.41)       (0.31)       (0.58)       (1.21)       (0.14)        (0.32)
     Prime Contracts plus         4.79         2.60         2.07         1.97         1.79         1.74         0.19          0.64
     Military Comp.              (2.65)       (1.18)       (0.67)       (0.98)       (0.60)       (1.00)       (0.19)        (0.31)
     Num Obs.                     1989         390          1989          390         1785          350         1989          390

                                     5. Output                6. Output                  7. Output                   8. BEA
                                  w/ Oil Controls         w/ Real Int. Contr.              LIML                   Employment
                                 States    Regions        States     Regions         States    Regions          States    Regions
     Prime Military               1.32         1.89         1.40         1.80         1.95         2.07         1.52          1.64
     Contracts                   (0.36)       (0.54)       (0.35)       (0.59)       (0.62)       (0.66)       (0.37)        (0.98)
     Prime Contracts plus         1.43         1.72         1.61         1.59         2.21         1.90         1.62          1.28
     Military Comp.              (0.39)       (0.66)       (0.40)       (0.84)       (0.67)       (1.02)       (0.42)        (1.16)
     Num Obs.                     1989         390          1989          390         1989          390         1836          360
Each cell in the table reports results for a different regression with a shorthand for the main regressor of interest listed in the far left
column. A shorthand for the dependent variable plus some extra description is stated at the top of each column. The dependent
variable is a two year change divided by the initial value in each case. The dependent variables are in per capita terms. The main
regressor is the two year change divided by output. Standard errors are in parentheses. Specifications: 1) and 2) Use national
military spending scaled by fraction of military spending in the state in 1966-1971 relative to the average fraction as the instrument
for state spending; 3) Constructs per-capita output using the working age population, which is available starting in 1970; 4) OLS
estimates of the benchmark specification; 5) Adds the price of oil interacted with state dummies as controls; 6) Adds the real interest
rate interacted with state dummies as controls; 7) LIML estimate of baseline specification; 8) Estimates the employment regression
using the BEA employment series, which starts in 1969. All specifications include time and regions fixed effects in addition to the
main regressor of interest. Standard errors are clustered by state or region depending on the specification.
                                           TABLE IV
                       Effect of Military Spending on Sectoral Output
                                               Weight       States                Regions
      Construction                                   0.05          5.43*           5.51*
                                                                   (1.24)          (1.33)
      Manufacturing                                  0.20          2.83*           3.45*
                                                                   (0.95)          (1.50)
      Retail                                         0.09          1.36*           1.78*
                                                                   (0.28)          (0.51)
      Services                                       0.18          0.99*           0.84*
                                                                   (0.39)          (0.41)
      Wholesale                                      0.07           0.44            0.80
                                                                   (0.35)          (0.63)
      Mining                                         0.02           -0.48          12.88
                                                                   (3.03)          (6.90)
      Agriculture                                    0.02           1.85            0.72
                                                                   (1.13)          (3.81)
      Transportation and Utilities                   0.08           -0.05           0.03
                                                                   (0.41)          (0.68)
      Finance, insurance, rental, estate             0.17           0.22            1.93
                                                                   (0.71)          (1.39)
      Government                                     0.13           0.15            0.30
                                                                   (0.34)          (0.64)
         Federal Military                            0.01           0.23            -1.37
                                                                   (0.82)          (1.87)
The table reports results of regressions of the two year change sectoral state output on the two year
change in state military spending. All regressions include region and time fixed effects, and are
estimated by two stage least squares. The sample period is 1966-2006. The first data column
reports the weight of each sector in total output over our sample period. All variables are in per
capita terms. A star indicates statistical significance at the 5% level.
                                                     TABLE V
                    Effects of Military Spending in High Versus Low Unemployment Periods
                                                Output                      Employment
                                    National Slack   State Slack   National Slack  State Slack
         βh                              3.54               4.31               1.85                1.32
                                        (1.55)             (1.80)             (0.87)              (0.81)
         βl ‐ β h                        -2.80              -3.37              -0.75               0.03
                                        (1.49)             (1.84)             (0.89)              (0.84)
A shorthand for the dependent variable is stated at the top of each column. The dependent variable is a two year
change divided by the initial value in each case. All variables are per capita. Standard errors are in parentheses. The
unit of observation is U.S. states for all regressions in the table. The two regressors are 1) the two year change in
military spending and 2) the two year change in military spending interacted with a dummy indicating low slackness.
We employ two different measures of slackness: "National Slack" refers to whether the national unemployment rate is
below its median value over the sample period; "State Slack" refers to whether the state unemployment rate is below
its median value over the sample period. This yields the effect of spending during high unemployment periods (βh
and the difference between the effect of spending during low and high unemployment periods (βl - βh). The National
Slack regressions include state and time fixed effects. The State Slack regressions include state and time fixed effects
interacted with the low slackness dummy. The regression are estimated by two stage least squares. The sample period
is 1966-2006. Output is state GDP. Employment is from the BLS payroll survey.




                                           TABLE VI
                    Government Spending Multiplier in Separable Preferences Model
                                                                    Closed Economy       Open Economy
                                                                    Agg. Multiplier      Rel. Multiplier

         Panel A: Sticky Prices
           Volcker-Greenspan Monetary Policy                              0.20                 0.83
           Constant Real Rate                                             1.00                 0.83
           Constant Nominal Rate                                           ∞                   0.83
                Constant Nominal Rate (ρg=0.85)                           1.70                 0.90

         Panel B: Flexible Prices
           Constant Income Tax Rates                                      0.39                 0.43
           Balanced Budget                                                0.32                 0.43
The table reports the government spending multiplier for output deflated by the regional CPI for the model
presented in the text with the separable preferences specification. Panel A presents results for the model with sticky
prices, while panel B presents results for the model with flexible prices. The first three rows differ only in the
monetary policy being assumed. The fourth row varies the persistence of the government spending shock relative
to the baseline parameter values. The fifth and sixth rows differ only in the tax policy being assumed.
                                           TABLE VII
                            Government Spending Multiplier in GHH Model
                                                                 Closed Economy        Open Economy
                                                                 Agg. Multiplier       Rel. Multiplier

         Panel A: Sticky Prices
           Volcker-Greenspan Monetary Policy                            0.12                  1.42
           Constant Real Rate                                           7.00                  1.42
           Constant Nominal Rate                                         ∞                    1.42
              Constant Nominal Rate (ρg=0.50)                           8.73                  2.04

         Panel B: Flexible Prices
           Constant Income Tax Rates                                     0.00                 0.30
           Balanced Budget                                              -0.18                 0.30
The table reports the government spending multiplier for output deflated by the regional CPI for the model
presented in the text with the GHH preferences specification. Panel A presents results for the model with sticky
prices, while panel B presents results for the model with flexible prices. The first three rows differ only in the
monetary policy being assumed. The fourth row varies the persistence of the government spending shock relative
to the baseline parameter values. The fifth and sixth rows differ only in the tax policy being assumed.




                                        TABLE VIII
                   Government Spending Multipliers in Incomplete Markets Model
                                                                 Closed Economy         Open Economy
                                                                 Agg. Multiplier        Rel. Multiplier

         Panel A: Sticky Prices
           Baseline Model (Complete Markets)                            0.20                  0.83
           Incomplete Markets, Locally Financed                         0.18                  0.84
           Incomplete Markets, Federally Financed                       0.18                  0.90
         Panel B: Flexible Prices
           Baseline Model (Complete Markets)                            0.39                  0.43
           Incomplete Markets, Locally Financed                         0.39                  0.41
           Incomplete Markets, Federally Financed                       0.39                  0.40
The table reports the government spending multiplier for output deflated by the regional CPI for a version of the
model presented in the text with seperable utility in which the only financial asset traded across regions is a non-
contingent bond. Panel A presents results for the model with sticky prices, while panel B presents results for the
model with flexible prices.
                                          TABLE IX
             Open Economy Relative Multiplier in Models with Variable Capital
                                                        Output        CPI Inflation
    Baseline Model (Fixed Capital)                              1.42              0.17
    Firm-Specific Capital Model                                 1.47              0.15
    Regional Capital Market Model                               0.98              0.11
    Firm-Specific Capital Model , Flexible Prices               0.25              0.36
The table reports the open economy relative government spending multiplier for output and CPI
inflation for our baseline model with GHH preferences and the two models with variable capital also
with GHH preferences. Output is deflated by the regional CPI.
0.08

0.07

0.06                                                               California
                                                                   National
0.05
                                                                   Illinois
0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

  0
       1966    1970   1974   1978   1982   1986   1990   1994   1998   2002     2006

                                        Figure I
              Prime Military Contract Spending as a Fraction of State GDP
Billion $                                                            Billion $
35                      California                                   10                        Conneticut
                                                                      9
30
                                                                      8
25                                                                    7
                                                                      6
20
                                                                      5
15                                                                    4
10                                                                    3
                                    Prime Military Contracts
                                                                      2
 5                                  Military Shipments
                                                                      1
 0                                                                    0
     1966 1970 1974 1978 1982 1986 1990 1994 1998 2002 2006             1966 1970 1974 1978 1982 1986 1990 1994 1998 2002 2006


Billion $                                                             Billion $
10                    Massachusets                                    30                         Texas
 9
 8                                                                    25
 7
                                                                      20
 6
 5                                                                    15
 4
 3                                                                    10
 2                                                                     5
 1
 0                                                                     0
     1966 1970 1974 1978 1982 1986 1990 1994 1998 2002 2006                1966 1970 1974 1978 1982 1986 1990 1994 1998 2002 2006



                                                                Figure II
                                             Prime Military Contracts and Military Shipments
         0.02




         0.01




            0




        -0.01




        -0.02
             -0.01             -0.005                0                0.005               0.01


                                         FIGURE III
          Quantiles of Change in Output Versus Predicted Change in Military Spending
The figure shows averages of changes in output and predicted military spending (based on our first-stage
regression), grouped by 30 quantiles of the predicted military spending variable. Both variables are
demeaned by year and state fixed effects.
           0.25


           0.20                                                        Price Level
                                                                       Real Interest Rate
           0.15


           0.10


           0.05


           0.00


           -0.05


           -0.10
                    0       5       10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80

                                                Figure IV
                   Prices and Real Interest Rates after a Government Spending Shock
The figure plots the relative price level and the relative real interest rate in the two regions for the model
with separable preferences after a positive government spending shock to the home region.


             0.05


             0.00


            -0.05


            -0.10


            -0.15


            -0.20                                                          Consumption
                                                                           Real Interest Rate

            -0.25
                        0       5   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80

                                            Figure V
              Consumption and Real Interest Rate after a Government Spending Shock
The figure plots the relative consumption and the relative real interest rate in the two regions for the
model with separable preferences after a positive government spending shock to the home region.
           2.50



           2.00

                                                     Output
           1.50                                      Consumption
                                                     Government Spending

           1.00



           0.50



           0.00



           -0.50
                   0    5      10      15     20      25      30     35     40

                                         Figure VI
         Output and Consumption after a Government Spending Shock in GHH Model
The figure plots the relative output and consumption in the two regions for the model with GHH
preferences after a positive government spending shock to the home region.
