                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              PRIVATE EQUITY AND EMPLOYMENT

                                             Steven J. Davis
                                           John C. Haltiwanger
                                              Ron S. Jarmin
                                               Josh Lerner
                                             Javier Miranda

                                          Working Paper 17399
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w17399


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      September 2011


We thank Chris Allen, Ronald Davis, Kyle Handley, and Sarah Woolverton for research assistance
with this project and Per Stromberg for data on the classification of private equity transactions. Francesca
Cornelli, Per Stromberg, a number of practitioners, and participants at the American Economic Association
meetings, the NBER “New World of Private Equity” conference, the AEI Conference on “The History,
Impact and Future of Private Equity,” and various university conferences and seminars provided many
helpful comments. The World Economic Forum, the Kauffman Foundation, Harvard Business School’s
Division of Research, and the Global Markets Initiative at the University of Chicago Booth School
of Business provided generous financial support for this research. One of the authors has advised institutional
investors in private equity funds, private equity groups, and governments designing policies relevant
to private equity. The analysis and results presented herein are attributable to the authors and do not
necessarily reflect concurrence by the US Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure
that no confidential information is disclosed. All errors and omissions are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Steven J. Davis, John C. Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, Josh Lerner, and Javier Miranda.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Private Equity and Employment
Steven J. Davis, John C. Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, Josh Lerner, and Javier Miranda
NBER Working Paper No. 17399
September 2011
JEL No. G24,G34,J23,L25

                                              ABSTRACT

Private equity critics claim that leveraged buyouts bring huge job losses. To investigate this claim,
we construct and analyze a new dataset that covers U.S. private equity transactions from 1980 to 2005.
 We track 3,200 target firms and their 150,000 establishments before and after acquisition, comparing
outcomes to controls similar in terms of industry, size, age, and prior growth. Relative to controls,
employment at target establishments declines 3 percent over two years post buyout and 6 percent over
five years. The job losses are concentrated among public-to-private buyouts, and transactions involving
firms in the service and retail sectors. But target firms also create more new jobs at new establishments,
and they acquire and divest establishments more rapidly. When we consider these additional adjustment
margins, net relative job losses at target firms are less than 1 percent of initial employment. In contrast,
the sum of gross job creation and destruction at target firms exceeds that of controls by 13 percent
of employment over two years. In short, private equity buyouts catalyze the creative destruction process
in the labor market, with only a modest net impact on employment. The creative destruction response
mainly involves a more rapid reallocation of jobs across establishments within target firms.


Steven J. Davis                                      Josh Lerner
Booth School of Business                             Harvard Business School
The University of Chicago                            Rock Center 214
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                           Boston, MA 02163
Chicago, IL 60637                                    and NBER
and NBER                                             jlerner@hbs.edu
Steven.Davis@ChicagoBooth.edu
                                                     Javier Miranda
John C. Haltiwanger                                  U.S. Bureau of the Census
Department of Economics                              Center for Economic Studies
University of Maryland                               4600 Silver Hill Road
College Park, MD 20742                               Washington, DC 20233
and NBER                                             javier.miranda@census.gov
haltiwan@econ.umd.edu

 Ron S. Jarmin
 Center for Economic Studies
 U.S. Census Bureau
 4600 Silver Hill Road
 Washington, DC 20233
ron.s.jarmin@census.gov

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17399
1.      Introduction

        The employment impact of leveraged buyouts by private equity firms arouses intense

concern and strongly held views. For instance, former Danish Prime Minister Poul Rasmussen –

architect of the European Commission’s recently enacted Alternative Investment Fund Managers

Directive – contends that “‘leveraged buy-outs’ leave the company saddled with debt and interest

payments, its workers are laid off, and its assets are sold, … benefiting neither workers nor the

real economy.” The Service Employees International Union, prominent critic of private equity on

both sides of the Atlantic, offers this assessment: “Typically it’s easier to decrease costs quickly

by cutting heads, which is why buyouts have typically been accompanied by layoffs.”1

Responding to similar contentions, several industry-sponsored studies claim positive

employment effects of private equity. Examples include European Venture Capital Association

(2005), British Venture Capital Association (2006), A.T. Kearney (2007), Taylor and Bryant

(2007), and Shapiro and Pham (2008).

        Efforts to bring data to the issue are highly welcome, but these studies have serious

limitations. First, they rely on surveys with incomplete and perhaps selective responses, raising

doubts as to whether the data accurately reflect the experiences of employers acquired by private

equity groups. Second, the underlying data offer little scope to control for employment changes

at comparable firms. When a firm backed by private equity sheds 5% of employment, the

interpretation depends greatly on whether comparable firms grow by 3% or shrink by 10%.

Third, these studies do not distinguish cleanly between employment changes at firms backed by

venture capital and firms backed by other forms of private equity. Both are interesting, but the

controversy involves buyouts and other later-stage private equity transactions, not venture

1
 See Rasmussen (2008) and remarks attributed to John Adler in Grace Wong, “Private Equity and the Jobs Cut
Myth”, CNNMoney.com, 2 May 2007 at http://money.cnn.com/2007/05/02/markets/pe_jobs/index.htm (accessed
August 25, 2011).


                                                                                                        1
capital. Fourth, these studies face major difficulties in measuring organic job growth because the

underlying data sources do not contain establishment-level observations.                    As a result, it is

difficult to disentangle organic growth from the acquisition and sale of particular facilities and

operating units. Fifth, the lack of establishment-level data also precludes a breakdown of firm-

level employment changes into job creation and job destruction components, i.e., gains and

losses at the establishment level. As we show, private equity transactions have different effects

on these two margins of employment change.2

        In this study, we construct and analyse a dataset that overcomes these limitations and, at

the same time, encompasses a much larger set of employers and private equity transactions. We

rely on the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) at the U.S. Census Bureau to follow

employment in private equity-backed companies in the United States. Using the LBD, we track

employment before and after private equity transactions at the level of firms and establishments

– i.e., specific factories, offices, retail outlets and other distinct physical locations where business

takes place. The LBD covers the entire nonfarm private sector and includes annual data on

employment for about 5 million firms and 6 million establishments. In addition to its other

strengths, the establishment-level information in the LBD enables us to explore important

aspects of within-firm restructuring activity in the wake of private equity events.

        We combine the LBD with data from CapitalIQ and other sources to identify and

characterize private equity transactions. The resulting matched sample contains about 3,200 U.S.

firms acquired in private equity transactions from 1980 to 2005 (“target firms”) and 150,000

U.S. establishments operated by these firms as of the transaction (“target establishments”). To

construct firm-level controls, we match each target to other firms in the transaction year that are

2
  See Service Employees International Union (2007) and Hall (2007) for other critiques. We discuss the broader
academic literature on the economic effects of private equity in Section 2. Few academic studies of private equity
focus on employment outcomes, and the main exceptions consider data for France and the United Kingdom.


                                                                                                                2
comparable in terms of industry, age, size, and single/multi-establishment status. We then follow

targets and matched controls over time. We take a similar approach to controls for target

establishments. In our econometric analysis of employment dynamics, we also control for pre-

buyout growth history.

       To clarify the scope of our study, we consider later-stage changes in ownership and

control executed and partly financed by private equity firms. In these transactions, the (lead)

private equity firm acquires a controlling stake in the target firm and retains a significant

oversight role until it “exits” by selling its stake. The transaction typically involves a shift toward

greater leverage in the capital structure of the target firm and, sometimes, a change in its

management. We exclude management-led buyouts that do not involve a private equity firm. We

also exclude startup firms backed by venture capitalists.

       There are three main elements in our analysis of employment outcomes associated with

private equity transactions. First, we track target establishments for five years before and after

the transaction, irrespective of whether the target firm owns and operates these establishments

throughout the entire time window. We compare the paths of employment, job creation, and job

destruction at target establishments to the paths at control establishments.            By following

individual production units over time, this element of our analysis overcomes key shortcomings

in previous studies of private equity buyouts. Those studies are not able to describe what happens

to the particular establishments and workers initially touched by private equity acquisitions.

Second, we undertake a firm-level analysis to encompass job creation at “greenfield”

establishments opened after the private equity transaction. We identify and quantify greenfield

job creation by target firms backed by private equity and compare with greenfield job creation by

control firms.    Our firm-level analysis also captures employment changes associated with

acquisitions and divestitures. Third, we draw on the first two elements of our analysis to


                                                                                                     3
quantify the effects of private equity transactions on the reallocation of jobs across

establishments within and between firms. Taken together, the various elements of our analysis

yield a much fuller and richer picture of the relationship between private equity transactions and

employment outcomes.

       Our establishment-level analysis yields three main findings: First, employment shrinks

more rapidly, on average, at target establishments than at controls after private equity

transactions. The average cumulative difference in favor of controls is about 3% of initial

employment over two years and 6% over five years.             Second, the larger post-transaction

employment declines at target establishments entirely reflect higher rates of job destruction at

shrinking and exiting establishments.      In fact, the post-transaction creation of new jobs at

expanding establishments is greater for targets than controls. Third, mean employment growth

rates are similar for target and control establishments in the two years before buyout, and targets

grow more rapidly in the transaction year.

       The establishment-level analysis does not fully answer the question of how employment

evolves in the wake of private equity transactions. Most important, it misses job creation at

newly opened establishments, whether by target or control firms. To capture this aspect of job

creation, we move to a firm-level analysis and identify new establishments opened after the

private equity transaction. The combination of firm and establishment data in the LBD is what

enables us to isolate and quantify greenfield job creation. For this part of our analysis, we

shorten the time window to two years post transaction. Lengthening the window involves a

greater incidence and complexity of ownership changes, threatening the integrity of our firm-

level longitudinal linkages or forcing us to rely on a selected sample.

       Target firms engage in more greenfield job creation than control firms, with a cumulative

two-year difference amounting to almost 2% of transaction-year employment. That is, greater


                                                                                                 4
greenfield job creation partly offsets the relative employment drop at target establishments in the

wake of private equity transactions. Our firm-level analysis also yields another interesting result:

Private equity targets engage in more acquisitions and more divestitures than controls. Over the

first two years post buyout, the employment-weighted acquisition rate is almost 6 percentage

points higher at target firms, and the divestiture rate is almost 3 percentage points higher.

Summing over job creation and destruction at continuing establishments, job losses at

establishments that shut down, job gains at greenfield establishments, and the contributions of

acquisitions and divestitures, employment shrinks by less than 1% at target firms relative to

controls in the first two years after private equity buyouts.

       We uncover a much larger response in the pace of job reallocation. Specifically, over the

first two years after the transaction, establishment-level job gains and losses at target firms

exceed gains and losses at controls by 13% of initial employment. This extra job creation and

destruction activity amounts to more than 30% of baseline job reallocation rates at control firms.

A more rapid pace of organic job creation and destruction accounts for 43% of the extra

reallocation activity at target firms, and a more rapid pace of acquisitions and divestitures

accounts for the rest. These results indicate that private equity buyouts catalyze the creative

destruction process, at least as measured by job creation and destruction and by the transfer of

production units between firms.

       We also document large outcome differences by type of private equity transaction and by

industry. The most visible transactions involve publicly traded firms that come under private

equity control. These public-to-private cases account for a small share of transactions but are

typically larger than other deals, and they attract the lion’s share of media attention. As it turns

out, target-firm employment losses are much greater in public-to-private transactions than other

private equity buyouts. Relative to controls, employment shrinks by 10% of initial employment


                                                                                                  5
in the first two years after private equity buyouts of publicly traded firms. There are also large

differences by industry. In the manufacturing sector, which accounts for about a quarter of U.S.

private equity transactions, post-buyout growth at target establishments is only slightly slower

than at controls. In contrast, Services and especially Retail Trade exhibit much larger

employment declines at target establishments in the wake of private equity buyouts.

          The next section briefly reviews related research. Section 3 describes the construction of

the datasets for our analysis, and Section 4 motivates and explains our empirical methods.

Sections 5 and 6 present our main establishment-level and firm-level analyses. Section 7 draws

out the implications for job reallocation and the role of private equity in the creative destruction

process. Section 8 highlights important outcome differences by industry and type of transaction,

and Section 9 offers concluding remarks.

2.        Related Work

          Economists hold a longstanding interest in how ownership changes affect productivity

and employment. Examples include Lichtenberg and Siegel (1987), Long and Ravenscraft

(1993), McGuckin and Nguyen (2001), and Harris, Siegel and Wright (2005). One ownership

change that attracts particular attention is the acquisition of firms by professional private equity

investors. Jensen (1989) and Shleifer and Summers (1988), among others, discuss the economic

effects of private equity transactions based largely on case study evidence. Kaplan and

Strömberg (2009) provide a useful overview of research on the economic effects of private

equity.

          Few previous studies focus on the employment effects of private equity transactions, and

the exceptions typically rely on small samples dictated by data availability. Kaplan (1989)

considers 76 public-to-private leveraged buyouts (LBOs) during the 1980s. He finds that the

median firm lost 12% of employment on an industry-adjusted basis from the end of the fiscal


                                                                                                  6
year prior to the private equity transaction to the end of the fiscal year after the transaction. After

dropping target firms with asset sales or purchases that exceed 10% of total value, the adjusted

employment decline is 6.2% for the remaining 24 firms. Muscarella and Vetsuypens (1990)

consider 72 firms that completed an initial public offering (IPO) after an LBO between 1983 and

1987. For the 26 firms they can track, employment declines by an average of 0.6% between the

LBO and the IPO. This outcome represents less employment growth than 92% of the publicly

traded firms in Compustat.

        In work close in spirit to our study, Lichtenberg and Siegel (1990) use U.S. Census

Bureau data to examine changes in employment at the manufacturing plants of 131 firms

undergoing buyouts between 1981 and 1986. On an industry-adjusted basis, employment falls

by 1.2% per year after buyout, as compared to a 1.9% annual rate of decline beforehand.

Declines are larger for non-production workers than blue-collar workers. Wright, Thompson and

Robbie (1992) and Amess and Wright (2007) similarly find that buyouts in the UK lead to

modest employment declines. These studies follow overall employment at a set of firms, and

contrast it with aggregate employment at matching firms.3 Boucly, Sraer and Thesmar (2009)

find that employment grows much more rapidly at target firms than at controls in the wake of

French private equity transactions. They attribute this result to an important role for private

equity in relaxing financing constraints for target firms in France.

        These studies share certain weaknesses. First, they focus on the company-wide

employment of firms backed by private equity. Thus, the sale of a division or other business unit

is typically counted as an employment loss, even if the sold business unit continues with the

same number of employees under new ownership. Likewise, the acquisition of a division or other

3
  The samples in these UK studies include management-led deals (management buyouts), which need not involve a
financial sponsor that acquires a controlling stake in the target firm. Management-led deals potentially differ
substantially from the traditional private equity transactions that we consider.


                                                                                                             7
business unit is counted as an employment gain, even if there is no employment change at the

business unit itself. Several studies attempt to address this issue by dropping buyouts that

involve substantial asset sales, but this sample restriction may greatly influence the results, given

the extent of “asset shuffling” by firms backed by private equity.

          Second, previous U.S. studies consider a modest number of deals in the 1980s. The

private equity industry is now much larger. Using inflation-adjusted dollars, fundraising by U.S.

private equity groups rose 36-fold from 1985 to 1998 and more than 100-fold by 2006.4 The

tremendous growth in private equity activity allows us to examine a much larger set of deals.

Moreover, the nature of private equity activity has also changed over time – competition for

attractive deals has intensified, and many private equity firms now have a strong operational

orientation, as opposed to the financial engineering approach that characterized many groups

during the 1980s.

          Third, previous U.S. studies of private equity deals rely on highly selected samples, and

most studies treat the firm as the unit of analysis. The selected nature of the sample is a

potentially important source of bias in the findings. The handful of previous studies that treat

establishments as the unit of observation are typically restricted to the manufacturing sector, and

even then face limitations in their ability to track establishment or firm closings. It is also

desirable to look beyond the public-to-private transactions that dominate earlier samples, but

which account for a minority of transactions.

          Our study overcomes these weaknesses, as we have explained. In addition, we exploit the

establishment-level aspect of our data to examine job creation and job destruction outcomes, as

well as net employment changes. In this regard, we are motivated in part by previous work that

documents a rapid pace of establishment-level job creation and destruction. Davis and

4
    Based on Thomson Reuters VentureXpert, http://www.venturexpert.com (accessed August 20, 2011).


                                                                                                     8
Haltiwanger (1999) review work in this area.             Earlier empirical work also shows that the

reallocation of jobs and workers across establishments plays a major role in medium-term

productivity gains. Many important theoretical models also feature distinct roles for the creation

and destruction margins of employment adjustment. Caballero (2007) provides an insightful,

detailed analysis and extensive references to the relevant literature.

3.      Constructing the Analysis Samples

        Our analysis requires a comprehensive database of private equity transactions and the

matching of target firms to firm-level and establishment-level records in the LBD. This section

describes the data construction process and the resulting samples.

A.      Identifying private equity transactions

        CapitalIQ has specialized in tracking private equity deals on a worldwide basis since

1999 and, through extensive research, has backfilled transactions prior to 1999.5 We consider all

recorded transactions in CapitalIQ that closed between January 1980 and December 2005. We

then impose two sample restrictions. First, we restrict attention to transactions that entail some

use of leverage. Many transactions that do not involve leverage are venture capital investments

rather than private equity investments in mature firms. To keep the focus on private equity, we

delete transactions not classified by CapitalIQ as “going private,” “leveraged buyout,”

“management buyout,” “platform,” or a similar term. This approach excludes “growth buyouts”

and “expansion capital” transactions that involve the purchase of a minority stake using little or

no leverage. These transactions do not fit the classic profile of leveraged buyouts, although they

may share other characteristics of private equity transactions. Second, the CapitalIQ database

includes a number of transactions that do not involve a financial sponsor, i.e., a private equity

5
  Most data services tracking private equity transactions were not established until the late 1990s. The most
comprehensive exception, SDC VentureXpert, mainly focused on capturing venture capital transactions until the
mid-1990s. See Stromberg (2007) for a discussion of the completeness of the CapitalIQ database.


                                                                                                           9
firm. We delete these deals as well. While transactions in which a management team takes a firm

private using its own resources are interesting, they are not the focus of our study or the recent

controversies surrounding private equity activity.

           After restricting the sample in these two ways, the resulting database contains about

11,000 transactions worldwide. Dropping transactions that involve firms with foreign

headquarters leaves about 5,000 U.S. target firms acquired in private equity transactions between

1980 and 2005. (We do not consider U.S. establishments operated by foreign targets.) To fill out

our information about private equity transactions and target firms, we supplement the data drawn

from CapitalIQ with data from Dealogic, Thomson Reuters SDC, VentureXpert databases, and

news stories. Dealogic, in particular, often contains greater detail about transaction

characteristics. Other useful information in the supplementary sources includes alternative names

associated with target firms and their later acquisitions and sales.

B.         Matching to LBD Records

           The LBD derives from the Census Bureau’s Business Register, which contains annual

data on U.S. businesses with paid employees. The LBD covers the entire nonfarm private sector

from 1976 to 2005. In recent years, it contains over 6 million establishment records and almost 5

million firm records per year. The Business Register and the LBD draw on administrative

records and survey sources for data on firms and their establishments. Core data items include

employment, payroll, four-digit Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) or six-digit North

American Industrial Classification (NAICS), employer identification numbers, business names,

and information about location.6 Identifiers in the LBD files enable us to compute growth rate

measures for establishments and firms and to track their entry and exit and ownership changes.



6
    Sales data in the Business Register are available annually from 1994 and once every five years in earlier years.


                                                                                                                       10
Firms in the LBD are defined based on operational control, and all establishments majority

owned by a parent firm are included in the parent’s activity measures.

       To merge data on private equity transactions into the LBD, we match names and

addresses of private equity portfolio firms (i.e., target firms) to LBD name and address records.

To cope with timing differences between datasets, we search over a three-year window in the

LBD centered on the transaction year for each target firm. We adopt a conservative approach to

matching that requires either an exact match on name or address or an approximate match on

both name and address according to probability-based matching algorithms. Our procedures

match about 65% of target firms to the LBD, 70% on a value-weighted basis, yielding about

3200 matched targets firms. Once matched, firm-establishment links in the LBD serve to identify

all establishments owned by target firms as of the private equity transaction. Matched target

firms operate about 150,000 U.S. establishments as of the transaction year. LBD longitudinal

links allows us to follow individual firms and establishments over time. As discussed below,

tracking firms is more challenging than tracking establishments, which influences the design of

our firm-level analysis sample.

       Given our interest in employment dynamics, the relationship of the LBD employment

measure to the timing of private equity transactions requires careful treatment. The LBD reports

total employment in the payroll period containing the week of March 12th. Accordingly, for

private equity transactions that close before October 1, LBD employment in March of the same

calendar year serves as our contemporaneous employment measure. We assign transactions that

close on or after October 1 in year t to year t + 1 for purposes of our analysis, treating the LBD

employment value in March of t + 1 as the contemporaneous measure. October is the natural

cutoff because it lies midway between March-to-March employment changes in the LBD.




                                                                                               11
        Figure 1 shows the number of U.S. target firm acquisitions by year and the number

matched to the LBD. It is apparent that the number of private equity transactions grew rapidly

beginning in the mid-1990s. Table 1 shows the enterprise value (debt plus equity, as valued at

the time of the transaction) of all private equity targets and the matched targets by sub-periods

(we group years together in Table 1 to avoid disclosing individual firm data given the skewed

distribution of values). The enterprise value of private equity acquisitions is very large in the

later years, reaching 420 billion in the 2000-2005 period. Figure 2 displays employment data for

our matched target firms. For example, target firms acquired in 2005 and identified in the LBD

account for 0.83% of total nonfarm business employment in 2005.                         Given the extent of

unmatched targets, the full set of firms that came under private equity control in 2005 accounts

for well over one percent of private sector employment. Based on our data, it is reasonable to

infer that more than 7 percent of private sector employment came under private equity control at

some point in the ten-year period from 1998 to 2007.7

C.      Target Firms and Establishments in the Analysis Samples

        Our study considers three related samples. For descriptive statistics on the number and

volume of private equity transactions and their distribution by industry and firm characteristics,

we consider all matched targets through 2005. For our establishment-level analysis sample, we

consider private equity transactions from 1980 to 2000. This sample allows us to track target

establishments for five years before and after the buyout year. For our firm-level analysis

sample, we consider transactions from 1980 to 2003, so that we can track firm-level outcomes

for two years post-transaction. Table 2 reports summary statistics on matched targets for our

three analysis samples.

7
 We arrive at this inference by summing the employment percentages of matched targets from 1998 to 2005,
dividing the sum by 0.7 to account for unmatched targets, and making the assumption (supported by other data
sources) that private equity activity continued at record levels in 2006 and the first half of 2007.


                                                                                                               12
4.     Empirical Methods

       This section describes key methodological choices in our empirical study. The first

relates to the unit of analysis. Section 5 considers establishments owned by a target firm in the

year of a private equity transaction.     We track these units over time, irrespective of their

ownership in earlier or later years. For example, if the target firm goes public or sells an

establishment, we continue to track that establishment and associate it with the transaction event.

Section 6 takes a different approach, treating the firm as the unit of analysis. The firm-level

approach allows us to capture greenfield job creation and the acquisition and sale of

establishments after the private equity transaction.

       The second key choice relates to controls. We need suitable controls because the

distribution of private equity transactions across industries and by firm and establishment

characteristics is not random. For example, practitioner accounts often suggest a concentration of

transactions in industries undergoing significant restructurings due to regulatory action, foreign

competition, or technological change.         Target firms in our data are disproportionately

concentrated in manufacturing, information services, and accommodation and food services, as

seen in Figures 3A and 3B. Target firms are also larger and older than the average firm, as

shown in Figure 4. The literature on firm dynamics concludes that growth and volatility vary

systematically with firm size and age. See, for example, Caves (1998), Davis et al. (2007), and

Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda (2010).            Thus, it is important to control for these

characteristics when evaluating the effect of private equity transactions on growth and

reallocation outcomes.

       The huge number of firms and establishments in the LBD allows us to control for a full

set of interactions among industry, size, age, multi-unit status, and transaction year. We sort




                                                                                                13
target firms into cells defined by the cross product of these characteristics.8 We then identify all

firms in the LBD not backed by private equity that fall into the same cell as a given target firm,

and we treat those firms as controls. Specifically, we control for the interaction of 72 two-digit

industries, 10 firm size categories, 6 firm age categories, a binary indicator for firms with

multiple establishments, and 24 distinct transaction years. The cross product of these categorical

variables yields over 8,000 control cells per year. Of course, many cells are unpopulated, but the

richness of our controls is evident. In our regression analysis, we also control for pre-transaction

employment growth histories. We follow the same approach in the establishment-level analysis.

To obtain controls for a given target establishment, we select all establishments in the same

control cell from among the set of active establishments in the transaction year, excluding

establishments owned by a firm under private equity control.

        A related choice involves our statistical approach to estimating the effects of private

equity transactions on employment outcomes. We consider nonparametric comparisons that

control for the cross-product of our categorical variables, semi-parametric regressions that

include additional controls, and propensity score methods.               Ideally, we would like to estimate

the average treatment effect on the treated, i.e., the average effect of private equity buyouts on

target firms. As discussed in Woolridge (2002, chapter 18), consistent estimation of average

treatment effects requires conditional mean independence: conditional on the controls and the

treatment indicator, outcomes for the treated and non-treated are independently distributed.

Compared to previous research, our rich set of controls lends greater plausibility to this

identifying assumption.




8
 We define industry for multi-unit firms based on the modal industry of their establishments, computed on an
employment-weighted basis.



                                                                                                               14
         Even if one questions the assumption of conditional mean independence, our study yields

a rich set of new findings about employment outcomes at private equity targets. These findings

throw light on alternative views about the economic role of private equity, as we discuss below.

Our findings also provide useful evidence for formulating and evaluating theoretical models of

private equity behavior and effects.

         A fourth choice relates to the time window around private equity transactions. Our

establishment-level analysis considers employment outcomes for five years on either side of a

private equity transaction. Five years is a typical holding period for target firms (Stromberg

2007).    For our firm-level analysis, we must confront the reorganization of firms through

mergers, ownership changes, partial divestitures, and acquisitions of establishments from other

firms. Because it tracks both firms and establishments over time and contemporaneously links

establishments to firms, the LBD offers greater scope for identifying these changes than most

other business-level datasets. Nevertheless, some private equity targets undergo complex post-

buyout restructurings that challenge the maintenance of high-integrity longitudinal links. We

deal with this challenge in two ways. First, our firm-level analysis considers a relatively short

window of two years after each buyout transaction, thereby limiting the linkage issues that arise

from complex firm-level reorganizations. Second, we use our establishment-level data to assess

the impact of potential sample selection bias in our firm-level analysis.

         Before proceeding, we define our employment and growth rate measures. Let Eit be

employment at establishment or firm i in year t; i.e., the number of workers on the payroll in the

pay period covering March 12. The employment growth rate is g it = ( Eit − Eit −1 ) / X it , where




                                                                                               15
X it = .5 * ( Eit + Eit −1 ) .9 The employment growth rate at any higher level of aggregation is the

weighted mean of establishment or firm growth rates given by gt = ∑ ( X it / X t ) git , where
                                                                                         i



X t = ∑ X it . We consider the respective contributions of expanding and shrinking
        i


establishments, establishment entry and exit, and acquisitions and divestitures to firm-level

employment changes, and compare outcomes between targets and controls on each of these

adjustment margins.

5.          Establishment-Level Analysis

A.          Nonparametric comparisons

            We begin with an “event study” that compares outcomes at target establishments to

outcomes at control establishments. To encompass a five-year window before and after buyout

years, we consider transactions in the 1980-2000 period. As discussed above, we construct

control cells as the cross product of industry, size of parent firm, age of parent firm, multi-unit

status, and transaction year. Our firm size categories are 1-4, 5-9, 10-19, 20-49, 50-99, 100-249,

250-499, 500-999, 1000-2499, 2500-4999, 5000-9999, and 10000 or more employees. Our firm

age categories are 0-5 years, 6-10, 11-15, 16-20, and 21 or more years.10 We use firm size and

age measures to facilitate comparisons to our firm-level analysis below. Replacing firm size and

age measures with establishment measures yields similar results.

            The solid curve in Figure 5a shows the employment path of target establishments around

the transaction year. Establishments that came under private equity ownership between 1980 and

2000 employed 2.3 million workers as of the transaction year. The dashed curve shows the
9
  This growth rate measure has become standard in analyses of establishment and firm dynamics, because it shares
some useful properties of log differences while also accommodating entry and exit. See Davis et al. (1996) and
Tornqvist, Vartia, and Vartia (1985) for discussion.
10
   Following Davis et. al. (2009), when a firm first appears in the LBD, we assign it the age of its oldest
establishment. We then increment the firm’s age by one year for each year it continues as a legal entity in the LBD.
In this way, we avoid arbitrary increases or decreases in firm age due to the sale and purchase of establishments.


                                                                                                                 16
counterfactual path of employment at targets had they grown at the same rate as controls. To

construct this counterfactual, we first rescale the employment of controls to match that of targets

cell by cell in the transaction year. We then apply the actual growth rates of the controls to

generate the dashed curve.11 Comparing the solid and dashed curves highlights the critical need

to evaluate target outcomes relative to controls. In particular, a simple difference-in-difference

analysis of target outcomes before and after transaction years would produce a highly misleading

impression about the employment effects of private equity buyouts.

        Figure 5b tracks mean employment growth rate differences between target and control

establishments from 5 years before to 5 years after the transaction year. Perhaps surprisingly,

Figure 5b shows no systematic pattern of slower job growth at targets in the years leading up to

buyout transactions. In the transaction year itself, employment growth at targets is actually 2

percentage points higher than at controls. However, there is a clear pattern of slower growth at

targets post buyout, with growth differentials ranging from 0.5% to 2% per year. These

differentials cumulate to 3.2% of employment in the first two years post buyout and 6.4% over

five years. These results accommodate heterogeneous treatment effects over the cross product of

industry, firm size, firm age, multi-unit status, and year of transaction. They recover the average

treatment effect on the treated under the assumption of conditional mean independence, as we

discussed above.

        Previous research finds very large gross job flows relative to net employment changes

(Davis and Haltiwanger, 1999), raising the question of how employment responds to private

equity transactions on job creation and destruction margins. Figure 6 tells an important story in

this regard: Slower employment growth at private equity targets post buyout entirely reflects a

11
  To be precise, we calculate the weighted mean growth rate over cells using the weights defined at the end of
Section 4. The cell-level weights evolve over time in line with the growth experiences of targets (solid curve) and
controls (dashed curve). For cells with multiple controls, each control receives equal weight.


                                                                                                                17
greater pace of job destruction.      Indeed, gross job creation rates are greater at target

establishments in the wake of buyouts. These results are interesting for at least two reasons.

First, they indicate that private equity buyouts accelerate the pace of employment change on

destruction and creation margins, a theme we return to below. Second, Figure 6b confirms that

jobs at target establishments are at greater risk post buyout than jobs at controls. As seen in

Figure 7, about half of this greater risk reflects a higher post-buyout shutdown propensity at

target establishments.

B.     Regression Analysis

       We turn now to a regression analysis that allows for additional controls and an easy

calculation of standard errors in the estimated effects of private equity transactions. Table 3

reports establishment-level regression results for the transaction year and five subsequent years.

Each regression involves the matched target establishments in transactions from 1980 to 2000

and their corresponding control establishments. The dependent variable is the employment

growth rate in the indicated year following the buyout. The first column in Table 3 reports the

mean growth rate differentials from Figure 5b. The second and third columns report results for

semi-parametric regressions that include controls for the pre-buyout growth history of parent and

target firms.

       We include two variables to control for pre-buyout history. One variable considers the

set of establishments owned by the target firm as of year 0 (the transaction year). We set the

value of this variable to the employment growth rate of these establishments from year -3 to year

-1. A second variable considers the parent firm that owned these establishments in year -3. If

ownership was split across multiple firms in year -3, we select the firm with the largest share of

employment among these establishments. We then set the second variable to the employment




                                                                                               18
growth rate of that firm from year -3 to year -1. Often, but not always, these two control

variables take on the same value.

           The Table 3 regressions contain a large battery of additional controls. The column headed

“ATE=ATE1” includes a fully interacted set of controls for two-digit industry, firm size, firm

age, multi-unit status, and year. This specification posits a common treatment effect, given by

the coefficient on an indicator variable for target establishments in private equity transactions.

The column headed “ATE1 Heterogeneous” includes the same set of controls, but relaxes the

assumption of uniform treatment effects by interacting the private equity indicator with the 6

firm age categories, 10 firm size categories, and the two measures of pre-buyout growth history.

This specification is more restrictive than the nonparametric specification in some respects but

less restrictive in the inclusion of controls for pre-buyout growth history and in allowing the

treatment effect to vary with pre-buyout employment growth. To recover the average treatment

effect on the treated in this case, we compute a weighted average of the heterogeneous estimated

treatment effects, using cell-level employment weights of targets in the transaction year.                     We

calculate standard errors by the Delta method.

           As seen in Table 3, the nonparametric and semi-parametric specifications deliver similar

results.     The two semi-parametric regressions also yield small standard errors and tightly

estimated effects of private equity transactions. Five-year cumulative employment losses at

targets range from -4.7% to -6.4%, depending on specification, with somewhat smaller losses in

the semi-parametric specifications.12 In short, the evidence says that private equity buyouts lead

to deeper job losses at establishments in operation as of the transaction year.


12
  Smaller losses in the semi-parametric specifications point to a modest tendency for private equity to target firms
with weaker employment growth prospects, which differs somewhat from the inference suggested by the pre-buyout
comparison in Figure 5b. Recall that Figure 5 involves a comparison of growth rates between target and control
establishments. In contrast, the semi-parametric regressions reported in Table 3 contain controls for the pre-buyout
growth history of parent firms.


                                                                                                                19
6.      Firm-Level Analysis

     A. Tracking Firms

        Section 5 considers outcomes for establishments owned by target firms at the time of the

deal. We now shift to a firm-level analysis to capture new establishments opened after the deal

as well as post-buyout acquisitions and divestitures. By necessity, we restrict attention to target

firms that we can track post buyout. While we can readily track establishments over time in the

LBD, tracking firms is more challenging for two reasons: the disappearance of firm identifiers

(IDs) in some circumstances, and irregularities in Census Bureau tracking of private equity

targets involved in divisional sales.

        The disappearance of a firm identifier (ID) in the LBD can occur for various reasons. One

is the death of a firm and closure of its establishments. Firm death in this sense presents no

problem for our analysis, and we capture such events whether they involve target or control

firms. A more difficult situation involves a firm ID in year 0 that disappears in later years, even

though some of the establishments owned by the firm continue to operate. This situation can

arise because of a merger or complex reorganization (e.g. different components of the original

firm are bought by multiple existing firms). It is inherently difficult to define and measure firm

growth when the original legal entity has ceased to exist, and we exclude these observations in

our firm-level analysis. To reduce the number of observations lost for this reason, we limit our

firm-level analysis to years 1 and 2 after the transaction.

        In the course of our data development and analysis, we discovered that the Census

Bureau did not accurately track firm IDs in certain private equity transactions. Inaccuracies

sometimes occurred when a private equity group acquired one or more divisions of a corporate

entity, but not the whole firm. In principle, the Census Bureau’s Annual Company Organization

Survey (sent to all large multi-unit companies) yields data that enables the Census to track these


                                                                                                20
divisional sales. However, we identified divisional sales in which the firm ID of the (new) target

firm remained the same as the ID of the selling firm.                    This problem did not affect the

establishment-level analysis in Section 5, because we could rely on an alternative identifier – the

Employer Identification Number (EIN) – to accurately identify, as of the transaction year,

establishments involved in divisional sales. Unfortunately, EINs are unsuitable for tracking

firms post buyout because new and acquired establishments may obtain new EINs. In light of

this issue, we exclude divisional cases from our firm-level analysis for those cases when Census

does not provide an accurate ID for the target firm.

         We more fully discuss tracking issues related to divisional sales and our use of EINs in

the web appendix. The web appendix also repeats the establishment-level analysis of Section 5

excluding establishments owned by divisional targets with inaccurate IDs. The pattern of results

for this subsample is quite similar to the results in Section 5, although the subsample yields

somewhat smaller employment losses at targets relative to controls.                    The similarity of the

establishment-based results for the full sample and the subsample suggests that our firm-level

analysis is not seriously distorted by the inability to accurately track firm IDs for some divisional

sales.

         For the firm-level analysis, we expand the sample period to run through 2003.13 Table 2

reports summary statistics for various firm-level samples. Our full matched sample contains

2265 target firms from 1980 to 2003. They account for about 4.3 million workers and 104,000

establishments as of the transaction year. Excluding the divisional, EIN cases that lack accurate

firm IDs yields 1874 target firms with about 3.4 million workers and 79,000 establishments.14


13
  A firm-level analysis for the period from 1980 to 2000 yields similar results.
14
  Although our firm-level analysis sample excludes some transactions covered by the establishment-level analysis,
extending the sample period through 2003 captures a large number of more recent transactions, as seen in Figures 1
and 2. As a result, the firm-level analysis sample actually covers more employment.



                                                                                                               21
Further restricting attention to firms that we can track for two years after the buyout year,

including deaths, yields a sample of 1,374 firms and 3.2 million workers. This sample represents

73 percent of the matched sample with accurate firm IDs and 93 percent of their employment.

The latter statistic is more relevant given our focus on employment-weighted outcomes.

   B. Firm-level Results

       Our firm-level analysis considers the same type of semi-parametric regression

specifications as in Table 3. Now, however, we explore employment responses on several

adjustment margins, including the entry of new establishments post buyout. As before, the

regressions include the pre-buyout growth variables and the cross product of industry, firm size

categories, firm age categories, multi-unit status, and transaction year as controls. We weight

observations by employment, as before. To obtain the effect of interest, we rely on indicator

variables for target firms. Table 4 presents the firm-level regression results for cumulative

responses over the first two years post buyout.

       The top row in Table 4 shows results using firm-level employment growth rates as the

dependent variable. Again, we report results for an ATE=ATE1 specification that posits a

uniform treatment effect, and for an ATE1 Heterogeneous specification that allows treatment

effects to vary with pre-buyout history and across firm age and size categories. The top row in

Table 4 says that target firms shrink more rapidly than controls in the two-year period after

buyouts – by 0.88 percentage points in the ATE=ATE1 specification and 0.65 percentage points

in the ATE1 Heterogeneous specification. These estimated effects are much smaller than the

cumulative two-year differences of 2.5 and 2.9 points, respectively, in Table 3. This comparison

suggests that the additional adjustment margins captured by the firm-level analysis alters the

picture of how private equity transactions affect employment outcomes.




                                                                                             22
         The remaining rows in Table 4 address the issue directly in the firm-level sample. Focus

on the ATE1 Heterogeneous specification, and consider first the results for “Continuers” and

“Deaths”. These are the adjustment margins captured in the establishment-level analysis.15

Summing these two components yields a two-year employment growth rate differential of -5.49

percentage points (-1.36 – 4.13) for targets, a large difference. But target firms create more new

jobs at new establishments in the first two years after buyouts, a difference of 1.87 points in

favor of targets.       Combining these three adjustment margins yields a differential of -3.62

percentage points for targets.           Finally, bringing in the role of acquisitions and divestitures

reduces this differential to -0.81 points, close to the estimated differential in the top row.16

Thus, the overall impact of private equity transactions on firm-level employment growth is quite

modest.

         Another noteworthy aspect of Table 4 involves the intensity of reallocation activity at

target firms.       In particular, target firms exhibit substantially greater job destruction in

establishment shutdowns, more job creation at establishment births, more employment losses

through divestitures, and greater employment gains through acquisitions. In other words, target

firms undergo more job reallocation activity post buyout than control firms. These results

support the view that private equity is a catalyst for creative destruction as measured by job

creation and destruction and the purchase and sale of business units. We develop this theme

more fully in the next section.

         As a robustness check, we also estimate the average treatment effect of private equity

buyouts on firm-level employment growth using propensity score methods.                                 We construct

propensity scores by fitting logit specifications, one for each transaction year, for the likelihood
15
   Note that for this to be fully comparable it would have to include establishments that were divested but continue
to operate under different ownership.
16
   The control variables take on different values in different rows of Table 4, so the estimated effects for the various
adjustment margins need not sum to the exact value of the net estimated effect in the top row.


                                                                                                                      23
that a firm becomes a private equity target. The logit specification includes the pre-buyout

growth variables and the cross product of industry, firm size categories, firm age categories, and

multi-unit status. Our second-stage regression includes an indicator for private equity targets, as

before, plus the propensity score measure interacted with year effects. Using this second-stage

regression, we estimate that a private equity buyout raises firm-level employment growth by

0.26 percentage points in the first two years post buyout, with a standard error of 0.18 points.17

Thus, under the propensity score approach, we cannot reject the hypothesis that private equity

transactions have zero net impact on employment growth at target firms.

          To conclude this section, it is worth stressing that our firm-level and establishment-level

regression analyses answer different questions. The establishment-level analysis tells us what

happens to employment at establishments owned by target firms as of the transaction year. The

firm-level analysis tells us what happens to employment at target firms, overall and on various

adjustment margins. In practice, the main difference is that the firm-level analysis picks up large

differentials between targets and controls in job creation at newly opened establishments and in

employment changes associated with acquisitions and divestitures. More subtle differences are

also present. Consider, for example, a target establishment sold to another firm one year after

the buyout transaction. Employment changes at this firm from year 1 to year 2 are captured in

the establishment-level analysis but not the firm-level analysis.

7.      Private Equity: Agents of Change or Agents of Restructuring?

        Table 4 and Figure 6 provide evidence that private equity transactions function as

catalysts for creative destruction. This evidence is consistent with two distinct hypotheses. One

17
   The standard errors are not adjusted for the first-stage estimation. As Woolridge (2002) notes, an advantage of
including controls directly in the main regression is that it simplifies the computation of standard errors. He also
points out that propensity score methods often yield similar results to methods that use controls in the main
regression. When estimated with a linear probability model, a propensity score approach is equivalent to a one-stage
approach that introduces the controls directly into the main regression.



                                                                                                                 24
hypothesis holds that private equity acts as an agent of change – inducing some target firms to

expand relative to controls and others to retrench. According to this hypothesis, our earlier

evidence reflects a combination of (a) upsizing target firms that add establishments and jobs

more rapidly than controls and (b) downsizing target firms that shed jobs and establishments

more rapidly than controls. The positive effects of buyouts on creation, destruction, acquisitions,

and divestitures then result by aggregating over upsizing and downsize cases. An alternative

hypothesis holds that private equity acts as an agent of restructuring within target firms,

accelerating the reallocation of jobs across establishments of target firms and the pace of their

divestitures and acquisitions. According to this hypothesis, the positive effects of buyouts on

gross job flows, acquisitions, and divestitures occur within target firms. These hypotheses are not

exclusive because private equity may accelerate both types of creative destruction.

        To investigate these hypotheses, we estimate the impact of private equity transactions on

various firm-level measures of reallocation activity in the wake of buyouts. The overall job

reallocation rate for a firm is the sum of its gross job gains due to new, expanding, and acquired

establishments and its gross job losses due to exiting, shrinking, and divested establishments. A

firm’s excess reallocation rate is the difference between its job reallocation rate and the absolute

value of its net growth rate.18 If a given firm changes employment in the same direction at all of

its establishments, then its excess reallocation is zero.               To the extent that a firm expands

employment at some units and contracts employment at others, it has positive excess

reallocation. If the firm adds jobs at some of its establishments and cuts an equal number of jobs

at other establishments, then excess reallocation equals job reallocation.



18
  This concept of excess reallocation is often used in the literature on gross job flows to analyze the nature of job
reallocation within and between industries or sectors. See Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson (1989), Davis and
Haltiwanger (1992), and, for a review of the literature, Davis and Haltiwanger (1999). Our approach here applies
the concept to the reallocation of jobs across units within firms.


                                                                                                                 25
        By estimating the impact of private equity transactions on excess and job reallocation

rates at target firms (relative to controls), we can quantify the extent to which private equity acts

as an agent of change or an agent of restructuring. For example, if private equity acts exclusively

as an agent of change, then the entire creative destruction response of target firms involves

higher job reallocation but no impact on firm-level excess reallocation. At the other extreme, if

private equity acts exclusively as agents of restructuring within target firms, then firm-level job

reallocation and excess reallocation rates respond by the same amount to private equity

transactions.

        Table 5 reports regression results for firm-level job reallocation and excess reallocation

rates using the same specifications and two-year horizon as in Table 4. In the ATE1

Heterogeneous specification, the reallocation rate is 5.0 percentage points higher at targets for

organic employment changes and 13.3 points higher when including acquisitions and

divestitures. These results confirm our previous inference that private equity transactions

substantially accelerate the pace of creative destruction activity at target firms. The excess

reallocation rate is 5.6 points higher at target firms for organic changes, 8.8 points higher with

acquisitions and divestitures. The implication is that the increase in job reallocation induced by

buyout transactions mainly involves an accelerated pace of restructuring within target firms. For

organic changes, the impact of buyouts on excess reallocation is actually greater than the impact

on job reallocation.19 Thus, especially for organic employment changes, our evidence implies

that private equity acts predominantly as an agent of restructuring within target firms.

        A limitation of the regression estimates in Tables 3, 4, and 5 is that they identify only the

differences between targets and controls. To recover information about the levels of creation and

19
  By definition, overall job reallocation equals or exceeds job reallocation for a given firm or group of firms. Our
comparison here, however, involves the difference between job reallocation and excess reallocation responses for
two distinct sets of firms, targets and controls.


                                                                                                                 26
destruction activity, we return to the nonparametric approach of section 5 and consider a

counterfactual exercise along the lines of Figure 5. Specifically, we sort target and control

observations in our 1980-2003 firm-level analysis sample into cells defined by the same cross

product of industry, size, age, multi-unit status, and transaction year as before. For each cell, we

calculate cumulative two-year changes post buyout for each employment adjustment margin.

We do this separately for targets and controls. We then generate the weighted average outcomes

for targets and controls using the same approach to weighting as in Figure 5. These calculations

reveal the extent of creation and destruction activity on each adjustment margin at target firms,

and they tell us how target firm activity would differ if they exhibited the same behavior as

controls.

       We report the results of these calculations in Table 6. They show high rates of creation

and destruction at target firms in the wake of private equity transactions. The two-year

cumulative job reallocation at target firms is 39 percent of employment for organic changes

(Panel A) and 57 percent with acquisitions and divestitures (Panel B). The large role of

establishment entry and exit at targets is especially striking. Greenfield entry accounts for 72

percent of organic job creation at target firms, and establishment closures account for 66 percent

of organic job destruction. The pace of job creation and destruction due to establishment births

and deaths is considerably slower at control firms.

       According to the “Difference” column in Panel A of Table 6, buyouts raise job creation,

destruction and reallocation rates by, respectively, 1.8, 3.9 and 5.8 percent of transaction-year

employment, which amount to 11, 20 and 17 percent of the base rates at control firms. Panel B

shows that the increases in creation, destruction, and reallocation associated with buyouts are

considerably larger, in both absolute and relative terms, when including acquisitions and

divestitures. In short, we find that private equity buyouts accelerate the pace of firm-level


                                                                                                 27
restructuring on every adjustment margin we measure. To check the consistency of these results

with the semi-parametric regressions in Tables 4 and 5, the two rightmost columns in Panels A

and B report the regression estimates of target-control differences. The two approaches yield

very similar differences, and the differences are precisely estimated.

       Panel C summarizes the information in a different way by decomposing job reallocation

separately for targets and controls. The two-year job reallocation rate is 57 percent at targets and

43 percent at controls. Organic components account for about 70 percent of job reallocation at

targets and a larger percent at controls. Moreover, the organic component of within-firm excess

reallocation accounts for a large share (about 35 percent) at both sets of firms. Acquisitions and

divestitures account for a larger share of job reallocation at targets.

8.     Differential Responses by Period, Industry and Target Type

       Thus far, we have characterized responses to private equity transactions for the private

sector as a whole, and obtained similar results whether we posit uniform or heterogeneous

treatment effects.   Nevertheless, our earlier analysis may obscure important differences in

responses to private equity buyouts by time period, industry, or type of transaction. We now

investigate these differences, drawing on previous accounts and research for inspiration as to

where there might be important differences.

       Descriptive accounts suggest that private equity groups shifted to a more operational

orientation over time, which could lead to time-varying responses at targets. The scale of private

equity buyout activity also increased enormously over time, which could alter the character of

the marginal target and its post-buyout performance. Motivated by these observations, in the

web appendix we analyze the mean growth rate differences between private equity targets and

control establishments for three periods.      The findings (see Figure B.2 of the web appendix)

show that the main pattern documented earlier also holds for transactions in the 1980s, the 1990-


                                                                                                 28
94 period, and the 1995-2000 period. In each period, employment contracts more rapidly at

targets than at controls in the years following buyout transactions.

       Some accounts of private equity buyouts paint a picture of aggressive cost cutting

through layoffs. This characterization suggests the potential for bigger job destruction responses

to private equity buyouts in labor-intensive industries, reflecting the view that aggressive cost

cutters focus on the biggest cost sources. More generally, there are major differences in factor

input shares, market structure, demand conditions, and labor relations across industries that

might lead to important differences in the responses to private equity buyouts. Motivated by

these ideas, Figure 9 displays results for three broad industry sectors that cover most private

equity transactions. Employment falls modestly at target establishments relative to controls post

buyout in manufacturing. Accounting for transaction-year outcomes as well, there is no material

cumulative jobs effect of buyout transactions in the manufacturing sector. Retail Trade exhibits

a markedly different response pattern. In the years leading up to buyout transactions, controls

and targets in the Retail Trade sector exhibit similar employment growth rates. Post buyout,

however, employment at target establishments falls by nearly 12 percent relative to controls over

five years. The Service sector exhibits yet a different pattern. Targets grow much rapidly than

controls prior to the transaction year but somewhat more slowly afterwards. Figure 9 serves as a

caution against painting with an overly broad brush when characterizing employment outcomes

in the wake of private equity buyouts.

       There are also good reasons to think that employment responses vary by type of

transaction. For example, a desire to ease capital constraints and improve funding access may be

more prevalent among independent firms that are privately held before the buyout. Public-to-

private deals may be more likely to involve target firms with a strong need for cost cutting, as in

the Beatrice case discussed by Baker (1992). Alternatively, there could be a higher incidence of


                                                                                                29
poor execution in public-to-private deals. Kaplan and Stromberg (2009) stress that large public-

to-private deals are concentrated at market peaks, where high valuations and extreme leverage

levels are commonplace, and these transactions seem to encounter a disproportionate share of

difficulties. For instance, Andrade and Kaplan (1998) find that 23% of larger public-to-private

transactions in the 1980s defaulted at some point. Guo et al. (2011) find weak operating

performance in a sample of public-to-private transactions undertaken in the first half of the

2000s.

         Motivated by these arguments, Table 7 reports the estimated effects of buyouts by type of

private equity transaction based on our ATE1 Heterogeneous regression specification. We report

results for the response of the firm-level employment growth rate and the response on each

adjustment margin. Each coefficient in Table 7 corresponds to the estimated average treatment

effect on the treated in the indicated regression. As in the earlier firm-level results, we focus on

changes over a two-year horizon post buyout.

         Inspecting the top row in Table 7, employment growth rate responses differ greatly by

type of private equity transaction. In public-to-private transactions, target employment contracts

by more than 10 percent relative to controls over two years. Target firms in public-to-private

transactions experience substantially greater job losses due to establishment deaths and

divestitures. They also experience less job creation through establishment births. Along with the

high visibility of public-to-private deals, these results help to understand concerns about job loss

related to private equity buyouts.

         In striking contrast, employment at independent targets (also known as private-to-private

deals) grows 10 percent relative to controls in the first two years post buyout. More rapid

employment growth at independent targets reflects a higher pace of acquisition, consistent with

the view that private equity investments facilitate firm-level expansion. It is worth stressing that


                                                                                                 30
most buyout transactions involve independent targets, even though public-to-private transactions

garner much more attention. In terms of transaction-year employment, independent targets

account for about 63 percent more jobs than publicly held targets (Table 2).

       Table 7 also shows that divisional buyouts involve a pattern of results broadly similar to

the ones in Tables 4 and 5 – modest net employment contractions at targets relative to controls

and substantially higher rates of creation, destruction, acquisitions, and divestitures. Secondary

transactions involve net employment gains at targets relative to controls and a very high pace of

excess reallocation driven, largely due to an extraordinary pace of creation at birth and

destruction at deaths. Secondary buyouts account for a modest 11 percent of transaction-year

employment for transactions that occurred from 1980 to 2003, and Other buyouts account for

only 3 percent.

       One common pattern emerges for all deal types in Table 7: excess reallocation rates are

higher at target firms than at controls. The magnitude of the target-control difference in excess

reallocation varies greatly by type of transaction, but it is positive and highly statistically

significant in all cases. This result says private equity acts as an agent of restructuring at target

firms in all of the transaction types we identify.

9.     Conclusions and directions for future research

       Our study examines employment responses to private equity buyouts at a much more

granular level than earlier work. Compared to previous research, we exploit a much larger

sample of transactions, a much more extensive set of controls, and a novel ability to track

outcomes at firms and establishments. These advantages enable us to overcome important

limitations in previous research and address controversies about employment outcomes. We also

exploit the strengths of our data to explore new questions about private equity’s role in the

creative destruction process and its impact on restructuring activity inside target firms.


                                                                                                  31
       Our findings support the view that private equity deals lead to greater job loss at

establishments operated by target firms as of the transaction year.         Employment at these

establishments shrinks by 3 percent relative to controls in the two-year period post buyout and by

6 percent over five years.      Gross job destruction at these target establishments outpaces

destruction at controls by a cumulative 10 percentage points over five years post buyout. These

results say that pre-existing employment positions are at greater risk of loss in the wake of

private equity buyouts.

       While noteworthy, these results make up only part of a richer and more interesting story

about the employment effects of private equity. Using our ability to track each firm’s constituent

establishments, we estimate how employment responds to private equity buyouts on several

adjustment margins, including job creation at greenfield establishments opened post buyout.

This aspect of our analysis reveals that target firms create new jobs in greenfield establishments

at a faster pace than control firms. Accounting for greenfield job creation erases about one-third

of the net employment growth differential in favor of controls. Accounting for the purchase and

sale of establishments as well, the employment growth differential is less than 1 percent of initial

employment over two years.

       Private equity buyouts involve much larger effects on the gross creation and destruction

of jobs – both in the form of organic employment changes and in the acquisition and divestiture

of establishments. The job reallocation rate at target firms exceeds that of controls by 13.5

percentage points over two years post buyout. About 43 percent of the extra job reallocation

reflects a more rapid pace of organic employment adjustments, and the rest reflects acquisitions

and divestitures. These novel findings provide evidence that private equity buyouts catalyse the

creative destruction process as measured by gross job flows and the purchase and sale of

business establishments.


                                                                                                 32
       Digging deeper, we also address two distinct hypotheses about the nature of the increased

creative destruction activity associated with private equity buyouts. One hypothesis sees private

equity as agents of change in the sense that buyouts accelerate retrenchments at some target

firms and they accelerate expansion at others. Another hypothesis sees private equity as agents

of restructuring in the sense that buyouts accelerate the reallocation of jobs across establishments

within target firms. We show that the restructuring effect predominates, especially for organic

employment changes.

       Finally, we provide evidence that employment responses to private equity buyouts vary

considerably across industries and by type of transaction. The largest employment losses at

targets relative to controls occur in Retail Trade. Public-to-private deals, which tend to be highly

visible, also involve large employment losses at targets relative to controls.         In contrast,

independently owned firms exhibit large employment gains relative to controls in the wake of

buyouts, mainly due to greater acquisitions. Private equity buyouts of independent firms are

more numerous than public-to-private transactions, and they account for a larger share of jobs.

       By identifying a large sample of private equity transactions and linking them to the LBD,

this paper also sets the stage for new research into the effects of private equity transactions on

capital expenditures, productivity growth, compensation, profitability, and other outcomes.

Simple measures of labor compensation and output per worker are available directly from the

LBD. A much richer array of input and outcome measures are available at the firm and

establishment level in other Census Bureau data sets that can be linked to the LBD and our

dataset of private equity transactions. One example is the Longitudinal Research Database, a

rich and widely used longitudinal source of data on manufacturing establishments. Currently, we

are using the LRD in combination with the dataset we constructed for this paper to study wage

and productivity effects of private equity buyouts.


                                                                                                  33
       In future work, we plan to examine employment and productivity outcomes in

corporations that sell to private equity groups. Many divisional buyouts involve divestitures of

underperforming units that may place heavy demands on senior management. Schoar (2002)

documents that acquisitions can lead managers to neglect core businesses, a phenomenon she

calls the “new toy” effect. The LBD will allow us to observe whether the same pattern operates

in reverse when firms sell underperforming or poorly fitting divisions, thereby freeing senior

management to focus on core activities.

       Finally, we wish to highlight the need to investigate experiences outside the United

States. While U.S. private equity outcomes are especially interesting because of the industry’s

large size and maturity, the U.S. experience may not reflect experiences in other countries. The

impact of private equity might differ across environments depending on corporate governance,

financial depth, legal institutions, and economic development. While they lack our combination

of firm-level and establishment-level data, recent works by Amess and Wright (2007) and

Boucly, Sraer, and Thesmar (2009) also consider employment outcomes in the wake of private

equity transactions, using data for the United Kingdom and France, respectively.




                                                                                             34
                                          References


Amess, K. and M. Wright (2007), “The Wage and Employment Effects of Leveraged Buyouts in
the UK,” International Journal of the Economics of Business 14, 179-195.

Andrade, G. and S.N. Kaplan (1998), “How Costly is Financial (not Economic) Distress?
Evidence from Highly Levered Transactions that Became Distressed,” Journal of Finance 53,
1443-1493.

Baker, G.P. (1992), “Beatrice: A Study in the Creation and Destruction of Value,” Journal of
Finance 47, 1081-1120.

British Venture Capital Association (BVCA) (2006), The Economic Impact of Private Equity in
the UK, London, BVCA.

Boucly, Q., D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar (2009), “Leveraged Buyouts: Evidence From French
Deals,” Unpublished working paper, HEC Paris and University of California at Berkeley.

Caballero, Ricardo (2007), Specificity and the Macroeconomics of Restructuring, Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.

Caves, Richard E. (1998), “Industrial Organization and New Findings on the Turnover and
Mobility of Firms,” Journal of Economic Literature, 36, no. 4 (December), 1947-1982.

Davis, S.J. and J. Haltiwanger (1992), “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and
Employment Reallocation” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, no. 3 (August), 819-863.

Davis, S.J., J. Haltiwanger (1996), Job Creation and Destruction, Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.

Davis, S.J. and J. Haltiwanger (1999), “Gross Job Flows," in Card, D. and O. Ashenfelter (eds.),
Handbook of Labor Economics, New York, North-Holland.

Davis, S.J., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, C.Z. Krizan, J. Miranda, A. Nucci, and K. Sandusky
(2009), “Measuring the Dynamics of Young and Small Businesses: Integrating the Employer and
Non-employer Business Universes,” in Dunne, T., J.B. Jensen and M.J. Roberts (eds.), Producer
Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data, University of Chicago Press, 329-368.

Davis, S.J., J.C. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2007), “Volatility and Dispersion in
Business Growth Rates: Publicly Traded versus Privately Held Firms,” in Acemoglu, D., K.
Rogoff and M. Woodford (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 21, 107-180.

Dunne, T., M. Roberts, and L. Samuelson (1989) “Plant Turnover and Gross Employment Flows
in the U.S. Manufacturing Sector,” Journal of Labor Economics 7, 48-71.




                                                                                               35
European Private Equity and Venture Capital Association (EVCA) (2005), Employment
Contribution of Private Equity and Venture Capital in Europe, Zaventum, Belgium, EVCA.

Guo, S., E.S. Hotchkiss, and W. Song (2011), “Do Buyouts (Still) Create Value?,” Journal of
Finance, 66, 479-517.

Hall, D. (2007), “Methodological Issues in Estimating the Impact of Private Equity Buyouts on
Employment,” Unpublished working paper, Public Services International Research Unit,
Business School, University of Greenwich.

Haltiwanger, J., R. Jarmin and J. Miranda (2010), “Who Creates Jobs? Small vs. Large vs.
Young,” Working Paper no. 16300, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Harris, R., D.S. Siegel and M. Wright (2005), "Assessing the Impact of Management Buyouts on
Economic Efficiency: Plant-Level Evidence from the United Kingdom,” Review of Economics
and Statistics 87, 148-153.

Jensen, M.C. (1989), “The Eclipse of the Public Corporation,” Harvard Business Review 67
(September-October), 61-74.

Kaplan, S.N. (1989), “The Effects of Management Buyouts on Operating Performance and
Value,” Journal of Financial Economics 24, 217-254.

Kaplan, S.N. and P. Strömberg (2009), “Leverage Buyouts and Private Equity,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 23(1), 121-146.

Kearney, A.T. (2007), Creating New Jobs and Value with Private Equity, Chicago, A. T.
Kearney.

Lichtenberg, F.R. and D. Siegel (1987), “Productivity and Changes in Ownership of
Manufacturing Plants,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 643-683.

Lichtenberg, F.R. and D. Siegel (1990), "The Effects of Leveraged Buyouts on Productivity and
Related Aspects of Firm Behavior,” Journal of Financial Economics 27, 165-194.

Long, W. and D. Ravenscraft (1993), “The Financial Performance of Whole Company LBOs,”
Working paper no. CES-WP-93-16, Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau.

McGuckin, R.H. and S.V. Nguyen (2001), “The Impact of Ownership Changes: A View from
Labor Markets,” International Journal of Industrial Organization 19, 739-762.

Muscarella, C.J. and M.R. Vetsuypens (1990), “Efficiency and Organizational Structure: A
Study of Reverse LBOs,” Journal of Finance 45, 1389–1413.

Rasmussen, P.N. (2008), “Taming the Private Equity ‘Locusts’,” Europe Today 8 (Spring), 130-
133.



                                                                                           36
Schoar, A. (2002), “Effects of Corporate Diversification on Productivity,” Journal of Finance
57, 2379-2403.

Service Employees International Union (SEIU) (2007), Behind the Buyouts: Inside the World of
Private Equity, Washington, SEIU.

Shapiro, R.J., and N.D. Pham (2008), American Jobs and the Impact of Private Equity
Transactions, Washington, Private Equity Council.

Shleifer, A. and L. Summers (1988), "Breach of Trust in Hostile Takeovers,” in Auerbach, A.J.
(ed.), Corporate Takeovers: Causes and Consequences, Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

Strömberg, P. (2007), “The New Demography of Private Equity,” Unpublished working paper,
Swedish Institute for Financial Research.

Taylor, A. and C. Bryant (2007), “Private Equity Deals that Cement Business Growth,”
Financial Times, 2 April.

Tornqvist, L., P. Vartia, and Y. Vartia (1985), “How Should Relative Change Be Measured?,”
American Statistician 39 (February), 43-46.

Woolridge, J. M. (2002), Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, Cambridge:
MIT Press.

Wright, M., S. Thompson, and K. Robbie (1992), “Management-Led Leveraged Buy-Outs: A
European Perspective,” Journal of Business Venturing 7, 45-71.




                                                                                          37
Figure 1: Matches of Private Equity Targets to LBD


                           Number of US Target Events: Targets Matched and Total


   900

   800

   700

   600

   500

   400

   300

   200

   100

        0
               1980
                       1981
                               1982
                                      1983
                                             1984
                                                    1985
                                                           1986
                                                                  1987
                                                                          1988
                                                                                  1989
                                                                                          1990
                                                                                                  1991
                                                                                                           1992
                                                                                                                    1993
                                                                                                                             1994
                                                                                                                                       1995
                                                                                                                                              1996
                                                                                                                                                     1997
                                                                                                                                                                1998
                                                                                                                                                                          1999
                                                                                                                                                                                   2000
                                                                                                                                                                                            2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                     2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                              2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2005
                                                                                                   match ed                       to tal



Figure 2: Employment of Matched Targets (Level and Percent of LBD Total)
                       Employment under Private Equity Targets: By Year and as a Percent of Economy

  0.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Thousands
  0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1000
  0.7


  0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                    800


  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         600
  0.4


  0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                    400


  0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         200
  0.1


   0                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
        1980
                1981
                        1982
                               1983
                                      1984
                                             1985
                                                    1986
                                                           1987
                                                                  1988
                                                                         1989
                                                                                 1990
                                                                                         1991
                                                                                                 1992
                                                                                                         1993
                                                                                                                  1994
                                                                                                                           1995
                                                                                                                                    1996
                                                                                                                                           1997
                                                                                                                                                  1998
                                                                                                                                                         1999
                                                                                                                                                                   2000
                                                                                                                                                                            2001
                                                                                                                                                                                     2002
                                                                                                                                                                                              2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                       2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2005




                                                      Percent of LBD Employment                                   Target Employment (right axes)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                38
Figure 3


                  Industry Distribution: Buyouts vs LBD, 1980-2001
                                Employment Weighted
             40

             35

             30

             25
   Percent




             20

             15

             10

             5

             0




                               LBD   Buy Out




                  Industry Distribution: Buyouts vs LBD, 2002-2005
                                Employment Weighted
             20
             18
             16
             14
             12
   Percent




             10
              8
              6
              4
              2
              0




                               LBD   Buy Out




                                                                     39
Figure 4


                  Firm Size Distribution: Matched Targets and LBD
                              (Employment Weighted)


        120

        100

             80
   Percent




                                                                    LBD
             60
                                                                    Buyout

             40

             20

              0
                  a. 0 <100         b. 100-499          c. 500+
                                  Firm Size Class



                  Firm Age Distribution: Matched Targets and LBD
                              (Employment Weighted)


        100
             90
             80
             70
             60
   Percent




                                                                    LBD
             50
                                                                    Buyout
             40
             30
             20
             10
              0
                   a. 0-4             b. 5-9             c. 10+
                                  Firm Age Class




                                                                             40
Figure 5a
                                      Employment: Targets vs Normalized Controls
                                              Before and After Event


 2,500,000




 2,000,000




 1,500,000
                  -5        -4         -3        -2        -1          0        1        2       3       4       5

                                                                Buy Outs       Control




Figure 5b
                            Comparison of Net Growth Rates -- Targets less Controls
                                           Before and After Event

  4.00

  3.00

  2.00

  1.00

  0.00
             -5        -4        -3         -2        -1        0          1        2        3       4       5
  -1.00

  -2.00

  -3.00

  -4.00




                                                                                                                     41
Figure 6a
                            Comparison of Job Creation RatesTargets less Controls
                                           Before and After Event

  4.00


  3.00


  2.00


  1.00


  0.00
            -5         -4        -3      -2       -1       0        1        2           3    4       5

 -1.00




Figure 6b
                            Comparison of Job Destruction Rates: Targets less Controls
                                             Before and After Event


  4.00


  3.00


  2.00


  1.00


  0.00
            -5         -4        -3      -2       -1       0        1        2           3    4       5

  -1.00




Figure 7

                 Comparison of Establishment Exit Rates : Targets less Controls After Event



   2.00




   1.50




   1.00




   0.50




   0.00
                   1                     2                  3                    4                5




                                                                                                          42
Figure 8: Variation in Impact on Employment Across Broad Sectors

                       Comparison of Net Growth Rates -- Targets less Controls
                               Before and After Event, Manufacturing


   8.00

   6.00

   4.00

   2.00

   0.00
           -5     -4        -3      -2      -1      0       1       2       3    4   5
   -2.00

   -4.00

   -6.00

   -8.00




                       Comparison of Net Growth Rates -- Targets less Controls
                                   Before and After Event, Retail


   8.00

   6.00

   4.00

   2.00

   0.00
           -5     -4        -3      -2      -1      0       1       2       3    4   5
   -2.00

   -4.00

   -6.00

   -8.00




                       Comparison of Net Growth Rates -- Targets less Controls
                                 Before and After Event, Services


   8.00

   6.00

   4.00

   2.00

   0.00
           -5     -4        -3      -2      -1      0       1       2       3    4   5
   -2.00

   -4.00

   -6.00

   -8.00
Table 1. Value of Private Equity Targets, Total and Matches by Time Period ($millions)

                          1980-1989          1990-1999             2000-2005
Matched                             73,209               169,271                 291,824
Total                              122,115               211,615                 420,245


Table 2. Private Equity Transactions in the Analysis Samples

                           Number of       Value of       Target           Target
                          Transactions   Transactions Establishments,   Employment,
                            (Target        in 2005     Transaction       Transaction
                             Firms)        Dollars         Year             Year
All, 1980-2005                   3,218        573,224         151,529       5,828,532
     Private to Private          1,350         88,919          59,865       2,224,530
      Public to Private            390        261,164          36,717       1,371,129
      Divisional Sales             918        132,330          35,259       1,359,139
      Secondary Sales              396         72,969          13,455         637,591
                 Other             164         17,841           6,233         236,143

All, 1980-2003                  2,265        431,871          103,671          4,323,558
Excluding EIN cases             1,874        377,303           79,131          3,410,598
Two-year continuers,
excluding EIN cases             1,374        272,325           76,271          3,187,171
     Private to Private           686         58,287           37,283          1,470,447
      Public to Private           248        129,382           20,380            872,206
      Divisional Sales            206         38,874            7,922            391,705
      Secondary Sales             160         35,474            7,957            353,325
                 Other             74         10,309            2,729             99,488

All, 1980-2000                  1,306        315,007           54,729          2,385,163
     Private to Private           647         60,865           24,593            901,284
      Public to Private           171        162,567           18,454            854,779
      Divisional Sales            342         60,615            6,557            416,055
      Secondary Sales             107         23,010            3,885            161,557
                 Other             39          7,951            1,240             51,488




                                                                                           44
Table 3. Post-Transaction Employment Growth Rates at Target Establishments Relative to
Controls, Transactions from 1980 to 2000

                             Nonparametric         Semi-Parametric Regressions
                              Comparison          ATE=ATE1            ATE1
                             From Figure 6b                       Heterogeneous
             Buyout Year           2.17               2.08                2.28
                                                     (0.17)              (0.17)
         Buyout Year +1           -0.93              -0.72               -1.15
                                                     (0.20)              (0.20)
                       +2         -2.23              -1.74               -1.76
                                                     (0.20)              (0.21)
                       +3         -0.55               0.00                0.08
                                                     (0.21)              (0.21)
                       +4         -1.64              -1.31               -1.16
                                                     (0.22)              (0.22)
                       +5         -1.09              -0.95               -1.23
                                                     (0.22)              (0.23)
Cumulative, Years 1 to 5          -6.44              -4.72               -5.22

Notes:
   1. Table entries report estimated employment growth rate differences between targets and
       controls in the buyout year and following years. For example, the entries for “Buyout
       Year +2” report the estimated growth rate difference from Year 1 to Year 2 following the
       buyout. Each reported coefficient is for a different nonparametric comparison or
       regression. Standard errors are in parentheses. They are computed by the delta method
       in the “ATE1 Heterogeneous” regression.
   2. The nonparametric comparison reflects the patterns displayed in Figure 5b. As explained
       in the text, this comparison controls for the cross product of 72 two-digit industries, 10
       firm size categories, 6 firm age groups, multi-unit status, and transaction year.
   3. The semi-parametric regressions control for two-digit industry, firm size categories, firm
       age categories, multi-unit status and transaction year plus two measures for the pre-
       buyout growth history of the parent firm. The “ATE=ATE1” specification imposes a
       uniform treatment effect, while the “ATE1 Heterogeneous” specification allows the
       treatment effect to vary firm size category, firm age category and the pre-buyout growth
       history measures.
   4. The average number of establishment-level observations in each regression or
       nonparametric comparison is about 4.9 million. The observation count falls with each
       successive year following the transaction year because of target deaths and deleted
       observations for the corresponding control establishments.




                                                                                               45
Table 4. Buyout Effects on Target Firms Relative to Controls: Employment-Weighted
Regression Estimates, Transactions from 1980 to 2003

                                  Regression Specification
                          ATE=ATE1                     ATE1
                                                  Heterogeneous
   Dependent Variable Buyout Effect   ܴଶ      Buyout Effect     ܴଶ
Firm-level Employment     -0.88      0.07         -0.65        0.07
           Growth Rate   (0.18)                  (0.16)

 By Adjustment Margin
Continuers                      -1.57       0.09          -1.36          0.09
                               (0.12)                    (0.11)
                 Creation       -1.33       0.20          -1.18          0.20
                               (0.08)                    (0.07)
               Destruction       0.24       0.09           0.18          0.09
                               (0.07)                    (0.06)
Deaths                           4.12       0.06           4.13          0.06
                               (0.09)                    (0.08)
Births                           1.80       0.22           1.87          0.22
                               (0.05)                    (0.05)
Acquisitions                     5.62       0.12           5.56          0.13
                               (0.05)                    (0.05)
Divestitures                     2.77       0.06           2.75          0.06
                               (0.05)                    (0.04)

Notes:
   1. Employment-weighted regressions based on a sample of Target and Control firms with
       growth rates calculated over two-year horizon from the event year t to t+2. Standard
       errors in parentheses.
   2. The semi-parametric regression specifications in Table 4 include fully interacted
       industry, year, firm age, firm size and multi-unit effects plus additional controls for pre-
       buyout growth history. The “ATE=ATE1” specification imposes a uniform treatment
       effect, while the “ATE1 Heterogeneous” specification allows the treatment effect to vary
       by firm size, firm age, and the two measures of pre-buyout growth history.
   3. Each regression has 1,985,489 observations.




                                                                                                 46
  Table 5. Estimated Effects of Buyouts on Excess Reallocation and Total Job Reallocation at
  the Firm Level, Transactions from 1980 to 2003


                                                Regression Specification
                                           ATE=ATE1            ATE1 Heterogeneous
                                      Buyout       ܴଶ         Buyout        ܴଶ
        Dependent Variable            Effect                  Effect
Firm-level Excess Reallocation –        8.00           0.26          8.08           0.26
All Adjustment Margins                 (0.07)                       (0.07)
Firm-level Excess Reallocation –        5.52           0.27          5.58           0.27
Births, Deaths & Continuers            (0.07)                       (0.07)
Firm-level Job Reallocation –          13.18           0.17         13.28           0.17
All Adjustment Margins                 (0.15)                       (0.15)
Firm-level Job Reallocation –           4.82           0.20          5.00           0.20
Births, Deaths & Continuers            (0.13)                       (0.13)



  Notes:
     1. Employment-weighted regressions based on a sample of Target and Control firms with
         growth rates calculated over two-year horizon from the event year t to t+2. Standard
         errors in parentheses.
     2. The semi-parametric regression specifications in Table 5 include fully interacted
         industry, year, firm age, firm size and multi-unit effects plus additional controls for pre-
         buyout growth history. The “ATE=ATE1” specification imposes a uniform treatment
         effect, while the “ATE1 Heterogeneous” specification allows the treatment effect to vary
         by firm size, firm age, and the two measures of pre-buyout growth history.
     3. Each regression has 1,985,489 observations.




                                                                                                   47
Table 6. Private Equity and Reallocation, Cumulative Outcomes over Years 1 and 2 Post
Transaction for Transactions from 1980 to 2003

A. Organic Changes, Excluding Acquisitions and Divestitures
Rates Expressed as a       Target    Control                         From Tables 3 and 4
Percent of Employment      Firms     Firms      Difference        Difference   Standard Error
Job Creation                  18.60     16.79          1.80               0.69          (0.10)
               Continuers      5.20       5.63        -0.43              -1.18          (0.07)
                    Births    13.40     11.17          2.23               1.87          (0.00)
Job Destruction               20.36     16.42          3.94               4.31          (0.11)
               Continuers      6.94       6.71         0.23               0.18          (0.06)
                   Deaths     13.42       9.70         3.71               4.13          (0.08)
Employment Growth*            -1.77       0.38        -2.14
Job Reallocation              38.96     33.21          5.75                5.00           (0.13)
Excess Reallocation*          37.19     32.83          4.36
              Within-Firm     20.39     15.03          5.36                5.58           (0.13)
           Between-Firm*      16.81     17.80         -1.00

B. All Adjustment Margins, Including Acquisitions and Divestitures
Rates Expressed as a        Target    Control                      From Tables 3 and 4
Percent of Employment       Firms     Firms       Difference Difference     Standard Error
Job Creation                   29.48     22.23          7.25           6.25            (0.11)
Job Destruction                27.28     21.06          6.21           7.03            (0.13)
Employment Growth               2.21      1.17          1.04          -0.65            (0.16)
Job Reallocation               56.76     43.29         13.46          13.28            (0.15)
Excess Reallocation*           54.55     42.12         12.43
              Within-Firm      26.16     18.27          7.89           8.08            (0.07)
           Between-Firm*       28.39     23.85          4.54

C. Level and Decomposition of Job Reallocation
                                                Target Firms Control Firms
Job Reallocation as a Percent of
Transaction-Year Employment                            56.76            43.29
Components, as Percent of Total
          Net Employment Change, Organic                 3.11            0.87
  Within-Firm Excess Reallocation, Organic             35.92            34.72
Between-Firm Excess Reallocation, Organic              29.61            41.12
             Net Employment Change, A&D                  7.00            1.84
                  Excess Reallocation, A&D             27.47            20.59
Notes:
    1. An asterisk in Panels A and B denotes values derived from the following identities: First, job
        creation minus job destruction equals the net employment change. Second, total job reallocation
        equals organic job reallocation plus job reallocation due to acquisitions and divestitures. Third,
        job reallocation is the sum of an absolute employment change and excess reallocation. Fourth,
        excess reallocation is the sum of within-firm (firm-level) and between-firm components. See
        Section 2.3 in Davis and Haltiwanger (1999) for a development and explicit statement of the first,
        third and fourth identities.
    2. “A&D” refers to Acquisitions and Divestitures.



                                                                                                       48
  Table 7 Buyout Effects on Target Firms Relative to Controls by Type of Transaction and
  Adjustment Margin, Transactions from 1980 to 2003

                                            Type of Buyout Transaction
                          Public to    Independent    Divisional   Secondary   Other
Dependent Variable         Private      to Private     Buyout       Buyout
Net Employment              -10.36        10.51          -1.47        7.15     -6.45
Growth Rate                 (0.42)        (0.24)         (0.45)      (0.58)    (0.80)


Adjustment Margin
Continuers                   1.40          1.44           -1.42         3.11     -1.84
                            (0.25)        (0.16)         (0.31)       (0.38)    (0.56)
Divestitures                 6.80          0.15           5.34         -0.06     -1.52
                            (0.13)        (0.05)         (0.11)       (0.16)    (0.19)
Deaths                       5.95          1.50           5.97        12.14       9.28
                            (0.19)        (0.12)         (0.23)       (0.30)    (0.44)
Births                      -3.12         -0.38            3.32       17.23        1.5
                            (0.14)        (0.07)         (0.13)       (0.19)    (0.25)
Acquisitions                 3.98         10.98           7.61         -1.21       1.7
                            (0.25)        (0.06)         (0.12)       (0.16)    (0.21)
Job Creation All            -0.29          9.64            9.19       20.09       1.32
                            (0.24)        (0.14)         (0.28)       (0.36)    (0.50)
Job Destruction All         11.06          -0.88         10.34        12.04       7.84
                            (0.28)        (0.30)         (0.30)       (0.40)    (0.56)
Excess Reallocation All      2.14          1.67          13.65        32.25      5.29
                            (0.20)        (0.09)         (0.17)       (0.26)    (0.35)
Number of Observations     289,228      1,269,396       456,135      168,508   122613

  Notes:
     1. See notes to Table 4 for the ATE1 Heterogeneous specification.




                                                                                           49
