                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     INFLATION, EXCHANGE RATES
                         AND STABILIZATION




                        Rud-iger Dornbusch




                      Working Paper No. 1739




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 1985




The research reported here -is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                      N13ER Working Paper #1739
                                                      October 1985




              Inflation, Exchange   Rates   and Stabilization



                               ABSTRACT




       The essay is an extended version of the Frank D. Graham Lecture

presented at Princeton University in May 1985. It discusses the interaction

of inflation and exchange rate policy in a variety of contexts. Four

different settings are used to highlight that role: the experiments with

exchange rate overvaluation in the Southern Cone; the place of exchange

depreciation in the transition from high to even higher inflation discussed

in the context of Brazil; exchange rate fixing and real appreciation during

stabilization in the 1920s; and finally the U.S. real appreciation of 1980-

85. The common thread of the argument is that exchange rate policy can make

an important contribution to stabilization, but that it can also be lead to

persistent deviations from PPP, with devastatingly adverse effects.The

essay investigates through what channels these PPP deviatiins arise and how

they influence inflation, trade and capital flight.




                                                      Rudiger DOrnbUSCh
                                                      E52—357
                                                      Massachusetts Institute of
                                                        Tecbnolocjy
                                                      Canbridge, W1 02139
                                                              October 1985

         INFLATION, EXCHANGE RATES AND STABILIZATION

                    Rudiger Dornbusch
             Massachusetts Institute of Technology


         Frank Graham's interest in the relationship between the monetary

 standard, exchange rates and prices spanned his entire professional career.

 From his 1920 Harvard dissertation on "International Trade Under I)epreciated

 Paper' to the "Cause and Cure of the Dollar Shortage" in 1949 his work

constantly touched on the implications of alternative monetary arrangements

and the interpretation of actual developments. His most outstanding writing

in this area is no doubt Exchange Rates. Prices and Production in

yprinflation_Ger,        a book which is required reading for anyone who

wants to understand the characteristics of extreme monetary experience. Of

course international monetary issues were only one of Graham's interests:

his work on protection and on general equilibrium can claim as much

importance. But even so his favorite must have been the issue of exchange

rates and prices to which he returned so frequently. It is appropriate to

honor his memory with further discussion of this topic.

        This essay considers the role which exchange rates play in the

context of inflation stabilization. Four different settings are used to

highlight that role: the experiments with exchange rate overvaluation in the

Southern Cone to which Carlos Diaz Alejandro first drew attention; the place

of exchange depreciation in the transition from high to even higher

inflation discussed in the context of Brazil; exchange rate fixing and real

appreciation during stabilization in the 1920s; and finally the U.S. real

appreciation of 1980—85. The common thread of the argument is that exchange

rate policy can make an important contribution to stabilization, but that it
                              2


can also be maipracticed leading to persistent deviations from PPP, with

devastatingly adverse effects.

         The various applications are chosen to highlight quite different

issues. In the first section dealing with Latin America attention focusses

on the trade and capital account effects of exchange rate overvaluation:

even though exchange rate policy can help stop inflation, at least for a

while, the resulting overvaluation can become very costly as capital flight

and import spending become large in anticipation of a collapse of the

program. Section 2 focusses on the synchronisation of wages, prices and the

exchange rate in two contexts. In a system of wage indexation and PPP—based

exchange depreciation we discuss the problem of budget and trade correction.

Stopping hyperinflation via exchange rate fixing is another application of

the same set of ideas and the German and Argentinian cases are given as

examples. Finally in section 3 dealing with the ILS. disinflation we pay

attention to the impact of the exchange rate on commodity prices and the

prices of manufactures, analysing the microeconomic channels through which

exchange rate movements affect relative prices and the inflation process.

The essay concludes with quantitative estimates of the contribution of

dollar appreciation to U.S. disinflation and the likely inflation cost that

must be borne when the dollar comes down again.



1. THE LATIN AMERICAN EXPERIMENTS

        In the late 1970s the authorities in Chile and in Argentina used

exchange rate overvaluation to try to bring down inflation. In Chile's case

the exchange rate was fixed outright even though the prevailing rate of
                                          3

         inflation   was still 30 percent.    In Argentinas case a timetable for

         prefixed disinflation --the tablita--- was adopted. In both countries

         inflation was indeed brought down, but at a cost of destructive

        overvaluation. The experiments were encouraged by the       belief   that in part

         inflation is the result of a vicious cycle: inflation requires for external

        balance depreciation which in turn causes cost inflation both directly and

        indirectly   (via increases in   wages),   and therefore requires renewed
        depreciation and   so on. The only means to escape from the inflation trap is

        to cut the recurrent feedback of currency depreciation.1



        Chile: In March 1979, having achieved a balanced budget, the Pinochet Regime

        decided   to round out their classical stabilization by putting the country on
        a fixed dollar exchange. Even though the rate of inflation was still 25
        percent the currency was pegged to the dollar at 39 Pesos forever after, or
        so the government announced.
                  Exchange rate pegging was thought to help bring inflation under
        control through at least two channels: first, international prices would

        exert an immediate, tight discipline on domestic price increases, perhaps

        not literally by the operation of the law of one price, but still in a very

        effective manner. This would be all the more true because extensive trade

        liberalization had been under way, clearing the road for international

       competition to play its role. The second channel through which exchange rate

       pegging would enhance inflation stabilization was through expectations. The

       expectation of a fixed exchange rate would influence those sectors which are

10n the Southern Cone experiment see Corbo and de Mello (1985), Diaz Alejandro
     (1981), Dornbusch (1985a), Edwards (1985),and Harberger (1983,1985).
                                  4

price setters rather than price takers. The recognition that exchange rates

would be fixed forever after would shift expectations from an inflationary

setting to a new regime of price stability.

             The disinflation strategy was almost successful: inflation fell over

the   next   two years from more than 20 percent to zero. But the disequilibria

accumulated in the process led to a complete failure of the experiment.

Today the standard of living in Chile is even below the levels of 1970,

mostly as a result of the policy blunders. The problem arose from the fact

that wages were indexed backward: each year's wage increases would be

determined by tne preceeding years rate of consumer price inflation. The

real wage policy was one of the tools which the military dictatorship used

to sustain its support. In fact, in 1979—80 the policy led to a rising real

wage, since wage increases exceeded the current rate of inflation that was

already being held down by the fixed exchange rate. As a result the

purchasing power of wages in terms of traded goods increased sharply. The

gain in real wages was all the more significant in that complete trade

liberalization had contributed to reducing the rate of import price

inflation.

         The mechanics of overvaluation can be described in a model of cost—

determined price inflation. Let p, w and e be the rates of CPI inflation,

wage inflation and exchange depreciation. For simplicity we assume zero

productivity growth. The given world rate of inflation (in dollars) is

denoted by p. The home rate of inflation of the CPI is a weighted average

of wage inflation and international inflation measured in pesos:
                                         5



 (1)             =
                     aw
                          +
                              (l—a)[et   p*]




where a is the share of labor iii costs. Next we use the indexing rule      w =
       to   substitute in (1) together with the exchange rate rule e=O to

obtain:




(2)          Pt =              (l_a)p*



            Equation (2) shows that the wage and exchange rate policy combine to

yield a gradually declining rate of inflation which ultimately converges on

the world rate of inflation, p. The convergence is more rapid the smaller

the weight of wages and the larger the weight of international prices in

determining the home inflation rate. Equation (2) thus bears out the view

that exchange rate policy can be used for disinflation and that the

opennesss of the economy speeds up and reinforces such a disinflation

strategy.

            But the problem with this strategy is brought out in (3) where we

show the rate of growth of the real wage,



(3)
            w-
                     =         -     = (l_a)[p   -
                                                     p*J



Equation (3) shows that as long as lagged inflation exceeds the rate of

international inflation the real wage is rising. As home inflation

gradually comes down (without overshooting) the real wage steadily increases
                                       6

        without there being at any stage a correction for the cumulative

        overvaluation. Thus, even as tile war on inflation is being WOfl there is a

        developing serious overvaluation problem. Tue model of the infilatiori process

        is, of course, highly simplified and leaves out potentially important

        channels, (in particular demand). But even so it. does capture tile basic

        contradiction of the wage and exchange rate policy. 2

                The disequilibrium implied by fixing too many variables did become a

        problem in Chile. In the period from the third quarter of 1979 to the second

        quarter of 1982 the real exchange rate appreciated by more than 70 percent.

        It is worth recording that in every instance of gross overvaluation there

        will always been an attempt to rationalize the overvaluation, commonsense

        notwithstanding, as a change in equilibrium relative prices. In the Chilean

        case three arguments were advanced: first that trade liberalization and

        extremely high productivity growth had changed the equilibrium price

        structure; second that the basket of Chilean tradeables was very special

        compared to the basket represented by world inflation; and third, that the

        real appreciation was merely a response of equilibrium relative prices to a

        sharp increase in the rate of capital inflow. It is a surprising fact that

        overvaluation tends to bring out more readily a rationalization rather than

        appeal to historical precedents in the same country or elsewhere that

        overvaluation is merely the result of' poor exchange rate policy, soon to be

        followed by collapse.

  2The contradiction is worth highlighting since Chicago graduate student,
   including the Chilean policy makers, had been brought up on Harbergers
classic "The Case of the Three Numeraires" which made the point that separate
  exchange rate and wage targets were incompatible. See,too, Mundell (1968,
                         chapter 8) and Swan (1960).
                               7


         The tendency to rationalize overvaluation may stem from the fact

 that overvaluation is very popular at least in the initial stages. Carlos

 Diaz Alejandro (1963) and Kruginan and Taylor (1978) have emphasized that

 devaluation can be deflationary as it cuts the purchasing power of wages in

 terms of tradeables. The same effect is at work in the opposite direction in

 periods of overvaluation. The first impact is to raise the purchasing power

 of wages and thus create a period of prosperity, usually called 'the

 miracle'. Of course the miracle can only last as long as the central bank

 can afford to put foreign exchange on sale. But even before the bank's

reserves are depleted the income effect of real wage increases come to be

dominated by the classical effects of substitution away from overpriced

domestic labor.

        The substitution effects on the demand and supply side lead to

bankruptcy and unemployment which is always stage III of an overvaluation

experiment. Stage III involves paying the bill: the central bank no longer

has reserves, but the external debt incurred to finance the overvaluation

needs servicing. The only way to do so is to run a trade surplus generated

by austerity and sharp real depreciation. The excessive standard of living

of the initial overvaluation period now is paid for by a long period of

deprivation. The matter is often worsened by a differential impact of the

policy on rich and poor, because of their differential ability to take

advantage of the overvaluation. The workers will almost always pay, in the

end, by a cut in their real wage. The real wage cut is necessary to generate

the gain in competitiveness required to service the foreign debt, but they

may not always fully benefit in the stage I where shifting into foreign

assets or durables is the name of the game.
                                  8

        The adverse substitution effects are reinforced by rca] interest

rate effects. The expectation of depreciation raises nominal interest rates

on peso loans. But because the government does not in fact depreciate the

currency the   realized   real interest rates keep being high. Thus result

financial difficulties for all those firms that are already unprofitable and

whose debts grow relative to assets and earning potential.

        In Chile the overvaluation played itself out through the trade

balance. The combined effects of overvaluation and trade liberalisation

cheapened imports in real terms to an unprecedented extent. There was

growing doubt that the overvaluation was sustainable and the public came to

believe that ultimately, access to cheap imports would again disappear via

devaluation, tariffs or quotas. As a result the level of imports in 1980—81

exploded. This was particularly the case for durables. Automobile imports

doubled, imports of electro—domestic equipment increased nearly 60 percent

and imports of breeding stock more than tripled.

        Needless to say, devaluation did take place in the end, inflation is

back to around 20 percent, the tariffs and quotas are back, the budget has

deteriorated, the debt crisis is on and unemployment stands for a few years

already at record levels. In retrospect the exchange rate experiment, has

proved a terrible mistake because of the neglect of the effects of wage

indexation. The mistake was enhanced by the arrogant stupidity of policy

makers who watched growing overvaluation without recognizing early on the

fatal flaw or later the inevitable collapse.
                                 9

 Argntina: The stabilization attempt using the tabl.ita was implemented by

 Economics Minister Martinez de Hoz, starting in December' 1978. The   initial
 inflation rate was 120 percent and thus an outright fixing of the exchange

 rate seemed implausible. Instead the government committed itself to a pre-

 set, declining rate of exchange depreciation. The time table for the

 exchange rate was seen as an important element in stabilizing expectations

 around a declining inflation trend.

         In Argentina. just as in Chile, domestic inflation did not come down

as rapidly as the rate of depreciation though for reasons that remain as yet

unsettled. The fact that the economy is very closed, via protection, and

the persistently large budget deficit must certainly be important elements

of any explanation. Figure 1 shows the real exchange rate measured by the

ratio of import prices to domestic prices. The Figure brings out the huge

real appreciation that took place between 1978 and 1980. Once again

disinflation was almost successful: the inflation rate fell from 120 percent

in 1978 to only 60 in early 1981, but the system broke down   in   early 1981

leading to a rapid escalation of inflation ultimately reaching

hyperinflatjon levels in 1985.

        The important difference between the Chilean and the Argentine case

is the channel through which exchange speculation took place. In Chile's

case trade had been utterly liberalized and hence flight into importables

was the rule. In Argentina's case, the capital account had been completely

opened and hence flight into foreign assets rather than into goods was the

rule.
                   Figure 1
             ARGENTINA'S REAL EXCHANGE RATE
                (Index 1978-83 100)




150




1 DC




       175   1G7E          195C          1982   1983
                                   10

          Estimates of the magnitude of capital flight are available from a

variety of sources. They can be built up from balance of payments statistics

and increases in gross external debt, or alternatively from recorded asset

holdings. Table 1 shows estimates of the capital flight from several

countries in 1979-82 and the increase in holdings with U.S. banks by

nationals of these countries in the form of deposits or securities.


Table 1 Capital Flight and Increases in Holdings With U.S. Banks
        (Billion $ U.S.)

                    Total Capital Flight      Increased Holdings
                                              With U.S. Banks

Argentina                   19.2                   1.9
Mexico                      26.5                   5.3
Venezuela                   22.0                   4.6

Source: World Development Report,l985 p.64 and Treasury Bulletin, various
issues.


          Estimates of the amount of capital flight in Argentina in 1978—82

vary, but $20—25 billion is certainly a conservative estimate.3 Argentinian

residents, fully aware that the real exchange rate overvaluation ultimately

had to come to an end fled into dollar assets, real estate in Brazil.

Uruguay and the U.S., and into U.S. currency. The capital flight was

financed by the central bank's borrowing from abroad and using the proceeds

to sustain the tablita against domestic speculation.



          The lesson from both the Chilean and the Argentine case is this: if

exchange rates are used for disinflation, success requires at least three

conditions: first that the monetary and fiscal fundamentals be consistent

    3See World Bank (1985) p.63—65 and Dornbusch (1985a).
                                11


with the exchange rate target. Second, that rather than relying passively on

 the influence of the exchange rate on inflation, a maximum effort at

exchange rate-consistent incomes policy should be undertaken. Third, that

the government should actively stand in the way of exchange losses

occasioned by speculation in durables or foreign assets. Transitory taxes on

durabiles can separate an open trading system and speculation; free capital

mobility, as in the Argentine case, should certainly not be a feature of a

stabilization plan. There is not much of a case to be made for free capital

outflows from an LDC at the best of times. During stabilization it

definitely is not a priority.



Other Experiences

        We have singled out the experience of Argentina and Chile because

they are particularly clear—cut. But in fact in the period 1978—83 there

were quite a few instances of exactly the same policy approach. Mexico

allowed her exchange rate to become overvalued in 1980—82 and thus provoked

massive imports and capital flight as already shown in Table 1 above.

Venezuela and Peru pursued an overvaluation policy with ultimate collapse

and so did Israel. In every case the exchange rate was held to decelerate

inflation and reap political benefits.

        Without exception the policy has ultimately involved fantastic costs

because of the large increases in external indebtedness and the massive

devaluations that were ultimately required.
                                 12

2.EXCHANGE RATES AND HIGH INFLATION

           In this section we take up the   role   of exchange rates in experiences

of extremely high inflation. Two points are made. First, in a setting of

institutional wage setting, accelerating inflation ultimately leads to a

shift from backward looking price setting to exchange rate-based price

setting. Second, in the stabilization of extreme inflation, fixing the

exchange   rate may be a strategic measure that establishes immediate support
for a   drastic program.




The_Pazos—Simonsen_Mechanism

          Institutional wage setting mechanisms often rely on fixed contract

length with wage adjustments occurring at specified intervals. The

adjustments will be based on the accumulated increase in prices since the

last adjustment. A good example is the Brazilian wage mechanism: wage

earners receive full compensation for past actual price increases at regular

intervals: until 1980 yearly, and since then at 6 month intervals. The

interesting question is what happens when the frequency of adjustments

increases. This point has been developed especially by Simonsen(l984) and

Pazos(1972). It is of interest here because it highlights the

characteristics of an accelerating inflation mechanism and the place of

exchange depreciation in that context.

         With periodic wage adjustments the real wage follows a saw—tooth

pattern as shown in Figure 2 below. On the adjustment date the real wage is

increased by the cumulated inflation since the preceding adjustment, say

50. Then, over the adjustment interval it declines as the constant nominal
                               13

payments steadily lose purchasing power as a result of the ongoing

inflation. As a result, at the end of the adjustment interval, real wages

have declined below their period average. The higher the rate of inflation,

given the interval of adjustment, the lower the average real wage.

         In a system of periodic full, though lagged, indexation the real

wage can be cut only by moving to a higher rate of inflation. A once and for

all depreciation of the currency immediately raises the rate of inflation

and thus erodes existing Contracts at a more rapid rate. But the catchup

ensures that inflation must be pushed to a higher rate so that there is

always some group that is still lagging on the price increases. The same

principle applies to removals of subsidies that are undertaken for

correcting the budget. Measures undertaken to correct competitiveness or the

budget can only be efffective if they achieve a cut in the real wage, but

that cut because of full indexation can only take place if inflation is

allowed to run at a higher rate. That mechanism often sets the stage for

inflation explosions.

        Consider a country that requires adjustments in the budget and

external competitiveness. Suppose, too, that the government does not have

the political force to suspend full indexation. Thi the removal of

subsidies or exchange depreciation will speed up the inflation rate. Workers

who are in the middle of their contracts or three quarters toward the next

adjustment find that their real wage falls below what they consider a

minimum standard of living. They cannot borrow in perfect capital markets.

Hence they will call for a shorter interval between wage adjustments in

order to recover the real wage losses imposed by inflation. They will ask
                                  14

 for an advance of what they think they are due. If the economy in fact

 shifts from say 6 monthly to 3 monthly indexation intervals, as is likely in

 the case of Brazil today, the inflation rate will simply double.4 But once

the Inflation rate has moved to a three month scheme two facts are clear'

first, it is exceptionally unlikely that indexation wil] return

spontaneously to a longer interval, even if shocks are favorable. Second,

there   is nothing that makes the 3 month interval more stable than the 6-
month one that was just abandoned. Renewed shocks will shift the economy to
even mo-re frequent   adjustments and hence to correspondingly higher rates of

inflation.   At this stage the exchange   rate becomes critical.

          Pazos   (1978,p..92—3) in his seminal study of the inflation process in
Latin   America has described the dynamics as follows:


    "When the rate of inflation approaches the limit of tolerance, a growing
    number of trade unions ask for raises before their contracts become due.
    And management grants theni. These wage increases give an additional push
    to inflation and bring about a further reduction of the adjustment
    interval. Probably the interval is initially shortened to six months,
    and then, successively, to three months, one month, one week, and one
    day. At first the readjustment is based on the cost—of—living index; but
    since there is a delay of one or two months or more in the publication
    of this index, it must soon be replaced by another. The best—known and
    more up—to—date of the possible indicators in Latin America is the
    quotation of a foreign currency, generally the U.S. dollar'


         This description of the inflation process makes one point very
clear: the dramatic escalation of inflation, seemingly out of proportion
with the disturbances, arises from the endogeneity of the adjustment
interval. This is due not so much to the direct impact on inflation of
corrective exchange rate or price policies. It rather occurrs because minor

   4See the discussion in Simonsen (1983) on this point.
                                      15

        increases in inflation, though highly visible as would be a l0 devaluation

        over and above a PPP rule or a removal of bread subsidies, are the straws

        that break the camels back. They lead to an increase in the fequency of

        wage adjustments, and with that a much higher inflation rate. The

        endogeneity of adjustment intervals is the mechanism that connects small

        inflation disturbances with the shift from 50 to 100 inflation, as was the

        case for example in Brazil in 1980.

                Figure 2 shows the real wage in Brazil in 1977—81 as well as the 12-

        month rate of inflation. Until 1979 readjustments occurred annually, in May.

        In November 1979 the new Planning Minister, Delfim Neto, increased the

        frequency of indexation to a semi—annual pace and, at the same time devalued

        the currency. A very rapid increase in the inflation to well over 100

        percent followed without much delay.

                The exact modality of the shift to increased frequency will differ

        from one experience to another: the government may cave in under the impact

        of a strike, business may find it is easier to give an 'advance" on the real

       wage adjustment rather than risk labor unrest in the middle of a recovery or

        boom, or a planning minister may want the popularity that comes from a wage

       policy apparently favoring labor. One way or the other the frequency will

        increase and once it happens in a large part of the economy it cannot fail

       to become generalized.5

                It is immediately clear from the Pazos—Simonsen mechanism that the

       optimal incomes policy in this context is a policy that monitors above all

5it is interesting to note that the dynamics of transition between intervals
have in fact not been modelled. Perhaps Schellings (l978,chapter 3) analysis
     of group choices placed in a macroeconomic setting might be a start.
z
0




               —    —   +<— — — — - — — — —

         7/
                                    -
               /&
           p
         I/b
                              _•\   :

    /
                                    —
                                +
    /0
                                t



               (0             1
         1'
                              16

the frequency of adjustments. An entirely different. view emerges with

respect to exchange rate and budget policy: even seemingly small

corrections, as long as indexation remains full, are a dramatic threat. to

inflation stability and hence may not be worth undertaking.




        Once frequencies have shortened to a weekly or daily interval we are

under conditions of hyper—inflation such as was experienced in Central

Europe in the 1920s and again in the immjdiate post—war II period, and more

recently in Argentina, Bolivia and Israel. Now the exchange rate comes to

play an important role in stabilization.

        The case of Germany is perhaps the clearest. In the final month of

the hyperinflation, October—November 1923, the inflation rate reached 30,000

percent per month. Prices were adjusted more than once a day to the official

exchange rate which in turn was moving more than once a day. In the move to

hyperinflation the dollar quotation moved from the financial pages to the

front page. It became the central front page feature for the same

synchronization reasons as the New York Times displays the the shift from

summer to winter time.

        But if everyone watches the exchange rate as the signal for setting

wages and prices it becomes natural to exploit that signal to synchronize

the end of inflation. Fixing the exchange rate outright at 4.2 trillion

Reichs Mark to the dollar or 0.8 Australes per dollar becomes a critical

first move in bringing inflation to a screeching halt. Of course, exchange

rate fixing cannot make up for the need for budget correction. But with
                                   17


budgets corrected, reliance on credibility of the policy by itself, without

further aid, may be taking a needless gamble on the perfect functioning of

markets. This is all the more true in that no policy is truly exogeneous:

budget corrections work if they turn out to be successful in terms of

inflation and not exceptionally costly. If a lack of credibility raises the

costs of the disinflationary policy may well go under even if   with   more

favorable   performance it could have survived.
        The use of exchange rate fixing (and wage—price controls) is
therefore   a helpful and problably indispensable complement to fiercely

orthodox budget correction. Those who argue that the latter is essential and

the former redundant or even counterproductive owe evidence for that

contention. For the time being they can only claim the properties of

equilibrium/perfect information rational expectations models in their

support where government policies are modelled as fully exogeneous. The jump

from there to policy recommendations is straight off the cliff. It is

interesting to note that a commission of experts advising the German

government in 1922, prior to stabilization, favored the policy of starting

with a fixed exchange rate. The commission included Casse]. and Keynes.6

        There is an important immediate benefit that stems from exchange

rate fixing and simultaneous wage-price controls: during high and

accelerating inflation, tax indexation and collection can never catch up

with the inflationary erosion of government revenue. While high inflation

clearly has as its source fiscal problems, it in turn gives rise to fiscal

problems via the collapse of the real value of tax collection. Price
            6            .     .
                See the discussion in Dornbusch (1985a).
                                  18

stabilization     therefore yields an immediate increase in the real value of

tax collection and makes an outright contribution to budget balancing even

before any new tax laws are even passed. The magnitude of that effect may be

on the   order   of 2 to 3 percent of GDP or even more.

         Using a fixed exchange rate as the tool for stabilization of course

involves risks. We saw above that exactly this kind of' policy led to

overvailuation and ultimate instability in Chile or Argentina in 1978—82. Why

then recommend it for the stabilization of hyperinflations? One reason why

exchange rate pegging may be appropriate is because the fact that the real

rate will have depreciated in the period of' accelerating inflation.     It is

not unusual for high—inflation countries to show trade surplusses and

corresponding capital exports. The stabilization of the exchange rate, even

when domestic inflation still shows a few points, thus can count on this

real depreciation as a cushion. But care must clearly be taken not to let

the real exchange rate get out of line beyond a narrow margin of something

like 10 percent. A safe way to do this is to depreciate at the outset of the

program and not allow corrective inflation for a while.

         In the German case stabilization was accompanied by a sustained real

appreciation and gains in real wages in excess of 30 percent. It is

difficult to determine whether the real exchange rate would have been

sustainable without the Dawes loans that started a year after stabilization.

Real appreciation was similarly a feature in the stabilization of the

Austrian Crown and in the Poincare stabilization of 1926. In the Argentinian

stabilization of June 1985 a 30 percent depreciation was undertaken as part

of the program before the rate was fixed. The low rates of inflation in the
                                19

 post—stabilization period —- 6.296 for July, 3.196 for August and ??% for

 September—- are still eroding the initial gain in competitiveness though up

 to this point a danger threshold has surely not been reached.



3. THE U.S DISrrFLATIor': 1980-85

        The typical pattern for U.S. inflation is that in a period of

recovery   inflation comes to exceed the average   of the   preceding recovery.
Measuring the   business cycle from peak to peak we find that in each

successive cycle the average inflation rate exceeds that of the preceding

cycle. This ratcheting upward of inflation, in combination with unfavorable

supply shocks, pushed inflation in the 1970s into the double digit range.

Since then inflation has declined to a comfortably low level and has

remained there even three years into the recovery. The argument to be

brought here is that the sharp dollar appreciation has played an important

role in the disinflation.

        The dollar appreciation which is due primarily to our monetary

fiscal mix (or even to bubbles and fads) has helped disinflation through two

separate channels: first, it has reduced the nominal prices of commodities

and and the real price in terms of the U.S. deflator. Second, the large

nominal appreciation of the dollar has reduced foreign firms' costs in

dollars and therefore has reduced import prices, and to some extent domestic

prices of competing products.

        The combined effect of these two channels is quite apparent in

Figure 3 which shows the U.S. GNP deflator as well as the deflator for

imports. In the period 1979—81 the preceding depreciation of the dollar is
                       Figure 3
        U.S. CNP DEFLATOR AND IMPORT DEFLATOR
           (Index 1979:1=100)




                                                 /
_' Ar
.LL)
                             GNP         /
                             DEFLATOP—




                                             IMPORT
                                             DEFLATOR


                  /
              /

          /
aoo

         19B0         2921   19E2   193 19B4            19E5
                                20

  still reflected in import price increases that outpace the GNP   deflator.   But

  from 1980 on the sharp appreciation of the dollar causes import prices to

  fall absolutely while domestic prices keep rising. By early 1985 while

  domestic prices had increased 45 percent import prices were only 13 percent

  above their 1979 level. In the period 1981:4 to 1985:1, after the dollar

 appreciation had set in, import prices declined more than 10 percent while

 domestic prices increased more than 14 percent.

          While the magnitude of the disinflation effect is quite apparent.

 what needs to be spelled out is why movements in the nominal dollar exchange

 rate should bring about these effects. A strict adherence to PPP would lead

 us to believe that movements in the nominal exchange rate reflect primarily

 divergent trends in price levels which in turn are a reflection of divergent

 trends of monetary expansion.7 But the vast size of the change in relative

 prices or of relative unit labor costs of the U.S. and other countries leave

 no doubt about the fact of a large real appreciation. In what follows we

 take as given that change in the real exchange rate or in relative unit

 labor costs and explore its implications.

         We first look at the impact of dollar appreciation on the prices of

 homogeneous commodities. Then we turmn to the question whether dollar

 appreciation lowers absolutely and relatively the prices of imported

 manufactures. We also ask to what extent domestic producers reduce their

 price in response to increased import competion. The section concludes with

 a discussion of aggregate estimates of the impact of the dollar on inflation

 in the U.S.

7See Dornbusch (1985b) for a review of PPP theory and evidence.
                              21




        Figure 4 shows the real price of commodities. The rea1 price is

measured by the Economist index of non—oil commodity prices deflated by the

U.S. GNP deflator. The striking fact is the mugnitude of decline in the real

commodity price since 1980--46 percent

        Much of the decline in real commodity prices can, in fact, be

explained by the behavior of the U.S. real exchange rate. The critical

ingredient in the argument is that for commodities, as opposed to

manufactures, the law of one price holds strictly. Let q and q* be commodity

prices in dollars and in foreign currency. The law of one price then

requires that q=Eq*. But the law of one price does not apply to goods in

general and hence with P and P the national price levels measured say by

the GNP deflators the real exchange rate R= P/EP* can change. The question

then is what are the links between the recorded change in the U.S. real

exchange rate and the decline in the real price of commodities in the U.S.

        Consider briefly the argument: suppose the price level (GNP

deflator) is given both in the U.S. and abroad. As the dollar appreciates,

at unchanged dollar prices of commodities, the price in foreign currencies,

say DM, is up in the same proportion as the exchange rate. Since the foreign

general price level is given, the real price of commodities abroad has

increased and hence foreign demand and thus world demand for commodities is

reduced. The equilibrium dollar price, and hence the real price to U.S.

users, must decline to restore commodity market equilibrium.
                                                        Figure     4

                                        ilie Real PrIce 01 Cout;nodlt Ie
                                        in Terrn of the U.S. (01 DEL I ;IL or
                                              (I idex   1980=100)




                    I I   4
                                                                    101

100




                                                                                                                 58

 50




                                     i-—4 I-—J                      I           -I          I   ---F-1983,4-
      1912   197)   1914      1975   1916   1917   1918     1919        19110        198!       1982     1984   1985
                                     22

         The argument is readily formalized in terms of the equilibrium

condition in the world commodity market. With S the supply and I) and D* the

U.S. and foreign demands we have:




(4)       S =   D(q/P,Y)   +   D*(q*/P*,Y*)


In each country demand depends on the real price and on activity (Y,Y*).

Substititing the law of one price, q=Eq*, and the definition of the real

exchange rate R=P/EP*, we can solve for the equilibrium U.S. real commodity

price:




(5)       q/P =   J(R,Y,Y*)


         From (5) an increase in activity in either of the regions will raise

the real price of commodities. This is the well—known cyclical effect on

commodity prices. But the real exchange rate of the dollar also appears as a

determinant of commodity prices. A real appreciation of the dollar must

reduce the real price of commodities. The extent of reduction is a fraction

of the real appreciation. The fraction is larger the smaller is the U.S.

share in total commodity demand. The exact magnitude depends on the

elasticities of demand, but will be a decreasing function of the real

exchange rate.

         The model of course also yields the nominal price of commodities in

dollars by simply writing (5) in the form:
                                       23



       (5a)         q =   PJ(R,Y,Y*)



       In this form it is apparent that commodity prices in dollars follow the U.S.

      price level trend as measured by the deflator, but with an adjustment for

      activity and for the real exchange rate. For a given U.S. price level a real

      appreciation will reduce the price of commodities in dollars.

              This very simple model of the determination of real commodity prices

      performs well in empirical tests.8 The cyclical effect is strongly present.

      A one percent increase in world industrial production raises real commodity

      prices by 2 percent. But an uncomfortable finding emerges with regard to the

      real exchange rate. The coefficient is, indeed, negative as the model

      predicts. But it is much too large, being on the order of —1.5 rather than

      say —0.5. Moreover the estimate is quite precise so that one can reject the

      hypothesis that the coefficient is a fraction as the model would predict.

      This oversized impact of the real exchange rate on real commodity prices

      remains a puzzle. It must be due to an omitted variable or possibly a

      failure to specify the supply side. But even supposing that the problem were

      remedied the important finding of a very sizeable impact of the real

      exchange rate on real commodity prices will stand.

              The argument so far has dealt with non—oil commodity prices. But it

      is clear that exactly the same forces work on petroleum prices even if they

     are administered. The dollar appreciation has raised the real price to the

     non—US world and therefore reduced demand. Hence the pressure for the real

8See Dornbusch (1985c) for a development and empirical test of this model
                                 24

price to decline in response to over—supply. This, of course, has been

happening in the past few years.

           The dec1ine in commodity prices has a favorable effect on domestic

inflation. Lower commodity prices reduce costs to firms and hence are

reflected in reduced rates of price inflation. They also affect directly

inflation via food prices. The index of U.S. crop prices today is at about

the 1980 level. While agricultural programs introduce discrepancies between

U.S. prices and prices abroad for many commodities, the impact of sharply

lower food prices in the world market also weighs on the U.S. price. The

reduced rate of food price inflation in turn dampens wage demands and hence

contributes to disinflation.

           The impact of reduced real prices of commodities, whether food or

copper, leaves U.S. producers of these commodities in the same position as

LDCs. Relative to prices paid U.S. by farmers crop prices have declined more

than 15 percent. The financial difficulties stemming from high interest

rates and low real commodity prices for agriculture and agricultural

financial institutions are a domestic reflection of the same adverse impact

that the strong dollar has in commodity producing LDCs.



Imperfect Competition in Manufactures

           The effects of dollar appreciation are particularly interesting in

the field of manufactures. Here is where we have to explain why the relative

prices of manufactures of the U.S. and her trading partners can move by

nearly 40 percent. From the PPP perspective the law of one price would

preclude       movement in the relative price except as a result of real
                                 25

disturbances that call for changes in the equilibrium terms of trade. But

even in   that   perspective the relative prices of close substitutes or even

identical goods would not be expected to move appreciably, contrary to what

appears to have happened.

          Table 2 shows measures of the U.S. loss in competitiveness at a

trade—weighted, aggregate level. The two measures are the relative prices of

US, manufactures and U.S. relative to foreign cyclically adjusted unit

labor costs. The two measures tell very much the same story of a massive

loss in competitiveness in the period since 1980, much more than offsetting

the gains of the preceding period of real dollar depreciation. The magnitude

of the change in relative prices and costs reflects the fact that superior

foreign wage and productivity performance was reinforced, perversely, by a

strengthening of the dollar.




Table 2     U.S. Relative Price and Relative Unit Labor Costs
            (Cumulative Percentage Change)

                                        1976—80            1980—85:1

Relative Value Added
  Deflator in Manufacturing               —14.7              49.3

Relative Unit Labor Cost                  -12.6              59.8

Source: IMF


          We can try to make some headway in understanding the impact of

changes in relative labor costs on relative prices by assuming a very simple

framework: labor is the only factor of production and there are constant

returns and firms here and abroad have given unit labor costs in       their
                                 26

respective currencies equal to W and W* respectively, Relative unit labor

costs in a common currency are then given by W/EW* and the second row in

Table 2 shows how this ratio has moved. We assume markets are geographically

separated and for concreteness think of the U.S. market. Competition is

imperfect so that each firm is a price setter. But each competes with other

firms in the same market. The only thing that sets domestic and foreign

firms apart is the fact that the former has unit costs fixed in dollars

while the latter has costs that are fixed foreign currency, and hence

decline in dollars in proportion to the dollar appreciation. We want to see

now what different market structures imply about the adjustment of prices to

cost disturbances.

        Industrial organization offers a variety of models to approach that

question. Two critical dimensions of the problem are the degree of

competition and the extent of product homogeneity or substitutablility. The

flavor of the analysis is conveyed by two examples: the Dixit-Stiglitz model

and the Cournot model. The Dixit—Stiglitz model assumes that there are many

firms in an industry, each producing a differentiated product (brands of

toothpaste or tires for example). Each firm faces a demand curve for "its"

particular brand. Quantity demanded depends negatively on the relative price

of the particular variant relative to the average price of the industry.

Given the assumption of constant marginal costs and a constant elasticity of

demand each firm will set a price that is a constant mark—up over cost. The

same applies to foreign firms. Hence the dollar prices set by the typical

home and foreign producer are:
                                  27




 (5)             P= kW   ,
                             p*= kEW



         It is immediately clear from (5) that a change in the exchange rate

will leave the price set by home firms unchanged. But dollar appreciation

will reduce the price charged by foreign firms in proportion to the dollar

appreciation. This model accordingly predicts that dollar appreciation

reduces the absolute and relative price of foreign goods in proportion to

the movement in unit labor costs.

        While domestic firms do not change their price, their relative price

does change because prices of all import models come down. Thus home firms

experience a leftward shift of their demand curves which leads at unchanged

prices to a decline in home output. The same occurs on the export side.

Dollar export prices remain constant, but in foreign currencies that means

increased prices, an increase in relative prices and hence a loss in

competitiveness and sales.

        The Cournot model considers a group of oligopolists who share a

market for a homogeneous product without colluding. The strategic assumption

is that each firm believes assumes the other firms are not reacting to its

policy but maintain their sales volume. In equilibrium each firm charges the

same price and the market is divided between firms in a manner that depends

on their relative costs. Figure 5 shows the impact of a dollar appreciation

on the typical foreign firm. The initial equilibrium is at output level Q

with price P. The dollar appreciation reduces marginal cost and hence leads

this firm to move to point A' ,   lowering   price and raising output. This is
Price




        P
            0




                                                 MC
                  A'

                                                                  MC

                                                                  D



                                        MR




                                                  n.. —. —— —,t
                     Qo     Q,                              —.7




                          Figure   5

                The Response tO        Cost Reduction
                                      28

        not the end of the story since all other firms will react. Domestic firms at

        their given output levels now find profits reduced, because of the decline

        in price and they will cut back production to raise price; foreign firms

        react in turn.

                The equilibrium that results will show a decline in the industry

        price that is proportional to the appreciation. The factor of

        proportionality is the product of two fractions: the relative number of

        foreign to domestic firms and the cost—price ratio in the initial

        equilibrium, which itself is a measure of the degree of departure from

        perfect competition. The larger the number of foreign forms relative to the

        total number of firms and the more competetive the industry (i.e. the larger

        the total number of firms) the more nearly the exchange rate appreciation

        translates 1:1 into a fall in dollar prices. But when the market is very

        uncompetitive or foreign firms are few relative to the total number then the

        pass through may be only 20 or 30 percent. For example if one of four firms

        is foreign and the cost-price ratio is 70 percent then a 50 percent dollar

        appreciation will lower the industry price by only 8.75 percent.9

                The same model can be applied to the dollar export prices of U.S.

        firms. For these firms dollar appreciation shifts the marginal revenue

        curves downward and therefore causes cuts in production and price. With

       prices of exports and prices in the home market both declining there is no

       presumption about the change in relative export/import price.

     9See Dornbusch (1985d) for a development of alternative industrial
organisation models in explaining the impact of exchange rates on manufactures
                                   prices.
                                 29

        The industrial organization models are highly suggestive of patterns

that should be traceable in the data. After all, the U.S. exchange rate

experience in 1976—85 has been so extreme as to swamp many of the factors

that normally cloud a clear view of industrial structure. Unfortunately

there are as yet no good data available to make comparisons of export,

import and domestic prices of narrowly defined product groups. But Figure 6

gives an idea of the pattern that is found in looking at the available

evidence. Two features are worth noting: First, almost invariably export

prices move more nearly in line with domestic prices than with the prices of

imports. Second, while home and export prices increase import prices decline

absolutely.

        These two findings suggest that the Dixit—Stiglitz model captures

well the behavior of export prices. The model is also suggestive for

imports although here the extent of decline is often quite small. Perhaps

the Dixit—Stiglitz model's differentiated products must be put together with

more strategic interaction between firms in the manner of the Cournot model

to obtain more limited price cuts.

Aggregate Effects

        The preceding discussion has spelled out the potential impact of

dollar appreciation via commodity prices and via the prices of manufactures.

In this concluding section we look at empirical evidence on the inflation

impact at the aggregate level.

        The recognition of exchange rate effects on inflation in the U.S.

context is certainly not new. There is abundant discussion in the literature

during the l950s and again during the l960s. But with the advent of flexible
                Figure 6

         Comparative    Prices
 (Current—Carrying Wiring Devices)




                domes c

                    —
                                 /
                                 ——
                             excrt
j.
     -
           :!
                    •    I       ipcrt
                              30

and fluctuating exchange rates the issue became of course more important.

The oil price shock highlighted the role of supply disturbances of which the

exchange rate is perhaps the most important. As a result macroeconometric

models of the US. economy include in their inflation equations a place for

the exchange rate or at least import prices.

        The rule of thumb is that a ten percent dollar depreciation, caused

by an exogeneous portfolio shift rather than a policy disturbances, will

increase the price level by a full percentage point. The extent of further

feedback via wages will depend crucially on the extent to which monetary

policy is accommodating. The more accommodating is monetary policy, say via

an interest rate rather than a monetary aggregate target, the stronger the

additional feedback to inflation from higher wage demands.

        More recent work by Dornbusch and Fischer (1984), Woo (1984) and

Sachs(1985) has once more assessed the evidence. The important question is

whether the exchange rate works only via the direct effect of import prices

on domestic prices or whether there are additional effects to reckon with.

Any additional effects could of course significantly raise the impact of

exchange rate movements on inflation. Woo concluded that there was no

evidence of exchange rate effects outside the direct impact on import

prices. Specifically he concluded that in manufactures foreign firms price

to the U.S. market thus even diminishing the full direct impact on import

prices. Most of the action in his view occurs via the reduction in oil and

food prices that come about when the dollar appreciates.
                                          31


                   Other research finds, on the contrary, important effects that go

        beyond the earlier estimates. In Dornbusch and Fischer(1984) the exchange

        rate affects directly the rate of inflation of the consumption deflator but

        it also affects wage settlements and, via that channel enters the Phillips

        curve. Table 3 shows the impact of a 10% real appreciation of the dollar

        indicating the channels and lags.


        Table 3 The Impact of a 10% Dollar Appreciation on Wages and the
                Consumption Deflator

                                Direct Effect      Effect on        Total Effect
                                on Prices          Wages            on Prices

        Magnitute                 —1.25             —1.26              —2.09
        (% Change)

        Mean Lag                   4.03              2.87                 n.a.
        (Quarters)

        Source: Dornbusch and Fischer (1984)


                The interesting point of Table 3 is that exchange rates appear to

        affect wage settlements even as of a given rate of unemployment. The

        argument must be that firms exposed via overvaluation to foreign competition

        are in a better position to exert wage discipline. Conversely following an

        episode of real depreciation the need for wage discipline is less plausible.

       The presence of this wage effect of course increases significantly the size

        of the exchange rate impact since wages have large coefficients in the price

       equation. Note that these estimates do not include the third round effects

       of increased price inflation feeding back to wages which would yet further

       raise the esimates.1°
10                   .                       .        .
  Sachs (1985) considers these effects and finds that in the total cumulative
slowdown of inflation in 1981—84 of 6.2 percent the exchange rate accounts for
                         between 1.9 and 2.8 percent.
                              32

        There are very few periods of major change in the exchange rate, and

these episodes coincide with large changes in commodity prices and oil

prices, in part by accident, but in part for the systematic reasons already

explored. At the same time the U.S. wage—price process has been changing by

a weakening of unions. The combination of these circumstances makes it

exceptionally difficult to decide what exactly the inflationary impact of

dollar appreciation and depreciation is. The divergence in estimates from

different approaches reflects the fact that the data cannot be made to

reveal a simple, sturdy message. But even so it is worthwhile looking at

Figure 7, which shows an estimate of the inflationary impact of exchange

rate movements in the U.S. economy using the estimates reported in Table 3.

        It is apparent from Figure 7 that the three episodes of large

movements in the dollar 1970—73, 1976-80 and 1980—83 are identified with a

significant dollar effect in raising inflation in the first two and reducing

it in the last one. The Figure of course immediately draws attention to the

fact that if our disinflation is "borrowed by overvaluation then it must be

paid back in the course of real depreciation which now has set in.

Accordingly wage and price inflation should be expected to speed up at each

level of unemployment.

        The uncertainty about the quantitative effect of exchange rates in

influencing prices extends to the question of the impact of the depreciation

now under way on U.S. inflation. Specifically, is it likely that inflation

will be driven back up to near 10 percent as was the case in the large

depreciation of 1976—80? There are several reasons why this is unlikely,

though not impossible. The first is that one should not expect as strong a
                           Figure 7
                     The Impact of Exchange Rates
                            on U.S. Inflation




           AC tu&1

           /
           1n
                                         /
.7.
                                  (       •/I•         7

                                                           S
                                                           \
                                        Aute
                                        .xnge    kar           .—.




      73
                              33

decline in the dollar. The 1980 level was an all-time low and a decline to

that level would certainly interfere in a major way with our inflation

objectives and Europe's concern with unemployment. The second reason is that

both in the labor market and in commodity markets conditions are more

favorable. Not all of the decline in real commodity prices is due to the

strong dollar (remember, we noted an oversized effect in the estimates

above) and hence need be paid back. Furthermore, the sharply reduced role

of unions rules out a major wage offensive in the wake of a depreciation.

These factors lead to the judgment that the impact on inflation of the

dollar depreciation to say the 1982 level is on the order of 2—2.5 percent.

This moderate effect is in large measure conditioned on a limited, gradual

decline of the dollar. For a large dollar collapse, although the data cannot

support the judgment, a really sizeable inflation bout is certainly likely.

        But even though the inflation impact is judged to be minor there

will, of course, be significant changes in relative prices and in the terms

of trade. The real appreciation has raised the standard of living via

strongly improved terms of trade and much of that must be given up. The

terms of trade will improve for agriculture and business will improve for

manufactures. The loser will be services.
                                  34


REFERENCES

Corbo,V.(1985) 'The Use of the Exchange Rate for Stabiliosation Purpose: The
Case of Chile". Unpublished manuscript, The World Bank.

           and de Melo,J. (1985) "what Went Wrong With The Recent Reforms in
the Southern Cone?" Economic_DeveJpment_and Cultural Change, forthcoming.

Diaz Alejandro,C.(1963) "A Note on the Impact of Devaluation and
Distributive Effect." Journal of Political Economy, Vol.71.

            (1981) 'Southern Cone Stabilisation Plans', in W.Cline and
S.Weintraub eds. Economic Stabilisation in Developing_Countries, The
Brookings Institution.

Dornbusch,R. (1982) "Stabilization Policy in Developing Countries: What
Lessons Have We Learned?" World              September.

             (1985a) "    External  Debt, Budget Deficits and Disequilibrium
Exchange Rates "   in   G.Smith and J.Cuddington,eds. International Debt and the
Developig Countries. The World Bank. Reprinted in jj, 2,Debts and
Deficits, MIT Press, forthcoming.

             (1985b) "Policy and Performance Linkages Between Industrial
Countries and Debtor LDCs." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No.2

             (1985c) "Stopping Hyperinflation: Lessons from the German
Experience in the 1920s." NBER Working Paper No.1675, May.

             (l985d) "Exchange Rates and Prices". Unpublished manuscript,
MIT.

           and Fischer,S.(1984) "The Open Economy: Implications for Monetary
and Fiscal Policy." NBER Working Paper No.1422.

Harberger, A. (1974) " The Case of the Three Numeraires" in W.Sellekaertz
(ed.) Economic Deve1pment and Planning, Macmillan

           (1983) "Observations on the Chilean Economy, 1973—83".
Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago.

            (1985) "Lessons for Debtor Country Managers and Policy Makers."
in G.Smith and J. Cuddington International Debt and the Developing
Countries., The World Bank

Edwards,S.(1985) "The Order of Liberalisation of the External Sector in
Developing Countries". Princeton Essays in International Finance, No. 156.
                              35

Krugnian,P. and Taylor,L.(1978) "Contractionary Effects of I)evajuation"
Journao f Pol itjcajEcono, Vol .8.

Lund,D. (1985) Only Limited Impact on Inflation Likely If Dollars Srtrong
Rise is Reversed. Business_America, March 4

Mundell,R. (1968) International Economics, Macmillan

Pazos F. (1972)            flQ!Li flL±a' Praeger
Polak,J.(1943) "European Exchange Depreciation in the Early Twenties."
Econometrç Vol. 11

Sachs,J.(1985) "The Dollar and the Policy Mix:1985 '   Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity,1.

Swan,T.(1960) "Economic Control in a Dependent Economy" Economic Record,
No. 36.


Woo,W.T.(1984) "Exchange Rates and the Prices of Nonfood, Nonfuel Products."
Brookings Papers on Economic Activft,2
