                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    COMPARING THE INVESTMENT BEHAVIOR OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE FIRMS

                                           John Asker
                                        Joan Farre-Mensa
                                       Alexander Ljungqvist

                                        Working Paper 17394
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17394


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2011




We are grateful to Sageworks Inc. for access to their database on private companies, and to Drew White
and Tim Keogh of Sageworks for their help and advice regarding their data. Thanks for helpful comments
and suggestions go to Mary Billings, Jesse Edgerton, Alex Edmans, Yaniv Grinstein, David Hirshleifer,
Hamid Mehran, Bruce Petersen, Joshua Rauh, Michael Schill, and Stanley Zin and to various seminar
and conference audiences. We are grateful to Mary Billings for sharing her ERC data with us. Ljungqvist
gratefully acknowledges generous financial support from the Ewing M. Kauffman Foundation under
the Berkley-Kauffman Grant Program. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by John Asker, Joan Farre-Mensa, and Alexander Ljungqvist. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Comparing the Investment Behavior of Public and Private Firms
John Asker, Joan Farre-Mensa, and Alexander Ljungqvist
NBER Working Paper No. 17394
September 2011
JEL No. D21,D92,G31,G32,G34

                                              ABSTRACT

We evaluate differences in investment behavior between stock market listed and privately held firms
in the U.S. using a rich new data source on private firms. Listed firms invest less and are less responsive
to changes in investment opportunities compared to observably similar, matched private firms, especially
in industries in which stock prices are particularly sensitive to current earnings. These differences
do not appear to be due to unobserved differences between public and private firms, how we measure
investment opportunities, lifecycle differences, or our matching criteria. We suggest that the patterns
we document are most consistent with theoretical models emphasizing the role of managerial myopia.


John Asker                                           Alexander Ljungqvist
Stern School of Business                             Stern School of Business
Department of Economics, Suite 7-79                  New York University
New York University                                  44 West Fourth Street, #9-160
44 West 4th Street                                   New York, NY 10012
New York, NY 10012                                   and NBER
and NBER                                             aljungqv@stern.nyu.edu
jasker@stern.nyu.edu

Joan Farre-Mensa
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 218
Boston, MA 02163
jfarremensa@hbs.edu
    This paper compares the investment behavior of stock market listed (or ‘public’) firms to that of

observably similar privately held (or ‘private’) firms, using a novel panel dataset of private U.S. firms that

contains data for around 250,000 firm-years over the period 2001-2007. Almost everything we know

about corporate investment at the micro level is based on evidence from public firms, 1 which number only

a few thousand, yet private firms form a substantial part of the U.S. economy. 2 We estimate that in 2007,

private U.S. firms accounted for 54.5% of aggregate non-residential fixed investment, 67.1% of private-

sector employment, 57.6% of sales, and 20.6% of aggregate pre-tax profits. Nearly all of the 6 million

U.S. firms are private (only 0.08% are listed), and many are small, but even among the larger firms,

private firms predominate: Among those with 500 or more employees, for example, private firms

accounted for 85.6% in 2007. 3

    Our empirical tests unearth two intriguing new patterns. First, a nearest-neighbor matching estimator

reveals that private firms invest substantially more than do public firms matched on size and industry. On

average, private firms invest nearly 10% of total assets a year compared to only 4% among public firms.

Second, private firms are 3.5 times more responsive to changes in investment opportunities than are

public firms, based on standard investment regressions in the tradition of tests of the Q theory of

investment (see Hayashi (1982) or, more recently, Gomes (2001), Cummins, Hassett, and Oliner (2006),

Bloom, Bond, and van Reenen (2007), or Bakke and Whited (2010)).

    The difference in investment sensitivities does not appear to be driven by lifecycle effects, how we

measure investment opportunities, or which characteristics we match on. In addition, we exploit a

plausibly exogenous tax shock to sidestep the need to directly measure investment opportunities, which

may be measured with error. This experiment reveals that private firms respond strongly to changes in

investment opportunities whereas public firms barely respond at all. In another alternative identification


1
  Most studies of investment dynamics use firm-level data from Compustat and so focus on public firms. The exceptions are
studies that use plant-level data from the Census of Manufactures. Prominent examples include Caballero et al. (1995) and
Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006). Plant-level studies do not examine the ownership structure of the plants’ owners.
2
  Private firms should not be confused with venture capital-backed firms. The latter are a subset of the population of private
firms, but they are few in number: Of the around 6 million private firms operating in the U.S. in 2007, only around 4,000 were
funded by VCs. VC-backed firms come from a narrow set of industries and are not representative of private firms in general.
3
  The denominators in these estimates are from the National Income and Product Accounts (http://www.bea.gov/national) and
the Statistics of U.S. Businesses (http://www.census.gov/econ/susb/data/susb2007.html). The numerators are based on CRSP-
Compustat data for U.S. corporations listed on a national exchange (the NYSE, AMEX, or Nasdaq).
strategy, we exploit within-firm variation in listing status for a sample of firms that go public without

raising new capital. This differences away any time-invariant firm-level unobservables. The identifying

assumption of this test is that these firms go public purely in order to change their ownership structure

(that is, the expressed intention was to allow existing owners to ‘cash out’). The within-firm results show

that IPO firms are significantly more sensitive to investment opportunities in the five years before they go

public than after. Indeed, once they are public, their investment sensitivity becomes indistinguishable

from that of observably similar, already-public firms.

    What would cause public and private firms to invest so differently? A natural place to look for an

answer is the agency literature. While stock markets provide investors with liquidity and opportunities for

diversification, and thereby reduce firms’ cost of capital (Pagano, Panetta, and Zingales (1998)), a stock

market listing can have two detrimental effects. First, ownership and control must be at least partially

separated, as shares are sold to outside investors who are not involved in managing the firm. This may

lead to agency problems if managers’ interests diverge from those of their investors (Berle and Means

(1932), Jensen and Meckling (1976)). Second, liquidity makes it easy for shareholders to sell their stock

at the first sign of trouble rather than actively monitoring management – a practice sometimes called the

‘Wall Street walk.’ This weakens incentives for effective corporate governance (Bhide (1993)). Private

firms, in contrast, are often owner-managed and even when not, are both illiquid and typically have highly

concentrated ownership, which encourages their owners to monitor management more closely. Indeed,

evidence from the Federal Reserve’s 2003 Survey of Small Business Finances (SSBF) shows that 94.1%

of the larger private firms in the survey have fewer than ten shareholders (most have fewer than three),

and 83.2% are managed by the controlling shareholder. 4,5According to another survey, by Brau and

Fawcett (2006), keeping it that way is the main motivation for staying private in the U.S. As a result,

agency problems are likely to be greater among public firms than among private ones. 6

    There are three strands of the agency literature that argue investment will be suboptimal as a result.

4
  See Tables A7 and A8 in our Online Data Appendix at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1659926. This
online appendix also provides an extensive overview of the private firm data used in this study.
5
  Contrast this with the fact that the average (median) public-firm CEO in our sample owns a mere 8.4% (1.6%) of his firm’s
equity, and the average (median) public firm has 23,772 (1,082) shareholders.
6
  Clearly, agency considerations are not the only difference between public and private firms. Public firms are subject to myriad
rules and regulations designed to protect investors which may slow down, and possibly distort, investment decisions.
                                                                                                                                2
First, Baumol (1959), Jensen (1986), and Stulz (1990) argue that managers have a preference for scale

which they satisfy by ‘empire building.’ Empire builders invest regardless of the state of their investment

opportunities. This could explain the lower investment sensitivity we observe among public firms.

    Second, Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003) argue the opposite: Managers may have a preference for

the ‘quiet life.’ When poorly monitored, managers may avoid the costly effort involved in making

investment decisions, leading to lower investment levels and, presumably, lower investment sensitivities.

    Third, models of ‘managerial myopia’ or ‘short-termism’ argue that a focus on short-term profits may

distort investment decisions from the first-best when a public-firm manager derives utility from both the

firm’s current stock price and its long-term value. Short-termism can lead to either too much or too little

investment. Overinvestment results when the manager has better information about the high quality of his

investment opportunities, which he signals by overinvesting (e.g., Bebchuk and Stole (1993)). Under-

investment results if investors do not know how much the firm should optimally invest (see Miller and

Rock (1985), Narayanan (1985), Stein (1989), Shleifer and Vishny (1990), von Thadden (1995), and

Holmström (1999)). Essentially, the manager underinvests to create the impression that the firm’s current

and future profitability is greater than it really is, hoping this will boost today’s share price (Stein (1989)).

    The fact that we find lower investment levels among public firms seems inconsistent with empire

building. The quiet life argument and short-termism models that predict underinvestment, on the other

hand, fit the empirical facts we document. To shed further light on what drives the observed investment

differences between public and private firms, we explore how the difference in investment behavior

between public and private firms varies with a parameter that plays a central role in short-termism

models: The sensitivity of share prices to earnings news. As we explain in Section 4, under short-termism

a public-firm manager has no incentive to underinvest if current earnings are uninformative about future

earnings, in which case we expect no difference in investment behavior between public and private firms.

But the more sensitive share prices are to earnings news, the greater is the incentive to distort investment

and hence the greater should be the difference between public and private firms’ investment sensitivities.

    These predictions can be tested using what the accounting literature calls ‘earnings response

coefficients’ or ERC (Ball and Brown (1968)). For industries in which share prices are unresponsive to

                                                                                                                3
earnings news (ERC = 0), we find no significant difference in investment sensitivities between public and

private firms. As ERC increases, public firms’ investment sensitivity decreases significantly while that of

private firms remains unchanged. In other words, the difference in investment sensitivities between public

and private firms increases in ERC, and this increase is driven by a change in public-firm behavior.

    These cross-sectional patterns are consistent with the notion that public firms invest myopically. If

that is true, we should find systematic differences in the share of public firms across industries.

Specifically, if investment distortions increase in the informativeness of current earnings, as our cross-

sectional tests suggest, fewer firms should wish to be stock market listed in high-ERC industries than in

low-ERC industries, all else equal. We test this prediction by regressing the share of public firms in an

industry on the industry’s ERC, controlling for other drivers of the listing decision. The results confirm

that there are significantly fewer stock market listed firms in high-ERC industries. To illustrate, a one-

standard deviation increase in ERC is associated with a decrease of a third in the share of public firms in

an industry. These patterns are consistent with the interpretation that firms and investors view agency-

induced investment distortions, brought about by managerial myopia, as a cost of being publicly listed.

    Our paper makes three contributions. First, we document economically important differences in the

investment behavior of private and public firms. Because few private firms have an obligation to disclose

their financials, relatively little is known about how private firms invest. Our comparison focuses on the

segments of public and private firms that overlap in size and industry, so we essentially compare large

private firms and smaller public firms. This is unlikely to skew our findings. Contemporaneous work

shows that investment rates decrease significantly with size among public U.S. firms (see Gala and Julio

(2011)), so the smaller public firms that end up in our sample are in fact the more active investors.

    Second, we provide rare direct evidence of an important potential cost of a stock market listing by

documenting that the investment of public firms in our sample appears to be distorted relative to that of

comparable private firms. Calling it a distortion assumes that private firms, carefully screened to be

observably similar, provide a good benchmark for how public firms would behave were their ownership

and control more closely aligned. The data support this assumption.

    Third, our analysis suggests that agency problems in public firms, and in particular short-termism, are

                                                                                                              4
an important driver of these differences. This finding adds to existing survey evidence of widespread

short-termism in the U.S. Poterba and Summers (1995) find that public-firm managers prefer investment

projects with shorter time horizons in the belief that stock market investors fail to properly value long-

term projects. Ten years on, Graham, Harvey, and Rajgopal (2005, p. 3) report the startling survey finding

that “the majority of managers would avoid initiating a positive NPV project if it meant falling short of

the current quarter’s consensus earnings [forecast].” This is not to say that effective corporate governance

cannot reduce public-firm managers’ focus on short-term objectives. Tirole (2001) argues that large

shareholders have an incentive to actively monitor managers and fire them if necessary, while Edmans’

(2010) model shows that the presence of large shareholders can reduce managerial myopia. But it is an

empirical question whether these mechanisms are sufficiently effective on average. Our evidence suggests

that, at least on the dimension of investment, this may not be the case.

    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 briefly reviews related literature. Section 2 introduces a rich

new database of private U.S. firms created by Sageworks Inc. (The Online Data Appendix describes it in

detail.) Section 3 establishes our main empirical results, that public firms invest less and are less

responsive to changes in investment opportunities than private firms. Section 4 investigates possible

agency explanations for these findings. Section 5 concludes.

1. Related Literature

    There is a small but growing empirical literature contrasting public and private firms. Using data for

the population of British firms, Saunders and Steffen (2009) show that private firms face higher

borrowing costs than do public firms; Michaely and Roberts (2007) show that private firms smooth

dividends less than public firms; and Brav (2009) shows that private firms rely mostly on debt financing.

    Before Sageworks became available, studies of private U.S. firms relied on limited samples. Gao,

Lemmon, and Li (2010) compare CEO compensation in public and private firms in the CapitalIQ

database, finding that public-firm pay – but not private-firm pay – is sensitive to measureable

performance variables such as stock prices and profitability. When a firm goes public, pay becomes more

performance-sensitive. Since the point of an incentive contract is to overcome an agency problem, these

patterns are consistent with survey evidence showing that private firms are subject to fewer agency

                                                                                                             5
problems than public firms. Edgerton (2010) shows that public firms overuse corporate jets compared to

observably similar private firms, while Sheen (2009) analyzes hand-collected investment data for public

and private firms in the chemical industry, finding results similar to ours. Bharat, Dittmar, and Sivadasan

(2010) analyze within-firm changes in productivity in a sample of U.S. manufacturing firms that are taken

private, for example by a private equity fund. For this group of firms, productivity does not change after

the change in ownership, relative to similar still-listed firms, and firms close down plants after being

taken private. This is consistent with the widely held view that private equity buyers target firms in

shrinking industries that are in need of consolidation and disinvestment.

       The empirical literature on the effects of agency costs on investment, surveyed in Stein (2003), is

vast. We depart from it by exploiting variation along the extensive (public/private) margin. Existing work

in this area focuses instead on the intensive margin. For example, Wurgler (2000), Knyazeva et al. (2007),

Franzoni (2009), Bøhren et al. (2009), Gopalan et al. (2010), and Xu (2011) relate investment among

public firms to variation in corporate governance, while Fang, Tian, and Tice (2010) examine whether

public firms with more liquid shares (and thus more footloose investors) are less innovative. Our

approach is distinct from, but complementary to, this body of work.

       Finally, the accounting literature documents that some public-firm managers sometimes act

myopically, in the specific sense of taking costly actions to avoid negative earnings surprises. Bhojraj et

al. (2009) show that firms that barely beat analysts’ earnings forecasts myopically cut discretionary

spending. This avoids the short-run stock price hit associated with missing earnings forecasts (Skinner

and Sloan (2002)) but over longer horizons leads to underperformance. Roychowdhury (2006) finds that

firms discount product prices to boost sales and thereby meet short-term earnings forecasts. Baber,

Fairfield, and Haggard (1991) find that firms cut R&D spending to avoid reporting losses, and Dechow

and Sloan (1991) find that CEOs nearing retirement cut R&D spending to increase earnings. Bushee

(1998) shows that these tendencies are mitigated in the presence of high institutional ownership.

2. Sample and Data

       According to the Census, there were 6,049,655 firms in the U.S. in 2007. 7 The vast majority of these

7
    See http://www.census.gov/econ/susb/data/susb2007.html.
                                                                                                               6
are privately held (in 2007, there were only 4,584 U.S. firms with a listing on a U.S. exchange) and even

among the very largest private firms, most express no desire to go public. 8 Unless they have issued public

bonds, private firms are not subject to public reporting requirements, so little is known about how they

invest. Our study is only possible because a new database on private U.S. firms, created by Sageworks Inc.

in cooperation with hundreds of accounting firms, has recently become available. We provide a

comprehensive overview of the data, along with detailed summary statistics, in the Online Data Appendix. 9

    Sageworks is similar to Compustat, a standard database for public U.S. firms. Like Compustat,

Sageworks contains accounting data from income statements and balance sheets along with basic

demographic information such as NAICS industry codes and geographic location—except that Sageworks

exclusively covers private firms. Unlike in Compustat, firm names are masked, though each firm has a

unique identifier allowing us to construct a panel. The main drawback of anonymity for our purposes is

that we cannot observe transitions from private to public status in the Sageworks database. We will later

describe how we assemble a dataset of such transitions from other sources.

    Sageworks obtains data not from the private firms themselves, which could raise selection concerns,

but from a large number of accounting firms which input data for all their unlisted corporate clients

directly into Sageworks’ database. Selection thus operates at the level of the accounting firm and not of

their clients. Sageworks co-operates with most of the largest national accounting firms as well as 100s of

regional players, but with proportionately fewer of the many thousand local accountants who service the

smallest firms in the U.S. As a result, the main selection effect is that firms in Sageworks are substantially

larger than the small private businesses covered in the only other large-scale private-firm dataset, the

Survey of Small Business Finances (SSBF). 10 This selection may be problematic for some research

questions but it is innocuous for our purposes as very small firms have no realistic chance of being public.

    Sageworks started in 2000 with fiscal year 2001 being the first panel year. The growth of the database

over time is detailed in Table A2 in the Online Data Appendix. We have data through fiscal year 2007



8
  In Brau and Fawcett’s (2006) survey of large private firms, only 10.5% had considered going public.
9
  Available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1659926.
10
   Unlike Sageworks, the SSBF is not a panel. Now discontinued, it surveyed a different cohort of firms in 1987, 1993, 1998,
and 2003.
                                                                                                                               7
and use 2001 to construct lags, giving a six-year panel covering 95,370 firms and 250,507 firm-years. 11

2.1 Sample Construction

     Full details of our sample construction can be found in Table A1 in the Online Data Appendix, along

with further summary statistics describing the Sageworks database. To construct our sample of private

firms, we exclude from Sageworks 10,104 Canadian firms as well as 3,930 firms with data quality

problems (i.e., those violating basic accounting identities and firms with missing or negative total assets).

     To be part of our public-firm sample, a firm has to be recorded in both Compustat and CRSP during

our sample period; be incorporated in the U.S. and listed on a major U.S. exchange (NYSE, AMEX, or

Nasdaq); have valid stock prices in CRSP; and have a CRSP share code of 10 or 11 (which screens out

non-operating entities such as real estate investment trusts, mutual funds, or closed-end funds).

     As is customary, we exclude financial firms (the NAICS equivalent to SIC 6) and regulated utilities

(SIC 49) from both the public and private samples. Since our empirical models exploit within-firm

variation, we exclude firms with fewer than two years of complete data. Both the public-firm and private-

firm samples cover the period from 2002 through 2007. The public-firm sample consists of 3,926 firms

and 19,203 firm-years; the private-firm sample contains 32,204 firms and 88,568 firm-years.

2.2 Matching

     In an ideal world, we would compare the investment behavior of two otherwise identical firms that

differ only in their listing status. To get close to this ideal, we need to find pairs of public and private

firms that are observably similar to each other. Matching is a convenient way to do so. Our preferred

match is based on size and industry, the two dimensions in which the samples differ the most and which,

economically, likely affect investment. 12 Not surprisingly, Compustat firms are larger than Sageworks

firms. The top graph in Figure 1 shows the distribution of total assets in log 2000 dollars for each dataset.

The distributions overlap only to a limited extent. Table 1 shows that the mean (median) public firm has

total assets of $1,364.4 million ($246.2 million), compared to $7.1 million ($1.3 million) for private

firms. The industry distributions are also different; see Tables A3 and A15 in the Online Data Appendix.

11
   Sageworks is free of survivorship bias. If a firm goes public, dies, or switches to an accounting firm that doesn’t co-operate
with Sageworks, its data time series will end but all of its historical data remains in the database.
12
   A large body of work, surveyed in Jorgenson (1971), has documented cross-industry variation in investment, while Gala and
Julio (2011) report evidence of an inverse relation between firm size and investment.
                                                                                                                                    8
     Other variables also differ in the two samples, but size is by far the most important observable

difference in our data. This can easily be seen in a probit model conditioned on a broad selection of firm

characteristics and a set of year effects. We find that one standard deviation increases in these firm

characteristics have the following effects on the probability that a sample firm is public: Log total real

assets: +10.6 percentage points; cash holdings: +0.52 percentage points; return on assets (ROA): -0.46

percentage points; leverage: -0.17 percentage points; and sales growth: +0.09 percentage points. The

unconditional probability is 17.8%, so size is the only covariate that is economically significant. The

pseudo-R2 of 84.1% suggests there is little unexplained variation left that could be due to unobserved

characteristics. We thus match on size and industry, though we will consider alternatives for robustness.

Matching on size means that our matched sample consists of small public and large private firms.

     In the language of the matching literature surveyed in Imbens and Wooldridge (2009), we use a

nearest-neighbor match adapted to a panel setting. Starting in fiscal year 2002, for each public firm, we

find the private firm that is closest in size and that operates in the same four-digit NAICS industry,13

requiring that the ratio of their total assets (TA) is less than 2 (i.e., max(TApublic, TAprivate) / min(TApublic,

TAprivate) < 2). If no match can be found, we discard the observation and look for a new match for that firm

in the following year. Once a match is formed, it is kept in subsequent years to ensure the panel structure

of the data remains intact. (If a matching firm exits the panel, a new match is spliced in.) The resulting

matched sample contains 4,975 public-firm-years and an equal number of private-firm-years. Because we

match with replacement, to maximize the match rate and match quality, the matched sample contains

1,666 public firms and 620 private firms. Our results are not sensitive to matching without replacement.

Standard errors are appropriately clustered to account for the resampling of private firms. 14

     How good is the match? The bottom graph in Figure 1 shows the distribution of log real assets for


13
   As we will show, our results are robust to using finer industry classifications, such as NAICS5 or NAICS6.
14
   We cluster standard errors in the usual way but do not adjust for variation introduced by the matching procedure. No such
adjustment yet exists for matched panels, though subsampling is potentially a viable solution (see Abadie and Imbens (2008)).
Econometric theory is silent on the optimal size of the subsample. For robustness, we have computed standard errors using a
standard subsampling procedure (see Politis, Romano, and Wolf (1999)) for different sizes, looking for one that seems robust
within a reasonable local interval and that gives results similar to standard asymptotic estimates wherever a specification
involves no additional variation that is unaccounted for. A subsample size of 70% satisfies these criteria. The resulting
subsampled standard errors support all inferences presented in the paper, except in Table 3, column 5, where the coefficient on
“Investment opp. x public” has a subsampled p-value of 12%.
                                                                                                                                  9
matched public and private firms. The overlap is near perfect and the sample moments are very close.

Average total assets, for example, are $144.7 million and $120.0 million for public and private firms and

the difference is not statistically significant. The distribution of the ratio of matched pairs’ total assets (our

matching criterion) is centered on 1, with 461 of the 1,666 public firms matched to somewhat larger

private firms and the remaining 1,205 firms matched to somewhat smaller ones. Thus, matched firms are

of similar size and so have a plausible choice between being public or private. In fact, empirically, they

share almost the same propensity to be public: The propensity scores (i.e., predicted probabilities)

associated with our nearest-neighbor match average 0.205 for public firms and 0.193 for the private ones.

2.3 Measures of Investment Opportunities

    The investment literature proxies for a firm’s investment opportunities using either Tobin’s Q or sales

growth. Q is usually constructed as the ratio of the firm’s market value to the book value of its assets, but

since private firms are not traded on a stock exchange, their market value is not observed. We thus favor

sales growth, which can be constructed at the firm level for any firm, whether public or private. Sales

growth (the annual percentage increase in sales) has been widely used as a measure of investment

opportunities. See, for example, Rozeff (1982), Lehn and Poulsen (1989), Martin (1996), Shin and Stulz

(1998), Whited (2006), Billett, King, and Mauer (2007), and Acharya, Almeida, and Campello (2007).

    For robustness purposes, we also explore two Q measures. The simplest measure constructs an

‘industry Q’ from public-firm data and then applies that to all firms, public and private. We measure

industry Q for each four-digit NAICS industry and year as the size-weighted average Q of all public firms

in that industry. Alternatively, we can impute Q at the firm level. Campello and Graham (2007) suggest

regressing Q, for public firms, on four variables thought to be informative about a firm’s marginal product

of capital (sales growth, ROA, net income before extraordinary items, and book leverage). The resulting

regression coefficients are then used to generate ‘predicted Q’ for each public and each private firm.

2.4 Measures of Investment

    Firms can grow their assets by either building new capacity or buying another firm’s existing assets.

These are reflected in capital expenditures (CAPEX) and mergers and acquisitions (M&A), respectively.

Many studies of investment focus on CAPEX, but there are reasons to expect systematic differences in the

                                                                                                               10
relative importance of M&A and CAPEX for public and private firms. Unlike public firms, private firms

usually cannot pay for their acquisitions with stock so their overall investment is likely to involve

relatively more CAPEX than that of public firms. Sageworks data do not allow us to distinguish between

CAPEX and M&A, so we cannot test this conjecture. But to avoid biases when we compare public and

private firms’ overall investment behavior, we will measure investment in a way that captures both

CAPEX and M&A. This can be done by modeling investment as the annual increase in fixed assets.

     Our main investment measure is gross investment, defined as the annual increase in gross fixed assets

scaled by beginning-of-year total assets. 15 We also model net investment, defined analogously using net

fixed assets. The difference between the two is depreciation. To the extent that depreciation represents

assets that need replacing due to wear and tear or obsolescence, gross investment better captures the

firm’s investment decisions. (For detailed definitions of these and all other variables, see Appendix A.)

2.5 Other Firm Characteristics

     Table 1 also shows that private firms have higher profits, less cash, and more debt, even after we

match on size and industry. While interesting in their own right, we will show that these differences in

observable characteristics do not drive our results.

3. Differences in Public and Private Firm Investment Behavior

     We begin our empirical investigation by documenting sizable differences in investment levels

between private and public firms using our size-and-industry matched sample and a range of alternative

samples that match on a wider choice of firm characteristics. We then document that public and private

firms differ in their response to changes in their investment opportunities using standard investment

regressions in the style of the Q-theory literature. We also show that these differences in investment levels

and in investment sensitivities are robust to a range of economic and measurement concerns, including

concerns that age or lifecycle effects may contaminate inference; differences in tax treatment and

accounting choices; and differences in observable characteristics such as size, cash holdings, or debt.

     A standard concern in investment regressions is that investment opportunities are measured with


15
  Another form of investment, R&D, does not change fixed assets and so is not captured by gross investment. We cannot model
investment in R&D explicitly as Sageworks does not break out R&D spending. We will, however, report evidence showing it is
highly unlikely that our results are driven by this data limitation.
                                                                                                                        11
error. To address this, we first estimate Arellano-Bond (1991) models and then explore a natural

experiment that exogenously varies the return on investment and so sidesteps the need to directly measure

investment opportunities. Both approaches confirm that public firms are much less responsive to changes

in investment opportunities. Finally, we report a test that uses within-firm variation in listing status, using

hand-collected data for firms that switch from private to public status without raising new capital (a

particular form of IPO).

3.1 Differences in Investment Levels: Baseline Results and Alternative Matches

    Table 2 compares public and private firms’ investment levels. It shows that private firms invest

significantly more than public firms on average. The differences are substantial. In the full samples,

private firms increase their gross and net fixed assets by an average of 7.6% and 3.3% of total assets a

year, compared to 4.5% and 2.2% for public firms. In our baseline size-and-industry matched sample, the

average differences are 5.6 and 7.2 percentage points in favor of private firms, respectively. (The median

differences are smaller, largely because neither the median public firm nor the median private firm invests

much.) These patterns are robust to matching on finer industry codes: Using five-digit NAICS has

virtually no effect on the difference in investment, while using six-digit NAICS increases the difference

from 5.6 percentage points in favor of private firms to 9.5 percentage points. When we include other firm

characteristics besides size and industry among the matching criteria, the difference shrinks somewhat but

remains highly significant, both economically and statistically: When matched on size, NAICS4 industry,

and sales growth, private firms invest 3.9% of assets more than public firms, and when additionally

matched on ROA, cash holdings, and book leverage, the difference is 3 percentage points.

3.2 Differences in Investment Levels: Robustness

    The final rows of Table 2 report results for three robustness tests. The first concerns potential

lifecycle effects. Public firms might simply be older and more mature than private ones, and so may have

reached that part of their lifecycle when investment naturally slows down. Unfortunately, we cannot

control for age directly since neither Compustat nor Sageworks contains data on founding years. But the

following indirect tests suggest differences in age cannot explain the gap in investment levels.

    How old are public firms? According to Ljungqvist and Wilhelm (2003), the average (median) firm in

                                                                                                             12
the U.S. goes public aged 10 (6). In our baseline matched sample, the average (median) Compustat firm

has been public for 11.9 (9.3) years in 2004. This suggests that the average (median) public firm in our

matched sample is around 21.9 (15.3) years old in 2004. For comparison, the average (median) SSBF

private firm is 18.2 (15) years old in 2004 (see the Online Data Appendix). Based on these back-of-the-

envelope calculations, it is not obvious that private firms are systematically younger than public ones.

     To investigate the potential effect of unobserved differences in age more formally, Table 2 splits

public firms by time-since-IPO. We code a firm as ‘young’ if its time-since-IPO in its first panel year is

less than the median in that calendar year, and as ‘old’ otherwise. 16 We then match public firms in each

subsample to private firms based on industry and size, as before. We do find some evidence that younger

public firms invest more than older public firms on average (4.6% vs. 3.2% of total assets), but both

groups invest significantly less than private firms, whose investment levels average more than 9%.

     The final two robustness tests concern legal form and accounting choices. Our private-firm sample

pools sole proprietorships, limited liability companies (LLCs), partnerships and limited liability

partnerships (LLPs) as well as firms incorporated under Subchapters C or S of the Internal Revenue Code.

(See Table A5 in the Online Data Appendix for further details.) These legal forms are taxed differently

and it is possible that taxes affect investment. Virtually all public firms are C Corps. When we restrict the

private firms to also be C Corps, we continue to find a large gap in investment levels, averaging 7.1

percentage points in favor of private firms. Finally, when we exclude private firms that use cash-basis

(rather than accrual) accounting, the difference is 5 percentage points.

3.3 Differences in Investment Sensitivity: Baseline Models and Alternative Matches

     Next, we investigate differences in public and private firms’ sensitivity to changing investment

opportunities. In Table 3, we estimate standard investment regressions of gross investment on investment

opportunities. 17 A long line of literature shows that standard proxies for investment opportunities are not,

as neoclassical theory predicts, a sufficient statistic for investment, and that changes in net worth,

measured as ROA, correlate positively with investment. A significant ROA effect is often interpreted as a

16
   This procedure will not produce two equal-sized subsamples unless the mortality rates of young and old firms are exactly the
same, but it keeps the panel structure intact by ensuring that firms do not switch between the two subsamples.
17
   As we will show later, we obtain similar results using net investment instead. Also, as we will show, our results are robust to
including R&D spending, which is left out of gross investment.
                                                                                                                                13
sign of financing constraints (Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988)), though some disagree (Kaplan and

Zingales (1997, 2000), Erickson and Whited (2000)). While we are agnostic about the debate surrounding

its interpretation, we follow the literature by including ROA. Finally, we remove unobserved time-

invariant heterogeneity through firm fixed effects, and we include year effects. 18

     The results in column 1 of Table 3 suggest that public firms’ investment decisions are significantly

less sensitive to changes in investment opportunities. The coefficient estimate is 0.136 for private firms,

3.5 times greater than the 0.136 – 0.097 = 0.039 coefficient estimate for public firms. The difference

between these estimates is statistically significant at the 1% level. We also find that investment is

sensitive to ROA for private firms and significantly less so among public firms. This may indicate that

private firms are more financially constrained than public ones.

     Columns 2 and 3 show that our results are robust to matching on finer industry codes. Using five-digit

NAICS (rather than NAICS4 as in column 1) has no effect at all on the point estimates. Using six-digit

NAICS naturally reduces the sample size considerably but again suggests that public firms have

significantly lower investment sensitivities than do private ones. (In fact, the difference is 50% larger

when we use NAICS6 in our match.) Our findings thus do not appear to be driven by an overly noisy

industry match, so we continue to match on NAICS4 in the remainder of the paper.

     Columns 4 and 5 expand the matching criteria. Column 4 matches on sales growth in addition to size

and industry, while column 5 matches on size, industry, sales growth, ROA, cash holdings, and book

leverage. The resulting matches are quite tight. In column 4, propensity scores average 0.251 for matched

public firms and 0.246 for matched private firms; in column 5, mean propensity scores are 0.256 for both

groups. This confirms that our public and private firms are observably very similar. In both columns,

public-firm investment continues to be substantially less sensitive to changes in investment opportunities,

with point estimates of -0.061 (p<0.001) and -0.048 (p=0.032). Thus, the observed difference in

investment sensitivities is unlikely to be an artifact of our matching choices.

     Columns 6 and 7 show that our findings are robust to using industry Q and predicted Q as alternative

proxies for investment opportunities. In light of this, and because sales growth is the methodologically
18
  Recall that all firms in Sageworks are unlisted and all firms in Compustat are listed. Thus, our fixed-effects specifications
cannot include a public-firm indicator, though we can let the effect of investment opportunities or ROA vary by listing status.
                                                                                                                                  14
sounder proxy in our setting, we report results using only sales growth in the remainder of the paper. 19

3.4 Differences in Investment Sensitivity: Robustness

       The results in Table 3 suggest a wide gap in the investment sensitivities of public and private firms.

We now consider a broad range of potential confounding factors in an effort to close this gap.

3.4.1 Age and Lifecycle Effects

       While we found no evidence that differences in age can explain the difference in investment levels

between public and private firms, they could generate differences in investment sensitivities. Jovanovic

and Rousseau (2010) argue that younger firms face a relatively lower cost of adopting new technologies

and so are more sensitive to changes in investment opportunities. If private firms were systematically

younger than public firms, such lifecycle effects could confound our results. As before, we cannot control

for age directly. However, the following indirect tests suggest age is not an important confound.

       As in Table 2, we split public firms into ‘young’ and ‘old’ ones and then match each group to private

firms based on size and industry. The spirit of the test is simple. If Sageworks firms are systematically

younger than matched Compustat firms and if this confound drives our results, then we should find no

difference in investment sensitivities once we restrict the Compustat sample to ‘young’ firms. As columns

1 and 2 of Table 4 show, we find a significantly lower investment sensitivity for public firms relative to

private firms in both subsamples. In fact, the point estimates of the difference are nearly identical in size:

-0.095 for old firms and -0.096 for young firms.

       Another way to look at the possible age confound is to test if investment sensitivity does change with

age, as the lifecycle hypothesis supposes. Column 3 restricts the sample to public firms and interacts

investment opportunities with the log of one plus the firm’s time-since-IPO. The coefficient estimate is -

0.002 (p=0.863) so investment sensitivity does not appear to vary with firm age in our sample period.

Overall, these tests suggest that it is unlikely that public and private firms invest differently simply

because they are at different points in their lifecycles.

3.4.2 The Omission of R&D Spending in the Private Firm Data

       Sageworks does not report R&D spending. There is substantial evidence linking IPOs to subsequent

19
     Complete results using the two Q measures are available on request.
                                                                                                                15
increases in R&D, suggesting that the stock market is an important source of funding for R&D projects

(Kim and Weisbach (2008), Brown, Fazzari, and Petersen (2009)). Omitting R&D from the dependent

variable would then bias our results if public firms’ R&D spending was more sensitive to changes in

investment opportunities than private firms’, sufficiently so to outweigh the lower sensitivity of public

firms’ fixed investment spending. While the absence of R&D data in Sageworks prevents us from testing

this hypothesis directly, we can assess its plausibility indirectly. To do so, we test whether including R&D

spending in the dependent variable increases the estimated investment sensitivity of public firms. Column

4 shows that it does not. The point estimate is 0.042 when we include R&D, marginally greater than the

point estimate of 0.136 – 0.097 = 0.039 when we omit R&D (cf. column 1 of Table 3). On its own, R&D

is thus far from sufficient to close the gap in investment sensitivities between public and private firms.

Closing the gap would require that private firms’ unobserved R&D spending correlated negatively with

investment opportunities. While this is possible, there is no compelling reason to think it is likely.

3.4.3 Differences in Tax Treatment or Accounting Choices

    Column 5 restricts the private-firm sample to C Corps, to hold the tax treatment of investment

constant. This leaves the coefficient of interest virtually unchanged, with an estimate of -0.085 (p<0.001)

for the difference in private and public firms’ investment sensitivity. Column 6 excludes firms that use

cash-basis (rather than accrual) accounting. This too leaves the coefficient of interest barely changed at -

0.092 (p<0.001). In column 7, we model net rather than gross investment and continue to find that private

firms are more sensitive to changes in investment opportunities than are public firms (p<0.001).

3.4.4 Controlling for Further Observable Differences

    Finally, we test whether observable differences between public and private firms that remain after we

match on size and industry can account for the observed difference in investment behavior. For example,

firms with greater cash holdings or lower leverage might more easily take advantage of improvements in

investment opportunities. Omitting cash holdings and leverage would then bias our results, though as

Table 1 shows, the effect likely goes in the other direction: Private firms actually hold less cash and are

more leveraged than public firms.

    In column 8, we add cash holdings and leverage as additional regressors. We also control directly for

                                                                                                              16
firm size. Gala and Julio (2011) argue that including size can improve the measurement of a firm’s true

unobserved investment opportunities, for example due to decreasing returns to scale. While each of these

additional controls is statistically significant, their inclusion does not alter the finding that public firms are

significantly less responsive to changes in investment opportunities. The coefficient for the difference in

investment sensitivity between public and private firms is -0.058 with a p-value of 0.001.

3.5 Measurement Error

       Across all specifications considered in Tables 3 and 4, we find the same result: Public firms are

significantly and substantially less responsive to changes in investment opportunities. We now investigate

if measurement error in our proxies for investment opportunities might spuriously generate this pattern.

Measurement error can lead to attenuation bias so that the estimated investment sensitivity is too low. For

this to drive our finding of a lower investment sensitivity among public firms, it would have to be the case

that their investment opportunities are measured with relatively more error than those of private firms. We

follow two alternative strategies to address this potential concern. First, we investigate this possibility

using a standard approach to account for measurement error due to Arellano and Bond (1991). This is a

GMM estimator in first-differences which uses lagged regressors as potentially valid instruments under

mild assumptions about serial correlation in the measurement error. Second, we exploit a plausibly

exogenous tax shock to sidestep the need to directly measure investment opportunities altogether.

3.5.1 Measurement Error: Arellano-Bond Models

       Table 5 reports the Arellano-Bond results. For ease of comparison, column 1 reproduces the baseline

estimates from Table 3. Columns 2 and 3 report models with regressors dated t-5 to t-3 as instruments. 20

Column 4 is a system GMM model that jointly estimates a first-differenced equation as in columns 2 and

3 (instrumented with lagged variables in levels) and an equation in levels instrumented with lagged

differences (see Blundell and Bond (1998)). The specification in column 5 is dynamic and so includes

first lags of all variables. Here, only variables dated t-5 and t-4 can be used as instruments, which greatly

affects identification as our six-year panel is probably too short. Each specification includes year effects.

       In all four GMM specifications, we find that private firms’ investment behavior is more sensitive to

20
     Variables dated t-2 are mechanically correlated with lagged sales growth and so cannot be included in the instrument set.
                                                                                                                                 17
changes in investment opportunities than that of public firms. The difference in investment sensitivity is

in fact larger than in the baseline model shown in column 1, at around -0.2 versus -0.097. Thus, there

appears to be more measurement error for private firms than for public firms, which makes intuitive

sense. The difference in investment sensitivity is significant in three of the four models. The exception is

the dynamic specification in column 5, perhaps because of the paucity of suitably lagged instruments in

our short panel. All four models pass the standard specification tests, i.e., the Hansen test of over-

identification restrictions and a test for the absence of third-order serial correlation in first differences.

3.5.2 Measurement Error: Changes in State Corporate Income Tax

    C Corps are subject to both federal and state income tax. While federal taxes change relatively rarely,

there is considerable variation in state taxes across time. Moreover, state taxes change in a staggered way

that can be usefully exploited for identification in the spirit of Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003).

    A cut in a state’s corporate income tax reduces the user cost of capital for firms operating in that state,

which should boost investment, and vice versa for tax increases. Changes in state taxes can thus be

viewed as shocks to firms’ after-tax returns on investment and thus to their investment opportunity sets.

    Are tax changes plausibly exogenous? While tax cuts could, potentially, reflect political economy

factors (such as firms lobbying the state legislature), it is hard to see why firms would ever lobby for tax

increases. As we will show, both tax cuts and tax increases affect investment in our sample.

    Our tax experiment asks if private firms are more sensitive to changes in state corporate income taxes

than public ones, increasing investment by more when taxes are cut and decreasing it by more when they

are raised. We examine this question using a difference-in-difference approach that lets firms’ investment

sensitivity to tax changes vary by listing status. Using data obtained from the Tax Foundation and verified

using state legislature and state department of revenue websites, we identify 19 tax cuts and 14 tax

increases over our sample period in a total of 19 states; see Appendix B for details. For example,

Kentucky cut its corporate income tax rate from 8.25% to 7% from January 2005.

    We code a firm as being affected by a tax change if the state it is headquartered in passed a tax cut or

tax increase that came into effect during the fiscal year in question. Since Compustat reports a firm’s

current – as opposed to historic – location, we verify public firms’ historic headquarter states using 10-K

                                                                                                                 18
and 10-Q filings obtained from the SEC’s EDGAR database. 21 This results in corrections to 132 of the

4,975 public firm-years. Overall in our industry-and-size-matched sample, 138 public and 106 private

firms are affected by a tax cut, while 134 public firms and 153 private ones are affected by a tax increase.

     Table 6 reports the results. In column 1, we code tax changes using an indicator variable set equal to 1

(-1) for firms affected by a tax cut (tax increase), and zero otherwise. 22 The results show that private firms

– but not public ones – significantly increase investment spending in response to tax cuts and reduce it in

response to tax increases. Compared to the unconditional average investment rate among private C Corps

in our sample of 9.7%, the point estimate is quite large. All else equal, private firms increase (reduce)

investment by 7.2% of total assets when their home state cuts (increases) corporate income tax. By

contrast, public firms’ average sensitivity is much lower, at 1.6 percentage points (0.072 – 0.056), and not

statistically significant (p=0.195). 23

     Column 2 models tax cuts and tax increases separately. The results are similar: Private firms respond

to tax changes while public ones do not. The point estimates are somewhat larger, in absolute terms, for

tax cuts than for tax increases, but the data cannot reject the null that the effects are symmetric (p=0.629).

     Column 3 investigates possible pre- and post-trends in the tax change effect by adding indicators

identifying firms in states that will undergo a tax change in a year’s time or that underwent a tax change a

year ago. Neither is statistically significant, neither for public nor for private firms.

     Before we can interpret these patterns as evidence of private firms showing greater sensitivity to

exogenous changes in investment opportunities, we have to consider two possible confounds. The first is

due to unobserved differences in geographic dispersion. States levy taxes on all corporate activities within

their jurisdiction, regardless of where a firm is headquartered. For example, a firm headquartered in VT

with a plant in ME will pay taxes in ME for the income generated by the ME plant. If public firms more

often operate in multiple states, their firm-level investment decisions will be less sensitive to a tax change

21
   Sageworks’ location data is historic and so poses no difficulty.
22
   We use an indicator variable instead of changes in tax rates because many tax changes (e.g., the introduction of a state
Alternative Minimum Tax or a tax surcharge) affect a firm’s overall tax burden but not marginal tax rates.
23
   Prior studies focus on the effect of tax changes on either public-firm or aggregate investment. For instance, like us, Gruber
and Rauh (2007) find a zero elasticity of investment to (federal) tax changes in Compustat data. Using cross-country data,
Djankov et al. (2010) show that aggregate investment is sensitive to taxes: A 10% increase in tax leads to a 2% drop in
aggregate investment to GDP (mean: 21%). If public-firm investment appears, at least locally, to be insensitive to tax changes,
then sensitivity at the aggregate level may be driven, at least in part, by greater sensitivity among private firms.
                                                                                                                               19
in their home state. This could potentially explain the lower tax sensitivity of public firms.

    To investigate this potential confound, we hand-collect data on the geography of public firms’

operations from Item 2 of their 10-K filings. In column 4, we let public firms’ sensitivity to tax changes

vary according to whether they are a multi-state or a single-state firm at the beginning of that year. The

point estimates are similar and not statistically different from each other (p=0.364). Compared to private

firms’ average tax sensitivity of 8.6 percentage points, the tax sensitivities of single-state and multi-state

public firms are a significant 8.8 and 7.2 percentage points lower on average, respectively. Thus, this

potential confound does not appear to drive the differential tax sensitivity of public and private firms.

    The second potential confound is due to the cash flow consequences of a tax change. Clearly, tax

changes affect not only firms’ after-tax return on investment but also how much cash flow is available for

investment. If private firms are more financially constrained than public firms, changes in state taxes

could affect their ability to invest differently even if investment opportunities remained unchanged. This

could explain the differential tax sensitivity in Table 6. To investigate this potential confound, column 5

controls for tax-induced changes in cash flows by including the change in the firm’s tax payments

between year t-1 and t, scaled by total assets. The associated coefficients are statistically zero for both

public and private firms, suggesting that tax-induced cash flow changes are not a serious confound.

    Finally, column 6 reports an indirect validity test of our tax identification strategy. Since in most

states, only C Corps are subject to state corporate income taxes, tax changes should have little effect on

the investment behavior of private non-C Corps. This is precisely what we find: The coefficient estimate

for the tax change indicator in a sample of non-C Corp firms is 0.004 with a standard error of 0.005.

    The results of the tax experiment suggest that private firms are more responsive to changes in

investment opportunities than are public firms, even when we sidestep the need to measure investment

opportunities and instead exploit exogenous variation in firms’ after-tax return on investment.

3.6 Differences in Investment Sensitivity: IPOs and Within-Firm Variation in Listing Status

    So far, our tests have compared the behavior of public and private firms using matched panels of

observably similar firms. While we are the first to have access to comprehensive financial data on a large

sample of private firms in the U.S., making such tests possible for the first time, there is a clear

                                                                                                              20
identification concern: The observed differences in investment could be driven by unobserved differences

between public and private firms. This is true of any matching algorithm since matching can only be done

on observables. To conclusively rule out possible biases stemming from unobserved heterogeneity would

require a randomized trial. However, it is clearly infeasible to randomly assign firms to a stock-market

‘treatment’ group and a ‘control’ group of unlisted firms.

     In light of this, we explore an alternative research designs that exploits within-firm variation in listing

status. To do this, we examine how a given firm’s investment behavior changes as it transitions from

private to public status. This allows us to remove unobserved time-invariant heterogeneity using firm

fixed effects. 24 Of course, going public is not a natural experiment: Most firms go public for reasons that

correlate with investment – usually to fund a planned increase in investment (Brau and Fawcett (2006)).

To mitigate problems of the IPO decision affecting investment directly, we focus on firms that go public

without raising capital. These firms sell stock belonging to their existing shareholders and so experience

increased ownership dispersion and, of necessity, some degree of separation of ownership and control.

     This within-firm test reduces identification concerns, but it cannot eliminate them. Unfortunately, the

obvious instruments for the IPO decision do not work in our data. In principle, one could exploit

discontinuities around stock exchange listing standards to identify the effects of a listing on investment.

But in practice, most U.S. listing standards can be satisfied simply by going public, and the remaining

standards – concerning profitability – are set so low that they would not be a binding constraint for most

of our private firms. 25 Alternatively, one could use the 2002 Sarbanes-Oxley Act as an exogenous shock

to the cost of being public, because compliance with its Section 404 effectively acts as a tax on being a

small publicly traded firm. However, our sample post-dates the Act, and while some of its provisions

were phased in for small firms, they did not come into force until after the end of our sample period. 26 As

a result, we offer the following evidence in the spirit of a reality check on our large-sample findings.

     Our IPO dataset consists of all 90 non-financial and non-utility firms that went public between 1990

24
   Gertner, Powers, and Scharfstein (2002), for example, employ this identification strategy, showing that divisions increase
their sensitivity to investment opportunities from before to after they are spun off as stand-alone firms by their parent firms.
25
   See http://www.nasdaq.com/about/nasdaq_listing_req_fees.pdf.
26
   Modeling delistings instead is problematic. Exploiting discontinuities around delisting thresholds has poor external validity:
Firms forced to delist are usually in trouble and so are not representative of private firms in general (Bakke and Whited (2011)).
Internal validity is also poor: Delisting is really a change in trading venue and so need not lead to more concentrated ownership.
                                                                                                                               21
and 2007 for the sole purpose of allowing existing shareholders to cash out, as opposed to raising equity

to fund operations or investment plans, or to repay debt. Suitable IPOs are identified from Thomson

Reuters’ SDC database. Appendix C lists their names, dates, and circumstances. We collect post-IPO

accounting data from Compustat and hand-collect pre-IPO accounting data from IPO prospectuses and

10-K filings available in the SEC-Edgar and Thomson Research databases. Since this sample does not

involve Sageworks data, we can collect data on capital expenditures (CAPEX) and spending on R&D

from the cash flow and income statements. On average, we have 4.4 pre-IPO years of accounting data.

    Columns 1 and 2 of Table 7 test if investment sensitivities change around a firm’s IPO. The variable

of interest interacts investment opportunities with an indicator equal to one if an observation is post-IPO.

Whether we measure investment as CAPEX (column 1) or the sum of CAPEX and R&D (column 2), we

find that it is significantly sensitive to investment opportunities before a firm goes public and then

becomes significantly less sensitive after the IPO. Thus, firms appear to alter their investment behavior

once they are public, even though their IPOs were of the kind that only affected their ownership structure.

This finding is consistent with the large-sample evidence reported in our earlier tables.

    It is possible that investment sensitivities change for macroeconomic reasons and not because of the

IPO itself. To test for this, columns 3 and 4 report difference-in-difference results, combining data from

the IPO sample with data for size-and-industry matched public-firm controls. While we cannot rule out

that treated and control firms differ in unobserved ways, the results continue to tell the same story: Before

they go public, IPO firms have significantly greater investment sensitivities; but once they are public,

their sensitivities are not only significantly lower but they become indistinguishable from those of

observably similar, public firms.

4. Potential Explanations

    The results of the three identification strategies reported in Section 3 – matching on observables, the

tax experiment, and the IPO approach – all paint the same picture: On average, stock market listed firms

are significantly and substantially less responsive to changes in their investment opportunities, despite

their relatively easier access to capital. What might account for these differences? As discussed in the

introduction, several agency models predict suboptimal investment behavior among public firms. Of

                                                                                                             22
these, two are consistent with the lower levels of investment we find among public firms: A preference

for a quiet life and certain types of short-termism models. In this section, we examine whether agency

problems are a plausible cause of the patterns we find and if so, which agency problem is most likely.

   For agency problems to be able to explain the patterns we document, it must be the case that private

firms are less prone to agency problems. Since such agency problems ultimately are the result of a

separation of ownership and control and insufficient incentives for monitoring, a necessary condition for

this to be true is that private firms tend to be owner-managed and have more concentrated ownership

structures than public firms. We first present evidence consistent with this premise. We then report cross-

sectional evidence that is consistent with public-firm managers’ short-termism being an important driver

of the reported differences in investment sensitivities between public and private firms.

4.1 Do Private Firms Have Fewer Agency Problems?

   We know that our public sample firms have highly dispersed ownership (see Table A7 in the Online

Data Appendix), but as Sageworks provides no ownership data, we cannot directly compare ownership

structures. Fortunately, Sageworks reports each firm’s legal form, and as a point of law, four of these

correlate strongly with concentrated ownership and little separation between ownership and control: 1)

Sole proprietorships have a single owner and are by definition owner-managed. 2) For tax purposes and to

limit their liability, many sole traders choose LLC status (according to the Federal Reserve’s SSBF

survey, 67.3% of LLCs are owner-managed). And both 3) partnerships and 4) LLPs give each partner the

statutory right to participate in management and so are usually managed by a committee comprising all

partners (in the SSBF, around 90% of each are owner-managed). In each of these four legal forms,

comprising 12% of the private firms in our Sageworks sample, there is essentially no separation of

ownership and control and so little possibility of agency problems distorting investment. This leaves two

legal forms that can theoretically have dispersed ownership: C Corps can have an unlimited number of

shareholders while S Corps can have up to 100 (or fewer, depending on the state).

   Our null hypothesis, which is informed by evidence from the SSBF, is that private C and S Corps in

practice have concentrated ownership. The alternative hypothesis is that such firms have dispersed

ownership and hence potentially suffer from agency problems. If so, we should find that their investment

                                                                                                          23
behavior is systematically different from that of the other legal forms.

     Table 8 tests this by allowing investment sensitivities among private firms to vary by legal form.

Column 1 includes a set of interaction terms for each legal form, capturing differences in investment

sensitivities relative to C Corps, in the full private-firm sample. The interaction terms are statistically

insignificant, individually and jointly. Thus, investment sensitivities among private firms are no different

for sample C and S Corps, which potentially have dispersed ownership structures, and the other legal

forms, which almost surely have concentrated ownership structures. For robustness, columns 2 and 3

focus on sole proprietorships, which are agency-cost free by definition. In column 2, we compare these to

all other private firms, while column 3 matches each by size and industry to a private firm that is not a

sole proprietorship, using our earlier matching algorithm. Columns 4 and 5 widen the definition of agency

cost-free firms by comparing sole proprietorships, LLCs, partnerships, and LLPs as a group to C and S

Corps, using the entire sample (column 4) or a size-and-industry matched sample (column 5).

     Each of these five models tells the same story: There is no significant variation in investment

sensitivities within the sample of private firms, in contrast to the large variation we found between public

and private firms. Since a non-trivial fraction of private firms in our sample are by definition free of

agency costs, this suggests that the private firms (including C and S Corps) in our sample suffer from

fewer investment-distorting agency problems than do the public sample firms.

4.2 Short-termism: Theory

     These results open the door to agency considerations, and in particular a preference for a quiet life or

short-termism, being a driver of the investment differences between public and private firms reported in

Section 3. We can shed further light on the importance of such agency considerations by putting some

structure on the nature of the possible short-termism. In common with other short-termism models, Stein

(1989) assumes that a public-firm manager derives utility from the firm’s current stock price as well as

from its long-term value. 27 This gives him an incentive to ‘manipulate’ the current stock price. Since the

stock price equals the present discounted value of the firm’s future cash flows, he will try to boost it by

27
  The manager may care about the current stock price because he intends to sell some of his stockholdings (as suggested in
Stein (1989) and confirmed empirically by Bhojraj et al. (2009)), because his compensation is tied to the stock price (see
Garvey, Grant, and King (1999) or Bolton, Scheinkman, and Ziong (2006) for the micro-foundations of such a scheme), or
because he fears losing his job in the event of a hostile takeover (Shleifer and Vishny (1990), Stein (1988)).
                                                                                                                             24
manipulating investors’ expectations of future cash flows. He does so by reporting higher current cash

flows, in the hope that investors will increase their expectations of future cash flows in response. The

mechanism in short-termism models is not fraudulent accounting (Kedia and Philippon (2009)) but

underinvestment. Stein (p. 657) lets the manager “borrow” cash flows from the future by “deciding not to

invest in assets that have returns greater than r,” the firm’s cost of capital. In other words, a short-termist

manager foregoes positive NPV projects.

    Investors do not know the extent of underinvestment but they understand the manager’s incentives.

They thus realize that high current cash flows might in fact lead to lower future cash flows. In response,

they ‘discount’ the manager’s report of current earnings. And yet in equilibrium, the manager will still

underinvest. The reason is akin to the prisoners’ dilemma: If investors assumed no underinvestment, the

manager would inflate current cash flows by cutting investment; and given that investors will, therefore,

assume underinvestment, the manager is better off actually underinvesting.

    Models of short-termism in the Stein (1989) tradition predict that the extent of a public firm’s

investment distortion depends on the sensitivity of its share price to its current cash flow. This parameter,

which Stein calls  0 , captures the extent to which investors base their expectations of the firm’s future

cash flows on its current cash flow. For firms with low  0 , current cash flows are uninformative about

future cash flows and so the manager cannot manipulate investors’ expectations and therefore has no

incentive to underinvest. Conversely, firms with high  0 are firms whose current cash flows are highly

informative about their future cash flows. Thus, the higher is  0 , the greater is the incentive to manipulate

investors’ expectations by underinvesting and hence the greater is the difference between public and

private firms’ investment sensitivities.

4.3 Testable Implications

    Short-termism thus has two cross-sectional implications. First, we expect no distortion for a public

firm whose current cash flow is uninformative about future cash flows, that is, whose  0 = 0. In this case,

the manager cannot manipulate investors’ cash flow expectations, so there is no point making myopic

investment decisions. Second, as  0 increases, distortions increase. Thus, we expect the difference in

                                                                                                              25
investment sensitivities between public and private firms to be zero for  0 = 0 and to increase in  0 . We

view these predictions as unique to short-termism as the  0 parameter plays no role in alternative stories.

4.4 Cross-industry Variation in Investment Behavior

     To test these predictions, we follow the accounting literature and measure  0 using earnings response

coefficients, or ERC (Ball and Brown (1968), Beaver (1968)). ERC measures the sensitivity of a firm’s

stock price to earnings news and so maps directly into  0 . As described more fully in Appendix A, we

follow Easton and Zmijewski (1989) and estimate a set of industry ERCs for each year from 2001 to

2006. 28 Industries are defined using Fama and French’s (1997) 30 industry groups, which contain enough

firms each to estimate ERCs relatively precisely. We also report somewhat noisier results using their finer

48 industries, which contain fewer firms in each industry. We then include a full set of interaction terms

involving lagged industry ERCs in our matched-firm investment equation.

     Panel A of Table 9 reports the results. In row 1, using Fama-French 30 industries, for ERC = 0 we

find no significant difference in investment sensitivities between public and private firms: The point

estimate for private firms is 0.099 (p<0.001) while that for public firms is an insignificant 0.033 lower

(p=0.355). This pattern is consistent with an absence of distortions for  0 = 0, as predicted. As ERC

increases, public firms’ investment sensitivity decreases significantly (p=0.033) while that of private

firms increases somewhat, though not significantly so (p=0.178). In other words, the difference in

investment sensitivities between public and private firms increases in ERC, and this increase is driven by

a change in public-firm behavior. 29 The results are similar using Fama-French 48 industries in row 2.

     Panel B illustrates the economic magnitudes, showing implied investment sensitivities from Panel A,

for private and public firms at the 25th and 75th percentile of the ERC distribution. In low-ERC industries,

the investment sensitivity is 0.062 higher for private firms, using Fama-French 30 industries. In high-ERC

industries, the difference more than doubles, to 0.141. The difference in differences of 0.079 is

significant. It is driven by a significant decline in sensitivity among public firms, from 0.054 at the 25th


28
  We are grateful to Mary Billings for providing the necessary data.
29
  Note that ERC affects investment in Table 9 only through its interaction with investment sensitivities and not directly. This
suggests that ERC does not capture some omitted dimension of investment opportunities.
                                                                                                                                  26
percentile to 0.019 at the 75th percentile. Results look very similar using Fama-French 48 industries.

4.5 Interpretation

     The findings in Table 9 are consistent with the interpretation that short-termism plays a first-order

role in explaining the observed differences in investment behavior between public and private firms in our

sample. The negative effect of  0 on public (but not private) firms’ investment sensitivity fits Stein’s

(1989) model of short-termism but is not predicted by any other agency model we are aware of. 30 In

particular, it plays no role in the quiet-life hypothesis.

     Alternatively, could it be the investment of private firms that is distorted? Maybe private firms

respond more strongly to investment opportunities not because they are relatively agency-cost free, but

because they are capital-inefficient, inexperienced at making investment decisions, or closet empire-

builders. In light of the results in this section, these alternative interpretations are unlikely. They cannot

explain why public and private firms exhibit similar investment sensitivities when  0 = 0 nor why the

difference in investment sensitivities between public and private firms increases in  0 .

4.6 Cross-industry Variation in the Share of Public Firms

     Our findings have implications for the distribution of public firms across industries. If investment

distortions, induced by short-termism, increase in the informativeness of current earnings, and if investors

and entrepreneurs understand this, we expect fewer firms to choose to be public in high-  0 industries

than in low-  0 industries, all else equal. We test this prediction by regressing the share of public firms in

an industry on the industry’s ERC, controlling for its R&D intensity and capital intensity as other likely

drivers of the listing decision. Apart from ERC, our variables are constructed from Census data which

restricts us to estimating a single cross-section, for 2007. (See Appendix A for further details.) To ensure

we have enough power, we model the share of public firms per four-digit NAICS industry, of which there

are 283, rather than in the 30 or 48 Fama-French industry groups.

     In column 1 of Panel C, we measure the share of public firms in an industry as the ratio of the number

of public firms (from Compustat) to the total number of firms (from the Census). The controls behave as

30
  Nor is it predicted by non-agency stories, such as the idea that public firms are less responsive to changes in investment
opportunities simply because they are weighed down by rules and regulations designed to protect minority shareholders.
                                                                                                                               27
expected: Significantly more firms are public in industries with greater R&D or capital intensity. The

results for ERC also go in the right direction – there are significantly fewer public firms in industries with

higher ERC – but the effect appears quite small economically: A one-standard deviation increase in ERC

is associated with a 0.1 percentage point decrease in the share of public firms. This reflects the very large

number of small private firms in the economy; in the average industry, 994 in 1,000 firms are private.

     A better way to measure the share of public firms is to exclude small firms from the denominator. 31

Following Chod and Lyandes (2010), who advocate this approach, columns 2 and 3 focus on the share of

public firms among firms with at least 100 or at least 500 employees, respectively. The results remain

unchanged – there are significantly fewer public firms in high-ERC industries – but the economic

magnitudes are larger. In column 2, a one standard deviation increase in ERC leads to a 1.5 percentage

point decrease in the share of public firms – a 32.6% decrease from the 4.6% unconditional mean share of

public firms. The corresponding effect in column 3 is a 3.3 percentage point decrease from the 9.9%

mean. These results are consistent with the interpretation that investors and entrepreneurs view short-

termism as a cost of being publicly listed.

5. Conclusions

     This paper compares the investment behavior of observably similar public and private firms. Our

results show that relative to private firms, public firms invest considerably less and in a way that is

significantly less responsive to changes in investment opportunities, especially in industries in which

stock prices are quite sensitive to earnings news.

     These differences do not appear to be due to unobserved differences between public and private firms:

Investment sensitivities among private firms that go public for reasons other than to fund investment are

significantly higher pre-IPO and converge on those of observably similar public firms post-IPO. Nor do

the results appear to be driven by how we measure investment opportunities, lifecycle differences, or our

matching criteria. Interestingly, it seems that the public-private margin is what matters for the effects we

observe: We see no differences in investment behavior, among private firms, across different

organizational structures (such as sole proprietors, partnerships, or different forms of incorporation).
31
  Computing the public-firm share using revenue instead is tricky. Compustat revenue includes foreign sales while the revenue
data reported by the Census do not. The resulting ratio is not well behaved: 30 out of 283 industries have ratios greater than 1.
                                                                                                                               28
    Our findings are consistent with the presence of a particular type of agency problem. Theorists have

long argued that the separation of ownership and control that accompanies a stock market listing can lead

to agency problems between managers and dispersed stock market investors and hence to suboptimal

investment decisions. The literature is divided on whether overinvestment or underinvestment will result,

or indeed whether effective corporate governance mechanisms can be devised to ensure investment does

not suffer (Tirole (2001), Shleifer and Vishny (1997)). Our results are most consistent with the view that

public firms’ investment decisions are affected by managerial short-termism. Managers and investors

appear to realize this, in the sense that there are fewer public firms in industries in which investment is

expected to be most affected. We find no evidence that looks consistent with empire building or other

agency problems that would lead to overinvestment.

    We are careful not to claim causality. Short of a trial that randomly assigns firms to public or private

status, we cannot categorically rule out endogeneity concerns. However, it is not easy to see how our

findings would result from reasonable alternative stories to short-termism. Such stories would not only

have to explain why public firms are, on average, less responsive to investment opportunities than private

firms, but also why this difference is increasing in the sensitivity of stock prices to earnings news in a

firm’s industry.




                                                                                                              29
References

Abadie, Alberto, and Guido W. Imbens, 2008, On the failure of the bootstrap for matching estimators,
   Econometrica 76, 1537-1557.
Acharya, Viral V., Heitor Almeida, and Murillo Campello, 2007, Is cash negative debt? A hedging
   perspective on corporate financial policies, Journal of Financial Intermediation 16, 515-554.
Ang, James S., Rebel A. Cole, and James Wuh Lin, 2000, Agency costs and ownership structure, Journal
   of Finance 55, 81-106.
Arellano, Manuel, and Stephen Bond, 1991, Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte Carlo
   evidence and an application to employment equations, Review of Economic Studies 58, 277-297.
Asker, John, Joan Farre-Mensa, and Alexander Ljungqvist, 2010, What Do Private Firms Look like? Data
   Appendix to “Does the Stock Market Distort Investment Incentives?”, Working paper, NYU.
Baber, William R., Patricia M. Fairfield, and James A. Haggard, 1991, The effect of concern about
   reported income on discretionary spending decisions: The case of research and development,
   Accounting Review 66, 818-829.
Bakke, Tor-Erik, and Toni Whited, 2010, Which firms follow the market? An analysis of corporate
   investment decisions, Review of Financial Studies 23, 1941-1980.
Bakke, Tor-Erik, and Toni Whited, 2011, Threshold events and identification: A study of cash shortfalls,
   Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Ball, Ray, and Philip Brown, 1968, An empirical evaluation of accounting income numbers, Journal of
    Accounting Research 6, 159-78.
Baumol, William, 1959, Business Behavior, Value, and Growth (New York, Macmillan).
Beaver, William H., 1968, The information content of annual earnings announcements, Journal of
   Accounting Research 6, 67-92.
Bebchuk, Lucian A., and Lars A. Stole, 1993, Do short-term objectives lead to under- or overinvestment
   in long-term projects?, Journal of Finance 48, 719-729.
Berle, Adolf A., and Gardiner C. Means, 1932, The Modern Corporation and Private Property (New
   York, Macmillan).
Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2003, Enjoying the quiet life? Corporate governance and
   managerial preferences, Journal of Political Economy 111, 1043-1075.
Bharat, Sreedhar, Amy Dittmar, and Jagadeesh Sivadasan, 2010, Does capital market myopia affect plant
   productivity? Evidence from “going private” transactions, Working paper, University of Michigan.
Bhide, Amar, 1993, The hidden cost of stock market liquidity, Journal of Financial Economics 34, 34-51.
Bhojraj, Sanjeev, Paul Hribar, Marc Picconi, and John McInnis, 2009, Making sense of cents: An
   examination of firms that marginally miss or beat analyst forecasts, Journal of Finance 64, 2361-2388.
Billett, Matthew T., Tao-Hsien Dolly King, and David C. Mauer, 2007, Growth opportunities and the
    choice of leverage, debt maturity and covenants, Journal of Finance 62, 697-730.
Bloom, Nick, Stephen Bond, and John van Reenen, 2007, Uncertainty and investment dynamics, Review
   of Economic Studies 74, 391-415.
Blundell, Richard, and Stephen Bond, 1998, Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dynamic panel
   data models, Journal of Econometrics 87, 115-143.
Bøhren, Øyvind, Ilan Cooper, and Richard Priestley, 2009, Real investment, economic efficiency, and
   managerial entrenchment, Working paper, Tel Aviv University.

                                                                                                       30
Bolton, Patrick, Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong, 2006, Executive compensation and short-termist
   behavior in speculative markets, Review of Economic Studies 73, 577-610.
Bond, Stephen, and John van Reenen, 2007, Microeconometric models of investment and employment,
   in: J.J. Heckman and E.E. Leamer (eds.), Handbook of Econometrics Vol. 6 (Amsterdam, Elsevier).
Brau, James C., and Stanley E. Fawcett, 2006, Initial public offerings: An analysis of theory and practice,
   Journal of Finance 59, 399-436.
Brav, Omer, 2009, Access to capital, capital structure, and the funding of the firm, Journal of Finance 64,
   263-208.
Brown, James R., Steven M. Fazzari, and Bruce Petersen, 2009, Financing innovation and growth: Cash
   flow, external equity, and the 1990s R&D boom, Journal of Finance 64, 151-185.
Bushee, Brian J., 1998, The influence of institutional investors on myopic R&D investment behavior,
   Accounting Review 73, 305-333.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Eduardo M.R.A. Engel, John C. Haltiwanger, Michael Woodford, and Robert E.
   Hall, 1995, Plant-level adjustment and aggregate investment dynamics, Brookings Papers on
   Economic Activity, 1-54.
Campello, Murillo, and John Graham, 2007, Do stock prices influence corporate decisions? Evidence
   from the technology bubble, NBER Working Paper no. 13640.
Chod, Jiri, and Evgeny Lyandes, 2010, Strategic IPOs and product market competition, Journal of
   Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Cooper, Russell W., and John C. Haltiwanger, 2006, On the nature of capital adjustment costs, Review of
   Economic Studies 73, 611-633.
Cummins, Jason G., Kevin A. Hassett, and Stephen D. Oliner, 2006, Investment behavior, observable
   expectations, and internal funds, American Economic Review 96, 796-810.
Dechow, Patricia M., and Richard G. Sloan, 1991, Executive incentives and the horizon problem: An
   empirical investigation, Journal of Accounting and Economics 14, 51-89.
Djankov, Simeon, Tim Ganser, Rita Ramalho, and Andrei Shleifer, 2010, The effect of corporate taxes on
   investment and entrepreneurship, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2, 31-64.
Easton, Peter D., and Mark E. Zmijewski, 1989, Cross-sectional variation in the stock market response to
   accounting earnings announcements, Journal of Accounting and Economics 11, 117-141.
Edgerton, Jesse, 2010, Agency problems in public firms: Evidence from corporate jets in leveraged
   buyouts, Working paper, Federal Reserve Board.
Edmans, Alex, 2010, Blockholder trading, market efficiency, and managerial myopia, Journal of Finance,
   forthcoming.
Erickson, Timothy, and Toni Whited, 2000, Measurement error and the relationship between investment
    and Q, Journal of Political Economy 108, 1027-1057.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1997, Industry costs of equity, Journal of Financial Economics
   43, 153-193.
Fang, Vivian W., Xuan Tian, and Sheri Tice, 2010, Does stock liquidity enhance or impede firm
   innovation?, Working paper, Tulane University.
Fazzari, Steven, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce Petersen, 1988, Financing constraints and corporate
   investment, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 141-195.
Franzoni, Francesco, 2009, Underinvestment vs. overinvestment: Evidence from price reactions to
   pension contributions, Journal of Financial Economics 92, 491-518.

                                                                                                         31
Gala, Vito D., and Brandon Julio, 2011, Convergence in corporate investment, Working paper, LBS.
Gao, Huasheng, Michael Lemmon, and Kai Li, 2010, A comparison of CEO pay in public and private
   U.S. firms, Working paper, University of British Columbia.
Garvey, Gerald T., Simon Grant, and Stephen P. King, 1999, Myopic corporate behavior with optimal
   management incentives, Journal of Industrial Economics 47, 231-50.
Gertner, Robert, Eric Powers, and David Scharfstein, 2001, Learning about internal capital markets from
   corporate spin-offs, Journal of Finance 57, 2479-2506.
Gomes, Joao F., 2001, Financing investment, American Economic Review 91, 1263-1285.
Gopalan, Radhakrishnan, Todd Milbourn, Fenghua Song, and Anjan V. Thakor, 2010, The optimal
   duration of executive compensation: Theory and evidence, Working paper, Washington University in
   St. Louis.
Graham, John R., Campbell R. Harvey, and Shiva Rajgopal, 2005, The economic implications of
   corporate financial reporting, Journal of Accounting and Economics 40, 3-73.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Joshua Rauh, 2007, How elastic is the corporate income tax base, in: Alan
   Auerbach, James Hines, and Joel Slemrod (eds.), Taxing Corporate Income in the 21st Century
   (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press).
Hayashi, Fumio, 1982, Tobin’s Q and average Q: A neoclassical interpretation, Econometrica 50, 213-
   224.
Holmström, Bengt, 1999, Managerial incentive problems: A dynamic perspective, Review of Economic
   Studies 66, 169-182.
Holmström, Bengt, 1982, Managerial incentive problems: A dynamic perspective, in: Essays in
   Economics and Management in Honor of Lars Wahlbeck (Helsinki, Swedish School of Economics).
Imbens, Guido W., and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge, 2009, Recent developments in the econometrics of
   program evaluation, Journal of Economic Literature 47, 5-86.
Jensen, Michael, and William H. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs
    and ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.
Jensen, Michael, 1986, Agency cost of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers, American
    Economic Review 76, 323-32.
Jorgenson, Dale, 1971, Econometric studies of investment behavior: A survey, Journal of Economic
    Literature 9, 1111-1147.
Jovanovic, Boyan, and Peter L. Rousseau, 2010, Extensive and intensive investment over the business
   cycle, Working paper, NYU.
Kaplan, Steven, and Luigi Zingales, 1997, Do financing constraints explain why investment is correlated
   with cash flow?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 169-215.
Kaplan, Steven, and Luigi Zingales, 2000, Investment-cash flow sensitivities are not valid measures of
   financing constraints, Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, 707-712.
Kedia, Simi, and Thomas Philippon, 2009, The economics of fraudulent accounting, Review of Financial
   Studies 22, 2169-2199.
Kim, Woojin, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2008, Motivations for public equity offers: An international
   perspective, Journal of Financial Economics 87, 281-307.
Knyazeva, Anzhela, Diana Knyazeva, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung, 2007, Comovement in
   investment, Working paper, University of Rochester.


                                                                                                         32
Lehn, Kenneth, and Annette Poulsen, 1989, Free cash flow and stockholder gains in going private
   transactions, Journal of Finance 44, 771-787.
Ljungqvist, Alexander, and William J. Wilhelm, 2003, IPO pricing in the dot-com bubble, Journal of
   Finance 58, 723-752.
Martin, Kenneth J., 1996, The method of payment in corporate acquisitions, investment opportunities, and
   management ownership, Journal of Finance 51, 1227-1246.
Michaely, Roni, and Michael R. Roberts, 2007, Corporate dividend policies: Lessons from private firms,
   Working paper, Cornell University.
Miller, Merton, and Kevin Rock, 1985, Dividend policy under asymmetric information, Journal of
   Finance 40, 1031-1051.
Narayanan, M.P., 1985, Managerial incentives for short-term results, Journal of Finance 40, 1469-1484.
Pagano, Marco, Fabio Panetta, and Luigi Zingales, 1998, Why do companies go public? An empirical
   analysis, Journal of Finance 53, 27-64.
Politis, Dimitris, Joseph Romano, and Michael Wolf, 1999, Subsampling (New York: Springer).
Poterba, James, and Lawrence H. Summers, 1995, A CEO survey of U.S. companies’ time horizons and
    hurdle rates, Sloan Management Review 37, 43-53.
Roychowdhury, Sugata, 2006, Earnings management through real activities manipulation, Journal of
   Accounting and Economics 42, 335-370.
Rozeff, Michael S., 1982, Growth, beta and agency costs as determinants of dividend payout ratios,
   Journal of Financial Research 5, 249-259.
Saunders, Anthony, and Sascha Steffen, 2009, The costs of being private: Evidence from the loan market,
   Working paper, New York University.
Sheen, Albert, 2009, Do public and private firms behave differently? An examination of investment in the
   chemical industry, Working paper, UCLA.
Shin, Hyun-Han, and René M. Stulz, 1998, Are internal capital markets efficient?, Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 113, 531-552.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1990, Equilibrium short horizons of investors and firms,
    American Economic Review 80, 148-153.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, A survey of corporate governance, Journal of Finance 52,
    737-783.
Skinner, Douglas J., and Richard G. Sloan, 2002, Earnings surprises, growth expectations, and stock
   returns or don’t let an earnings torpedo sink your portfolio, Review of Accounting Studies 7, 289-312.
Stein, Jeremy C., 1988, Takeover threats and managerial myopia, Journal of Political Economy 96, 61-80.
Stein, Jeremy C., 1989, Efficient capital markets, inefficient firms: A model of myopic corporate
    behavior, Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 655-669.
Stein, Jeremy C., 2003, Agency, information and corporate investment, in: Constantinides, G., M. Harris,
    and R. Stulz (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance (Amsterdam: Elsevier Science).
Stulz, René M., 1990, Managerial discretion and optimal financing policies, Journal of Financial
    Economics 26, 3-27.
Tirole, Jean, 2001, Corporate governance, Econometrica 69, 1-35.
Von Thadden, Ernst-Ludwig, 1995, Long-term contracts, short-term investment, and monitoring, Review
   of Economic Studies 62, 557-575.

                                                                                                         33
Whited, Toni M., 2006, External finance constraints and the intertemporal pattern of intermittent
  investment, Journal of Financial Economics 81, 467-502.
Wurgler, Jeffrey, 2000, Financial markets and the allocation of capital, Journal of Financial Economics
  58, 187-214.
Xu, Moqi, 2011, CEO contract horizon and investment, Working paper, INSEAD.




                                                                                                          34
Appendix A. Variable Definitions

Total assets is Compustat item at or its Sageworks equivalent. It is reported in $ millions of 2000 purchasing power,
deflated using the annual GDP deflator, at the beginning of the fiscal year.
Gross investment is the annual increase in gross fixed assets (Compustat data item ppegt or its Sageworks equivalent)
scaled by beginning-of-year nominal total assets
Net investment is the annual increase in net fixed assets (Compustat item ppent or its Sageworks equivalent).
Investment (with R&D) is capital expenditures plus R&D expenditures (Compustat items capx + xrd) scaled by
beginning-of-year total assets (Compustat item at).
Investment (no R&D) is capital expenditures (Compustat item capx) scaled by beginning-of-year total assets (Compustat
item at).
Sales growth is the annual percentage increase in sales (Compustat item sale or its Sageworks equivalent).
Predicted Q is computed as follows. Following Campello and Graham (2007), we regress each public firm’s Tobin’s Q
(Compustat items prcc_f×cshpri + pstkl + dltt + dlc – txditc divided by beginning-of-year total assets, at) on the firm’s
sales growth, return on assets (ROA, defined as operating income before depreciation scaled by beginning-of-year total
assets), net income before extraordinary items, book leverage, and year and industry fixed effects (using 3-digit NAICS
industries). We then use the regression coefficients to generate predicted Q for each firm, both public and private ones.
Industry Q is the lagged size-weighted mean of Tobin’s Q (Compustat items prcc_f×cshpri + pstkl + dltt + dlc – txditc
divided by beginning-of-year total assets, at), estimated separately for each four-digit NAICS industry and each year. We
use Compustat total assets (at) as weights in computing the size-weighted means.
ROA is operating income before depreciation (Compustat item oibdp or its Sageworks equivalent) scaled by beginning-
of-year total assets.
Cash holdings is beginning-of-year cash and short-term investments (Compustat item che or its Sageworks equivalent),
scaled by beginning-of-year total assets.
Book leverage is beginning-of-year long-term and short-term debt (Compustat items dltt + dlc or their Sageworks
equivalents), scaled by beginning-of-year total assets.
ERC is the earnings response coefficient. Following Easton and Zmijewski (1989), we estimate ERC separately for each
industry j and fiscal year t=2001 to 2006 by regressing abnormal returns SARijt on a constant and on unexpected earnings
UEijt using all firms i in industry j. ERC for industry j in year t is the coefficient estimated for UEijt. SARijt is firm i’s size-
adjusted abnormal return in the five-day window centered on the day the firm announced annual earnings. UEijt is firm i’s
earnings surprise, measured as actual earnings per share less analyst consensus (i.e., the median outstanding earnings
forecast from I/B/E/S data). We are grateful to Mary Billings for sharing these data with us. We use the Fama and French
(1997) classification of either 30 or 48 industry groups, available from Kenneth French’s webpage. Once we have an ERC
estimate for each Fama-French industry and year, we assign each private firm to a Fama-French industry based on its
NAICS code. (We map NAICS codes to SIC codes using the U.S. Census Bureau’s NAICS-SIC bridge, available at
http://www.census.gov/epcd/naics02/index.html.)
Industry R&D intensity equals the ratio of total R&D spending and total revenue in each four-digit NAICS industry,
measured in 2007 and covering both public and private firms. Data on corporate R&D spending by NAICS industry come
from the National Science Foundation; see Table 3 at http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/infbrief/nsf09316/. Data on industry
revenue come from “Statistics of U.S. Businesses” provided by the Census Bureau. There is no Census data for NAICS
codes 111 (Crop production), 112 (Animal production), and 4821 (Rail transportation).
Industry capital intensity equals one minus the ratio of labor costs and total revenue in each four-digit NAICS industry,
measured in 2007 and covering both public and private firms. Labor costs are measured as data item “annual payroll” in
the Core Business Statistics of the Economic Census. Data on industry revenue come from “Statistics of U.S. Businesses”
provided by the Census Bureau.
Net income before extraordinary items is Compustat item ib or its Sageworks equivalent.




                                                                                                                                35
Appendix B. List of State Corporate Income Tax Changes
This table lists the state corporate income tax changes that we use for the analysis in Table 6. We list all changes that
occurred within one year either side of our sample period (2002-2007) to allow the construction of leads and lags. In
states with more than one tax bracket, we report the change to the top bracket; lower tax brackets were usually also
affected. To identify these changes, we use data obtained from the Tax Foundation (an abbreviated version of which is
available at http://www.taxfoundation.org), and verify the information using each state’s Department of Revenue and
Legislature websites.


             State       Date    Brief description of tax change

         Tax increases:
             AL         1/2001   Increase in corporate income tax rate from 5% to 6.5%
             AR         1/2003   Introduction of 3% tax surcharge
             CT         1/2004   Introduction of 25% tax surcharge
             DC         1/2004   Increase in corporate income tax rate from 9.5% to 9.975%
             IA         1/2002   Introduction of 2.5% tax surcharge
             IL         1/2003   Introduction of 2.5% tax surcharge
             IN         1/2003   Increase in corporate income tax rate from 3.4% to 8.5%
             KS         1/2002   Increase in tax surcharge from 3.35% to 4.5%
            KY          1/2002   Introduction of 3.35% tax surcharge on income > $50,000
            MD          1/2008   Increase in corporate income tax rate from 7% to 8.25%
             MI         1/2008   Increase in corporate income tax rate from 1.9% to 4.95%
             NJ         1/2003   Introduction of an Alternative Minimum Assessment tax based on gross
                                 receipts, which applies if it exceeds the corporate franchise tax
              NJ        1/2006   Introduction of 4% tax surcharge
              TN        7/2002   Increase in corporate income tax rate from 6% to 6.5%

         Tax cuts:
             AR         1/2006   Repeal of tax surcharge
             AZ         1/2001   Reduction in corporate income tax rate from 7.968% to 6.968%
             CT         1/2006   Reduction in tax surcharge from 25% to 20%
             CT         1/2008   Repeal of tax surcharge
             IA         1/2003   Repeal of tax surcharge
             ID         1/2001   Reduction in corporate income tax rate from 8% to 7.6%
             KS         1/2003   Reduction in tax surcharge from 3.35% to 4.5%
             KS         7/2008   Reduction in corporate income tax rate from 7.35% to 7.1%
            KY          1/2003   Repeal of tax surcharge
            KY          1/2005   Reduction in corporate income tax rate from 8.25% to 7%
            KY          1/2007   Reduction in corporate income tax rate from 7% to 6%
            ND          1/2004   Reduction in corporate income tax rate from 10.5% to 7%
            ND          1/2007   Reduction in corporate income tax rate from 7% to 6.5%
            NY          7/2000   Reduction in corporate income tax rate from 8.5% to 8%
            NY          7/2001   Reduction in corporate income tax rate from 8% to 7.5%
            NY          1/2007   Reduction in corporate income tax rate from 7.5% to 7.1%
             VT         1/2006   Reduction in corporate income tax rate from 9.75% to 8.9%
             VT         1/2007   Reduction in corporate income tax rate from 8.9% to 8.5%
            WV          1/2007   Reduction in corporate income tax rate from 9% to 8.75%




                                                                                                                      36
Appendix C. List of IPO firms
The sample used in Table 7 consists of 90 U.S. firms that went public on the NYSE, AMEX, or Nasdaq exchanges between 1990 and
2007 for the sole purpose of allowing existing shareholders to cash out, as opposed to raising equity to fund the firm’s operations,
investment plans, or to repay debt. Suitable IPOs are identified from Thomson Reuters’ SDC database. In step 1, we filter on SDC field
‘share type offered’ to equal S (for secondary IPO, i.e. an IPO in which none of the proceeds is paid to the firm). In step 2, we filter all
non-secondary IPOs using SDC field ‘use of proceeds’ to include SDC codes 13, 18, 40, 79, 91, and 116 (which identify the use of
proceeds as being a stock repurchase, the payment of a dividend, or redemption of preferred securities). In step 3, we verify, using IPO
prospectuses, that the sole purpose of the non-secondary IPOs was indeed to allow shareholders to cash out and drop IPOs whose use
of proceeds included the funding of operations, investments plans, or debt repayment. We exclude financial firms (SIC 6), regulated
utilities (SIC 49), government entities (SIC 9), and firms with CRSP share codes greater than 11 (such as mutual funds).

   IPO date      Name of IPO firm                            Purpose of IPO/use of proceeds
   12-Apr-90     RMI Titanium Co                             Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   26-Jul-90     Banner Aerospace Inc                        Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   18-Sep-90     Pamida Holdings Corp                        Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   11-Nov-91     Bally Gaming International Inc              Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   25-Nov-91     Broderbund Software Inc                     Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   30-Jan-92     ElectroCom Automation Inc                   Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   12-Feb-92     TNT Freightways Corp                        Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   13-Feb-92     Living Centers of America Inc               Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   30-Mar-92     Eskimo Pie Corp                             Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   28-Apr-92     Ben Franklin Retail Stores Inc              Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   29-Apr-93     Geon Co                                     Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   10-Jun-93     Department 56 Inc                           Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   29-Sep-93     Belden Inc                                  Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   10-Dec-93     Camco International Inc                     Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   26-Jan-94     O’Sullivan Industries Holdings              Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   27-Jan-94     Interim Services Inc                        Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   10-May-94     Advocat Inc                                 Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   25-May-94     Merix Corp                                  Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   24-Jun-94     Case Corp                                   Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   30-Jun-94     Rawlings Sporting Goods Co                  Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   27-Sep-94     Sterile Concepts Inc                        Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   08-Nov-94     Thompson PBE Inc                            Repurchase redeemable capital stock from pre-IPO shareholders
   01-Feb-95     Congoleum Corporation                       Repurchase Class B stock from pre-IPO shareholders
   06-Mar-95     Dollar Tree Stores Inc                      Redeem preferred stock from pre-IPO shareholders
   06-Mar-95     Riviana Foods Inc                           Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   06-Sep-95     Ballantyne of Omaha Inc                     Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   21-Sep-95     Midwest Express Holdings Inc                Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   14-Nov-95     Lexmark International Group                 Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   25-Jan-96     World Color Press Inc                       Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   01-Mar-96     Berg Electronics Corp                       Redeem preferred stock from pre-IPO shareholders
   28-Mar-96     Century Aluminum Co                         Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   03-Apr-96     Lucent Technologies Inc                     Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   27-Jun-96     FactSet Research Systems Inc                Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   25-Jul-96     Strayer Education Inc                       Pay S Corp dividend to pre-IPO shareholders
   15-Aug-96     Consolidated Cigar Holdings Inc             Pay dividend to parent
   09-Oct-96     Splash Technology Holdings Inc              Redeem preferred stock from pre-IPO shareholders
   25-Nov-96     Linens n Things Inc                         Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   17-Dec-96     Swisher International Group Inc             Pay dividend to parent
   15-May-97     General Cable Corp                          Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   10-Oct-97     Stoneridge Inc                              Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   15-Oct-97     CH Robinson Worldwide Inc                   Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   23-Oct-97     ITC Deltacom Inc                            Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
   11-Dec-97     Spectra Physics Lasers Inc                  Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)




                                                                                                                                        37
IPO date    Name of IPO firm                 Purpose of IPO/use of proceeds
28-Jan-98   Keebler Foods Co                 Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
17-Feb-98   Steelcase Inc                    Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
26-Mar-98   Columbia Sportswear Co           Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
22-Jul-98   USEC Inc                         Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
21-Oct-98   Conoco                           Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
22-Feb-99   Corporate Executive Board Co     Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
09-Jun-99   DiTech Corp                      Redeem preferred stock from pre-IPO shareholders
09-Nov-99   United Parcel Service Inc{UPS}   Redeem A Class shares from pre-IPO shareholders
17-Nov-99   Agilent Technologies Inc         Pay dividend to parent
27-Jan-00   Packaging Corp of America        Redeem preferred stock from pre-IPO shareholders
04-Apr-00   Cabot Microelectronics Corp      Pay dividend to parent
10-Jul-00   Axcelis Technologies Inc         Pay dividend to parent
27-Mar-01   Agere Systems Inc                Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
12-Nov-01   Advisory Board Co                Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
14-Nov-01   Weight Watchers Intl Inc         Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
10-Dec-01   Aramark Worldwide Corp           Repurchase stock from company’s retirement plan
10-Jul-02   Kirkland’s Inc                   Repurchase preferreds and common stock from pre-IPO shareholders
14-Nov-02   Constar International Inc        Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
24-Sep-03   Anchor Glass Container Corp      Redeem Series C participating preferreds from pre-IPO shareholders
30-Oct-03   Overnite Corp                    Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
19-Nov-03   Whiting Petroleum Corp           Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
24-Nov-03   Pinnacle Airlines Corp           Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
11-Dec-03   Compass Minerals Intl Inc        Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
13-Jan-04   CrossTex Energy Inc              Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
04-Feb-04   TODCO                            Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
16-Jun-04   ADESA Inc                        Repurchase stock from company’s retirement plan
21-Jun-04   Jackson Hewitt Tax Service Inc   Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
21-Jul-04   Blackbaud Inc                    Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
06-Aug-04   NAVTEQ Corp                      Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
08-Dec-04   Foundation Coal Holdings Inc     Pay dividend to pre-IPO shareholders
20-Jan-05   Celanese Corp                    Pay dividend to pre-IPO shareholders
27-Jan-05   W&T Offshore Inc                 Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
08-Feb-05   FTD Group Inc                    Repurchase preferred stock and junior preferred stock from pre-IPO shareholders
02-May-05   Morningstar Inc                  Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
13-Jun-05   Premium Standard Farms Inc       Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
28-Jun-05   NeuStar Inc                      Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
22-Jul-05   Maidenform Brands Inc            Redeem all outstanding shares of preferred stock from pre-IPO shareholders
04-Aug-05   Dresser-Rand Group Inc           Pay dividend to pre-IPO shareholders
08-Aug-05   K&F Industries Holdings Inc      Redeem junior preferred stock from pre-IPO shareholders; pay a special dividend
10-Nov-05   IHS Inc                          Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
21-Nov-05   Tronox Inc                       Pay dividend to parent
14-Mar-06   Transdigm Group Inc              Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
03-May-06   DynCorp International Inc        Redeem preferred stock from pre-IPO shareholders, pay prepayment penalties,
                                             and pay a special dividend
27-Jun-06   J Crew Group Inc                 Redeem preferred stock from pre-IPO shareholders
25-Jul-06   Chart Industries Inc             Pay dividend to pre-IPO shareholders
28-Feb-07   Coleman Cable Inc                Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)
12-Jun-07   Bway Holding Co                  Secondary IPO (some pre-IPO shareholders selling out)




                                                                                                                               38
Figure 1. Size Distribution of Public and Private Sample Firms.
The top graph shows the size distribution of the public and private firms in our full samples of Compustat and Sageworks firms
The bottom graph shows the size distribution of the public and private firms in our matched sample. The graphs present, for each
set of firms, Epanechnikov kernel densities of the natural logarithm of total assets in $ millions of 2000 purchasing power. The
width of the kernel density window around each point is set to 0.4. The unit of observation in the top graph is a firm. The unit of
observation in the bottom graph is a firm-year, to illustrate the closeness of the matched panels.


                              .25
                              .2
                     Kernel density
                      .1      .15
                              .05
                              0




                                         -20                 -10                   0               10                 20
                                            Log of total assets (in $ millions of 2000 purchasing power) - Full sample

                                                            Public companies               Private companies
                              .3    .2
                       Kernel density
                     .1       0




                                         -5                        0                      5                    10
                                         Log of total assets (in $ millions of 2000 purchasing power) - Matched sample

                                                            Public companies               Private companies




                                                                                                                               39
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics.
This table presents descriptive statistics for the full samples of public and private firms and for a size-and-industry
matched sample over the period from 2002 to 2007. See Section 2.1 for a description of how we construct the full
samples from Compustat and Sageworks data and Section 2.2 for details of the matching procedure. The table
reports means, medians, and standard deviations of the key variables used in our empirical analysis as well as
pairwise differences in means and medians, with *** and ** indicating a difference that is significant in a t-test (for
means) or a Pearson χ2 test (for medians) at the 1% and 5% level, respectively. For variable definitions and details of
their construction, see Appendix A. All variables (except industry Q and predicted Q) are winsorized 0.5% in each
tail to reduce the impact of outliers.

                                                  Full sample                              Matched sample
                                                                Differences                            Differences in
                                        Public     Private      in means or      Public     Private       means or
                                        firms       firms         medians        firms       firms        medians
 Firm size
   Total assets ($m)        mean       1,364.4       7.1        1,357.3***        144.7       120.0       24.7
                            median      246.2        1.3         245.0***         40.3         28.0       12.3***
                            st.dev.    2,958.1      190.2                         692.8       675.5
 Investment opportunities
   Sales growth             mean        0.183       0.177          0.006          0.256       0.327       -0.071***
                            median      0.087       0.070          0.016***       0.091       0.111       -0.020***
                            st.dev.     0.674       0.652                         0.925       1.075
  Industry Q                mean        1.747       1.398          0.349***       1.838       1.838        0.000
                            median      1.579       1.235          0.344***       1.753       1.753        0.000
                            st.dev.     0.840       0.613                         0.740       0.740
  Predicted Q               mean        1.817       1.473          0.344***       2.119       1.964        0.155***
                            median      1.778       1.385          0.393***       2.047       1.889        0.158***
                            st.dev.     0.663       1.082                         0.774       1.229
 Firm characteristics
  ROA                       mean        0.065       0.075         -0.010**       -0.060       0.084       -0.144***
                            median      0.111       0.095          0.016***      0.051        0.123       -0.072***
                            st.dev.     0.286       1.069                        0.437        0.986
  Cash holdings             mean        0.225       0.152          0.073***      0.304        0.151        0.152***
                            median      0.131       0.073          0.058***      0.228        0.074        0.154***
                            st.dev.     0.239       0.202                        0.267        0.200
  Book leverage             mean        0.199       0.311         -0.111***      0.149        0.218       -0.069***
                            median      0.145       0.157         -0.012***      0.055        0.132       -0.077***
                            st.dev.     0.230       0.455                        0.250        0.264

 No. of observations                   19,203       88,568                        4,975       4,975
 No. of firms                           3,926       32,204                        1,666        620




                                                                                                                      40
Table 2. Investment Levels.
This table compares the investment levels of public and private firms for the full samples of Compustat and Sageworks firms, our size-and-industry matched samples, and various
variations of our basic matching specification. For details on the matching approach see Section 2.2. The table reports means, medians, and standard deviations of investment
levels of public and private firms under the different matching specifications, as well as pairwise differences in means and medians, with *** and ** indicating a difference that is
significant in a t-test (for means) or a Pearson χ2 test (for medians) at the 1% and 5% level, respectively. For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix A.
Investment levels are winsorized 0.5% in each tail to reduce the impact of outliers. The last four rows investigate potential confounds. ‘Old’ public firms are those whose time-
since-IPO in their first year in our panel exceeds the median time-since-IPO of all public firms in the same calendar year. Age for private firms is not available in Sageworks, so
we continue to match on size and industry but not on age. The last two rows restrict the sample to C Corps (in order to hold tax regime constant between public and private firms)
and to firms using accrual-basis rather than cash accounting, respectively.

                                                                      Public firms                                           Private firms                       Public - private firms
                                          Invest
                                          ment
                                          mea-                Std.                   No. of   No. of                 Std.                    No. of   No. of      Diff. in    Diff. in
 Sample                                   sure      Mean      dev.     Median         obs.    firms        Mean      dev.      Median         obs.    firms       means       medians

 Full sample                              Gross      0.045    0.154      0.023       19,203   3,926        0.076     0.261       0.017       88,568   32,204     -0.031***     0.005***
                                          Net        0.022    0.123      0.002       19,203   3,926        0.033     0.205       0.000       88,568   32,204     -0.011***     0.002***

 Samples matched on:
  NAICS4, total assets                    Gross      0.040    0.191      0.017        4,975   1,666        0.097     0.304       0.016        4,975     620      -0.056***     0.001
                                          Net        0.022    0.150      0.000        4,975   1,666        0.094     0.302       0.009        4,975     620      -0.072***    -0.009***

   NAICS5, total assets                   Gross      0.042    0.197      0.017        4,320   1,483        0.099     0.296       0.016        4,320     566      -0.057***     0.001

   NAICS6, total assets                   Gross      0.043    0.209     -0.001        1,462     558        0.137     0.362       0.016        1,462     223      -0.095***    -0.017***

   NAICS4, total assets, sales growth     Gross      0.047    0.170      0.021        7,273   2,578        0.086     0.244       0.022        7,273    1,635     -0.039***    -0.001
   NAICS4, total assets, sales
   growth, ROA, cash, and debt            Gross      0.049    0.171      0.022        7,413   2,618        0.079     0.270       0.015        7,413    1,809     -0.030***     0.007***

   NAICS4, total assets, restricted to
    old public firms                      Gross      0.032    0.166      0.016        2,014     624        0.092     0.285       0.016        2,014     360      -0.061***     0.000

     young public firms                   Gross      0.046    0.206      0.018        2,961   1,042        0.100     0.316       0.017        2,961     456      -0.054***     0.001

     C Corps                              Gross      0.023    0.154      0.000        4,077   1,472        0.093     0.308       0.008        4,077     441      -0.071***    -0.008***

     accrual basis accounting             Gross      0.040    0.191      0.017        4,914   1,644        0.091     0.280       0.016        4,914     611      -0.050***     0.001




                                                                                                                                                                                    41
Table 3. Sensitivity To Investment Opportunities.
This table exploits within-firm variation to analyze differences in the sensitivity of investment spending to investment opportunities between public and private firms. The
dependent variable is gross investment (the annual increase in gross fixed assets scaled by beginning-of-year total assets). We obtain similar results using net investment (the
scaled increase in net fixed assets); see column 7 in Table 4. We use three different measures of investment opportunities: Sales growth, our preferred measure (columns 1 through
5); industry Q (column 6); and predicted Q (column 7). For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix A. Note that we lose a small number of observations
for four firms in column 7 due to missing leverage data, which is used in the construction of predicted Q. Following parts of the empirical investment literature, all specifications
include ROA, sometimes interpreted as a possible proxy for financing constraints. Our baseline specification in column 1 uses a size-and-industry matched sample based on four-
digit NAICS industries. (See Section 2.2 for further details of the matching.) Columns 2 and 3 investigate robustness to matching on finer industry classifications. In columns 4 and
5, we add further matching criteria to the baseline specification. Column 4 matches on sales growth in addition to total assets and NAICS4 industry while column 5 matches on
industry, total assets, sales growth, ROA, cash holdings, and book leverage. Each specification uses a nearest-neighbor propensity score match with a 5% caliper. All regressions
include firm fixed effects. Since the sample contains no firms that transition from public to private status or vice versa, inclusion of firm fixed effects implies that we cannot
identify differences in investment levels between public and private firms in these regressions. Each regression also includes year effects; their coefficients are not reported to
conserve space. The data panel is set up in calendar time; fiscal years ending January 1 through May 31 are treated as ending in the prior calendar year. Heteroskedasticity-
consistent standard errors clustered at the firm level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates in all columns except for column 7, where the standard errors are
obtained by bootstrapping in order to account for the fact that predicted Q is an estimated regressor. When bootstrapping, we use the matched public-private firm pairs as
resampling clusters and perform 500 replications. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively. All continuous variables are
winsorized 0.5% in each tail to reduce the impact of outliers, except industry Q (which is a size-weighted average and so already downweights outliers) and predicted Q (which is
itself constructed from winsorized data).

                                                                                  Dependent variable: Gross investment / lagged total assets
        Measure of investment opportunities:                                       Sales growth                                              Industry Q              Predicted Q
                                                                                                                       Matched on
                                                                                                      Matched on         size, sales
                                                  Matched on           Matched on    Matched on        size, sales   growth, ROA,            Matched on              Matched on
                                                   size and             size and       size and        growth &        cash, debt &           size and                size and
                                                   industry             industry       industry         industry          industry            industry                industry
                                      Sample      (NAICS4)             (NAICS5)       (NAICS6)         (NAICS4)         (NAICS4)             (NAICS4)                (NAICS4)
                                                      (1)                  (2)            (3)              (4)               (5)                 (6)                     (7)

  Investment opportunities                          0.136***             0.135***          0.186***         0.098***          0.081***             0.148***            0.383***
                                                    0.013                0.016             0.055            0.020             0.022                0.055               0.030
  Investment opp. x public                         -0.097***            -0.099***         -0.143**         -0.061***         -0.048**             -0.147***           -0.226***
                                                    0.015                0.018             0.057            0.021             0.023                0.053               0.030
  ROA                                               0.173***             0.171***          0.232***         0.124***          0.102***             0.112               0.519***
                                                    0.014                0.018             0.065            0.025             0.021                0.077               0.034
  ROA x public                                     -0.135***            -0.146***         -0.254***        -0.076**          -0.041               -0.063              -0.342***
                                                    0.027                0.029             0.077            0.036             0.034                0.080               0.042

  R2 (within)                                      29.6 %               26.5 %           17.4 %            18.1 %           11.7 %               15.1 %               28.1 %
  F-test: all coeff. = 0                           32.1***              19.9***           2.9***            7.8***           8.6***               3.0***              15.1***
  No. observations                                 9,950                8,640            2,924            14,546           14,826                9,950                9,931
  No. firms                                        2,286                2,049              781             4,213            4,427                2,286                2,282




                                                                                                                                                                                   42
Table 4. Alternative Specifications.
As in Table 3, we use sales growth to proxy for investment opportunities and exploit within-firm variation using OLS with firm and year fixed effects. Columns 1-3 investigate
lifecycle stories of investment. Column 1 restricts the sample of public firms to ‘old’ firms (those whose time-since-IPO in their first year in our panel exceeds the median time-
since-IPO of all public firms in the same calendar year), while column 2 restricts the sample of public firms to ‘young’ firms. Age for private firms is not available in Sageworks,
so we continue to match on size and industry but not on age. Column 3 excludes private firms altogether and tests if the investment sensitivity of public firms depends on their age
by interacting investment opportunities with log time since IPO. Column 4 includes public firms’ R&D spending in the dependent variable. Column 5 restricts the sample to C
Corps in order to hold tax regime constant between public and private firms. Column 6 restricts the sample to firms using accrual-basis rather than cash accounting. In column 7,
we change the dependent variable from gross to net investment (i.e., the change in net fixed assets over beginning-of-year total assets). In column 8, we test whether the results
presented in Table 3, column 1 are robust to observable heterogeneity in cash holdings, book leverage, and firm size. For variable definitions and details of their construction, see
Appendix A. Each regression includes firm fixed effects and year effects (not reported). Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the firm level are shown in italics
underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively. All continuous variables are winsorized
0.5% in each tail to reduce the impact of outliers.

                                                                                 Dependent variable: Investment / lagged total assets
                                                                                                  R&D
                                                             Lifecycle effects                   effects,                      Only
                                                                                Matched         matched                      accrual        Net rather
                                                                  Young           public          public      Only C           basis        than gross    Additional
                                                   Old firms      firms        firms only      firms only      Corps       accounting      investment      controls
                                                      (1)          (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)
                 Investment opportunities            0.149***       0.131***      0.042*           0.042***       0.121***      0.131***      0.210***      0.092***
                                                      0.016         0.013         0.023             0.010         0.013         0.021         0.016         0.020
                  … x public                         -0.095***     -0.096***                                     -0.085***     -0.092***     -0.175***      -0.058***
                                                      0.028         0.016                                         0.017         0.022         0.017         0.022
                  … x ln(1 + years since IPO)                                    -0.002
                                                                                  0.011
                 ROA                                 0.189***       0.169***     -0.134*           -0.123**       0.159***      0.166***     -0.006         0.174***
                                                      0.018         0.015         0.077             0.037         0.015         0.025         0.019         0.012
                  … x public                         -0.121**      -0.137***                                     -0.114***     -0.128***      0.007         -0.118***
                                                      0.052         0.030                                         0.032         0.034         0.028         0.030
                  … x ln(1 + years since IPO)                                     0.076**
                                                                                  0.032
                 Cash holdings                                                                                                                              0.116*
                                                                                                                                                            0.065
                 Book leverage                                                                                                                              -0.157**
                                                                                                                                                            0.062
                 Size (ln(total assets))                                                                                                                    -0.055***
                                                                                                                                                            0.017
                   2
                 R (within)                         26.9 %        31.1 %          6.2 %            6.5 %        34.0 %         19.3 %        50.0 %        32.4 %
                 F-test: all coeff. = 0             26.6***       24.7***         5.0***           5.7***       15.1***        11.0***       27.3***       80.1***
                 No. observations                   4,028         5,922          4,975            4,975         8,154          9,822         9,950         9,931
                 No. firms                           984          1,498          1,666            1,666         1,913          2,250         2,286         2,282




                                                                                                                                                                                   43
Table 5. Arellano-Bond Estimates of Public and Private Firms’ Investment Sensitivities.
This table explores the robustness of the Table 3 results to potential measurement error in investment opportunities, using
Arellano and Bond’s (1991) one-step GMM estimator (or a variation thereof). We focus on our preferred specification, the
matched sample of public and private firms with sales growth as the measure of investment opportunities. As in Table 3, we
exploit within-firm variation. Specifically, we first-difference the data to remove firm fixed effects. For ease of comparison,
column 1 reproduces the within-groups results from column 1 in Table 3 as a baseline. Columns 2 to 5 report the GMM results.
In columns 2 and 3, we estimate two static GMM models. The first uses investment and sales growth dated t-5 to t-3 and year
effects as instruments while the second adds ROA dated t-5 to t-3 to the instrument set. (Note that variables dated t-2 are
mechanically correlated with the first-differences of sales growth and investment and so cannot be included in the instrument
set.) Column 4 shows results from a system GMM model which jointly estimates a first-differenced equation as in columns 2 and
3 (instrumented with lagged variables in levels) and an equation in levels instrumented with lagged differences (see Blundell and
Bond (1998)). This allows us to include a dummy for public firms and so to identify differences in investment levels between
public and private firms. The specification in column 5 is dynamic and thus includes first lags of all variables in the estimated
equation; however, for brevity, the table suppresses the coefficient estimates for all lags except for lagged investment. In the
dynamic specification, only variables dated t-5 and t-4 can be used as instruments, which greatly affects identification as our
panel is relatively short. For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix A. Each regression includes an
intercept and year effects (not reported). For the GMM models in columns 2 to 5, we report the p-values of the Hansen test of
over-identification restrictions and the Arellano-Bond test for AR(3) in first differences. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard
errors clustered at the firm level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively. All continuous variables are winsorized 0.5% in each tail to
reduce the impact of outliers.

                                                           Dependent variable: Gross investment / lagged total assets
                                                        Within-
                                                        groups      First diff.   First diff.    System       First diff.
                                                         (fixed      GMM,          GMM,          GMM,           GMM,
                                                        effects)      static        static        static       dynamic
                                                           (1)         (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)

 Investment opportunities                                0.136***       0.182*          0.181**        0.220*          0.294
                                                         0.013          0.098           0.082          0.113           0.355
                                                                 ***            **              **             *
 Investment opp. x public                               -0.097         -0.244          -0.187         -0.219          -0.292
                                                         0.015          0.118           0.091          0.132           0.357
 ROA                                                     0.173***       0.171           0.205          0.059           0.163
                                                         0.014          0.383           0.307          0.304           0.318
 ROA x public                                           -0.135***      -0.108          -0.229          0.119          -0.160
                                                         0.027          0.343           0.305          0.314           0.332
 Public                                                                                                0.031
                                                                                                       0.053
 Investment lagged                                                                                                    -0.118
                                                                                                                       0.302

 Instrument set                                                        Inv. (3-5)     Inv. (3-5)     Inv. (3-5)     Inv. (4-5)
                                                                         Sales          Sales          Sales          Sales
                                                                        growth         growth         growth         growth
                                                                         (3-5)          (3-5)          (3-5)          (4-5)
                                                                                      ROA (3-5)       Public        ROA (4-5)
                                                                                                     Levels eq.

 Hansen test of overidentifying restrictions (p)                        0.894           0.877          0.485          0.822
 Arellano-Bond test: AR(3) (p)                                          0.913           0.933          0.552          0.965
 No. observations                                        9,950          7,474           7,474          9,950          5,055
 No. firms                                               2,286          2,217           2,217          2,286          1,773




                                                                                                                               44
Table 6. Public and Private Firms’ Reactions To State Corporate Income Tax Changes.
We use staggered changes in state corporate income taxes as plausibly exogenous shocks to investment
opportunities. A firm is coded as experiencing a tax change if its headquarter state passed a tax cut or tax increase
that became effective during the fiscal year in question. We hand-collect historic HQ states for Compustat firms as
Compustat only reports current firm locations. Appendix B lists 33 tax changes in 19 states that occurred over the
period 2001 through 2008 (one year either side of our sample period). Multi-state firms in column 4 are those listing
operations in multiple states in Item 2 of their 10-K filing for fiscal year t-1. The change in tax payments in column
5 is defined as taxt / total assetst – taxt-1 / total assetst-1. In column 6, we restrict the sample of private firms to the
20,448 firms (56,665 firm-years) that are non-C Corps (i.e., sole proprietorships, LLCs, partnerships, LLPs, and S
Corps). Each regression includes firm fixed effects and year effects (not reported) and is estimated using least-
squares. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the firm level are shown in italics underneath the
coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided),
respectively. All continuous variables are winsorized 0.5% in each tail to reduce the impact of outliers.

                                                        Dependent variable: Gross investment / lagged total assets
                                                                     Matched sample                                Private non-C
                                                       (No. observations = 9,950; no. firms = 2,286)                   Corps
                                              (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
Tax change (cut = 1, increase = -1)         0.072***                     0.091***      0.086***       0.072***       0.004
                                            0.022                        0.020          0.026         0.022          0.005
     x public                              -0.056**                     -0.069***                    -0.056**
                                            0.025                        0.024                        0.025
     x public single-state firm                                                        -0.088***
                                                                                        0.028
     x public multi-state firm                                                         -0.072***
                                                                                        0.028
Tax cut                                                   0.092***
                                                          0.033
     x public                                            -0.072*
                                                          0.039
Tax increase                                             -0.053*
                                                          0.028
     x public                                             0.041
                                                          0.030
Tax change (t-1)                                                         0.020
                                                                         0.013
     x public                                                           -0.022
                                                                         0.016
Tax change (t+1)                                                        -0.034
                                                                         0.041
     x public                                                            0.001
                                                                         0.044
Change in tax payments t-1 to t                                                                       0.036
                                                                                                      0.126
     x public                                                                                         0.009
                                                                                                      0.144
Sales growth                                0.136***      0.136***       0.136***      0.136***       0.136***       0.053***
                                            0.005         0.005          0.005          0.005         0.005          0.005
     x public                              -0.097***     -0.097***      -0.098***      -0.097***     -0.097***
                                            0.010         0.010          0.010          0.010         0.010
ROA                                         0.174***      0.174***       0.174***      0.174***       0.174***       0.037***
                                            0.004         0.004          0.004          0.004         0.004          0.006
     x public                              -0.135***     -0.135***      -0.135***      -0.135***     -0.135***
                                            0.024         0.024          0.024          0.024         0.024
 2
R (within)                                 29.8 %        29.8 %        29.8 %         29.8 %         29.8 %          3.5 %
F-test: all coefficients = 0?             198.8***      169.7***      167.8***       182.1***       168.6***        33.5***
F-test: coeff.(tax change, public) = 0?     1.7           1.1           2.3            0.7            1.7            n.a.
F-test: tax cut = – tax increase?           n.a.          0.5           n.a.           n.a.           n.a.           n.a.
F-test: single-state = multi-state?         n.a.          n.a.          n.a.           0.8            n.a.           n.a.


                                                                                                                              45
Table 7. Changes in Investment Sensitivities Around IPOs.
In this table, we estimate changes in the sensitivity of investment spending to investment opportunities around the IPOs of firms
that go public for the sole purpose of allowing some of their existing shareholders to cash out. Appendix C lists their names,
dates, and circumstances. We use sales growth as a measure of investment opportunities, given that this is the only measure
available for pre-IPO observations. As in previous tables, we exploit within-firm variation by including firm fixed effects.
Columns 1 and 2 report own-difference results for the IPO sample, where we interact investment opportunities and ROA with an
indicator variable that equals one if the observation is post-IPO. Columns 3 and 4 report difference-in-difference results based on
combining data from the IPO sample with data from a matched control sample of public firms. To be eligible for matching, a
public firm must be in both Compustat and CRSP; be incorporated in the U.S. and listed on the NYSE, AMEX, or Nasdaq
exchanges; have valid stock price data in CRSP; and have a CRSP share code no greater than 11. Each IPO firm is matched in its
first sample year to up to five public firms in the same industry (three-digit SIC) with the closest total assets to the IPO firm in
the year of the match. In three cases, this algorithm yields no eligible matches, so we broaden the industry criterion to two-digit
SIC. On average, we have 3.7 matches per IPO firm. The difference-in-difference tests allow us to interact investment
opportunities and ROA with separate indicators for pre- and post-IPO. Uncrossed variables capture the effect of investment
opportunities and ROA on the investment decisions of the matched control public firms, while the interaction terms test whether
IPO firms have investment behavior that is significantly different from that of their matched controls either before or after going
public, respectively. We also allow for a level difference in investment spending between IPO and matched firms by including a
post-IPO indicator. (Note that the presence of firm fixed effects rules out simultaneous inclusion of a pre-IPO indicator.) For
variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix A. Each regression includes firm fixed effects and year effects
(not reported for brevity) and is estimated using least-squares. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are shown in italics
underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided),
respectively. All continuous variables are winsorized 0.5% in each tail to reduce the impact of outliers.

                                                               Dependent variable: Investment / lagged total assets
                                                                                                Diff-in-diff with matched
                                                                Own difference                           controls
                                                                        investment                             investment
                                                           investment      (with                investment        (with
                                                            (no R&D)       R&D)                  (no R&D)         R&D)
                                                               (1)          (2)                     (3)            (4)

     Investment opportunities                                 0.074***        0.111***            0.013*           0.027***
                                                              0.025           0.031               0.007            0.008
     Investment opp. x pre-IPO                                                                    0.066**          0.092***
                                                                                                  0.028            0.035
     Investment opp. x post-IPO                              -0.058*         -0.080*              0.003            0.006
                                                              0.032           0.041               0.020            0.027
                                                                                                          ***
     ROA                                                      0.053           0.095               0.139            0.140***
                                                              0.063           0.074               0.018            0.027
     ROA x pre-IPO                                                                               -0.093           -0.052
                                                                                                  0.067            0.080
     ROA x post-IPO                                           0.059           0.057              -0.019            0.019
                                                              0.053           0.062               0.038            0.046
     Post-IPO                                                 0.001          -0.004              -0.004           -0.006
                                                              0.010           0.012               0.009            0.012

     R2 (within)                                            19.4 %           21.1 %              13.9 %          14.3 %
     F-test: all coefficients = 0                            6.7***           7.3***             16.6***         14.8***
     No. observations                                          963              963               4,501           4,501
     No. firms                                                  90                90                419             419




                                                                                                                                46
Table 8. Investment Sensitivities by Legal Form.
This table tests whether private firms in our sample are likely to be free of agency problems that could distort their investment
decisions. Agency problems ultimately stem from a separation of ownership and control and from dispersed ownership. Since
Sageworks does not report ownership information, we use legal form as a proxy for ownership concentration instead. Sole
proprietorships, LLCs (limited liability companies), partnerships, and limited liability partnerships (LLPs) in the U.S. are
overwhelmingly owner-managed and have highly concentrated ownership (see Table A8 in the Online Data Appendix). The
other two legal forms open to private firms – C Corps and S Corps – can theoretically have dispersed ownership. These account
for the bulk of our sample firms. We test for differences in investment sensitivities between C and S Corps on the one hand and
the other types of private firms in our sample on the other. If the private C and S Corps in our sample were to have dispersed
ownership and thus suffer from agency problems, their investment behavior should be systematically different from that of the
other types of private sample firms. Column 1 includes all private sample firms and allows investment sensitivities to vary by
legal form. The null is that the investment sensitivities do not differ by legal form, which we test with a Wald test. The
uninteracted effect in column 1 captures the investment sensitivity of C Corps (together with 702 firms of unknown legal origin;
dropping these has no bearing on the results). Columns 2 and 3 focus on sole proprietorships which, by definition, have a single
owner. In column 2, we compare the investment behavior of sole proprietorships to that of all other private firms, while in
column 3 we match each sole proprietorship by size and industry to a private firm that is not a sole proprietorship, using the same
matching algorithm described in Section 2.2. In columns 4 and 5, we group sole proprietorships with LLCs, partnerships, and
LLPs and compare this group to C and S Corps, using either the entire sample (column 4) or a size-and-industry matched sample
(column 5). Each regression includes firm fixed effects and year effects (not reported) and is estimated using least-squares.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the firm level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates.
We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively. All continuous variables are
winsorized 0.5% in each tail to reduce the impact of outliers.

                                                             Dependent variable: Gross investment / lagged total assets
                                                                                                          Sole prop. + LLC +
                                                                      Sole proprietorships                 partnership + LLP
                                                                                   matched to                         matched to
                                                                   vs. all other    similar           vs. all other     similar
                                                  All private        private        private             private         private
                                                    firms              firms         firms                firms          firms
                                                      (1)                (2)           (3)                  (4)           (5)
                                                            ***
 Investment opportunities                           0.057             0.054***        0.106***           0.054***       0.073***
                                                    0.007             0.004           0.036              0.004           0.018
   x sole proprietorship                           -0.017            -0.020          -0.065
                                                    0.041             0.043           0.057
   x LLC                                           -0.003
                                                    0.013
   x partnership                                   -0.013
                                                    0.016
   x LLP                                           -0.035
                                                    0.024
   x S Corp                                        -0.003
                                                    0.009
   x (sole prop.+LLC+partnership+LLP)                                                                   -0.005          -0.026
                                                                                                         0.010           0.019
                                                            ***               ***             **                 ***
 ROA                                                0.034             0.033           0.078              0.034          0.050***
                                                    0.005             0.005           0.032              0.005           0.018
   x sole proprietorship                                              0.023          -0.024
                                                                      0.028           0.043
   x (sole prop.+LLC+partnership+LLP)                                                                   -0.005          -0.023
                                                                                                         0.015           0.023

 R2 (within)                                        3.2 %             3.2 %           6.0 %             3.2 %           3.7 %
                                                       ***
 F-test: all coeff. = 0                            29.4              39.2***          4.6***           39.0***         10.6***
 F-test: inv. opp. interaction coefficients = 0     0.54              n.a.            n.a.              n.a.            n.a.
 No. observations                                  88,568             88,568          2,530             88,568          19,244
 No. firms                                         32,204             32,204          1,168             32,204           8,058




                                                                                                                                 47
Table 9. Cross-industry Variation in Short-termism.
Short-termism models predict that the difference in investment sensitivities between public and private firms is zero for 0 = 0 and then increases in 0, where 0 measures how
sensitive a public firm’s stock price is to its current cash flows. We follow the accounting literature and use the earnings response coefficient (ERC) to capture a firm’s stock price
sensitivity and include a full set of interaction terms involving ERC in our baseline investment equation from Table 3. For details of how we construct ERC, see Appendix A. Panel
A shows the results, using our matched sample of private and public firms. We report results for two separate measures of ERC, estimated at the Fama-French (1997) 30 industry
level (row 1) and at the Fama-French 48 industry level (row 2). As before, the dependent variable is gross investment over lagged assets and the regression includes firm fixed
effects and year effects (not reported) and is estimated using least-squares. Panel B illustrates the effect of ERC on investment sensitivities, as estimated in Panel A, for private and
public firms at the 25th and 75th percentile of the ERC distribution (0.077 and 0.289, respectively, when using Fama-French 30 industries and 0.085 and 0.323, respectively, when
using Fama-French 48 industries). In Panel C, we test the follow-on prediction that public firms account for a smaller share of activity in an industry the higher is the industry’s
ERC. The unit of observation is a four-digit NAICS industry. We exclude government entities (NAICS 92XX, 5211, 4911, and 8131), pension funds (5251), REITs and other
investment trusts (5259), and private households (8141). Data availability restricts us to a single cross-section, for 2007. The independent variables besides the industry’s ERC are
the industry’s R&D intensity and its capital intensity. For details of their construction, see Appendix A. In column 1 of Panel C, the dependent variable is the ratio of the number of
public firms in an industry. Specifically, we divide the number of firms in Compustat during fiscal year 2007 that belong to a particular NAICS4 industry by the total number of
firms (public + private) active in that industry according to the 2007 “Statistics of U.S. Businesses” provided by the Census Bureau. We require that Compustat firms are located in
the U.S. (excluding Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands), are listed on a major exchange, have a price quote in CRSP, have a CRSP share code no greater than 11, and report
positive sales. This variable ignores differences in firm size and so can produce meaningless results. For example, if a public firm produces 99% of the output in an industry but
there are thousands of tiny private firms, the industry would still be classified as being dominated by private firms. Chod and Lyandes (2010) suggest limiting the denominator (the
total number of firms) to firms of a certain size (e.g., in terms of employment). We follow their approach and report results for firms with at least 100 employees (column 2) or at
least 500 employees (column 3). Since we model fractions, Panel C is estimated using standard fractional logits (results are similar using OLS). Heteroskedasticity-consistent
standard errors are shown in italics. In Panels A and B, they are clustered at the firm level. In Panel C, where the unit of observation is a four-digit NAICS industry, they are
clustered at the Fama-French-30 industry level, the level at which ERC is measured. This is more conservative than clustering at the NAICS4 level. We use ***, **, and * to denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively. In Panel C, we report marginal effects in brackets underneath the standard errors. They are computed for a
one-standard deviation increase in the relevant variable, holding the other covariates constant, and should be compared to the sample mean of the dependent variable, reported in
the last row of Panel C. The number of firm-years in Panels A and B is 9,950 and the number of firms is 2,286. The number of NAICS4 industries in Panel C is 283. In Panel A, all
continuous variables are winsorized 0.5% in each tail to reduce the impact of outliers.

Panel A: Interaction results

                                                                                           Sales
                                                               Sales         Sales       growth x                                                                             F-test:
                                                 Sales       growth x      growth x       ERC x                      ERC x                        ROA x          R2          all coef.
 Row     Industry definition                    growth        public         ERC          public         ERC         public         ROA           public       (within)         =0

   1     Fama-French 30 industries              0.099***      -0.033        0.208        -0.373**       0.017       -0.010         0.168***      -0.139***     30.6%        13.1***
                                                0.031          0.036        0.154         0.174         0.058         0.057        0.019          0.028

   2     Fama-French 48 industries              0.106***      -0.048        0.189        -0.298*        0.082       -0.064         0.167***      -0.135***     30.6%        14.1***
                                                0.028          0.032        0.157         0.166         0.053         0.056        0.019          0.028




                                                                                                                                                                                      48
Panel B: Implied investment sensitivities

                             Low ERC                 High ERC
                          (25th percentile)       (75th percentile)                   Difference
                         coeff.     std. error   coeff.     std. error             coeff.    std. error

 Fama-French 30 industries:
 Private firms          0.115***     0.021       0.160***      0.023            0.044          0.033
 Public firms           0.054***     0.013       0.019*        0.010           -0.035**        0.017

 Difference             0.062***     0.025       0.141***      0.025              0.079**      0.037

 Fama-French 48 industries:
 Private firms          0.122***     0.018       0.167***      0.030            0.045          0.037
 Public firms           0.049***     0.012       0.023**       0.009           -0.026*         0.013

 Difference             0.073***     0.021       0.144***      0.031              0.071*       0.039




Panel C: Public firms’ industry shares and ERC

                                                      Fraction of firms in a four-digit NAICS
                                                     industry that are public, measured by the
                                                                  number of firms
                                                                     with 100 or     with 500 or
                                                                        more             more
                                                     all firms       employees       employees
                                                        (1)              (2)              (3)

ERC                                                  -4.408**            -5.271***          -5.110***
                                                      1.865              1.661                1.960
                                                    [-0.001]           [-0.015]             [-0.033]

industry R&D intensity                               15.916***           20.625***          26.348***
                                                      1.611               2.846              4.361
                                                     [0.001]             [0.017]            [0.048]

industry capital intensity                            6.800***            4.607***           4.334***
                                                      1.858               1.236              1.156
                                                     [0.003]             [0.018]            [0.038]


R2                                                   62.1 %              40.6 %             30.3 %
Sample mean of dep. var.                              0.006               0.046              0.099




                                                                                                          49
