NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFORMATION MANIPULATION, COORDINATION, AND REGIME CHANGE
Chris Edmond
Working Paper 17395
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17395

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2011

This is a revised version of a chapter from my UCLA dissertation. Previous versions circulated under
the title "Information and the limits to autocracy". I would particularly like to thank Andrew Atkeson
and Christian Hellwig for their encouragement and many helpful discussions. I also thank Marios Angeletos,
Costas Azariadis, Heski Bar-Isaac, Adam Brandenburger, Ethan Bueno de Mesquita, Ignacio Esponda,
Catherine de Fontenay, Matias Iaryczower, Stephen Morris, Alessandro Pavan, Andrea Prat, Hyun
Shin, Adam Szeidl, Laura Veldkamp, Iván Werning, seminar participants at the ANU, Boston University,
University of Chicago (GSB and Harris), Duke University, FRB Minneapolis, La Trobe University,
LSE, University of Melbourne, MIT, NYU, Northwestern University, Oxford University, University
of Rochester, UC Irvine, University College London and UCLA and participants at the NBER political
economy meetings for their comments. Vivianne Vilar provided excellent research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Chris Edmond. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Information Manipulation, Coordination, and Regime Change
Chris Edmond
NBER Working Paper No. 17395
September 2011
JEL No. C7,D7,D8
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a model of information and political regime change. If enough citizens act against
a regime, it is overthrown. Citizens are imperfectly informed about how hard this will be and the regime
can, at a cost, engage in propaganda so that at face-value it seems hard. This coordination game with
endogenous information manipulation has a unique equilibrium and the paper gives a complete analytic
characterization of its comparative statics. If the quantity of information available to citizens is sufficiently
high, then the regime has a better chance of surviving. However, an increase in the reliability of information
can reduce the regime's chances. These two effects are always in tension: a regime benefits from an
increase in information quantity if and only if an increase in information reliability reduces its chances.
The model allows for two kinds of information revolutions. In the first, associated with radio and mass
newspapers under the totalitarian regimes of the early twentieth century, an increase in information
quantity coincides with a shift towards media institutions more accommodative of the regime and,
in this sense, a decrease in information reliability. In this case, both effects help the regime. In the
second kind, associated with diffuse technologies like modern social media, an increase in information
quantity coincides with a shift towards sources of information less accommodative of the regime and
an increase in information reliability. This makes the quantity and reliability effects work against each
other. The model predicts that a given percentage increase in information reliability has exactly twice
as large an effect on the regime's chances as the same percentage increase in information quantity,
so, overall, an information revolution that leads to roughly equal-sized percentage increases in both
these characteristics will reduce a regime's chances of surviving.

Chris Edmond
Department of Economics
University of Melbourne
Parkville VIC 3010
AUSTRALIA
chris.edmond@gmail.com

1

Introduction

Will improvements in information technologies help in overthrowing autocratic regimes? Optimists
on this issue stress the role of new technologies in facilitating coordination and in improving
information about a regime’s intentions and vulnerabilities. The “Arab Spring” of uprisings against
autocratic regimes in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya and elsewhere that began in December 2010 has led to
widespread discussion of the role of modern social media technologies such as Facebook, Twitter,
Skype and YouTube in facilitating regime change. Similar discussion followed the use of such
technologies during the mass demonstrations against the Iranian regime in June 2009.1 Autocratic
regimes encountering significant unrest have clearly felt it important to take easily detected steps
to undermine the use of these technologies, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Egypt
120

120

90

90

60

60

30

30

0

0
Jan 2011

Feb 2011

Mar 2011

Apr 2011

May 2011

June 2011

July 2011

Libya
120

120

90

90

60

60

30

30

0

0
Jan 2011

Feb 2011

Mar 2011

Apr 2011

May 2011

June 2011

July 2011

Figure 1: Recent disruptions to Google internet traffic under autocratic regimes.
Country traffic divided by worldwide traffic and normalized to 100 on January 2, 2011. (a) Egypt: starting on January 28, 2011, all
Google services were inaccessible for 5 days during the height of protests against the Mubarak regime. (b) Libya: starting on March 4,
2011, all Google services became inaccessible as the civil war intensified. Source: Google Transparency project, August 2011.

Optimism about the use of new technologies in putting autocratic regimes under sustained pressure is hardly new; social media is only the latest technology to be viewed as a catalyst for regime
change. Simple internet access, cell phones, satellite television, radio and newspaper have all been
viewed as potential catalysts too. While information optimism has a long and somewhat mixed
history, it is also worth bearing in mind that the relationship between new information technologies
and autocratic regimes has a prominent dark side. Perhaps the most well known examples are the
1

See, for instance, Kirkpatrick (2011) for an account of the use of social media during the Egyptian protests.
Musgrove (2009) discusses the role of Twitter in the Iranian demonstrations. Optimistic sentiments have also
been expressed in the context of Google’s recent decision to cease its self-censorship of search results for Chinese
audiences. See MacMillan (2010) for a round-up of reactions to Google’s announcements.

use of mass media propaganda by totalitarian regimes like Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
And even with more recent developments, it is clear that breakthroughs in information technology
also provide opportunities for the regime. During the Iranian demonstrations, technologies like
Twitter allowed the regime to spread rumors and disinformation (Esfandiari, 2010). Similarly, it is
now well-known that the Chinese regime engages in efforts to counter online organization, efforts
that make use of the exact same technologies that optimists hope will help in bringing regime
change (Kalathil and Boas, 2003; Fallows, 2008; Morozov, 2011).
So, should we be optimistic that recent breakthroughs in information technology will lead to
the collapse of present-day autocratic regimes? To help address this question, I develop a simple
model of information and regime change. While stylized, this model provides a number of insights
into ways in which a regime’s chances of survival are affected by changes in information technology.
The model predicts that (i) an increase in the quantity of information can increase the regime’s
chances of survival,2 but (ii) an increase in the reliability of information can reduce the regime’s
chances. The model also predicts that these two effects are always in tension. The circumstances
where an increase in the reliability of information works against a regime’s interests are precisely
the circumstances where an increase in the quantity of information is in the regime’s interests.
The model clearly identifies situations where pessimism about the ability of new information
technologies to threaten autocratic regimes is born out. The simplest example of a pessimistic
situation is where an increase in the quantity of information is accompanied by a decrease in the
reliability of information, e.g., if the media is increasingly cowed by and accommodative of the
regime. Indeed, the model predicts that a regime will want to exert a strong influence over the
media exactly when new technologies make the quantity of information high. In practice, this
does seem to be a feature of autocratic regimes: a clear example is the heavily subsidized diffusion
of radios in Nazi Germany (Zeman, 1973). More generally, even if an increase in the quantity of
information is accompanied by an increase in information reliability, it can still be the case that
the regime benefits if the size of the change in reliability is not large enough.
That said, the model also clearly gives some grounds for optimism that increases in information
reliability can more than make up for increases in information quantity. The model predicts that
a given percentage increase in information reliability has exactly twice as large an effect on a
regime’s chances of surviving as the same percentage increase in the quantity of information. Thus
breakthroughs in information technology that lead to roughly equal-sized percentage increases in
information quantity and reliability will reduce a regime’s chances of surviving.
Section 2 outlines the model. There is a single regime and a large number of citizens with
heterogeneous information. Citizens can either subvert the regime or not. If enough of them subvert
the regime, it is overthrown. The ability of the regime to withstand an attempted overthrow is
2
Moreover, the consequences of an increase in the quantity of information do not operate through the kinds of
mechanisms identified by Mullainathan and Shleifer (2005), Sobbrio (2010), or Stone (2010) whereby increasing the
number of media outlets induces greater polarization or segregation amongst consumers of information.

2

determined by a single parameter, the regime’s type. Citizens are imperfectly informed about the
regime’s type and may coordinate either on overturning the regime or not. The regime is informed
about its type and seeks to induce coordination on the status quo. Citizens receive information
from a collection of “media outlets”. These media outlets place some weight on reporting the
regime’s true type and some weight on accommodating the regime’s preferred message, a message
that depends on a costly hidden action taken by the regime. Balancing these considerations,
each media outlet produces a report and citizens observe these reports with idiosyncratic noise.
Effectively, this gives the regime a signal-jamming technology that influences the distribution of
signals so that citizens receive information that suggests, at face-value, that the regime is difficult
to overthrow. Citizens are rational and internalize the regime’s incentives when forming their
beliefs. Section 3 gives the first main result of the paper: this coordination game with endogenous
information manipulation has a unique perfect Bayesian equilibrium (Proposition 1).
Section 4 turns to the question of whether more information can assist citizens in overthrowing
the regime. The second main result of this paper is that the regime’s information manipulation
is effective, in the sense of increasing the regime’s ex ante survival probability, when the quantity
of information is sufficiently high (Proposition 2). In the model, the quantity of information is
proportional to the number of media outlets. When this quantity of information is sufficiently
high, the regime survives in all states where it is possible for the regime to survive.
The reason for this result is as follows. Regimes are overthrown if their type is below an
endogenous threshold. If a regime manipulates, it generates a signal distribution with an artificially
high mean that is strictly greater than this threshold. Two effects then come into play: (i) when the
quantity of information is high, citizens have signals that are precise (of low variance) and hence
tightly clustered around the signal mean, and (ii) collectively the citizens are not, in equilibrium,
able to completely infer the extent of the regime’s manipulation. Because of the clustering around
the mean, even quite a small increase in the signal mean can cause a large fall in the size of the
aggregate attack on the regime. Some regimes can achieve precisely such an increase in the signal
mean when there is a collective inability to infer the extent of manipulation. In turn, two features
of the model account for the inability of citizens to correctly infer the manipulation: (a) different
regime types take different actions so that there is uncertainty about the amount by which citizens
should discount their signals, and (b) citizens are imperfectly coordinated. If all regimes took
the same action or if citizens were perfectly coordinated, and hence able to completely pool their
disparate information, then there would be no difficulty in inferring the extent of manipulation
and any ability the regime has to use propaganda is rendered ineffectual.
While an increasing quantity of information can be a source of effective manipulation, the
regime’s chances of survival also depend on the reliability of information as determined by the
media’s willingness to accommodate the regime. If the media is unwilling to accommodate, then
the regime’s effective costs of manipulation are high. The third main result of this paper is that an
increase in media reliability lowers a regime’s chances of survival in exactly those situations where
3

an increase in the quantity of information raises a regime’s chances (Proposition 3). In this sense,
the two effects always pull in opposite directions.
Section 5 then uses the comparative static results to interpret historical and present-day examples of the relationships between information technologies, propaganda, and autocratic regimes.
Section 6 provides various extensions of the model. These address questions such as:
• what if the regime is confronted by an increasing number of media outlets that are completely
independent of its manipulation, will that necessarily undermine it?
• is manipulation more effective if it works through aggregate (i.e., common) information rather
than individual information?
• how do outcomes change if the regime is challenged by a consolidated opposition that also
tries to change beliefs?
Section 7 then concludes. All proofs and lengthy derivations are in the appendices.
Political economy of regime change and imperfect information. Political regime change
is an important subject both in its own right and because the threat of regime change is an essential
part of modern theories of democratization, the composition of civil society, economic and political
redistribution, corruption, and a host of related topics. Acemoglu and Robinson (2006) and Bueno
de Mesquita, Smith, Siverson, and Morrow (2003) provide recent introductions to this literature.
To focus on the roles of information and coordination, this paper adopts a reduced form approach
to the payoffs of the regime and citizens. It is taken as given that the regime prefers the status
quo while citizens prefer regime change.
More specifically related are political economy models of coordination problems and/or imperfect information as barriers to regime change. Following the overthrow of the Eastern European
communist regimes in 1989, Kuran (1989, 1991, 1995), Lohmann (1994b), Sandler (1992) and others adopted the use of models of information cascades to understand why regime change can occur
seemingly spontaneously with no apparent change in economic or political fundamentals. Unlike
this paper, in these contributions the regime is essentially passive and equilibrium outcomes do
not depend on strategic interactions between the regime and the citizens.3
For simplicity, this paper adopts a static model with no cascades element. This makes the paper
more closely related to Ginkel and Smith (1999) and Bueno de Mesquita (2010) who consider costly
signaling by both a regime and a rival group of dissidents that each seek the support of a mass
of citizens. In Ginkel and Smith there is no information heterogeneity.4 By contrast, in Bueno de
Mesquita, as in this paper, information heterogeneity plays a key role in determining equilibrium
3

In an industrial organization context, however, see Bose, Orosel, Ottaviani, and Vesterlund (2006) for an
information cascade problem where an informed monopolist seeks to control the ensuing herd behavior of consumers.
4
See Baliga and Sjöström (2010) for a related model with cheap talk instead of costly signaling.

4

outcomes. In Bueno de Mesquita, heterogeneously informed citizens play a coordination game
following the actions of the dissidents. The dissidents decide how much effort to expend on violent
activities that send a noisy signal suggesting the regime is vulnerable. In this way, the dissidents
seek to ensure that citizens coordinate on overthrowing the regime. My paper is complementary
in that it also models regime change as a coordination game played by heterogeneous citizens, but
focuses instead on the regime’s efforts to ensure citizens coordinate on the status quo. Technically,
however, the papers differ in several ways. Most importantly, in Bueno de Mesquita the dissidents
are uninformed about the regime’s type and so choose a single effort level (known in equilibrium).
In my model, by contrast, the regime is informed and takes an action that depends on its type so
that individual citizens have a genuine information filtering problem.
In other complementary work, Debs (2007) shows how a regime can use the media to implement
divide-and-rule policies that may thwart regime change.
Media bias and media freedom. A recent literature determines the equilibrium degree of
media bias emerging from competition between media outlets (e.g., Mullainathan and Shleifer,
2005; Baron, 2006; Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2006). Related work determines the equilibrium degree
of media freedom from governmental influence (e.g., Besley and Prat, 2006; Egorov, Guriev, and
Sonin, 2006; Gehlbach and Sonin, 2008). A common assumption in this literature is that some
agents have an exogenous preference for information that is biased. This preference for bias affects
the consumers in Mullainathan and Shleifer (2005), the journalists in Baron (2006), and the media
outlets in Besley and Prat (2006). In my model citizens do prefer to know the truth, but cannot
exactly infer the extent of manipulation and so some bias in their signals persists in equilibrium.
Coordination games with endogenous information. This paper draws on the global games
approach to coordination games with imperfect information pioneered by Carlsson and van Damme
(1993) and Morris and Shin (1998, 2000, 2003). While coordination games often have multiple
equilibria, as is now widely known, the introduction of a small amount of idiosyncratic noise
can ensure a unique equilibrium. In a political economy setting, Boix and Svolik (2009) have
recently used the global games approach to study power-sharing arrangements in dictatorships
while Chassang and Padro-i-Miquel (2010) have used the approach in work on strategic deterrence.5
The equilibrium uniqueness result in this paper contrasts with Angeletos, Hellwig, and Pavan
(2006), who were the first to emphasize endogenous information in global games and who showed
that this can lead to multiple equilibria.6 In the version of their model closest to this paper,
Angeletos, Hellwig, and Pavan let individuals receive two noisy signals, (i) a signal of the regime’s
5
Although a coordination game with heterogeneously informed citizens, Bueno de Mesquita (2010) is technically
not a global game (because it lacks the limit dominance property). The threshold behavior in Persson and Tabellini
(2009) is also motivated by a global game but that is not essential for their analysis.
6
Other important contributions to the study of endogenous information in coordination games include Angeletos,
Hellwig, and Pavan (2007) and Angeletos and Werning (2006).

5

action (an endogenous function of the underlying state), and (ii) a signal of the underlying state
itself. By contrast, in my model individuals get one noisy signal of a function that depends on
the underlying state both directly and indirectly through the regime’s endogenous action. Loosely
speaking, citizens in my model have less information about their strategic environment.

2

Model of information manipulation and regime change

There is a unit mass of ex ante identical citizens, indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. The citizens face a regime
that seeks to preserve the status quo. Each citizen decides whether to subvert the regime, si = 1,
R1
or not, si = 0. The population mass of subversives is S := 0 si di. The type of a regime θ is its
private information and is normalized such that the regime is overthrown if and only if θ < S.
Hidden actions. Given its θ, a regime may take a hidden action â ≥ 0 in an attempt to convey
to citizens (via the media, as discussed below) that the regime’s type is θ + â. Hidden actions incur
a convex cost C(â) where C(0) = 0, C 0 (â) > 0 for â > 0 and C 00 (â) ≥ 0 for all â with C 00 (0) = 0.
Regime payoffs. The regime obtains a benefit θ − S from remaining in power. The regime is
not just concerned with remaining in power but also wants to minimize the costs of dealing with
significant unrest and so wants S small even when it survives.7 If θ < S, the regime is overthrown
and obtains an outside option with value normalized to zero. The payoff to a regime is therefore
B(S, θ) − C(â),

B(S, θ) := max[0, θ − S]

(1)

Media outlets. Citizens obtain information about the regime’s type from N identical media
outlets. Each media outlet n = 1, ..., N chooses a signal mean yn for the information it produces
and each citizen i ∈ [0, 1] costlessly acquires a signal xi,n , one from each of the N outlets.8 Each
signal is of the form xi,n = yn + εi,n where the εi,n are jointly IID normal across citizens and across
media outlets with mean zero and precision α̂ > 0 (that is, variance 1/α̂). The owners of media
outlets are assumed to have preferences that trade off a desire to accommodate the regime against a
desire to provide a truthful, reliable, report of the regime’s type. Each media outlet places a weight
r ∈ [0, 1) on reporting the true type θ and weight 1 − r on accommodating the regime’s preferred
message θ + â. Each outlet chooses a signal mean yn to minimize a quadratic loss function
r (yn − θ)2 + (1 − r) (yn − (θ + â))2

(2)

7
The regime prefers to avoid events like suppressing a Prague Spring or a Tiananmen Square demonstration.
The main results are unchanged if instead the regime cares only for survival and has no direct aversion to S.
8
Following Mullainathan and Shleifer (2005), this can be interpreted as follows: the marginal cost of producing
information is zero and Bertrand competition between symmetric media outlets has driven the price of information
to zero. To be consistent with this interpretation, the number of symmetric media outlets should be N ≥ 2.

6

with solution
yn = θ + (1 − r)â

(3)

If the media is reliable, r = 1, then the signal mean is the true type θ while if the media is
unreliable, r = 0, the signal mean is the regime’s preferred report θ + â.
Citizen information. Citizens begin with common, uninformative, priors for the regime type
θ. They then costlessly acquire their N signals from the media outlets
xi,n := yn + εi,n = θ + (1 − r)â + εi,n ,

n = 1, ..., N

(4)

Because the media outlets are symmetric, the information of citizen i can be represented by the
P
9
average signal xi := N1 N
n=1 xi,n which satisfies
xi = θ + (1 − r)â + εi
P
where similarly εi := N1 N
n=1 εi,n . Since the εi,n are jointly IID normal across N with mean zero
and precision α̂, a citizen’s average noise εi is also normal with mean zero and precision α := N α̂.
Since it is proportional to N , I refer to the aggregate signal precision α as a measure of the
quantity of information available to citizens. With this representation of citizen information, it is
also natural to analyze the model in terms of the regime’s effective hidden action a := (1 − r)â.
Since the qualitative properties of the model are the same for any fixed r < 1, I abuse notation
slightly and generally write C(a) rather than C(a/(1 − r)) for the regime’s cost function. The
density of xi is
√
√
(5)
f (xi |θ, a) := αφ( α(xi − θ − a))
where φ(·) denotes the standard normal PDF.
Citizen payoffs. A citizen’s payoffs depend on whether the regime is overthrown or not and on
whether that individual participated or not. Let p(S, θ) denote the cost of subverting
(
p(S, θ) :=

p
p

if θ ≥ S
,
if θ < S

0 ≤ p and p ≤ p, strictly if p = 0

(6)

so that an individual who subverts pays a higher price p if the regime survives and a lower price p
if the regime is overthrown. This specification allows for the possibility that individual subversion
is only costly if the regime survives (i.e., p = 0 and p > 0) or for the possibility that the cost
of individual subversion does not depend on the regime outcome (i.e., p = p > 0). Similarly, let
9

If different media outlets had different preferences for accommodating the regime, then citizens would not weigh
them equally. An extension involving heterogeneous media outlets is given in Section 6 below.

7

u(si , S, θ) denote the benefit from the regime outcome


 u
u(si , S, θ) :=
u


0

if θ < S and si = 1
if θ < S and si = 0 ,
otherwise

0<u≤u

(7)

so that if an individual subverts and the regime is overthrown, then that individual gets u while a
citizen who “free-rides” on successful regime change gets u ≤ u. Otherwise, if the regime survives,
citizens get no benefit and pay costs according to (6) above. A citizen’s net utility is
U (si , S, θ) := u(si , S, θ) − p(S, θ)si

(8)

Or, in tabular form,
subvert si = 1

not subvert si = 0

u−p
0−p

u
0

regime overthrown (θ < S)
not overthrown (θ ≥ S)
Citizens choose si to maximize expected utility.

2.1

Equilibrium

A symmetric perfect Bayesian equilibrium is an individual’s posterior density π(θ|xi ), individual
subversion decision s(xi ), mass of subversives S(θ, a) and regime hidden actions a(θ) such that
f (xi |θ, a(θ))
f (xi |θ, a(θ)) dθ
−∞

π(θ|xi ) = R ∞
s(xi ) ∈ argmax
si ∈{0,1}

Z

∞


U (si , S(θ, a(θ)), θ)π(θ|xi ) dθ

−∞

Z
S(θ, a) =

∞

−∞

s(xi )f (xi |θ, a) dxi

a(θ) ∈ argmax {B(S(θ, a), θ) − C(a)}
a≥0

The first condition says that a citizen with information xi takes into account the regime’s manipulation a(θ). The second says that given these beliefs, s(xi ) is chosen to maximize expected
utility. The third condition aggregates individual decisions to give the mass of subversives. The
final condition says that the actions a(θ) maximize the regime’s payoff. In equilibrium, the regime
is overthrown if θ < S(θ, a(θ)) and otherwise survives.

8

2.2

Further discussion of the model

Collective action and free-riding. This model involves a collective action problem. Overthrowing the regime requires coordination — the regime can only be overthrown if enough citizens
act against it — but the benefits from regime change are a public good that can be enjoyed by
all citizens.10 As forcefully argued by Olson (1971), this creates an inventive for an individual to
free-ride on the actions of others, an incentive that in turn undermines the prospects for successful
regime change.
In this paper I impose a condition on citizen payoffs that prevents the incentive to free-ride from
being “overwhelming” while still allowing this incentive to play a role in determining equilibrium
outcomes. To derive this condition, let P (xi ) denote the posterior probability assigned to the
regime’s overthrow for a citizen with signal xi . The expected payoff from subverting the regime,
s(xi ) = 1, is
(u − p)P (xi ) + (0 − p)(1 − P (xi ))
while the expected payoff from not subverting the regime, s(xi ) = 0, is
(u − 0)P (xi ) + (0 − 0)(1 − P (xi ))
Collecting terms and rearranging, this citizen will find subversion optimal if and only if
P (xi ) ≥

p
=: p
(p − p) + (u − u)

(9)

The difference u − u measures the incentive to free-ride. A bad free-rider problem is one of the
reasons why the effective opportunity cost of subversion, p, may be high. A sufficiently severe
free-rider problem will make p ≥ 1 in which case it is never rational for an individual to engage
in subversion. To focus on the more interesting scenario where the free-rider problem is in tension
with the coordination problem and the outcome of the game is not trivial, I assume parameters
such that p < 1, specifically:
Assumption 1. The incentive to free-ride is not overwhelming, u − u > p.
The existence of a differential gain to being part of a successful overthrow, u−u > 0, is necessary
but not generally sufficient to ensure p < 1. In the important special case where p = 0 so that
citizens pay no price for subverting if the regime is successfully overthrown, however, then u−u > 0
is also sufficient to ensure p < 1. One straightforward interpretation of the differential gain u − u
is a higher probability of individual material rewards in the event of participating in successful
regime change (more private consumption, preferential treatment, etc), but these considerations
10

The use of a coordination game to model regime change is common in the political economy literature — see
for example Kuran (1989, 1995) or more recently Fearon (2006) and Bueno de Mesquita (2010).

9

seem more appropriate for sustaining effective coordination by a small number of non-anonymous
agents and less appropriate for a model of coordination by a large number of anonymous agents.
Given this, it is important that the differential gains u − u also capture non-material concerns such
as individual shame from non-participation. Whenever Assumption 1 is satisfied, the individual
si and the aggregate S are strategic complements. The more citizens subvert the regime, the more
likely it is that the regime is overthrown and so the more likely it is that any individual’s best
response is also to subvert.
Overcoming free-rider problems. A large literature in political economy discusses how freerider problems can be mitigated in practice. Assumption 1 should be understood as a reduced form
for these mechanisms. For example, Lohmann (1993, 1994a) considers a model where individuals
participate in individually costly political action out of the desire to signal private information
about a common fundamental.11 In her model, individuals are heterogeneous with respect to their
preferences over aggregate outcomes and thus, despite the fact that any individual is small relative
to the population, some individuals — those with “moderate” preferences — have a disproportionate impact on the beliefs of others and so find it worthwhile to pay the individual cost of political
action. Other theoretical approaches to the free-rider problem include Karklins and Petersen
(1993) who consider a sequence of stag-hunt coordination games that capture the gradual building
of a coalition against the regime. Fearon (2006) considers reputation-formation in a repeated game
between a large number of citizens and a regime. In public choice theory, the literature on club
goods as applied to social and political movements emphasizes the use of partial excludability to
overcome free-rider problems, as in Tullock (1971, 1974), or for a recent application Berman and
Laitin (2008). Another form of partial excludability is the threat of reprisal against individuals
who collaborate with an overthrown regime.12 Finally, from an empirical point of view, the evidence suggests that in practice it is hard for individuals to free ride on an insurgency against a
regime (Kalyvas, 2007) and there is abundant historical evidence on the costs of collaboration, see
Jackson (2001) and Frommer (2005) for instance.
Media outlets. Similar to the media bias model of Mullainathan and Shleifer (2005), where
media outlets report an unbiased estimate of the truth plus some slant, here media outlets report
the true θ plus the attempted manipulation of the regime a = (1−r)â. In Mullainathan and Shleifer
however, media outlets only add slant in equilibrium if citizens have an exogenous preference for
11

Of these, Lohmann (1993) is most closely related to this paper. In that model, there is a large agent that takes
a political action in response to the collective decisions of many small voters, but in her setting the large agent has
preferences that align with the median voter whereas the large agent in this model, the regime, is diametrically
opposed to the preferences of the citizens.
12
In a binary action game like the one in this paper, individual citizens who do not subvert implicitly collaborate
with the regime in that they make it harder to raise a mass of subversives S large enough to force regime change.

10

biased information.13 In my model, information is biased in equilibrium without citizens having
any preference for bias. Even though media outlets have some tolerance for manipulation, given
by 1 − r, ultimately it is the underlying coordination game and incomplete information about the
regime’s type θ that allows bias in equilibrium, not the media’s r. The regime is the ultimate
source of any bias with the media outlets an essentially passive channel by which the regime’s
action is passed along. The reliability of information does change the regime’s effective costs of
manipulation but does not affect the citizens’ ability to discard any bias that has been introduced.
Hidden actions and media influence. The hidden action a = (1 − r)â represents the collective impact of all the regime’s behind-the-scenes efforts at spinning, lobbying, bullying, and
blackmailing media owners, editors and journalists. It is common knowledge that this influence
occurs, but it is not possible for individual citizens to observe it directly and instead its extent
must be inferred. The regime’s cost function accounts for all the direct and indirect costs of exerting this behind-the-scenes influence over the media. To simplify the analysis and to focus on
the effects of the regime’s attempted manipulation in determining equilibrium outcomes, I treat
r as a parameter. Besley and Prat (2006) and Gehlbach and Sonin (2008) provide models of the
equilibrium extent of government influence over the media, but they do not share this paper’s
focus on coordination problems or regime change.
Public or private signals. An important issue in coordination games with incomplete information is the extent to which signals are public or private. A sufficiently precise public signal is
often a source of multiple equilibria. More generally, changes in public information often have
a disproportionate impact on equilibrium outcomes. In my setting, the term “public signal” is
unfortunate in that it calls to mind public media and it is natural to think of the regime’s manipulation operating through this channel (e.g., through broadcast television). In my model, the
regime’s action enters the citizens’ individual signals xi = θ + (1 − r)â + εi and I interpret the
media, collectively, as determining the common or systematic component of the signal, θ + (1 − r)â,
while the idiosyncratic component, εi , captures all the cross-sectional variation in beliefs created
by an individual citizen’s haphazard media consumption. An individual’s signal xi does not reflect a private channel of communication from the regime to i but instead reflects individual i’s
idiosyncratic observation of a common channel of communication, namely the N media outlets.
13

In Mullainathan and Shleifer (2005), if individuals have heterogeneous preferences — say some preferring slant
one way, some the other — then competitive media outlets differentiate and the market for information is segmented
in a manner that serves to align individuals’ preference for biased information with the reports they actually receive.
By contrast, in Gentzkow and Shapiro (2006) market competition serves to reduce the amount of bias.

11

2.3

Exogenous information benchmarks

Two important special cases of the model are when: (i) the regime’s type is common knowledge,
or (ii) there are no hidden actions and so the analysis reduces to a standard global game.
Common knowledge. If θ is common knowledge, costly hidden actions are pointless and a(θ) =
0 for all θ. The model reduces to a standard coordination game. If θ < 0, any crowd S ≥ 0
can overthrow the regime. It is optimal for any individual to riot, all do so, and the regime is
overthrown. If θ ≥ 1, no crowd can overthrow the regime. It is optimal for any individual not
to riot, none do, and the regime survives. If θ ∈ [0, 1), the regime is “fragile” and multiple selffulfilling equilibria can be sustained. For example, if each individual believes that everyone else
will riot, it will be optimal for each citizen to do so and S = 1 > θ leads to the regime’s overthrow
and the vindication of the initial expectations.
Standard global game. If there are no hidden actions, a(θ) = 0 for all θ, then each citizen
has signal xi = θ + εi and the analysis reduces to a standard global game. Because each citizen
has a signal of the regime’s type, expectations are no longer arbitrary. As discussed by Carlsson
and van Damme (1993), Morris and Shin (1998) and much subsequent literature, this introduces
the possibility of pinning down a unique equilibrium outcome.14 In this equilibrium, strategies are
threshold rules: there is a unique type θ∗ such that the regime is overthrown for θ < θ∗ and a
unique signal x∗ such that a citizen subverts for xi < x∗ . These thresholds are characterized by:
∗
Morris-Shin Benchmark. The unique equilibrium thresholds x∗MS , θMS
simultaneously solve

√ ∗
Φ( α(θMS
− x∗MS )) = p
√
∗
∗
Φ( α(x∗MS − θMS
)) = θMS

(10)
(11)

∗
where Φ(·) denotes the standard normal CDF. In particular, θMS
= 1 − p independent of α and
√
x∗MS = 1 − p − Φ−1 (p)/ α.
∗
The first condition says that if the regime’s threshold is θMS
, the marginal citizen with signal
∗
xi = xMS will be indifferent between subverting or not. The second condition says that if the signal
∗
threshold is x∗MS , a regime with type θ = θMS
will be indifferent between abandoning its position
or not. In the analysis below, I will say that a regime’s hidden action technology is effective if in
∗
equilibrium θ∗ < θMS
= 1 − p.
As the signal precision α becomes high, some regimes are faced with a powerful incentive to
shift the signal mean in their favor. Specifically, the equilibrium mass of subversives is

√
√
∗
SMS
(θ) := Φ( α(x∗MS − θ)) = Φ( α(1 − p − θ) − Φ−1 (p))
14

This result depends on a relatively diffuse common prior (Hellwig, 2002; Morris and Shin, 2000, 2003).

12

(12)

∗
and as the precision α → ∞, the mass SMS
(θ) → 1{1 − p > θ} where 1{·} denotes the indicator
function. In this case, the equilibrium mass of subversives is a step function around the Morris∗
Shin benchmark. If the regime’s type is θ < θMS
= 1 − p, it faces a unit mass of subversives and is
∗
overthrown. If the regime has θ > θMS it faces zero subversives and survives. A small increase in
∗
the signal mean would suffice to enable a regime with θ just below θMS
to achieve a large reduction
in the size of the attack and to switch from being overthrown to surviving. In short, as information
becomes precise, there is a large incentive for marginal regimes to shift the signal mean.

3

Unique equilibrium with information manipulation

When information depends on the the regime’s manipulation, a citizen’s signal xi is informative
for both the regime’s θ and its hidden action. The hidden action is itself informative about θ and
citizens take this into account when forming their beliefs. In equilibrium, the regime’s action and
the beliefs of citizens need to be mutually consistent. The first main result of this paper is that
there is a unique equilibrium:
Proposition 1. There is a unique perfect Bayesian equilibrium. The equilibrium is monotone in
the sense that there exist thresholds x∗ and θ∗ such that s(xi ) = 1 for xi < x∗ and zero otherwise,
while the regime is overthrown for θ < θ∗ and not otherwise.
A detailed proof is given in Appendix A. Briefly, the proof involves first showing (i) that there is
a unique equilibrium in monotone strategies, and (ii) that the unique monotone equilibrium is the
only equilibrium which survives the iterative elimination of interim strictly dominated strategies.
Here in the main text I give a brief characterization of the unique equilibrium.

3.1

Equilibrium characterization

Let x̂ denote a candidate for the citizens’ threshold and let Θ(x̂) and a(θ, x̂) denote candidates for
the regime’s threshold and hidden actions given x̂.
Regime problem. Since individual citizens subvert s(xi ) = 1 for xi < x̂, for any given x̂ the
aggregate mass of subversives facing the regime is
Z

x̂

−∞

√
√
√
αφ( α(xi − θ − a)) dxi = Φ( α(x̂ − θ − a))

(13)

(using the expression for the signal density given in (5) above). And since the regime is overthrown
for θ < Θ(x̂), hidden actions are a(θ, x̂) = 0 for all θ < Θ(x̂), otherwise the regime would be
incurring a cost but receiving no benefit. For all θ ≥ Θ(x̂), the regime chooses hidden actions
 √

a(θ, x̂) ∈ argmin Φ( α(x̂ − θ − a)) + C(a)
a≥0

13

(14)

A key step in proving equilibrium uniqueness is to recognize that hidden actions are given by
a(θ, x̂) = A(θ − x̂), where the auxiliary function A : R → R+ is exogenous and in particular does
not depend on the citizen threshold x̂. Using (13), this function is defined by

 √
A(t) := argmin Φ( α(−t − a)) + C(a)

(15)

a≥0

The regime threshold Θ(x̂) is then found from the indifference condition
√
Θ(x̂) = Φ[ α(x̂ − Θ(x̂) − A(Θ(x̂) − x̂))] + C[A(Θ(x̂) − x̂)]

(16)

This condition requires that total costs equal total benefits at the extensive margin. For any given
candidate citizen threshold x̂, equations (15)-(16) determine the regime threshold Θ(x̂) and hidden
actions a(θ, x̂) = A(θ − x̂) solving the regime’s problem.
Citizen problem. Now given a candidate citizen threshold x̂ and the solution to the regime’s
problem, an individual citizen with arbitrary signal xi will subvert the regime if and only if Pr[θ <
Θ(x̂) | xi , a(·, x̂)] ≥ p, where p is the effective opportunity cost of subversion (as given in equation
(9) above) and where the posterior probability assigned to the regime being overthrown is
√
αφ( α(xi − θ)) dθ
√
Pr[θ < Θ(x̂) | xi , a(·, x̂)] := R ∞ √
αφ( α(xi − θ − a(θ, x̂)) dθ
−∞
R Θ(x̂) √
−∞

(using a(θ, x̂) = 0 for all θ < Θ(x̂) in the numerator). Writing the hidden actions in terms of the
auxiliary function a(θ, x̂) = A(θ − x̂), evaluating at xi = x̂, and then equating the result to the
effective opportunity cost p gives the indifference condition characterizing the citizen threshold
R Θ(x̂) √
√
αφ( α(x̂ − θ)) dθ
−∞
R∞ √
√
=p
αφ(
α(x̂
−
θ
−
A(θ
−
x̂)))
dθ
−∞

(17)

Monotone equilibrium. A monotone equilibrium is given by a pair of thresholds simultaneously
solving the indifference conditions (16) and (17). As shown in Appendix A, there is a unique
monotone equilibrium with thresholds denoted x∗ and θ∗ . The regime’s equilibrium hidden actions
are given by a(θ) = A(θ − x∗ ) using the auxiliary function from (15). A key step in the proof is
showing that the posterior probability on the left hand side of equation (17) depends only on the
difference Θ(x̂) − x̂ and is monotone increasing in this argument so that (17) can be solved for a
unique difference θ∗ − x∗ . Similarly, the right hand side of the regime indifference condition (16)
only depends on the difference Θ(x̂) − x̂ so we can take the unique solution θ∗ − x∗ from (17) and
plug it into the right hand side of (16) to determine θ∗ separately.
The appendix goes on to show that this unique monotone equilibrium is all that remains after

14

the iterative elimination of interim strictly dominated strategies. Thus, this monotone equilibrium
is the only equilibrium.

3.2

Further discussion of equilibrium uniqueness

The uniqueness result in Proposition 1 contrasts with Angeletos, Hellwig, and Pavan (2006), who
were the first to emphasize endogenous information in a global game. In their benchmark model,
individuals get one noisy observation of θ plus one observation of a signal a chosen at cost C(a)
by the regime which may also be informative for θ. Individual strategies s(xi , a) may condition
on a. In this signaling game, there is typically an uninformative pooling equilibrium and many
separating equilibria. For example, if each individual expects no manipulation, individual strategies
and hence the aggregate mass S will be independent of a. Given this, the regime has no incentive
to manipulate and so validates the original expectation.
In the version of their model closest to this paper, Angeletos, Hellwig, and Pavan let individuals
receive two noisy signals, (i) a signal of the regime’s endogenous action a(θ), and (ii) a signal of
θ itself. Multiple equilibria arise even in this scenario.15 By contrast, in my model individuals
get one noisy observation of one object, the sum θ + a(θ), instead of separate signals for the two
constituent parts. Since this is the only essential difference between the models, this suggests it is
the restriction that citizens only see the sum that delivers equilibrium uniqueness in my setting.

3.3

Hidden actions

To characterize the regime’s hidden actions, it is instructive to recast the regime’s problem in
terms of the signal mean. Let V (y, θ) denote the payoff to a regime of type θ if they choose signal
mean y = θ + a, that is
√
V (y, θ) := θ − Φ( α(x∗ − y)) − C(y − θ),

θ ≥ θ∗

(18)

with V (y, θ) = 0 for all θ < θ∗ . The payoff V (y, θ) is supermodular in y and θ, in particular16
∂2
V (y, θ) = C 00 (y − θ) ≥ 0
∂y∂θ

(19)

Consequently, the signal mean y(θ) = θ+a(θ) is increasing in the regime’s type θ, strictly increasing
if the cost function is strictly convex. More specifically, for θ < θ∗ hidden actions are zero and the
signal mean is just y(θ) = θ. At the threshold θ∗ the mean jumps discretely to y(θ∗ ) = θ∗ + a(θ∗ ).
The signal mean y(θ) is thereafter increasing in θ, strictly if the cost function is strictly convex.
15

The action a(θ) also has a payoff relevant effect in Angeletos, Hellwig, and Pavan (2006) but this is not essential.
The objective function has a kink at the threshold, so at θ∗ the expression (19) should be interpreted as the
right-hand derivative (the left-hand derivative is zero at that point).
16

15

The hidden actions themselves are characterized by the first order necessary condition17
∂
V (y, θ) = 0
∂y

⇔

√

√
αφ( α(x∗ − θ − a)) = C 0 (a),

θ ≥ θ∗

(20)

The marginal benefit of an action is the associated reduction in the mass of subversives and at an
interior solution this is equated to C 0 (a).

4

Equilibrium information manipulation

The most interesting implication of this model is that the regime’s information manipulation —
or signal-jamming — is more effective if the quantity of information, as measured by the effective
signal precision α = N α̂, is sufficiently high. Section 4.1 gives an extended example of this effect
using a specific case that is particularly easy to handle, namely the case where the regime’s cost
function is linear. Section 4.2 presents results for strictly convex cost functions. Section 4.3
provides further intuition and compares these results with other signal-jamming models in the
literature. Finally, Section 4.4 shows that an increase in the reliability of information is in tension
with an increase in the quantity of information in the sense that they always have opposite effects
on the regime’s chances of surviving.
Terminology. I draw a distinction between whether signal-jamming occurs in equilibrium (when
a(θ) > 0 for some θ) and whether it is effective. I measure the effectiveness of signal-jamming by
∗
its ability to reduce the regime’s threshold θ∗ below the Morris-Shin level of θMS
= 1 − p. A lower
∗
θ increases the regime’s ex ante survival probability by making it more likely that nature draws
a θ ≥ θ∗ . In principle, it might be the case that lower θ∗ is achieved through large, costly, actions
that give the regime a lower net payoff than they would achieve in the Morris-Shin world. But
it turns out that as α → ∞ and θ∗ falls, hidden actions also become small so that the fall in θ∗
represents a genuine increase in payoffs, at least in the limit.

4.1

Signal-jamming with linear costs

In the special case of a linear cost function, C(a) := ca for some constant marginal cost c, the
regime’s hidden actions can be calculated explicitly.
Corner solutions. In this special case, the regime may be at a corner solution. In particular, the
√
√
marginal benefit of an action a is the reduction in the mass of subversives, i.e., αφ( α(x∗ −θ−a)).
√
√
This marginal benefit is bounded above by αφ(0) where φ(0) = 1/ 2π ≈ 0.399 is the maximum
17

The first order condition (20) may have zero, one or two solutions. In the event of two solutions, only the higher
solution satisfies the second order condition.

16

value of the standard normal density. Consequently, if the signal precision is too low, namely

α ≤ α :=

c
φ(0)

2
(21)

then the marginal benefit from manipulation is too low to justify the cost and the regime is at a
corner solution with a(θ) = 0. Otherwise, if α > α then the regime may be at an interior solution.
Interior solutions. Manipulating the first order condition (20) shows that interior solutions to
the regime’s problem are given by
a(θ) = θ∗∗ − θ,

θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ )

(22)

α>α

(23)

where θ∗∗ := x∗ + γ and where γ > 0 is defined by
s
γ :=

 
α
,
α

1
log
α

In this case, the signal-jamming is acute. All regimes that manipulate information pool on the
same distribution of signals. Since the signal mean is y(θ) = θ + a(θ), all regimes that manipulate,
i.e., all θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ), generate a mean of θ∗∗ . As shown in Figure 2, these regimes mimic the signal
mean of a type θ∗∗ that is intrinsically more difficult to overthrow (than they are) and generate
signals for the citizens xi = x∗ + γ + εi that are locally completely uninformative about θ. As a
consequence of this signal-jamming, the equilibrium precision of a citizen’s information is generally
less than its intrinsic “fundamental” precision α. Appendix C provides a more detailed discussion
of the implications of the signal-jamming for equilibrium beliefs.
Solving the indifference conditions. To complete the solution of the model, write the indifference condition of the marginal citizen (17) in terms of the equilibrium thresholds x∗ , θ∗ and
hidden actions a(θ), as follows
√
Φ[ α(θ∗ − x∗ )] =

p
1−p

Z

∞

√

θ∗

√
αφ[ α(x∗ − θ − a(θ))] dθ

Now use the first order condition (20) and C 0 (a) = c to simplify the right hand side integral
Z

∞

θ∗

√

√
αφ[ α(x∗ − θ − a(θ))] dθ =

Z

θ∗∗

Z
c dθ +

θ∗
∗

∞

θ∗∗

√ √
αφ[ α(x∗ − θ)] dθ

√
= (x − θ + γ)c + Φ(− αγ)

17

∗

(24)

signal mean
y(θ) = θ + a(θ)

θ ∗∗

all regimes θ ∈ [θ ∗ , θ ∗∗ ) pool
on the same signal distribution
in equilibrium

θ∗

θ ∗∗

regime type θ

Figure 2: Signal-jamming with linear costs.
The equilibrium signal mean y(θ) = θ + a(θ) when the regime has linear costs of manipulation. All regimes with θ < θ∗ are overthrown.
All regimes with θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ) generate the same signal distribution in equilibrium. They mimic a higher type of regime θ∗∗ that will
not be overthrown and generate signals for the citizens that are (locally) uninformative about θ.

where the first equality uses a(θ) = 0 for θ ≥ θ∗∗ and the second equality uses θ∗∗ = x∗ + γ.
Plugging this back into (24) gives us the first of two equations characterizing the two thresholds
√
Φ[ α(θ∗ − x∗ )] =


√
p  ∗
(x − θ∗ + γ)c + Φ(− αγ)
1−p

(25)

As a function of the difference θ∗ − x∗ , the left hand side is a continuous, strictly increasing oneto-one map from R to [0, 1]. Similarly, as a function of θ∗ − x∗ the right hand side is a continuous,
strictly decreasing one-to-one map from R to R so, by the intermediate value theorem, there is a
unique difference that solves this equation. As shown in Appendix A, the fact that the marginal
citizen’s indifference condition uniquely determines the threshold difference θ∗ − x∗ is true more
generally and is not particular to the case of linear costs.
The regime threshold θ∗ is then determined using the indifference condition (16) which, with
linear costs, can be written
√
θ∗ = (x∗ − θ∗ + γ)c + Φ(− αγ)
(26)
where the difference θ∗ − x∗ on the right hand side is implicitly determined by (25) above.
Use of manipulation vs. effectiveness of manipulation. As in classic signaling games, the
regime is able to send a (noisy) signal in equilibrium and this enables some weaker regime types
to pool with stronger regime types. Whether this pooling behavior is effective in equilibrium is
another matter. In principle, it might be true that the only regime types that are able to imitate
18

stronger regime types are those regimes that would have survived even in the absence of the signaljamming technology. Moreover, it might also be true that some weak regimes that would survive if
they could commit not to use information manipulation are overthrown because they cannot make
that commitment. In short, regimes may manipulate information in equilibrium but it does not
follow that manipulation is necessarily effective in increasing the likelihood of the regime surviving.
It turns out that manipulation is effective when the signal precision α is high.
Effective manipulation when signal precision is high. In the special case of linear costs,
it is possible to give a complete characterization of the effects of increases in α. The sensitivity of
the regime threshold θ∗ to the signal precision α is characterized by:
Proposition 2. For each c there is a α(c) such that for all α ≤ α(c) all regimes are at a corner
∗
solution with a(θ) = 0 for all θ and θ∗ = θMS
. Otherwise, for all α > α(c) regimes θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ) are
at an interior solution and there is a critical precision α∗ (c, p) ≥ α(c) given by


2 
α∗ (c, p) := α(c) exp max 0, Φ−1 (p)

(27)

such that

∂ ∗
θ <0
for all
α > α∗ (c, p)
(28)
∂α
and limα→∞ θ∗ = 0. For α sufficiently high, θ∗ is strictly less than the Morris-Shin benchmark.

From equation (21), for α ≤ α regimes are at a corner solution with a(θ) = 0 for all θ and the
∗
= 1 − p. For α > α the regimes θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ) are at an interior solution
regime threshold is θ∗ = θMS
with a(θ) > 0 and the regime threshold θ∗ is decreasing in α for all α greater than the critical
precision α∗ . In particular, if the opportunity cost of subverting is small, p < 1/2, then Φ−1 (p) < 0
and so from (27) the critical precision is just α∗ = α and the regime threshold is strictly decreasing
in α for all α > α. Hence, in this case, for all α > α the regime threshold is lower than the MorrisShin benchmark 1 − p. This is shown in the left panel of Figure 3. Alternatively, if the opportunity
cost of subverting is large, p > 1/2, then Φ−1 (p) > 0, the critical precision is α∗ > α, and the
regime threshold is non-monotone in α. This is shown in the right panel of Figure 3. In this case,
the regime threshold reaches a maximum at α∗ and strictly decreases thereafter. Again, for high
enough α it is the case that the regime threshold θ∗ is lower than the Morris-Shin benchmark.
Even the most fragile regimes can survive. This result is striking. As the precision becomes
sufficiently high, all the regimes that can survive, do survive. To see an extreme example of this,
consider an economy with effective opportunity cost p → 0 so that it requires almost no individual
sacrifice to participate in an attack on the regime. In the Morris-Shin benchmark we would have
∗
θMS
→ 1 and only the strongest of all regimes, those with θ ≥ 1, can survive. But with information
manipulation, we have θ∗ → 0 so all regimes θ ≥ 0 survive even though p is very low. If information
19

regime threshold θ∗
1

1

1−p
1/2

1/2
1−p

θ∗

θ∗
0

0

α = α∗

α α∗

signal precision α

Figure 3: Information manipulation is effective when signal precision α is sufficiently high.
The left panel shows the case when p < 1/2 and the regime threshold θ∗ is monotone decreasing in the precision α, the right panel shows
the case when p > 1/2 so that θ∗ is non-monotone in α. In both cases, for low enough precision (α < α) the regime threshold coincides
∗
with the Morris-Shin benchmark θMS
= 1 − p. In both cases, for high enough α the threshold is reduced below this benchmark.

can be manipulated and signals are sufficiently precise, then even the very most fragile regimes
can survive.

4.2

Strictly convex costs

The effectiveness of information manipulation when α is sufficiently high is true not just in the
special case of linear costs. For any convex cost function C(a) it can be shown that as the signal
precision α → ∞ the limiting equilibrium thresholds and hidden action profile are
lim θ∗ = 0+ ,

α→∞

lim x∗ = 0+ ,

and

α→∞

lim a(θ) = 0+

α→∞

for all θ

So for high enough α, the regime is able to reduce the threshold θ∗ below the Morris-Shin benchmark. If in addition costs are strictly convex, C 00 (a) > 0 for all a, then as α → 0+ the limiting
equilibrium thresholds and hidden action profile are
lim θ∗ = 1− ,

α→0

lim x∗ = +∞,

and

α→0

lim a(θ) = 0+

α→0+

for all θ

In short, if costs are strictly convex then for low enough α, information manipulation necessarily
∗
backfires on the regime in the sense that θ∗ > θMS
= 1 − p. Regimes would want to be able to
credibly commit to refrain from all media manipulation.
20

1

∗
benchmark Morris-Shin thresholds θMS
=1−p

regime threshold, θ∗

0.75

0.50

0.25
p = 0.25
p = 0.75

0

0

50

100

150

200

signal precision, α

Figure 4: Information manipulation with strictly convex costs.
∗
The Morris-Shin benchmark thresholds are θMS
= 1 − p for all α. With information manipulation, the regime threshold θ∗ is below
1 − p when α is sufficiently high. In this sense, more information increases a regime’s chances of survival. These examples use strictly
convex costs C(a) = a2 /2. The thresholds θ∗ → 0 as α → ∞ so that in the limit all fragile regimes θ ∈ [0, 1) survive. Note that when
α is sufficiently low information manipulation backfires in the sense that θ∗ > 1 − p and moreover θ∗ → 1 as α → 0.

Numerical examples. With general cost functions the model cannot be solved analytically.
Figure 4 shows θ∗ as a function of precision α under the assumption that C(a) = a2 /2 for three
levels of p. The higher the individual opportunity cost p, the lower the threshold and the thresholds
are decreasing in the signal precision.18

4.3

Intuition for signal-jamming results

The result that information manipulation is effective when the signal precision α is sufficiently high
depends on two crucial effects: (i) the increased density of signals near the signal mean when α is
high, and (ii) the collective inability of the citizens to neutralize the increase in the signal mean
via an increase in the signal threshold x∗ . To see these two effects, consider first the Morris-Shin
benchmark where, as a function of the regime type θ, the mass of subversives is
√
∗
SMS
(θ) = Φ( α(x∗MS − θ))
√
= Φ( α(1 − p − θ) − Φ−1 (p))
18

−→

1{1 − p > θ}

as α → ∞

If costs are linear C(a) = ca, then as discussed above, for any signal precision α below α(c) := (c/φ(0))2 , the
regime is at a corner solution such that the equilibrium threshold is the Morris-Shin benchmark 1 − p. By contrast,
with strictly convex costs the regime threshold can be driven all the way to 1 as α falls to zero.

21

In the Morris-Shin benchmark, as signals become precise the mass of subversives is a step function
∗
around 1 − p. The mass of subversives facing the marginal regime θMS
is exactly 1 − p for all
α. Relative to this benchmark, a small exogenous “shock” that increased the signal mean from θ
to θ + ã, say, would cause a shift of the step function so that the mass of subversives facing the
marginal regime would fall from 1 − p to 0 and more regimes would be able to survive. But this
only delivers a reduction in the mass of subversives if the ã is unanticipated. If the citizens could
correctly anticipate such an increase in the signal mean, then they would discount their signals
accordingly and the signal threshold would rise to x∗MS + ã. If so, there would be no increase in
the mass of subversives
√
√
∗
(θ)
Φ( α(x∗MS + ã − (θ + ã)) = Φ( α(x∗MS − θ)) = SMS
Thus there would be no effect on the regime’s ex ante chances of surviving. For the regime to
benefit from perturbing the signal mean when the density of signals near the mean is high, it must
also be the case that the citizens are, collectively, somehow inhibited in their ability to correctly
discount their signals.
Consider now the model with information manipulation. Some regimes are indeed able to
achieve an endogenous shift in the signal mean that reduces the mass of subversives they face.
All regimes with θ ≥ θ∗ mimic the signal mean of a type y(θ) = θ + a(θ) ≥ θ that is harder to
overthrow. And when signals are precise, there is a large density of citizens near this artificially
high mean. But for the regime to benefit from this it must also be the case that the signal threshold
x∗ does not increase to neutralize the increase in the signal mean. In this model citizens know the
regime’s incentives, so why can they not correctly discount their signals?
Two features of the model account for the inability of citizens to correctly discount their
signals on account of the regime’s manipulation. First, it is important that different regime types
θ generally take different actions a(θ) so citizens have imperfect information about the amount by
which they should discount their signals. If all regimes took the same action, ã, it would be easy
to undo. Second, it is important that individual citizens be imperfectly coordinated.
Different regimes take different actions. To see why it is important that different regimes
generally take different actions, consider by contrast a career concerns model, as in Holmström
(1999) and Dewatripont, Jewitt, and Tirole (1999). A standard career concerns model has the
same additive-normal setup for information manipulation θ + a + ε. But in such models, a worker’s
costly effort to manipulate information always backfires in equilibrium: the firm receiving the
signal is able to infer the worker’s action and thereby correctly decompose their signal into its
underlying components. Moreover, because the action is costly the worker is necessarily worse-off
than they would be if no manipulation was possible. This happens because in a standard career
concerns model the signal-jammer, the worker, is uninformed about its talent. The worker chooses
22

an action to maximize expected utility with expectations taken over the joint distribution of the
worker’s talent and the signals observed by the firm. So no matter what their underlying talent,
all workers choose the same action. In equilibrium this means the firm can perfectly decompose
their signal into the component due to talent and the component due to effort.
By contrast, in my model, the signal-jamming regime is informed about its type. The regime
knows its θ and takes an action a(θ) contingent on it. While in equilibrium citizens know the
function a(·), they do not know θ and so do not know the specific amount a(θ) by which they
should discount their signals. In addition, because they each have different signals xi , the citizens
generally differ in their beliefs about the true θ and therefore differ in their beliefs about the
hidden action that has been chosen. And finally, these citizens with different beliefs are playing a
coordination game amongst themselves.
Imperfect coordination among signal receivers. In traditional models of strategic information transmission such as Crawford and Sobel (1982) and Holmström (1999) there is one sender and
one signal receiver. But in this paper, and in the similar model of Angeletos, Hellwig, and Pavan
(2006), there is instead a large cross-section of imperfectly coordinated receivers. This gives rise to
effects absent from the traditional setup. Intuitively, since the incentives of the regime to manipulate information depend on the aggregate response of the citizens and since the aggregate response
and an individual’s decision are strategic complements, implicitly each citizen’s information filtering problem depends simultaneously on the information filtering problems of all the other citizens.
To see the role of imperfect coordination more formally, suppose to the contrary that citizens were
perfectly coordinated and able to act as a single large agent who could force regime change for all
θ < 1. This agent receives one signal x = θ + a + ε with precision α → ∞. For simplicity, suppose
also that costs are strictly convex. Then the single agent knows that x → y(θ) = θ + a(θ) and
y(θ) is strictly increasing and can be inverted to recover θ = y −1 (x). But knowing θ, the single
agent can deduce any manipulation a(θ) and discard it so that the regime in fact has no incentive
to undertake the costly manipulation. Therefore if citizens are perfectly coordinated, they know
x → θ and attack if and only if x = θ < 1. In this case, all the fragile regimes with θ ∈ [0, 1) are
wiped out. By contrast, if citizens are imperfectly coordinated all fragile regimes with θ ∈ [0, 1)
survive (see Appendix B for more details).

4.4

Media reliability and the costs of manipulation

The regime chooses an effective action a := (1−r)â where the weight r ∈ [0, 1) governs the media’s
willingness to accommodate the regime’s preferred message. For any fixed signal precision α, a
citizen’s information is more reliable when r = 0 so that the media reports the true θ, and less
reliable when r = 1 so that the media reports the regime’s preferred message θ + â. If the cost of
â is C(â), the cost of the effective action a is C(a/(1 − r)).
23

The reliability and quantity effects are always in tension. For simplicity, consider the
case of linear costs C(â) = â with constant marginal cost normalized to one. Then in terms
of the effective action a := (1 − r)â the cost function is ca, where the effective marginal cost is
c := 1/(1−r). Thus the effective marginal cost is in direct relationship to the reliability parameter r
with c = 1 corresponding to least reliable and c = ∞ corresponding to most reliable. Qualitatively,
the effects of an increase in r are the same as the effects of an increase in c and are given by:
Proposition 3. The effect of a change in information reliability always has the opposite sign to
the effect of a change in information quantity:
∂θ∗
2α ∂θ∗
=−
∂c
c ∂α

(29)

If α ≤ α(c), all regimes are at a corner solution with a(θ) = 0 for all θ and θ∗ = 1 − p so that both
effects are zero. Otherwise, for α > α(c), regimes θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ) are at an interior solution and the
effects are determined by whether α is larger or smaller than the critical precision α∗ (c, p).
In particular, for high enough α we have α > α∗ (c, p) and an increase in media reliability c
would increase the regime’s threshold θ∗ and reduce the regime’s ex ante chances of surviving while
at the same time an increase in the quantity of information α would reduce the threshold and so
increase its chances of surviving. In this region, α > α∗ (c, p), the level of the regime threshold is
∗
= 1 − p and the regime is benefitting from the ability to manipulate information — it is
θ∗ < θMS
just that a marginal increase in media reliability would make the regime somewhat worse off.
Proposition 3 tells us that the effects of increases in information reliability and increases in
information quantity work against each other. Since we would generally expect that dramatic
changes in information technologies will have consequences for both these characteristics, this
suggests that we will have to consider the joint effects of changes in information quantity and
reliability if we are to make use of the model in interpreting the relationship between actual
autocratic regimes and information technologies.

5
5.1

Implications of the model
Empirical predictions of the model

It may seem that the opposing quantity and reliability effects of changes in information undermine
the model’s empirical discipline. If “better information” can increase or decrease the regime’s
chances of survival depending on which effect dominates, then isn’t the model unfalsifiable? To
allay these concerns, in this section I explain in more detail the model’s key empirical predictions.
Relative magnitudes of the quantity and reliability effects. The offsetting effects of a
change in the quantity of information and a change in the reliability of information are related by
24

Proposition 3. Multiplying both sides of equation (29) by c/θ∗ > 0 and rearranging we have
∂ log θ∗
∂ log θ∗
= −2
∂ log c
∂ log α

(30)

Thus the model predicts that the information reliability effect is exactly twice as large as the information quantity effect (though of the opposite sign). A breakthrough in information technology
that gives rise to roughly equal-sized percentage increases in information quantity and reliability
will, overall, increase the regime threshold θ∗ and reduce the probability of the regime surviving.
Non-monotonicities and interaction effects. In addition, the sign of the marginal effect of
α on the probability of regime change is predicted to depend both on the level of α itself and on
interactions with the other explanatory variables. More specifically, an increase in α is predicted
to decrease the probability of regime change only if α is larger than the critical precision α∗ (c, p)
given by equation (27). This critical precision is in turn increasing in the reliability measure
c and (weakly) increasing in the opportunity cost measure p. If p is high enough (p > 1/2)
then the effects of α on the probability of regime change are non-monotone and the size of the
interval (α(c), α∗ (c, p)) is increasing in p. That is, the model predicts that if the average individual
consequences of taking action against the regime, as measured by p, is large, then it is also more
likely that we will find non-monotone effects of α on the probability of regime change.
In short, there is a well-defined set of circumstances for which the marginal effect of a greater
quantity of information changes sign. Although the model admits the possibility of either a negative
or a positive effect of the quantity of information on the probability of regime change, the fact
that the positive effect can only arise under these narrow circumstances is an important source of
empirical discipline. It would be clear evidence against this model, for example, if the quantity of
information had a positive effect on regime change even when measures of the opportunity cost p
are low. Similarly, it would be clear evidence against the model if the quantity of information had
a negative effect on regime change when α is low while having a positive effect when α is high.

5.2

Information technologies and autocratic regimes

Together Proposition 2 and Proposition 3 suggest two different kinds of information revolutions.
One kind, perhaps best associated with modern decentralized technologies like the internet and
social media, involves channels of information that are harder to manipulate by the regime for a
given cost. The second kind, perhaps best associated with relatively centralized technologies like
radio and cinema, involves technologies that can be more easily manipulated for given cost.
So, will improvements in information technology help in overthrowing autocratic regimes?
From an optimistic perspective, accounts of the 1989 collapse of the Eastern European communist
regimes often stress changes in information technology and the increasing inability of these regimes

25

to control the information that people could access (Kalathil and Boas, 2003). But historically, the
relationship between new information technologies and autocratic regimes has not always seemed
benign. The use of propaganda by totalitarian regimes such as Nazi Germany and the Soviet
Union is well known, and while the propaganda of these regimes operated through many overlapping channels, the key role played by then state-of-the-art technologies such as radio and cinema is
troubling (Arendt, 1973; Friedrich and Brzezinski, 1965). Radio and cinema made the propaganda
machinery of these regimes extraordinarily effective (Zeman, 1973). Another example serves to
reinforce this concern. While not a totalitarian regime, nineteenth century Ottoman Turkey was
nonetheless brutally autocratic. Towards the end of the nineteenth century, new information technologies like the telegraph and mass newspapers led to a pronounced increase in the quantity of
available information available. But rather than foster regime change, as an optimist might have
supposed, instead this period witnessed a dramatic consolidation of the regime’s power.
My model suggests that regimes may particularly benefit when an increase in the quantity of
information occurs at the same time as a decrease in the effective cost of information manipulation
c (or equivalently r). If a particular technological breakthrough that increases the quantity of
information also makes it easier to disseminate information through more centralized channels of
communication, then it also seems likely that the media outlets that provide information through
these new channels may increasingly fall under the influence of the regime. Indeed, in my model,
a regime will want to exert a strong influence over the media precisely when α is sufficiently high.
Consistent with this, from the moment the Nazi Party came to power in 1933 it sought everincreasing influence over the German media establishment. Control over radio and film was easiest
to establish and nearly total. Indeed, far from being threatened by new technologies, the regime
actively subsidized the diffusion of the cheap radio sets. By 1939, 70% of households owned a
radio, the highest proportion in the world at the time (Zeman, 1973).19
One response to these rather pessimistic views is that, precisely because they involve centralized
technologies such as radio and cinema that can be easily influenced by a regime, these examples
are basically uninformative about the prospects of using modern decentralized technologies to help
in overthrowing regimes. In this more optimistic view, modern technologies like the internet are
diffuse, less easily influenced by a regime, and so are more threatening to them.
My model suggests that an information revolution that leads to a surge in the quantity of
information α at the same time as an increase in the costs of manipulation c will generally have
ambiguous implications for regime change. But if the percentage change in the quantity of information and the costs of manipulation are roughly the same, then, because the magnitude of the
cost of manipulation effect is twice that of the quantity of information effect, overall the chances
of regime change will improve. In this sense, the model gives some grounds for optimism.
19

Radios were also essential for propaganda because of their ability to deliver a simultaneous, mass audience and
because of the regimes complete monopoly over the airwaves. Moreover, channels of communication like radio that
make use of a shared experience can induce relatively high degree of common knowledge amongst the public (Chwe,
2001), thereby facilitating the regime’s efforts at inducing coordination on its preferred outcomes.

26

In practice, the evidence on the effects of modern information technologies and autocratic
regimes is mixed. On the one hand, and as is now well-known, some regimes have had considerable success in countering the effects of the internet and related technologies (Chase and Mulvenon,
2002; Kalathil and Boas, 2003; Fallows, 2008; Morozov, 2011). In particular, Kalathil and Boas
(2003), emphasize the Chinese regime’s use of the exact same breakthroughs in information technology to counter online dissent.20 Similar examples of a regime’s efforts to counteract modern
technologies come from the 2009 presidential elections in Iran and subsequent demonstrations. In
the run-up to the election, the regime suspended access to social media websites like Facebook
(Ribeiro, 2009). On election day, mobile phone communications were interrupted and foreign news
providers such as the BBC experienced jamming designed to impede their broadcasts. During the
subsequent demonstrations, services like Twitter were used by the regime to provide disinformation (Esfandiari, 2010; Cohen, 2009). On the other hand, the wave of uprisings against autocratic
regimes in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, Syria and other Arab countries beginning in December 2010 has
given renewed support to the idea that modern decentralized technologies can play a significant
role in facilitating coordination against regimes even in the face of concerted efforts to disrupt such
technologies (as illustrated in Figure 1, above).

6

Extensions

To illustrate the robustness of these results, in this section I consider alternative information
structures. Section 6.1 presents a setting where citizens have additional clean information that
is not affected by the regime’s manipulation. Section 6.2 compares the effects of information
manipulation that directly affects an aggregate signal as opposed to individual signals. Section 6.3
allows for a struggle over information as a rival opposition group attempts to shift information in
the opposite direction to the regime. Section 6.4 considers a model where the regime’s actions
directly affect signal precision rather than the mean.

6.1

Heterogeneous media outlets

Suppose media outlets come in two types, some that are potentially amenable to the regime’s
message and others who resolutely report the truth. Specifically, let citizens have Nx reports from
media outlets that each give weight 1 − r to the regime’s action â, and Nz reports from media
outlets that give zero weight to the regime’s action. Citizens observe each of these reports with
20
See also Fallows (2008) for an account of the surprising effectiveness of China’s national firewall and the system
of monitoring and censorship that the firewall interacts with. Chase and Mulvenon (2002) particularly emphasize
the use of traditional authoritarian methods — arrest, detention, and seizure — in cracking down on online dissent.
Kalathil and Boas (2003) also discuss related efforts by autocratic regimes to counteract the internet in Cuba, Saudi
Arabia, and elsewhere. Similarly, Soley (1987) discusses earlier efforts by the Cuban regime to counteract US-based
satellite radio and television broadcasts.

27

idiosyncratic noise that is jointly IID normal across them and across all media outlets with mean
zero and precision α̂. Let a = (1 − r)â again denote the regime’s effective action. Then the
information of a citizen can be represented by two representative signals
xi = θ + a + εx,i ,

and

zi = θ + εz,i

(31)

where the noise terms εx,i and εz,i are independent, jointly normally distributed, both with mean
zero and precisions αx := Nx α̂ and αz := Nz α̂ respectively. This gives citizens a clean source of
information zi not affected by the regime’s manipulation. This setup is also equivalent to giving
citizens noisy signals of the hidden action a itself. Subtracting zi from xi gives
(xi − zi ) = a + (εx,i − εz,i )
This is an unbiased signal of the regime’s action a.
I consider a monotone equilibrium where the regime is overthrown for θ < θ∗ and citizens
subvert, s(xi , zi ) = 1, if their signals satisfy xi < x∗ (zi ). Here θ∗ is a single threshold and
x∗ : R → R is a threshold function, both to be determined endogenously. In this case, the mass of
subversives facing a regime that takes action a is
Z
S(θ, a) =

∞

−∞

√
√
√
Φ( αx (x∗ (zi ) − θ − a)) αz φ( αz (zi − θ)) dzi

In general a citizen makes use of both types of information even though one is contaminated
by a while the other is not. This is because, even considering the presence of manipulation,
the xi signals may still be more informative about θ than the zi signals if the precision αx is
sufficiently high relative to αz . Indeed, if αz → 0, then we are back to the main model with
only contaminated information since any uncontaminated information is too inherently noisy to
be usable. Alternatively, as αz increases, the zi signals will be given more weight, and, as αz
becomes sufficiently large, the model reduces to the Morris-Shin benchmark where the only source
of information is clean. For intermediate values of αx and αz , matters are more complex. And,
unfortunately, it is not possible to give a simple analytic characterization of the equilibrium for
general signal precisions. In Figure 5, I show several numerical examples.
The left panel shows the equilibrium hidden actions a(θ) and the citizen threshold function
x∗ (zi ) for two cases, (i) with αx = αz = .5, so that the number of media outlets is the same
for both kinds, and (ii) with αx = .5 but αz = 2.5, so that there are five times as many clean
sources of information. In both cases the overall level of precision is relatively low, so even though
the xi signals are manipulated while the zi signals are clean, citizens still draw on both kinds of
information. The citizen threshold function x∗ (zi ) is decreasing in zi because if a citizen gets a
low zi it takes a high xi to induce subversion. And as αz increases, the citizen threshold function

28

x∗ (zi ) becomes steeper so that the zi are weighed more heavily and it takes an even bigger xi
to compensate for a low zi . The right panel shows the regime threshold θ∗ as a function of the
clean precision αz for various opportunity costs p and for fixed αx = .5 for the precision of the
manipulated signal. In these examples, the θ∗ are lower than the Morris-Shin benchmarks 1 − p
and information manipulation is effective. Moreover, in this range the thresholds are decreasing
in the precision αz of the clean signal implying that, for these parameters, even an increase in the
quantity of clean information increases the regime’s chances of surviving.
These examples are only suggestive of what can happen in equilibrium. Still, it is clear that
introducing clean information unaffected by the regime’s manipulation does not by itself overturn
the possibility that more information may increase the regime’s chances of surviving.
0.25

6

αz = 2.5
0.75

αz = 0.5

αz = 2.5

αz = 0.5
0.70
1

2

threshold θ ∗

0.15

citizen threshold, x∗ (zi )

action, a(θ)

1
1

1

0.20

0.10

p = 0.25

4

0

3

4

p = 0.50
0.45
1

2

3

4

p = 0.75

1
1

-6
-4 -2

0

2

4

6

8

regime type, θ

10

5

0.25

-4

0

5

0.50

-2

0.05

2

0.2
-4

-2

0

2

4

1

clean signal, zi

2

3

4

5

precision of clean signal, αz

(a) hidden actions a(θ) and citizen thresholds x∗ (zi )

(b) regime threshold θ∗ as function of clean signal precision αz

Figure 5: Information manipulation still effective even though citizens have clean information.
Panel (a) shows that as the precision αz of the clean signal information increases, regimes near θ∗ take smaller actions a(θ) but θ∗
hardly changes. Citizens give more weight to their clean signal so x∗ (zi ) is steeper, for low values of the clean signal zi it takes a higher
value of the manipulated signal xi to induce subversion. In this example the opportunity cost of subversion is p = .25. Panel (b) shows
the regime threshold θ∗ as a function of the precision of the clean signal αz . The regime still benefits from information manipulation in
∗
that θ∗ < θMS
= 1 − p. In all of these calculations, the manipulated signal has precision αx = .5 and the cost function is C(a) = a2 /2.

6.2

Manipulating aggregate information

To this point, information manipulation has entered through individual signals xi = θ + a + εi .
But the competing roles of idiosyncratic and aggregate information is generally an important
determinant of equilibrium outcomes in global games (Hellwig, 2002; Morris and Shin, 2003). In
this section, I show that qualitatively similar results to those obtained for the main model can
be obtained if information manipulation takes place through an aggregate signal. I contrast two
setups, both with aggregate and idiosyncratic information but which differ in the channel by which
manipulation enters citizens’ information.
29

In the first setup, manipulation enters through the idiosyncratic information. That is, citizens
have xi = θ + a + εx,i as usual, but also have a common or aggregate signal z = θ + εz that is
free from manipulation. Here εx,i and εz are jointly normally distributed, both with mean zero
and precisions αx and αz respectively. This provides an appropriate benchmark against which to
judge the effects of manipulation that enters through aggregate information. The second setup
has xi = θ + εx,i but now the regime’s manipulation enters the common signal z = θ + a + εz .
Aggregate uncertainty. In both cases, I assume that the common signal z is realized after
the regime chooses its action a(θ). Thus the regime faces aggregate uncertainty and can no longer
perfectly anticipate play along the equilibrium path. I consider a monotone equilibrium where the
regime is overthrown ex post for θ < θ∗ (z) and citizens subvert, s(xi , z) = 1, if their signals satisfy
xi < x∗ (z). Here θ∗ : R → [0, 1] and x∗ : R → R are threshold functions to be determined.
Manipulation through individual signal. In this case, the ex post mass of subversives facing
a regime that takes action a is
√
S(θ, a, z) = Φ( αx (x∗ (z) − θ − a))
and the regime ex ante chooses a(θ) to maximize its expected payoff, namely

Z
a(θ) ∈ argmax −C(a) +
a≥0

∞

−∞

√
√
max[0, θ − S(θ, a, z)] αz φ( αz (z − θ)) dz



The thresholds θ∗ (z) and x∗ (z) are implicitly determined by indifference conditions for the regime
and the citizens where the mass of subversives is S(θ, a, z) as above and where citizens’ posterior
√
√
densities are proportional to φ( αx (xi − θ − a(θ)))φ( αz (z − θ)).
Manipulation through aggregate signal. In this case, the ex post mass of subversives facing
a regime is
√
S(θ, z) = Φ( αx (x∗ (z) − θ))
independent of the regime’s hidden action a. Now the regime ex ante chooses a(θ) to maximize

a(θ) ∈ argmax −C(a) +
a≥0

Z

∞

−∞

√
√
max[0, θ − S(θ, z)] αz φ( αz (z − θ − a)) dz



And again, the thresholds θ∗ (z) and x∗ (z) are implicitly determined by indifference conditions for
the regime and the citizens where the mass of subversives is S(θ, z) as above and where citizens’
√
√
posterior densities are now proportional to φ( αx (xi − θ))φ( αz (z − θ − a(θ))).

30

Numerical results. I solve these two models numerically.21 Several examples are shown in
Figure 6. The left panel shows the hidden action function a(θ) for the two models, each for two
levels of signal precision, αx = .5 and three times higher at αx = 1.5. Notice that, because of the
aggregate uncertainty, all regimes with θ > 0 take hidden actions a(θ) > 0. Even with aggregate
uncertainty, regimes with θ < 0 know they will be overthrown.
0.4

through individual signal
manipulation through individual signal

through aggregate signal

0.04

difference in expected regime threshold

manipulation through aggregate signal

hidden actions, a(θ)

0.3

individual signal precision αx
increases from αx = .5 (solid line)
to αx = 1.5 (dashed line)

0.2

0.1

0.02

αx = 0.5

αx = 0.5

0

-0.02

αx = 1
-0.04

αx = 1

αx = 1.5
-0.06

αx = 1.5
-0.08

average regime threshold less
average Morris-Shin benchmark

-0.10

-0.12
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

regime type, θ

−5

0

5

regime type, θ

10

−5

0

5

10

regime type, θ

∗ |θ]
(b) difference in average thresholds E[θ ∗ |θ] − E[θMS

(a) hidden actions a(θ) as function of regime type θ

Figure 6: Manipulation through idiosyncratic vs. aggregate information.
Panel (a) shows the regime’s hidden actions a(θ) taken to maximize its expected payoff. Since there is aggregate uncertainty, for all
θ > 0 regimes take positive actions. The darker lines show the case of manipulation through individual signals, the lighter lines show
the case of manipulation through the aggregate signal. The solid lines show low signal precisions αx = .5 while the dashed lines show
high signal precisions αx = 1.5. Panel (b) shows the difference between the average regime threshold and its Morris-Shin counterpart
for the same specifications. For higher αx , the average threshold tends to be lower than its Morris-Shin counterpart and the regime’s
gain is relatively larger when the manipulation takes place through aggregate information. In all these examples, p = .25, αz = .5 and
the cost function is C(a) = a2 /2.

In these examples, the extent of manipulation is typically larger when the signal precision is
at the higher level αx = 1.5 in the model where manipulation enters through the individual signal
channel xi . But the extent of manipulation is typically smaller when the signal precision is higher
if the manipulation enters through the aggregate signal channel. In both cases, the ex post regime
survival outcome depends on the realization of the aggregate signal z. The right panel shows the
average regime threshold less the average regime threshold that would obtain in the absence of any
manipulation (the corresponding Morris-Shin model with aggregate uncertainty) for each of the
specifications. Here we see that for higher levels of signal precision, the average regime threshold
tends to be lower than its Morris-Shin counterpart so that regimes expect to be better off. In this
21

These calculations keep the precision αz of aggregate information fixed and sufficiently low relative to the
precision of idiosyncratic information that there is no multiplicity of monotone equilibria. As shown by Hellwig
(2002) and Morris and Shin (2003), in global games multiple equilibria can be reintroduced if aggregate information
is sufficiently precise compared to aggregate information (in which case there is “approximate” common knowledge).

31

sense, the results are qualitatively similar to those obtained for the main model without aggregate
uncertainty. This specification of the model has the additional implication that the extent of
the regime’s expected gain is relatively larger if manipulation takes place through the aggregate
information.

6.3

Struggles over information

Returning to the case of a single type of information, suppose now that there is an opposition and
that if a regime is of type θ and takes action a while the opposition takes action e, then citizens
draw signals
xi = θ + a − e + εi
(32)
where, as usual, εi is IID normal with mean zero and precision α. The regime’s action a increases
the signal mean but the opposition’s action e decreases the signal mean. Both of these actions are
unobserved by individual citizens.
To highlight the struggle over manipulating information, I assume that the regime and the
opposition both know the regime’s type θ. Along the equilibrium path citizens receive signals with
mean θ + a(θ) − e(θ). If a(θ) = e(θ), then the opposition simply undoes the efforts of the regime
of type θ. I further assume that the opposition pays cost C(κe)/κ to take action e where C(·) is
the same cost function as for the regime and where κ > 0. For strictly convex cost functions, this
specification implies that costs are ordered by κ. If κ = 1, the costs of the regime and opposition
are the same, if κ > 1 then the regime has a cost advantage.
The payoff to the opposition is of the form S − C(κe)/κ so that the opposition prefers the
mass of subversives to be as large as possible (subject to the cost of taking action e), similar
to the dissidents in Bueno de Mesquita (2010). Now let S(θ, a, e) denote the aggregate mass of
subversives. Taking this as given, an equilibrium in the subgame between the regime and the
opposition consists of hidden actions a(θ), e(θ) that are mutual best responses
a(θ) ∈ argmax {B(S(θ, a, e(θ)), θ) − C(a)}

(33)

e(θ) ∈ argmax {S(θ, a(θ), e) − C(κe)/κ}

(34)

a≥0

e≥0

The regime’s outside option introduces a key asymmetry between the regime and the opposition.
The regime does not care about the size of S in those states where it is overthrown. By contrast,
the opposition cares about S both when the regime is overthrown and when it is not.
Consider now a monotone equilibrium where the regime is overthrown if θ < θ∗ and citizens
subvert s(xi ) = 1 if their signal is xi < x∗ for thresholds x∗ , θ∗ to be determined. In this case, the
mass of subversives is
√
S(θ, a, e) = Φ( α(x∗ − θ − a + e))
32

The first order necessary condition characterizing the regime’s hidden action can be written, similar
to (20) above,
√
√
θ ≥ θ∗
(35)
C 0 (a) = αφ( α(x∗ − θ − a + e(θ))),
with a(θ) = 0 for all θ < θ∗ . Similarly, for the opposition
C 0 (κe) =

√

√
αφ( α(x∗ − θ − a(θ) + e)),

all θ

(36)

Combining equations (35) and (36) we have that for all states θ ≥ θ∗ where the regime survives
a(θ) = κe(θ),

θ ≥ θ∗

(37)

And so for these states the actions of the regime are larger than those of the opposition if and only
if κ > 1, i.e., when the regime has a cost advantage. For these states the equilibrium actions of
the regime a(θ) implicitly solve
C 0 (a) =

√

√
αφ( α(x∗ − θ − a (κ − 1)/κ)),

θ ≥ θ∗

(38)

with the opposition’s actions in these states then following from (37). Otherwise, when θ < θ∗ we
have a(θ) = 0 and the opposition’s actions e(θ) implicitly solve
C 0 (κe) =

√

√
αφ( α(x∗ − θ + e)),

θ < θ∗

(39)

Notice that just as the regime’s hidden actions jump discretely from a = 0 to a(θ∗ ) > 0 at the
threshold θ = θ∗ , so too do the opposition’s actions typically jump at the threshold (though their
jump may be up or down, depending on parameters). The left panel of Figure 7 illustrates these
action profiles a(θ) and e(θ) with κ > 1 so that the regime’s actions a(θ) are larger than the
opposition’s actions e(θ) on θ ≥ θ∗ .
Does the opposition’s action undo the regime’s efforts? On the one hand, it is true that the
presence of the opposition generally moves the threshold θ∗ against the regime (it is higher than
it would be in the model where there is no opposition, κ = ∞). On the other hand, the regime
still manipulates information and for high enough signal precision α is still better off than it would
∗
be in the Morris-Shin benchmark where the threshold is θMS
= 1 − p. Figure 7 shows several
numerical examples.
These results suggest that while the presence of organized opposition is important for understanding how much manipulation takes place and for the equilibrium level of the regime threshold
θ∗ , it is less important for the qualitative result that the regime threshold can be decreasing in
signal precision so that more precise signals move the threshold in the regime’s favor.

33

1

regime action a(θ)

0.5

regime threshold, θ∗

competing interventions, a(θ) vs. e(θ)

1

0

opposition action e(θ)

Morris-Shin benchmark 1 − p

0.75

κ = 1.5

0.5

κ = 2.0

-0.5

κ = 5.0
signal mean = θ + a(θ) − e(θ)

0.25

-1
-1

0

1

2

3

4

0

5

regime type, θ

10

15

20

25

signal precision, α

(b) regime threshold θ ∗ as function of signal precision α
and opposition cost disadvantage κ

(a) regime and opposition actions a(θ) and e(θ)
as function of regime type θ

Figure 7: Hidden actions and regime threshold when there is an opposition.
Panel (a) shows the regime’s and opposition’s hidden actions a(θ) and e(θ) when there is a struggle over information. The signal mean
is y(θ) = θ + a(θ) − e(θ). For clarity the opposition’s action e(θ) is plotted on a negative scale. For θ < θ∗ , only the opposition takes an
action. For θ ≥ θ∗ the actions satisfy a(θ) = κe(θ), where κ measures the relative costliness of the opposition’s action. In this example,
κ = 1.5 and the opposition’s costs are greater than the regimes so that a(θ) > e(θ) whenever the regime intervenes. Panel (b) shows the
regime threshold θ∗ as a function of the signal precision α for various κ. In these examples, the regime still benefits from information
∗
manipulation in that θ∗ < θMS
= 1 − p when α is high enough. In all of these calculations, the opportunity cost of subversion is p = .25
and the regime’s cost functions is C(a) = a2 /2 so that the opposition’s cost function is C(κe)/κ = κe2 /2.

6.4

Manipulating signal precision

Until now, signal manipulation entered in an additive way, xi = θ + a + εi . With this specification
the action shifts the signal mean and only indirectly influences the signal precision. In this section
I consider an alternative approach where the regime can directly set the signal precision. In
particular, let signals be xi = θ + εi where the εi is IID normal with mean zero and precision
β(a) > 0 that depends on the regime’s hidden action a. I adopt the specification

β(a) := α


1
+ Φ(a) ,
2

α>0

The function β : R → R+ is strictly increasing in a with β(−∞) = α/2, β(0) = α, and β(∞) =
3α/2. Thus when the regime takes no action, the precision is just α which in this context should
be thought of as the intrinsic signal precision. Otherwise, by intervening, the regime can achieve
a precision as much as 50% more or 50% less than this intrinsic level.
Again, I consider only a monotone equilibrium where the regime is overthrown for θ < θ∗ and
citizens subvert s(xi ) = 1 for xi < x∗ for thresholds x∗ , θ∗ to be determined. In this case, the mass
of subversives is
p

∗
S(θ, a) = Φ
β(a)(x − θ)
34

0.05

·10−2

1

1

a > 0, regime makes
signals more precise

α = 2.50

regime threshold, θ ∗

0.75

α = 0.50

0

-0.025

0.75

p = .25

0.5

0.5

p = .50

0.25

0.25

p = .75

a < 0, regime makes
signals more noisy
-0.05

0
-2

0

2

regime threshold, θ∗

hidden action, a(θ)

0.025

4

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

regime type, θ

0.8

1

20

40

60

80

100

signal precision, α

(b) regime threshold θ∗ as function of signal precision α

(a) hidden actions a(θ) as function of regime type θ

Figure 8: Hidden actions and regime threshold when regime can manipulate signal precision.
Panel (a) shows hidden actions when the regime can directly manipulate the signal precision. For intermediate θ it may be optimal
for a(θ) < 0 so that the regime makes the signal less noisy than α. For high θ it is optimal for a(θ) > 0 so that the regime clarifies
its strength by making the signal more precise than α. In this example the opportunity cost of subversion is p = .25. Panel (b) shows
the regime threshold θ∗ as a function of the intrinsic signal precision α. In these examples, the regime still benefits from information
∗
manipulation in that θ∗ < θMS
= 1 − p when α is high enough. In all these calculations, the cost function is C(a) = a2 /2.

Equilibrium hidden actions are characterized by the first order necessary condition
C 0 (a) = (θ − x∗ )φ

 ∂ p
β(a)(x∗ − θ)
β(a),
∂a

p

θ ≥ θ∗

(40)

Actions are a(θ) = 0 for θ < θ∗ before jumping discretely at θ∗ . The sign of a(θ) is the same as the
sign of θ − x∗ . If θ > x∗ , the hidden actions are positive. If θ < x∗ , the hidden actions are negative.
This can only arise if θ∗ < x∗ , in which case the hidden actions jump down at the threshold θ∗ .
Otherwise, if θ∗ > x∗ , the hidden actions jump up at θ∗ .
Intuitively, if the regime has intermediate type θ ∈ [θ∗ , x∗ ) then it makes the signal noisier
than α (it muddies the signal) while if θ > x∗ , the regime makes the signal less noisy than α so
as to clarify its position of strength. The left panel of Figure 8 illustrates the equilibrium hidden
actions a(θ) with parameters chosen so that x∗ > θ∗ , implying that the hidden actions jump down
at θ∗ . When α increases, the signal threshold x∗ shifts down while the θ∗ hardly moves so the
interval of θ for which regimes degrade signal precision is smaller. Moreover, diminishing returns
to information manipulation set in faster when α is high. An increase in α from .5 to 2.5 hardly
shifts the state threshold θ∗ at all. The right panel of Figure 8 confirms this general tendency. It
shows θ∗ as α varies from 0 to 100. The left panel shows the results for very low α. There is a
brief interval of α where θ∗ can initially rise. These effects play out very quickly and there is then
a monotonic but very gradual decline in θ∗ .

35

7

Conclusions

In this paper I develop a simple model of information and political regime change. Perhaps the
most surprising result is that a regime’s chances of surviving increase as the aggregate quantity
of information available to individuals becomes sufficiently high. More specifically, I show how a
regime’s efforts to manipulate information to induce coordination on the status quo is effective, in
the sense of increasing the regime’s ex ante survival probability, when the quantity of information
is sufficiently high (Proposition 2). In contrast with familiar signal-jamming games, the regime’s
manipulation presents citizens with a difficult signal-extraction problem and the manipulation is
often payoff improving for the regime. This result suggests that breakthroughs in information
technologies may not be as threatening to autocratic regimes as is often supposed.
Offsetting this pessimistic result, the model also predicts that in any circumstances where a
regime is made better off by an increase in the quantity of information, it is also the case that the
regime would be made worse off by an increase in the reliability of information (Proposition 3). In
this sense, an increase in the quantity of information is in tension with an increase in the reliability
of information; they always have opposite effects on a regime’s ex ante chances of surviving.
Because of this tension, the model allows for two kinds of information revolutions. In the first
kind, associated with the role of radio and mass newspapers under the totalitarian regimes of the
early twentieth century, an increase in information quantity coincides with a shift towards media
institutions more accommodative of the regime and hence a decrease in information reliability.
Here the quantity and reliability effects both help the regime. In the second kind, perhaps best
associated with the role of diffuse technologies like modern social media, an increase in information
quantity coincides with a shift towards sources of information less accommodative of the regime
and hence an increase in information reliability. Here the quantity and reliability effects work
against each other.
Finally, the model goes beyond simply predicting that the reliability and quantity effects have
opposite signs; it also predicts that the magnitude of the reliability effect is exactly twice as large
as the magnitude of the quantity of information effect. Thus, if an information revolution gives rise
to roughly equal-sized percentage changes in information quantity and reliability, the reliability
effect will dominate so that overall the regime’s chances of surviving are reduced.
The coordination game studied in this paper is deliberately stylized so as focus attention on
the effectiveness of the regime’s manipulation and its sensitivity to changes in the information
environment. The results suggest several directions for future research. For example, this model
takes as given the degree of influence the regime has over the media. But there are clear incentives
for the regime to attempt to exert more media control when the quantity of information changes.
It would be interesting to develop a richer model where the degree of influence over the media
is itself an equilibrium outcome, in the spirit of Besley and Prat (2006) or Gehlbach and Sonin
(2008), that needs to be determined simultaneously with the regime’s manipulation and survival
36

probability. Another limitation of this paper is the reduced-form assumption that free-riding is not
an overwhelming barrier to collective action against the regime. Following Lohmann (1993, 1994a),
one way to endogenously mitigate the free-rider problem might be to focus on communication
between individual citizens with ex ante heterogeneous preferences over the aggregate outcome.
An alternative approach might be to follow Karklins and Petersen (1993) to address the building
of credible coalitions against the regime. This would complement existing work such as Acemoglu,
Egorov, and Sonin (2008), who study the formation of ruling coalitions within an autocratic
regime. Finally, this paper has abstracted from all issues of individual and social learning. It
would be interesting to develop a dynamic version of the model where both individual and social
information can accumulate over time so that unrest against the regime builds (or dissipates).
An extension along these lines would bring the analysis closer to the original information cascade
models of regime change developed by Kuran (1991), Lohmann (1994b) and others, but would
feature strategic interactions between the regime and citizens that are absent from their work.

Technical Appendix
A
A.1

Proofs and omitted derivations
Morris-Shin Benchmark

Let x̂, θ̂ denote candidates for the critical thresholds. The posterior beliefs of a citizen with xi
√
facing θ̂ are given by Pr[θ < θ̂|xi ] = Φ( α(θ̂ − xi )). A citizen with xi will subvert if and only
√
if Φ( α(θ̂ − xi )) ≥ p. This probability is continuous and strictly decreasing in xi , so for each θ̂
there is a unique signal for which a citizen is indifferent. Similarly, if the regime faces threshold
√
x̂ the mass of subversives is Φ( α(x̂ − θ)). A regime θ will not be overthrown if and only if
√
θ ≥ Φ( α(x̂ − θ)). The probability on the right hand side is continuous and strictly decreasing in
θ, so for each x̂ there is a unique state for which a regime is indifferent. The Morris-Shin thresholds
∗
x∗MS , θMS
simultaneously solve these best response conditions as equalities, as stated in equations
(10)-(11) in the main text. It is then straightforward to verify that there is only one solution to
√
∗
these equations and that θMS
= 1 − p independent of α and x∗MS = 1 − p − Φ−1 (p)/ α.

A.2

Proof of Proposition 1

The proof shows first that (i) there is a unique equilibrium in monotone strategies, and (ii) that
the unique monotone equilibrium is the only equilibrium which survives the iterative elimination
of interim strictly dominated strategies. For ease of exposition, the proof is broken down into
separate lemmas.

(i) Unique equilibrium in monotone strategies
Regime problem. Let x̂ ∈ R denote a candidate for the citizens’ threshold in a monotone
equilibrium.
37

Lemma 1. For each x̂ ∈ R, the unique solution to the regime’s decision problem is characterized
by a pair of functions, Θ : R → [0, 1) and A : R → R+ such that if citizens subvert for all xi < x̂
then the best-response of the regime is to abandon if and only if its type is θ < Θ(x̂) and to choose
an action a(θ) = 0 for θ < Θ(x̂) and a(θ) = A(θ − x̂) for θ ≥ Θ(x̂).
Proof of Lemma 1. To begin, let

√
S(w) := Φ(− αw)

(41)

The auxiliary function S(w) is exogenous and does not depend on x̂. In terms of this function,
the mass of subversives facing the regime is
Z

x̂

−∞

√

√
√
αφ( α(xi − θ − a)) dxi = Φ( α(x̂ − θ − a)) = S(θ + a − x̂)

(42)

Since the regime has access to an outside option normalized to zero, its problem can be written
V (θ, x̂) := max[0, W (θ, x̂)]

(43)

where W (θ, x̂) is the best payoff regime θ can get if it is not overthrown
W (θ, x̂) := max [θ − S(θ + a − x̂) − C(a)]
a≥0

(44)

From the envelope theorem, the partial derivative Wθ (θ, x̂) = 1 − S 0 (θ − x̂ + a) > 1 since S 0 (w) < 0
for all w ∈ R. Since S(w) ≥ 0 and C(a) ≥ 0 we know W (θ, x̂) < 0 for all θ < 0 and all x̂. Similarly,
W (1, x̂) > 0 for all x̂. So by the intermediate value theorem there is a unique Θ(x̂) ∈ [0, 1) such
that W (Θ(x̂), x̂) = 0. And since Wθ (θ, x̂) > 1 the regime is overthrown if and only if θ < Θ(x̂).
Since positive actions are costly, the regime takes no action for θ < Θ(x̂). Otherwise, for θ ≥ Θ(x̂),
the actions of the regime are given by
a(θ) = A(θ − x̂)

(45)

where the auxiliary function A(t) is exogenous and does not depend on x̂. This auxiliary function
is defined by:
A(t) := argmin [S(t + a) + C(a)]
(46)
a≥0

The first order necessary condition for interior solutions can be written C 0 (a) = −S 0 (t + a) and on
using the formula for S(·) in equation (41) above,
C 0 (a) =

√

√
αφ( α(t + a))

√
where φ(w) := exp(−w2 /2)/ 2π for all w ∈ R. This first order condition may have zero, one
or two solutions for each t. If for a given t there are zero (interior) solutions, then A(t) = 0. If
for given t there are two solutions, one of them can be ruled out by the second order sufficient
√
condition αφ0 ( α(t + a)) + C 00 (a) > 0. Using the property φ0 (w) = −wφ(w) for all w ∈ R shows
that if there are two solutions to the first order condition, only the “higher” of them satisfies the
second order condition. Therefore for each t there is a single A(t) that solves the regime’s problem.
38

Making the substitution t = θ − x̂, the regime’s threshold Θ(x̂) is then found from the indifference
condition W (Θ(x̂), x̂) = 0, or more explicitly
Θ(x̂) = S[Θ(x̂) − x̂ + A(Θ(x̂) − x̂)] + C[A(Θ(x̂) − x̂))]

(47)

Taking x̂ as given, equations (46) and (47) give the regime threshold Θ(x̂) and the hidden actions
a(θ) = A(θ − x̂) that solve the regime’s problem.

Citizen problem. Let θ̂ ∈ [0, 1) and a : R → R+ denote, respectively, a candidate for the
regime’s threshold and a candidate for the regime’s hidden actions with a(θ) = 0 for θ < θ̂.
Lemma 2. For each θ̂ ∈ [0, 1) and a : R → R+
(a) The unique solution to the problem of a citizen with signal xi is characterized by a mapping
P (· | a(·)) : R × R → [0, 1] such that the citizen subverts if and only if its signal is such that
P (xi , θ̂ | a(·)) := Pr[θ < θ̂ | xi , a(·)] ≥ p

(48)

where P is continuous and strictly decreasing in xi with limits P (−∞, θ̂ | a(·)) = 1 and
P (+∞, θ̂ | a(·))) = 0 for any candidate θ̂ and hidden action function a(·) satisfying a(θ) = 0
for θ < θ̂.
(b) For any candidate citizen threshold x̂, with implied regime threshold Θ(x̂) and hidden actions
A(θ − x̂), an individual citizen with signal xi subverts if and only if its signal is such that
K(xi , x̂) := Pr[θ < Θ(x̂) | xi , A(·)] ≥ p

(49)

where K : R × R → [0, 1] is continuous, strictly increasing in xi with limits K(−∞, x̂) = 0
and K(+∞, x̂) = 1 for any x̂. Moreover, K(xi , x̂) = Pr[θ < Θ(x̂) − x̂ | xi − x̂, A(·)] for any x̂.
Proof of Lemma 2. (a) For notational simplicity, write x for an individual’s signal, θ for the state
threshold, and P (x, θ) for the probability an individual with x assigns to the regime’s type being
less than θ when the actions are a : R → R+ . That is,
√
αφ(
α(xi − t)) dt
√
√
P (x, θ) = R ∞ −∞
αφ( α(xi − t − a(t))] dt
−∞
Rθ √

(50)

where the numerator uses a(t) = 0 for t < θ. Hence P : R × R → [0, 1] is continuous in x, θ. This
probability can be written
N (θ − x)
P (x, θ) =
(51)
N (θ − x) + D(x, θ)
where

√
N (θ − x) := Φ( α(θ − x)),

Z
and D(x, θ) :=
θ

39

∞

√
√
αφ( α(x − ξ − a(ξ))) dξ

(52)

Differentiating (51) shows Px < 0 if and only if N 0 /N > −Dx /D. Calculating the derivatives
shows that this is equivalent to
R∞ 0 √
R∞√
√
√
φ ( α(x − y(ξ))) dξ
α(x − y(ξ))φ( α(x − y(ξ))) dξ
θ
θ
R∞ √
=
H( α(x − θ)) > − R ∞ √
φ(
φ( α(x − y(ξ))) dξ
α(x
−
y(ξ)))
dξ
θ
θ

(53)

where H(w) := φ(w)/(1 − Φ(w)) > 0 denotes the standard normal hazard function for w ∈ R,
where y(ξ) := ξ + a(ξ) is the mean of the signal distribution if ξ ≥ θ, and where the equality
follows from φ0 (w) = −wφ(w) for all w. Now define a density ϕ(ξ|x) > 0 by
√
φ( α(x − y(ξ)))
ϕ(ξ|x) := R ∞ √
,
φ( α(x − y(ξ 0 ))) dξ 0
θ

ξ ∈ [θ, ∞)

(54)

Then after a slight rearrangement of terms in (53), Px < 0 if and only if

Z
√
√
√
H( α(x − θ)) − α(x − θ) > α θ −

∞


y(ξ)ϕ(ξ|x)dξ

(55)

θ

Since the hazard function satisfies H(w) > w for all w ∈ R and α > 0, it is sufficient that
Z
θ

∞

y(ξ)ϕ(ξ|x)dξ ≥ θ

(56)

But since y(ξ) := ξ + a(ξ), ξ ≥ θ, and a(ξ) ≥ 0, condition (56) is always satisfied. Therefore
Px < 0. Since N 0 > 0 and Dθ < 0, Pθ > 0 for all x, θ. Moreover, since N (−∞) = 0 and D > 0
we have P (x, −∞) = 0 for all x. Similarly, since a(ξ) = 0 for all ξ < θ as θ → ∞ we have
D(x, θ) → 1 − N (θ − x) and since N (+∞) = 1 this means D(x, +∞) = 0 for all x. Therefore
P (x, +∞) = 1 for all x. The limit properties in x are established in parallel fashion.
(b) Fix a x̂ ∈ R and let A(θ − x̂) denote the associated hidden actions. Analogous to (51),
write P (x, θ, x̂) = N (θ − x)/[N (θ − x) + D(x, θ, x̂) where N : R → [0, 1] is defined as in (52) above
and where
Z ∞
√
√
αφ( α(x − t − A(t − x̂))) dt
(57)
D(x, θ, x̂) :=
θ

Now define K(x, x̂) := P (x, Θ(x̂), x̂). That K(x, x̂) is continuous and decreasing in x is immediate
from part (a) above. Finally, for K(x, x̂) = P (x− x̂, Θ(x̂)− x̂, 0) it is sufficient that D(x, Θ(x̂), x̂) =
D(x − x̂, Θ(x̂) − x̂, 0). From (57) and using the change of variables ξ := θ − x̂ we have
Z
D(x, Θ(x̂), x̂) =

∞

Θ(x̂)−x̂

√
√
αφ( α(x − x̂ − ξ − a(ξ))] dξ = D(x − x̂, Θ(x̂) − x̂, , 0)

Therefore K(x, x̂) = P (x − x̂, Θ(x̂) − x̂, 0) = Pr[θ < Θ(x̂) − x̂ | x − x̂, A(·)] as claimed.

(58)


Fixed point. A citizen with signal xi will subvert the regime if and only if K(xi , x̂) ≥ p. Since
K(xi , x̂) is strictly increasing in xi with K(−∞, x̂) < p and K(+∞, x̂) > p for any x̂ ∈ R, there is
a unique signal ψ(x̂) solving
K(ψ(x̂), x̂) = p
(59)
40

such that a citizen with signal xi subverts if and only if xi < ψ(x̂).
Lemma 3. The function ψ : R → R is continuous and has a unique fixed point x∗ = ψ(x∗ ) with
derivative ψ 0 (x∗ ) ∈ (0, 1) at the fixed point. Moreover ψ(x) ≤ x∗ for all x < x∗ and ψ(x) ≥ x∗ for
all x > x∗ .
Proof of Lemma 3. Since K(x, x̂) is continuously differentiable in x, an application of the implicit
function theorem to (59) shows that ψ(·) is continuous. Fixed points of ψ(·) satisfy x∗ = ψ(x∗ ).
Equivalently, by part (b) of Lemma 2, they satisfy K(x∗ , x∗ ) = P (0, Θ(x∗ )−x∗ , 0) = p, where Θ(x̂)
is the critical state in the regime’s problem (46)-(47). By Lemma 2 and the intermediate value
theorem there is a unique z ∗ ∈ R such that P (0, z ∗ , 0) = p. Then applying the implicit function
theorem to (46)-(47) gives
√

√
αφ[ α(x̂ − Θ(x̂) − A(Θ(x̂) − x̂))]
√ √
Θ (x̂) =
∈ (0, 1)
1 + αφ[ α(x̂ − Θ(x̂) − A(Θ(x̂) − x̂))]
0

(60)

Since Θ(−∞) = 0 and Θ(+∞) = 1, there is a unique x∗ ∈ R such that Θ(x∗ ) − x∗ = z ∗ , hence ψ(·)
has a unique fixed point, the same x∗ . Now using part (b) of Lemma 2 and implicitly differentiating
(59) we have
Pθ [ψ(x̂) − x̂, Θ(x̂) − x̂, 0]
[1 − Θ0 (x̂)]
(61)
ψ 0 (x̂) = 1 +
Px [ψ(x̂) − x̂, Θ(x̂) − x̂, 0]
By Lemma 2, Pθ > 0 and Px < 0 and Θ0 (x̂) ∈ (0, 1) from (60). Therefore ψ 0 (x̂) < 1 for all x̂. To
see that ψ 0 (x∗ ) > 0, first notice that it is sufficient that Pθ /Px ≥ −1 when evaluated at x̂ = x∗ .
Calculating the derivatives shows that this is true if and only if
√
φ( α(y(θ∗ ) − x∗ )) +

Z

∞

θ∗

√

√
αφ0 ( α(y(θ) − x∗ )) dθ ≤ 0

(62)

where θ∗ := Θ(x∗ ) and where y(θ) = θ + a(θ) is the mean of the signal distribution from which a
citizen is sampling if the regime has type θ ≥ θ∗ . To show that this condition always holds, we
need to consider the cases of linear costs and strictly convex costs separately. If costs are linear,
√
C(a) = ca, then if c ≥ c := αφ(0) the result is trivialpbecause a(θ) = 0 for all θ ∈ R. So suppose
√
c < c. Then a(θ) = max[0, x∗ + γ − θ] where γ := 2 log ( αφ(0)/c) /α > 0. Calculating the
√
integral and then simplifying shows that (62) holds if and only if −αγφ( αγ)a(θ∗ ) ≤ 0 which is
true because a(θ∗ ) ≥ 0. If costs are strictly convex, then from the optimality conditions for the
regime’s choice of action we have that a(θ) > 0 for all θ ≥ θ∗ and
√
√
αφ( α(y(θ) − x∗ )) = C 0 (a(θ)),

θ ≥ θ∗

(63)

Differentiating with respect to θ gives
√
αφ0 ( α(y(θ) − x∗ ))y 0 (θ) = C 00 (a(θ))a0 (θ),

41

θ ≥ θ∗

(64)

Using the associated second order condition shows that y 0 (θ) > 0 for θ ≥ θ∗ . Since y(·) is invertible,
a change of variables shows that (62) holds if and only if
Z

∞

θ∗

√
a0 (θ)
φ0 ( α(y(θ) − x∗ )) 0
dθ ≥ 0
y (θ)

(65)

Using (64) we equivalently have the condition
Z

∞

θ∗

√
φ0 ( α(y(θ) − x∗ ))2
dθ ≥ 0
C 00 (a(θ))

(66)

which is true since the integrand is non-negative. Therefore, Pθ /Px ≥ −1 at x̂ = x∗ and ψ 0 (x∗ ) > 0.
Finally, ψ(x̂) ≤ x∗ for every x̂ < x∗ is proven by contradiction. Suppose not. Then by
continuity of ψ there exists x̃ < x∗ such that ψ(x̃) = x∗ . Moreover, since ψ 0 (x∗ ) > 0, we must have
ψ 0 (x̃) < 0 for at least one such x̃. Since ψ(x̃) = x∗ and K(x∗ , x∗ ) = p, under this hypothesis we
can write K(ψ(x̃), ψ(x̃)) = p so by the implicit function theorem ψ(x̃) must satisfy
ψ 0 (x̃)[K1 (x∗ , x∗ ) + K2 (x∗ , x∗ )] = 0

(67)

where the hypothesis ψ(x̃) = x∗ is used to evaluate the partial derivatives K1 and K2 . Since
ψ 0 (x̃) < 0, this can only be satisfied if K1 (x∗ , x∗ ) + K2 (x∗ , x∗ ) = 0. But for any x̂ ∈ R, the value
ψ(x̂) is implicitly defined by K(ψ(x̂), x̂) = p so that by the implicit function theorem ψ 0 (x̂) =
−K2 (ψ(x̂), x̂)/K1 (ψ(x̂), x̂). From (61) we know ψ 0 (x̂) < 1 for any x̂ and since K1 < 0 from Lemma
2 we conclude K1 (ψ(x̂), x̂) + K2 (ψ(x̂), x̂) < 0 for any x̂. For x̂ = x∗ in particular, K1 (x∗ , x∗ ) +
K2 (x∗ , x∗ ) < 0 so we have the needed contradiction. Therefore ψ(x̂) ≤ x∗ for every x̂ < x∗ . A
symmetric argument shows ψ(x̂) ≥ x∗ for every x̂ > x∗ .

Concluding that there is a unique equilibrium in monotone strategies. To conclude
part (i) of the proof, we take an arbitrary x̂ ∈ R and solve the regime’s problem to get Θ(x̂)
and a(θ, x̂) = A(θ − x̂) using the auxiliary function from Lemma 1. We use these functions to
construct K(xi , x̂) from (49) for each signal xi ∈ R and use Lemma 2 to conclude that in particular
K(x̂, x̂) = P (0, Θ(x̂) − x̂, 0). We then use the intermediate value theorem to deduce that there is
a unique z ∗ ∈ R such that P (0, z ∗ , 0) = p. This gives a unique difference z ∗ = θ∗ − x∗ that can
be plugged into the regime’s indifference condition (47) to get the unique θ∗ = Θ(x∗ ) ∈ [0, 1) such
that the regime is overthrown if and only if θ < θ∗ . The unique signal threshold is then x∗ = θ∗ −z ∗
and the unique hidden action function is given by a(θ) := A(θ − x∗ ).

(ii) Iterative elimination of interim strictly dominated strategies
We can now go on to show that there is no other equilibrium. The argument begins by showing
that for sufficiently low signals it is a dominant strategy to subvert the regime and for sufficiently
high signals it is a dominant strategy to not subvert the regime.
Dominance regions. If the regime has θ < 0, any mass S ≥ 0 can overthrow the regime.
Similarly, if the regime has θ ≥ 1 it can never be overthrown. Any regime that is overthrown
42

takes no action, since to do so would incur a cost for no gain. Similarly, any regime θ that is not
overthrown takes an action no larger than the a such that θ = C(a). Any larger action must result
in a negative payoff which can be improved upon by taking the outside option. Given this:
Lemma 4. There exists a pair of signals x < x, both finite, such that s(xi ) = 1 is strictly dominant
for xi < x and s(xi ) = 0 is strictly dominant for xi > x.
Proof of Lemma 4. The most pessimistic scenario for any citizen is that regimes are overthrown
only if θ < 0 and that regimes take the largest hidden actions that could be rational a(θ) := C −1 (θ)
for θ ≥ 0 and zero otherwise. Let P (xi ) := Pr[θ < 0 | xi , a(·)] denote the probability the regime
is overthrown in this most pessimistic scenario. Part (a) of Lemma 2 holds for hidden actions of
the form a(θ) and implies P 0 (xi ) < 0 for all xi , and since P (−∞) = 1 and P (+∞) = 0 by the
intermediate value theorem there is a unique value, x, finite, such that P (x) = p. For xi < x it is
(iteratively) strictly dominant for s(xi ) = 1. Similarly, the most optimistic scenario for any citizen
is that regimes are overthrown if θ < 1 and that regimes take the smallest hidden actions that
could be rational a(θ) := 0. Let P (xi ) := Pr[θ < 1 | xi , a(·)] denote the probability the regime
is overthrown in this most optimistic scenario. A parallel argument establishes the existence of
a unique value, x, finite, such that P (x) = p. For xi > x it is (iteratively) strictly dominant for
s(xi ) = 0.

Iterative elimination. Starting from the dominance regions implied by x and x it is then
possible to iteratively eliminate (interim) strictly dominated strategies. Recall that
√
S(w) := Φ(− αw)
and
A(t) := argmin [S(t + a) + C(a)]
a≥0

Again, these auxiliary functions do not depend on any endogenous variable and in particular do
not depend on citizen thresholds.
Lemma 5. Let xn+1 = ψ(xn ) for n = 0, 1, 2, ... where
K(ψ(xn ), xn ) = p
(a) If it is strictly dominant for s(xi ) = 1 for all xi < xn , then the regime is overthrown for at
least all θ < θn := Θ(xn ) where the function Θ : R → [0, 1) solves
Θ(x) = S[Θ(x) − x + A(Θ(x) − x)] + C[A(Θ(x) − x)]

(68)

Similarly, if it is strictly dominant for s(xi ) = 0 for all xi > xn , then regime is not overthrown
for at least all θ > θn := Θ(xn ).
(b) Moreover, if it is strictly dominant for s(xi ) = 1 for all xi < xn , then it is strictly dominant
for s(xi ) = 1 for all xi < xn+1 = ψ(xn ). Similarly, if it is strictly dominant for s(xi ) = 0 for
all xi > xn , then it is strictly dominant for s(xi ) = 0 for all xi > xn+1 = ψ(xn ).
43

Proof of Lemma 5. (a) Fix an xn and xn such that citizens with signals xi < xn have s(xi ) = 1
and likewise citizens with signals xi > xn have s(xi ) = 0. From Lemma 4 this can be done at least
for the signals x, x that determine the bounds of the dominance regions. All citizens with signals
√
xi < xn have s(xi ) = 1 so the mass of subversives is at least Φ( α(xn − θ − a)). To acknowledge
this, write the total mass of subversives as
√
Φ( α(xn − θ − a)) + ∆(θ + a)

(69)

for some function ∆ : R → [0, 1]. First consider the case ∆(·) = 0 where only citizens with
xi < xn subvert the regime. From Lemma 1 there is a unique threshold θn := Θ(xn ) ∈ [0, 1)
sustained by hidden actions a(θ) = A(θ − xn ) solving (46)-(47) such that the regime is overthrown
if θ < θn = Θ(xn ). Now consider the case ∆(·) > 0 where some citizens with signals xi ≥ xn
also subvert the regime. The proof that the regime is overthrown for at least all θ < Θ(xn ) is
by contradiction. Suppose that when ∆(·) > 0 regime change occurs for all θ < θ̃n for some
θ̃n ≤ Θ(xn ). A marginal regime θ̃n must be indifferent between being overthrown and taking the
outside option, so this threshold satisfies θ̃n = S(θ̃n + ãn − xn ) + C(ãn ) where ãn ≥ 0 is the optimal
action for the marginal regime θ̃n . Then observe
√
Θ(xn ) = Φ[ α(xn − Θ(xn ) − A(Θ(xn ) − xn ))] + C[A(Θ(xn ) − xn ))]
√
≤ Φ[ α(xn − Θ(xn ) − a)] + C(a),
√
< Φ[ α(xn − Θ(xn ) − a)] + ∆(θ̃n + ãn ) + C(a),
for any a ≥ 0
√
where the first inequality follows because A(·) minimizes Φ[ α(xn − θ − a)] + C(a) and where the
second inequality follows from ∆(·) > 0. Taking a = ãn ≥ 0 we then have
√
Θ(xn ) < Φ[ α(xn − Θ(xn ) − ãn )] + ∆(θ̃n + ãn ) + C(ãn )
√
= Φ[ α(xn − Θ(xn ) − ãn )] + ∆(θ̃n + ãn ) + C(ãn )
√
√
+ Φ[ α(xn − θ̃n − ãn )] − Φ[ α(xn − θ̃n − ãn )]
√
√
= θ̃n + Φ[ α(xn − Θ(xn ) − ãn )] − Φ[ α(xn − θ̃n − ãn )]
≤ θ̃n

√
where the last inequality follows because the hypothesis θ̃n ≤ Θ(xn ) implies Φ[ α(xn − θ̃n − ãn )] ≥
√
Φ[ α(xn − Θ(xn ) − ãn )]. This is a contradiction, and so θ̃n > Θ(xn ). Therefore, the regime is
overthrown for at least all θ < Θ(xn ). A parallel argument shows that if it is strictly dominant for
s(x) = 0 for all xi > xn , then the regime is not overthrown for at least all θ > θn := Θ(xn ).
(b) Since cumulative distribution functions are non-decreasing, for any beliefs of the citizens,
the posterior probability assigned by a citizen with signal xi to the regime’s overthrow is at least
as much as the probability they assign to θ < Θ(xn ). Equivalently, K(xi , xn ) − p is the most
conservative estimate of the expected gain to subverting. From Lemma 2 and the intermediate
value theorem, there is a unique xn+1 = ψ(xn ) solving K(ψ(xn ), xn ) = p such that if it is strictly
dominant for s(xi ) = 1 for all xi < xn , then it is strictly dominant for s(xi ) = 1 for all xi < xn .
Similarly, there is a unique xn+1 = ψ(xn ) solving K(ψ(xn ), xn ) = p such that if it is strictly
dominant for s(xi ) = 0 for all xi > xn , then it is strictly dominant for s(xi ) = 0 for all xi > xn+1 .
Applying the proof of part (a) at each step then completes the argument.

44

Concluding that there is no other equilibrium. Let x0 := x and x0 := x and generate
∞
sequences {xn }∞
n=0 from xn+1 = ψ(xn ) and {xn }n=0 from xn+1 = ψ(xn ) where
K(ψ(xk ), xk ) = p

(70)

K(ψ(xk ), xk ) = p

(71)

and
∞
Part (a) of Lemma 5 maps the sequences of citizen thresholds {xn }∞
n=0 and {xn }n=0 into mono∞
∞
tone sequences of regime thresholds, {θn }n=0 from θn := Θ(xn ) and {θn }n=0 from θn := Θ(xn ).
Moreover, by Lemma 3 the function ψ(·) generating the sequences xn+1 = ψ(xn ) is continuous,
has a unique fixed point x∗ = ψ(x∗ ) with derivative ψ 0 (x∗ ) ∈ (0, 1) at this fixed point and upper
bound ψ(xn ) ≤ x∗ for all xn < x∗ . From below, the sequence {xn }∞
n=0 is bounded above, strictly
monotone increasing and so converges xn % x∗ as n → ∞. Similarly the sequence {θn }∞
n=0 is
∗
∗
bounded above, strictly monotone increasing and so converges θn % θ =: Θ(x ) as n → ∞. From
above, symmetrically, the sequence {xn }∞
n=0 is bounded below, strictly monotone decreasing and so
∗
converges xn & x as n → ∞. Similarly the sequence {θn }∞
n=0 is bounded below, strictly monotone
decreasing and so converges θn & θ∗ =: Θ(x∗ ) as n → ∞. After a finite n iterations, the only
candidates for a citizen’s equilibrium strategy all have s(xi ) = 1 for xi < xn and s(xi ) = 0 for
xi > xn with s(xi ) arbitrary for xi ∈ [xn , xn ]. Similarly, the only candidate for the regime’s strategy has the regime abandoning for all θ < θn , not abandoning for θ ≥ θn with arbitrary choices
for θ ∈ [θn , θn ]. At each iteration, these regime thresholds are implicitly determined by hidden
actions an (θ) := A(θ − xn ) and an (θ) := A(θ − xn ) respectively. In the limit as n → ∞, the only
strategy that survives the elimination of strictly dominated strategies is the one with s(xi ) = 1 for
xi < x∗ and s(xi ) = 0 otherwise for citizens, with the regime abandoning for θ < θ∗ = Θ(x∗ ) and
hidden actions given by a(θ) = A(θ − x∗ ). Therefore the only equilibrium is the unique monotone
equilibrium.


A.3

Proofs of Proposition 2 and Proposition 3

Proof of Proposition 2
If α ≤ α := (c/φ(0))2 , any regime is at a corner solution and has hidden actions a(θ) = 0. In this
case the regime threshold is the same as in the Morris-Shin benchmark economy, θ∗ = 1 − p for
∗
∗
∗
all α ≤ α. If α >
pα, then regimes θ ∈ [θ , x + γ) take hidden actions a(θ) = x + γ − θ where the
coefficient γ = log(α/α)/α > 0. For these interior solutions, substitute the regime indifference
condition (26) into the citizen indifference condition (25) to obtain
√
Φ[ α(θ∗ − x∗ )] =

p ∗
θ
1−p

⇔

1
θ − x = √ Φ−1
α
∗

∗



p ∗
θ
1−p


(72)

And now substitute this expression for the difference θ∗ − x∗ back into the regime indifference
condition (26) to get a single equation characterizing the critical regime threshold θ∗ , namely
c
T (θ ) := θ + √ Φ−1
α
∗

∗



p ∗
θ
1−p
45



√
= cγ + Φ(− αγ)

(73)

Implicitly differentiating both sides with respect to α gives
c
∂θ∗
− √ Φ−1
T (θ )
∂α
2α α
0

∗



p ∗
θ
1−p





√
√ ∂γ
∂γ
1
=c
− φ( αγ)
+ √ γ
α
∂α
∂α 2 α

Then using the fact that the coefficient γ satisfies

√
√
αφ( αγ) = c, we can simplify this to





p ∗
∂θ∗
c
1 −1
√ Φ
T (θ )
=
θ −γ
∂α
2α
1−p
α
0

(74)

∗

(75)

Then because T 0 (θ) > 0 for all θ and c/α > 0 we have that
∂ ∗
θ <0
∂α

⇔

θ∗ < θcrit :=

1−p √
Φ( αγ)
p

(76)

And because T 0 (θ) > 0 for all θ we have θ∗ < θcrit if and only if T (θ∗ ) < T (θcrit ). Applying T (·) to
both sides of equation (76) and simplifying we have that the regime threshold θ∗ is decreasing in
α if and only if
√
p < Φ( αγ)
(77)
√
Since αγ > 0 p
and Φ−1 (p) < 0 for any p < 1/2, this condition is necessarily satisfied if p < 1/2.
√
Using αγ = log(α)/α and rearranging we have the stated condition for the critical signal
precision α∗ , namely
∂ ∗
θ <0
∂α

⇔



2 
α > α∗ = α exp max 0, Φ−1 (p)

(78)

√
For all α > α∗ the opportunity cost is p < Φ( αγ) so that the regime threshold θ∗ is decreasing.
√
To establish that limα→∞ θ∗ = 0, observe that for any w ∈ R the cumulative density Φ( αw) →
1{w > 0} as α → ∞, i.e., to the indicatorpfunction that equals one if√w > 0 and zero otherwise.
Moreover, as α → ∞ the coefficient γ = log(α/α)/α → 0 and Φ(− αγ) → 0. Applying these
to (25) we see that for large α solutions to the citizen’s indifference condition are approximately
the same as solutions to
p
1 {θ∗ − x∗ > 0} = −
(θ∗ − x∗ )c
(79)
1−p

The only solution to equation (79) is θ∗ − x∗ = 0. So as α → ∞, solutions to (25) approach zero
too. Then from the regime’s indifference condition (26), if θ∗ − x∗ → 0 it must also be the case
that θ∗ → 0 as claimed.


Proof of Proposition 3
Following calculations similar to those in the proof of Proposition 2 above, we have
∂θ∗
1
T (θ )
+ √ Φ−1
∂c
α
0

∗



p ∗
θ
1−p



46

=γ+c

√
√ ∂γ
∂γ
− φ( αγ) α
∂c
∂c

(80)

Again using

√

√
αφ( αγ) = c and rearranging we have
1
∂θ∗
= γ − √ Φ−1
T (θ )
∂c
α
0

∗



p ∗
θ
1−p


(81)

Then using equation (81) to eliminate T 0 (θ∗ ) from (75) and simplifying we have
∂θ∗
2α ∂θ∗
=−
∂c
c ∂α

(82)

Since α/c > 0, the two effects have the opposite sign as claimed.

B

.

Role of coordination

This appendix highlights the role of imperfect coordination in enabling the regime to survive even
when signals are precise. Suppose to the contrary that citizens are perfectly coordinated and receive
one x = θ + a + ε. Collectively, they can overthrow the regime if θ < 1. In a monotone equilibrium
the mass attacks the regime, S(x) = 1, if and only if x < x∗ where x∗ solves Pr(θ < 1|x∗ ) = p.
The regime now faces aggregate uncertainty. It does not know what value of x will be realized.
The regime chooses its hidden action to maximize its expected payoff

Z
a(θ) ∈ argmax −C(a) +
a≥0

∞

−∞


√
√
max[0, θ − S(x)] αφ( α(x − θ − a)) dx

(83)

In a monotone equilibrium, the regime’s objective simplifies to
√
− C(a) − min[θ, 1]Φ( α(x∗ − θ − a))

(84)

Regimes with θ < 0 are overthrown and so never engage in costly manipulation.
Example: strictly convex costs. Suppose, with some loss of generality, that costs are strictly
convex, C 00 (a) > 0. This implies all regimes θ > 0 will choose some positive manipulation a(θ) > 0
even regimes that are overthrown ex post. The key first order necessary condition for the regime’s
choice of action a(θ) is
√
√
min[θ, 1] αφ( α(x∗ − θ − a)) = C 0 (a),

θ≥0

(85)

As usual, there may be two solutions to this first order condition; if so, the smaller is eliminated
by the second order condition. An equilibrium of this game is constructed by simultaneously
determining a(θ) and the x∗ that solves Pr(θ < 1|x∗ ) = p.
The first order condition implies that taking as given x∗ the regime’s a(θ) → 0 as α → ∞.
Given this, the probability of overthrowing the regime Pr(θ < 1|x) → 1{x < 1} as α → ∞. This
implies x∗ → 1. With arbitrarily precise information, the regime takes no action and so x is very
close to θ. The mass attacks only if it believes θ < 1 and since x is close to θ attacks only if x < 1.
So if citizens are perfectly coordinated then for precise information regime change occurs for all
47

θ < 1. By contrast, if citizens are imperfectly coordinated then for precise information all regimes
θ ≥ 0 survive.
Angeletos, Hellwig, and Pavan (2006) provide a related analysis. In their model, if agents
∗
∗
are imperfectly coordinated then for precise information θ∗ can be any θ ∈ (0, θMS
] where θMS
=
1−p < 1. But if agents are perfectly coordinated then for precise information regime change occurs
for all θ < 1. Thus when information is precise the two models agree about the regime change
outcome when agents are perfectly coordinated but come to different conclusions when agents are
imperfectly coordinated.

C
C.1

Equilibrium beliefs
Laplacian beliefs in the Morris-Shin benchmark

In this global game the marginal citizen with signal xi = x∗MS believes the equilibrium mass of
∗
(θ) is uniformly distributed on its support [0, 1]. That is, if the equilibrium mass
subversives SMS
√
∗
∗
(θ) ≤ k
(θ) = Φ[ α(x∗MS − θ)], the marginal citizen assigns the event SMS
of subversives is SMS
posterior probability
∗
G∗MS (k) := Pr[SMS
(θ) ≤ k|x∗MS ] = k,

k ∈ [0, 1]

i.e., the uniform distribution on [0, 1]. In a sense, the marginal citizen is agnostic about the mass of
subversives. Morris and Shin (2003) refer to these as Laplacian beliefs (in reference to the principle
of insufficient reason). Intuitively, since citizens have no prior information about the regime’s θ, a
citizen’s signal xi contain no information about that citizen’s rank-order in the population and thus
provides no information about the proportion of citizens who observe lower (or higher) signals.

C.2

Non-Laplacian beliefs if information is manipulated

√
Now let S(θ) = Φ[ α(x∗ − θ − a(θ))] denote the equilibrium mass of subversives when the regime
can manipulate. This function inherits a discontinuity at θ∗ from the hidden actions a(θ).
For simplicity, consider the case of linear costs so that a(θ) = θ∗∗ − θ on the interval [θ∗ , θ∗∗ )
and zero elsewhere. Then it is straightforward to show that the marginal citizen with xi = x∗
assigns the event S(θ) ≤ k posterior probability

G∗ (k) := Pr[S(θ) ≤ k|x∗ ] =















(1 − p)
θ∗
1−p
(1 − p)
(k − 1)
+1
θ∗
k

k ∈ [0, k ∗∗ )
k ∈ [k ∗∗ , k ∗ ]

(86)

k ∈ (k ∗ , 1]

where the critical points 0 ≤ k ∗∗ ≤ k ∗ ≤ 1 are respectively the masses of subversives just below the
regime threshold θ∗ and at the regime type being imitated θ∗∗ > θ∗ , specifically
√
k ∗ := lim∗ S(θ) = Φ( α(x∗ − θ∗ ))
θ↑θ

48

(87)

and

√
k ∗∗ := S(θ∗∗ ) = Φ( α(x∗ − θ∗∗ ))

(88)

and where, from equations (25)-(26) above, k ∗ and the regime threshold θ∗ are also related by
(1 − k ∗ )(1 − p) = pθ∗

(89)

which from (86) implies that the posterior G∗ (k) is continuous at k = k ∗ . As illustrated in Figure 9,
the posterior is piecewise linear in k with slope (1 − p)/θ∗ . At the lower point k = k ∗∗ it jumps
discretely and then takes the value 1 − p on the interval [k ∗∗ , k ∗ ] before rising again with slope
(1 − p)/θ∗ after it reaches the higher point k ∗ . In other words, the posterior probability has an
atom at the point k = k ∗∗ . This comes from the discontinuity in the hidden actions a(θ) at the
regime threshold θ∗ and is a general feature of this model. By contrast, the constancy on [k ∗ , k ∗∗ ]
is special to the case of linear costs where all regimes θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ] produce exactly the same signal
mean so that the mass of subversives S(θ) is the same for all such regimes. For strictly convex
costs, the posterior is relatively flat on this interval without being exactly constant.
Key to the shape of the posterior is the ratio θ∗ /(1 − p). Since the Morris-Shin benchmark is
∗
θMS = 1 − p, the shape of the posterior is determined by whether θ∗ is less than or more than the
Morris-Shin benchmark 1 − p. If the signal precision α → ∞ so that θ∗ → 0, then in this limit
the marginal citizen’s posterior probability is the binomial distribution on {0, 1} with probabilities
{1−p, p} respectively, as shown in the left panel of Figure 10. If, on the other hand, the parameters
of the model are such that α < α, then there is no manipulation in equilibrium, a(θ) = 0 for all
θ, so that θ∗ = 1 − p and k ∗ = k ∗∗ and the posterior G∗ (k) reduces to the uniform distribution on
[0, 1]. This is shown in the right panel of Figure 10.

49

probability S ≤ k
1

1
G∗ (k)

1−p

k ∗∗

G∗ (k)

1−p

k∗

1

k ∗∗

1
k∗
∗
(b) θ > 1 − p
signal-jamming ineffective

∗

(a) θ < 1 − p
signal-jamming effective

k

Figure 9: Non-Laplacian beliefs of the marginal citizen with signal xi = x∗ .
The shape of the posterior probability G∗ (k) := Pr[S(θ) ≤ k|x∗ ] depends on whether the threshold θ∗ is above or below the Morris-Shin
benchmark 1 − p. If parameters are such that θ∗ < 1 − p, then signal jamming is effective and the posterior is as in panel (a). Otherwise,
if θ∗ > 1 − p, signal-jamming is ineffective and the posterior is in panel (b). The atom at the point k∗∗ comes from the discontinuity in
the hidden actions a(θ) at the regime threshold θ∗ . In either case, the posterior takes the value 1 − p at this point. By contrast, in the
Morris-Shin benchmark the marginal citizen has uniform beliefs over the mass of subversives (indicated by the 45◦ line).

probability S ≤ k
1

1−p

1
G∗ (k)

1−p

k∗ ↑ 1

k ∗∗ ↓ 0

G∗ (k) = k

1−p

(a) signal precision α → ∞

1

k

(b) signal precision α < α

∗

θ∗ = 1 − p

θ →0

Figure 10: Binomial and uniform limiting cases.
As the signal precision α → ∞, the regime threshold θ∗ → 0. In this case k∗∗ → 0 from above while k∗ → 1 from below. In the limit,
the posterior for the mass of subversives is the binomial distribution on {0, 1} with probabilities {1 − p, p} respectively. For low signal
precision, α ≤ α, there is no information manipulation. In the limit, k∗∗ = k∗ = 1 − p and the posterior for the mass of subversives
approaches is the uniform distribution on [0, 1].

50

References
Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson. Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy.
Cambridge University Press, 2006. 4
Daron Acemoglu, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin. Coalition formation in non-democracies.
Review of Economic Studies, 75(4):987–1009, 2008. 37
George-Marios Angeletos and Iván Werning. Crises and prices: Information aggregation, multiplicity and volatility. American Economic Review, 96(5):1720–1736, 2006. 5
George-Marios Angeletos, Christian Hellwig, and Alessandro Pavan. Signaling in a global game:
Coordination and policy traps. Journal of Political Economy, 114(3):452–484, 2006. 5, 15, 23,
48
George-Marios Angeletos, Christian Hellwig, and Alessandro Pavan. Dynamic global games of
regime change: Learning, multiplicity, and the timing of attacks. Econometrica, 75(3):711–756,
2007. 5
Hannah Arendt. The Origins of Totalitarianism. André Deutsch, revised edition, 1973. 26
Sandeep Baliga and Tomas Sjöström. The strategy of manipulating conflict. Northwestern University working paper, 2010. 4
David P. Baron. Perisistent media bias. Journal of Public Economics, 90(1-2):1–36, 2006. 5
Eli Berman and David D. Laitin. Religion, terrorism and public goods: Testing the club model.
Journal of Public Economics, 92:1942–1967, 2008. 10
Timothy Besley and Andrea Prat. Handcuffs for the grabbing hand? The role of the media in
political accountability. American Economic Review, 96(3):720–736, 2006. 5, 11, 36
Carles Boix and Milan Svolik. The foundations of limited authoritarian government: Institutions
and power-sharing in dictatorships. Princeton University working paper, 2009. 5
Subir Bose, Gerhard Orosel, Marco Ottaviani, and Lise Vesterlund. Dynamic monopoly pricing
and herding. RAND Journal of Economics, 37(4):910–928, 2006. 4
Bruce Bueno de Mesquita, Alastair Smith, Randolph M. Siverson, and James D. Morrow. The
Logic of Political Survival. MIT Press, 2003. 4
Ethan Bueno de Mesquita. Regime change and revolutionary entrepreneurs. American Political
Science Review, 104(3):446–466, 2010. 4, 5, 9, 32
Hans Carlsson and Eric van Damme. Global games and equilibrium selection. Econometrica, 61
(5):989–1018, 1993. 5, 12
Michael S. Chase and James C. Mulvenon. You’ve Got Dissent: Chinese Dissident use of the
Internet and Beijing’s Counter-Strategies. RAND report MR-1543, 2002. 27

51

Sylvain Chassang and Gerard Padro-i-Miquel. Conflict and deterrence under strategic risk. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(4):1821–1858, 2010. 5
Michael Suk-Young Chwe. Rational Ritual: Culture, Coordination, and Common Knowledge.
Princeton University Press, 2001. 26
Noam Cohen. Twitter on the barricades: Six lessons learned. New York Times, June 2009. 27
Vincent P. Crawford and Joel Sobel. Strategic information transmission. Econometrica, 50(6):
1431–1451, 1982. 23
Alexandre Debs. Divide-and-rule and the media. University of Rochester working paper, 2007. 5
Mathias Dewatripont, Ian Jewitt, and Jean Tirole. The economics of career concerns, part I:
Comparing information structures. Review of Economic Studies, 66(1):183–198, 1999. 22
Georgy Egorov, Sergei Guriev, and Konstantin Sonin. Media freedom, bureaucratic incentives,
and the resource curse. Harvard University working paper, 2006. 5
Golnaz Esfandiari. The Twitter devolution. Foreign Policy, June 2010. 2, 27
James Fallows. The connection has been reset. Atlantic Monthly, 301(2), 2008. 2, 27
James D. Fearon. Self-enforcing democracy. Stanford University working paper, 2006. 9, 10
Carl J. Friedrich and Zbigniew K. Brzezinski. Totalitarian Dictatorship and Autocracy. Harvard
University Press, second edition, 1965. 26
Benjamin Frommer. National Cleansing: Retribution Against Nazi Collaborators in Postwar
Czechoslovakia. Cambridge University Press, 2005. 10
Scott Gehlbach and Konstantin Sonin. Government control of the media. University of Wisconsin
working paper, 2008. 5, 11, 36
Matthew Gentzkow and Jesse M. Shapiro. Media bias and reputation. Journal of Political Economy, 114(2):280–316, 2006. 5, 11
John Ginkel and Alastair Smith. So you say you want a revolution: A game-theoretic explanation
of revolution in repressive regimes. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 43(3):291–316, 1999. 4
Christian Hellwig. Public information, private information, and the multiplicity of equilibria in
coordination games. Journal of Economic Theory, 107:191–222, 2002. 12, 29, 31
Bengt Holmström. Managerial incentive problems: A dynamic perspective. Review of Economic
Studies, 66(1):169–182, 1999. 22, 23
Julian Jackson. France: The Dark Years, 1940-1944. Oxford University Press, 2001. 10
Shanthi Kalathil and Taylor C. Boas. Open Networks, Closed Regimes: The Impact of the Internet
on Authoritarian Rule. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2003. 2, 26, 27

52

Stathis N. Kalyvas. How free is ‘free riding’ in civil wars? Violence, insurgency, and the collective
action problem. World Politics, 59(2):1043–1068, 2007. 10
Rasma Karklins and Roger Petersen. Decision calculus of protesters and regimes: Eastern europe
1989. Journal of Politics, 55(3):588–614, 1993. 10, 37
David D. Kirkpatrick. Wired and shrewd, young Egyptians guide revolt. New York Times, February 2011. 1
Timur Kuran. Sparks and prairie fires: A theory of unanticipated political revolution. Public
Choice, 61:41–74, 1989. 4, 9
Timur Kuran. Now out of never: The element of surprise in the European revolution of 1989.
World Politics, 44(1):7–48, 1991. 4, 37
Timur Kuran. Private Truths, Public Lies: The Social Consequences of Preference Falsification.
Harvard University Press, 1995. 4, 9
Susanne Lohmann. A signaling model of informative and manipulative political action. American
Political Science Review, 87(2):319–333, 1993. 10, 37
Susanne Lohmann. Information aggregation through costly political action. American Economic
Review, 84(3):518–530, 1994a. 10, 37
Susanne Lohmann. The dynamics of information cascades: The monday demonstrations in leipzig,
east germany, 1989-91. World Politics, 47(1):42–101, 1994b. 4, 37
Douglas MacMillan. Google’s quixotic China challenge. Bloomberg Businessweek, March 2010. 1
Evgeny Morozov. The Net Delusion. Allen Lane, 2011. 2, 27
Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin. Unique equilibrium in a model of self-fulfilling currency
attacks. American Economic Review, 88(3):587–597, 1998. 5, 12
Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin. Rethinking multiple equilibria in macroeconomic modeling.
In Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, editors, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, pages 139–
161. MIT Press, 2000. 5, 12
Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin. Global games: Theory and applications. In Mathias Dewatripont, Lars Peter Hansen, and Stephen J. Turnovsky, editors, Advances in Economics and
Econometrics: Theory and Applications. Cambridge University Press, 2003. 5, 12, 29, 31, 48
Sendhil Mullainathan and Andrei Shleifer. The market for news. American Economic Review, 95
(4):1031–1053, 2005. 2, 5, 6, 10, 11
Mike Musgrove. Twitter is a player in Iran’s drama. Washington Post, June 2009. 1
Mancur Olson. The Logic of Collective Action. Harvard University Press, revised edition, 1971. 9
Torsten Persson and Guido Tabellini. Democratic capital: The nexus of political and economic
change. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(2):88–126, 2009. 5
53

John Ribeiro. Facebook blocked in Iran ahead of elections. PC World, May 2009. 27
Todd Sandler. Collective Action: Theory and Applications. University of Michigan Press, 1992. 4
Francesco Sobbrio. A citizen-editors model of news media. IMT Lucca working paper, 2010. 2
Lawrence C. Soley. Clandestine Radio Broadcasting: A Study of Revolutionary and Counterrevolutionary Electronic Broadcasting. Praeger, 1987. 27
Daniel F. Stone. Ideological media bias. Oregon State University working paper, 2010. 2
Gordon Tullock. The paradox of revolution. Public Choice, 11(Fall):89–100, 1971. 10
Gordon Tullock. The Social Dilemma: The Economics of War and Revolution. Blacksburg: Center
for the Study of Public Choice, 1974. 10
Z.A.B. Zeman. Nazi Propaganda. Oxford University Press, second edition, 1973. 2, 26

54

