NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ADMINISTRATION TAX REFORM
PROPOSAL AND HOUSING

Patric H. Hendershott

David C. Ling

Working Paper No. 1740

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1985

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation and project in Taxation and Capital Formation. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

1ER Working Paper #1740
Noverrber 1985

The Administration Tax Reform Proposal and Housing

ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the likely impact of the Administration tax reform
plan on housing. Our analysis incorporates two general equilibrium impacts ——
a one percentage point decline in the level of interest rates and a decrease in
the property tax rate on principal residences —— and corrects errors regarding
discount rates and refinancing in the basic rental model.
A 7 percent increase in market rents (11 percent without the decline in
interest rates) is projected. Consideration of the individual components of
the Administration plan suggests that the only significant negative provision
is the cut in the personal tax rate from 0.53 (including a 6 percent state and
local rate deductible at the Federal level) to 0.41. Without this cut (and the
decline in interest rates which is largely attributable to the cut), market
rents would fall by 6 percent. Rents rise only because rental housing is a
negatively taxed asset in the sense that a tax cut lowers the supply of the
asset.

The general—equilibriwn effects will offset the negative direct effects——
the cut in marginal tax rates and loss of deductibility of property taxes —— on
owner—occupied housing in the aggregate. However, this housing will generally
be cheaper for households with incomes below $40,000 —— especially below
$25,000 —— but will be more expensive for those with incomes above $60,000.
This constitutes an improvement in both efficiency and equity because under
current law the price of owner housing services is far lower for high income
households than for low income households. Homeownership rates should increase
by 2 to 3 percentage points for households with incomes below $40,000 and 1 to
2 percentage points in the aggregate.

Patrio H. Hendershott
321 Hagerty Hall
The Chio State University
1775 College Road

Olurrbus, chio 43210

David C. Ling
Cox Sohool of Business
Southern Tethodist University

Dallas, Texas 75275

The Administration Tax Reform Proposal and Housing
Patric H. Hendershott and David C. Ling

In May 1985, the Administration finally endorsed a specific tax reform

proposal. This was at least the fifth major proposal advanced, following
Hall—Rabuska, Bradley—Gephardt, Kemp—Kasten and the Treasury Department.1
Analyses of the Administration plan by Downs, Follain, the Homebuilders (NAHB,
1985b) •

and Maisel and Quigley have already appeared; however, little

agreement exists among them. To illustrate, both Downs and Follain expect a 7
percent increase in rents, but the NAHE anticipates increases of 20 to 25

percent or more. None of these incorporates a change in the level of interest
rates. Maisel and Quigley agree with NAHB if interest rates do not change, but
because they anticipate a 2.6 percentage point rate decline, they expect a mere
3 percent rise in rents.

The wide range of estimated impacts alone suggests value in further

analysis. In addition, several features of the underlying models commonly
employed seem inappropriate, and neither zero nor the 2.6 percentage point

decline in interest rates is reasonable. Correcting these features and
incorporating a plausible decline in rates will lead to a better understanding
of the Administration plan and its likely impact on housing.

The basic rental model has two shortcomings. First, the stream of tax
depreciation allowances is discounted by the same rate used to discount the

risky net operating income stream. Finance theory suggests that near—certain
cash flows should be discounted by a near risk—free rate and risky cash flows

by a risky rate. Second, additional borrowing to prevent the debt ratio from
falling below its optimal level is not allowed. Prohibition against additional

borrowing creates artificial gains from trading. Analyses of owner—occupied
housing have one common deficiency. Elimination of the deductibility of

—2—

property taxes will not reduce demand to the extent implied in existing models
because property tax rates (and the Supply of local services) will be reduced
to some extent in response

to

the loss of deductibility.

All the major tax reform proposals advanced to date will lower interest
rates, although the magnitude of the decline will vary with the specific
proposal (Hendershott, 1985) .

Reductions in investment incentives, such as

elimination of the investment tax credit and decreases in tax rates at which
households deduct interest expense, will lower real capital outlays and thus

the demand for funds; reduced taxation of returns to savers will increase the

supply of funds. On both accounts, interest rates will decline.2 The NAHB
recognized this in their analysis of Bradley—Gephardt, Kemp—Kasten and the
original Treasury plan (l985a, p. 30) but not in their more recent study.
Maisel and Quigley have recently joined us (l984c, 1985) in contending that
rates will fall, but they threaten to give the position a bad name with the

enormity of their assumed decline. A single percentage point decline is
plausible (Hendershott, 1985) and is assumed in the calculations reported
below.

The paper is divided into three sections and a summary. The first two
deal with the measurement of equilibrium rents, for owner and rental housing

respectively, under both current law and the proposed reform. A tax reform can
alter asset prices, investor rates of return, and/or equilibrium rents
(explicit for rental housing, implicit for owner housing) .

While all three

variables might be expected to change, the primary adjustment will come in
rents because capital market equilibrium and production costs, respectively,

drive rates of return and asset values.3 The third section reports the
estimated impact of the reforms on these rents and on the homeownership rate.

—3—

I. Owner—Occupied Housing

Three 'prices° of owner—occupied housing services are relevant: the
average price which influences the tenure—choice decision, the marginal price
which determines the quantity demanded assuming the household choices to own,
and the "constrained" price for households that find owner housing unaffordable
in the sense that they cannot purchase the optimal amount dictated by the

marginal Price. How these prices would be measured under both current law and
the Administration plan is the subject of this section.

A. The Price of Owner—Occupied Housing Services
Households will purchase sufficient housing so that the rents from the
last dollar spent plus the expected capital gains on that dollar equals the

costs of obtaining the rents and gains. The costs included financing, upkeep
and property taxes. Put another way, households will purchase sufficient
housing so that the present value of all the after—tax cash flows, including
the implicit rents, generated by the last dollar of house equals the equity the

household supplies to obtain that dollar of house. If the rents and house
price are expected to grow at rate —d (inflation less depreciation), v portion
of the house is debt financed at rate i and the outstanding loan balance in
period t is Lt. the annual maintenance and property tax rates are in and t,
household is in the T

marginal

the

tax bracket and has a required after—tax return

on equity invested in the house of e, and the household expects to hold the
house for N years, the rental cost of owner—occupied housing services from one
dollar of housing can be deduced by solving equation (1) for H:

—4—

1—v

it_i

.jR(l+T_d)tl
(l+e)

—

(l+e)

(1-t-e)

(l+lT_d)N —
+

[(1_T)T+m]
(l+e)

LN

.

(l+e)N

For

(1)

the first dollars of house purchased, the right side of the equation

exceeds the left because R is initially high. However, R declines as more
dollars are purchased; eventually equality holds and the demand of the
household is determined.

Equation (1) can be simplified in a number of illuminating ways. First,
assume all—equity financing (v and all L's equal zero). The equation reduces
to

R. ea_n÷d+m+ (l—T)t
1

P

where ea is the required return on all—equity financed houses. The j
subscripts, which were not included in equation (1) for simplicity, allow for

ea and r, and thus R, to vary across households (the other variables also

likely vary, but not in a systematic way). Next, allow for debt financing in
which the loan—to—value ratio is continuously maintained at v. In this case,

L = v(l+lr_d)t_l, AL = v(r—d)
P.. =
J

where r. =

r.J

—

v(l—r.)i+(l—v)e.

w

(l+lr.d)t and

+d

+ m +

(l—T)r ,
p

(2)

is the "weighted average cost of capital."

In general, i is interpreted as the risk—free debt rate of maturity N.
This is less than the commonly employed home mortgage rate because the latter
includes premiums to compensate lenders for the prepayment and default options
that households will, in an expected value sense, exercise systematically to

the detriment of lenders. If one were to include these premiums as negative

—5—

cash flows in equation (1), then one should also include the present value of

these probable gains from exercising the options as positive cash flows. We
assume fair premiums in the sense that the cost and value of the options
cancel.

The equity rate can be expressed as the after—tax debt rate plus a risk
premium, p, which we assume for. simplicity to be constant across households:

e. =
J

(l—r.)i
J

+

p.

(3)

Because the risk per dollar of equity investment is less on all—equity financed
investments than on partially debt—financed investments,
a
e. =
J

where

(l—r.)i
J

+

a
p

Note that if p p/(l—v), then r. =

e.

In our analysis, we

follow the weighted—average cost of capital approach, but we modify (3) to
reflect the attractiveness of tax—exempt securities to high—income households:3

e.

I(l—r)i +
j

max.ç
Ii.

p

(3)

,

e

where 1e the exempt rate, is assumed to equal 0.7± under current law and 0.78i
under the Administration plan (Hendershott, 1985)

In our empirical work, equation (1) is solved for R, after applying a 6

percent selling cost. We assume N = 8 (years), it

= 005,

a 0.012 depreciation

rate on the structure which is 0.83 of the total investment so d =

.01, r =
p

0.012, m =

0.035, and a 30—year amortizing debt—instrument initially financing

80 percent of the house at an 11 percent rate. The risk premium,

p,

for

this

equity investment which rises from 20 percent of the initial property value to,
under our other assumptions, 45 percent of the value after 8 years is assumed
to be 0.075.

—6—

Equation (1) presumes that households can purchase the optimal quantity

of housing. More specifically, the household is presumed to be able to make a
down payment of 20 percent of the value of the economically optimal house and
to have sufficient income to qualify for a loan for the remaining 80 percent.
Other combinations of equity and debt would not appreciably alter the results,
but what about households that cannot achieve any combination (households that

find housing "unaffordable")? These households could be renters or they could
own a smaller house than the optimal, in which case the left side of equation

(1) is less than the right and the calculation of R is not meaningful. To
account for such households, initial monthly mortgage and property tax

payments, net of tax savings, are also computed. In these calculations, the
current 0.12 mortgage rate is used, not the 0.11 risk—free rate.
The tenure decision of households involves a comparison of the cost of
obtaining housing services from owner—occupied housing relative to the cost of

obtaining the same services from rental housing. One might be tempted to
simply take the R. from equation (1) and compare it with the equilibrium rents

in the rental market. However, the cost of obtaining the average dollar's
worth of owner—occupied housing services, not the marginal dollar, is required

here. Thus the t.

for

this calculation must be redefined as the average tax

rate at which housing related expenditures, including forgone interest on
invested equity, are deducted (Hendershott and Slemrod, 1983)

B. The Administration Plan and Owner—Occupied Housing
The Administration plan would alter the rental cost of owner—occupied

housing in three ways. First, property taxes would no longer be deductible at

the federal level; the l—t multiplying r in equation (1) becomes unity.
Second, marginal federal taxes are cut —— from a maximum of 0.50 to 0.35 or by
0.15 ——

generally

lowering the tax rate at which interest is deductible in (1)

—7—

and raising e in (3). However, the loss of the deductibility of state and
local taxes partially offsets this decline; with an assumed maximum state and
local rate of 0.06 deductible against federal taxes under current law but not
under the reform, the decline in the maximum t

in

equation (1) is only 0.12.

Third, interest rates will decrease by a percentage point, and e will also
decline via (3) -

Because the tax rates relevant to both the quantity—demanded and tenure—
choice decisions vary widely across households, the rental costs are computed

for three types of households at five income levels. The households considered
are: married filing jointly with one earner and two dependents, married filing

jointly with two earners and no dependents, and single with no dependents. A
variety of income tax rates have been computed for these households assuming
adjusted gross income (AGI) of $17,500, $27,500, $40,000, $70,000 and $130,000.
To hold resources constant, owning households with AGIs, assuming they rented,

are compared to renting households with the same AGIs. Separate data are
calculated for renting and owning households. The calculations assume:
(1)

the nonsingle households have average fringe benefits and nonhousing
itemized deductions (excluding State and local income taxes) of their
income classes (based on 1982 Statistics of Income data) ;

single

households are assumed to differ in that their other miscellaneous
deductions are only half of their income classes and they have no excess
medical deductions,
(2)

owning households purchase houses of dollar value equal to twice
their AGI5 and pay property taxes equal to 1.2 percent of their house
values,

(3)

the second spouse income in two earner households is assumed to
for 40 percent of total income,

account

—8—

(4)

the average loan—to--value ratio over the assumed 8—year holding period

is 70 percent (the calculations are not sensitive to this assumption)
and
(5)

marginal state and local income tax rates are 3.0, 3.5, 4.0, 5.0, and

6.0 percent of state taxable income for households with Ads of $17,500
through $130,000 respectively, and states allow the same deductions for
computing AOl and the same itemized deductions from AOl to calculate
state taxable income as the federal government does.
The first section of each panel in Table 1 provides the renter and owner
marginal tax rates and the tenure choice tax rate at different income levels

under current law.4 The total marginal rate for both owners and renters is the
marginal federal rate plus the assumed state and local rate marked down to

reflect its deductibility at the federal level.5 The second sections provide
comparable data for the Administration plan. This plan would modestly raise
Ads by counting the first $120 of health insurance benefits as income and
significantly increase taxable income by eliminating deductions for state and

local income, sales and property taxes. On the other hand, the exemption for
self, spouse, and dependents would be almost doubled to $2,000, and marginal
federal tax rates would be lowered generally.

The marginal tax rates relevant to the quantity of owner—occupied housing
demanded range from 18 to 41 percent for married households with one wage

earner and two dependents (HH1). These rates are slightly higher than the
corresponding current law marginal rate at the lowest income level considered,
reflecting the initially higher 15 percent federal rate and the lack of

deductibility of state and local income taxes at the federal level. At income
levels above approximately $25,000, the marginal rates for owners under the
reform are roughly a sixth lower than current law.

—9—

Married households with two wage earners and no dependents (HH2) are

typical of many first—time home buyers. While the average tax burden of these
households differs from HH1 under both current law and the reform, the second
panel of Table 1 reveals that marginal rates are identical for the two

household types under current law and nearly so under the reform. The loss of
two exemptions at the $40,000 AGI level is just enough to leave HH2 owners in
the 29 percent marginal bracket (versus 19 percent for HH1 owners)

Marginal rates are quite different for single households with no
dependents (HH3) ,

ranging from 22 to 53 percent for owners under current law.

These rates are nearly half again as high (except at the highest income level)
as the current law rates for HI-Il owners. The Administration plan would reduce
these marginal rates approximately 20 percent at all income levels.

Next consider the tax rate relevant to the tenure choice decision: the
average rate at which housing related expenses are deducted. For all
households but those at the lowest income level considered, the tenure choice
tax rate lies between the marginal tax rates for owners and renters under

current law. Tenure choice tax rates that are below the owner marginal rate
would be the rule, rather than the exception at low to moderate incomes under
the reform proposal because deductions for excess medical expenses and other

"miscellaneous" items would be effectively eliminated or greatly reduced. No
state and local tax deductions would be allowed and consumer interest expense

would be limited for high income households. Moreover, the zero bracket amount
would be raised to $4,000. These changes would typically result in wasted
housing—related deductions (because the zero bracket amount exceeds nonhousing
itemized deductions) except at higher incomes, and thus the tenure—choice rate,
a weighted average of zero and the marginal tax rates, would be less than the

marginal rate. The average cost of owner housing will therefore tend to rise.

—10-

11. Rental Housing
Analysts generally assess the impact of tax reforms on rental housing by
asking how the reforms would alter the required initial rents on a prototype

residential project. The answer is obtained by manipulating an equality
between the equity investment in the project and the present value of the cash

flows the project is expected to generate. This procedure is described below
with particular care being given to the choice of discount rates employed and
financing assumptions made.

A. The Equilibrium Level of Rents
Equation (1) must be modified in a number of ways to make it applicable

to rental housing. First, the rent and maintainance terms must be multiplied

by l—T, the former being taxed and the latter deductible. Second, tax
depreciation allowances can be deducted so rz must be added, where z, the
present value of the deductions, is defined by
N

Z L

tl

dxt
(l+x)

dx is the deduction on a dollar initial investment in structures, and x is the
appropriate discount rate. Third, a tax is due upon sale so TAXC/(l+e)N must
be subtracted, where

TAXC =

T(YdXt

— N/N*) + Tcg[ (1—s) (l+id)N_(1_N,/N)]

(4)

under current law, and B is the selling cost as a proportion of asset value.

The first term is the recapture of accelerated depreciation (N is the minimum

number of years over which the property can be depreciated and N is the
minimum of N and N*) , and the second term is the gains tax applied to the sale

price net of the adjusted basis. Finally, construction period interest and

—"-

property taxes (CPIT) must be accounted for and all the terms must be
discounted additional periods to account for the lag between construction and

operation. Hendershott and Shilling (1982a) provide a discussion of the
nitty—gritty on most of these points.
Our methodology for computing rent levels under current law and the
Administration proposal differs from that typically employed by real estate

analysts in two key respects. First is the discount rate Cx) used in
calculating the present value of tax depreciation allowances. Financial
economists argue that the relatively Certain depreciation deductions should be
discounted at a lower (less risky) discount rate than the relatively risky

opering incomes (Brealey and Myers, 1984, p. 559). By a lower discount rate,
.e ,aear, srmething less than the weighted—average cost of capital, say the 8—

year tax—exempt rate, and far less than the required equity return, e. Of
course, one ..c'Lld discount all cash flows by the same rate, call it d, that

lies between e

rid

i

and gives the same V value.

What differ'nce does it make whether one discounts all cash flows by d or
some by e and some

1e? As long as tax reforms don't alter the pattern and

relative importance of tax depreciation allowances, it doesn't make any

difference. But the Administration proposal would substantially change the
depreciation write of f pattern, shifting from the front—loaded ACRS to back—

loaded systems (but with more than 100 percent writeoff owing to the indexation

of the depreciable base). Whether the present value of the new tax
depreciation schedule is better or worse (or how much worse) than ACRS depends

crucially on which discount rate is used. Too high a discount rate would
discriminate against the later Administration deductions, while too low a rate

would favor them. Real estate analysts have been using the highest possible
rate, the required return on equity.

—12—

Another issue is the treatment of debt and equity in the model. At the
margin (or at the optimal loan—to—value ratio) ,

the after—tax cost of debt

equals the cost of equity. The "average" cost of debt is, of course, "cheaper"

because the debt is on average less risky. By using a two—tiered pricing
approach, a low cost for debt and high cost for equity, the models are very

sensitive to the loan—to—value ratio. In the models, the initial loan—to—value
ratio is generally set at a plausible 70 to 80 percent level, but the loan is

then presumed to amortize. Given that the asset value is generally assumed to
inflate, the actual loan—to—value ratio falls significantly over time. After
five years, the ratio on a property inflating at 4 percent per year financed
with a 12½%, 25—year, 75% loan—to—value, fixed—rate mortgage would be 59%;

after ten years the ratio would be 45%. Holding the equity rate constant, when
it should be falling because the risk on the average equity dollar is falling,
results in discounting distant cash flows, especially near—certain tax
depreciation allowances, at too high a rate.
If a loan—to—value ratio of, say, two—thirds is optimal, letting the
loan—to—value ratio decline to 59 percent after 5 years and 45 percent after 10

years could cause a significant economic loss to equity investors. Their
obvious response would be to renegotiate a higher loan ——

to refinance. But

this response is not allowed in the typical real estate valuation model. The
Only way to reestablish a high loan—to—value ratio is to trade the property.

Thus the "gains from trading" properties in these models include gains from
reestablishing the optimal loan—to—value ratio, as well as from establishing a

higher depreciable base. These gains must, of course, be weighed against sales
costs and capital gains taxes at the time of sale.
Under the Administration plan, trading would be far less rewarding than

under current law. There are fewer gains from establishing a higher base
because the base is already indexed and depreciation is not frontloaded. As a

—13—

result, "optimal expected future trading is minimal. If, however, trading is
the only way to reestablish the desired loan—to—value ratio, trading will occur

even if pure trading is unprofitable. Thus prohibition of refinancing, like
the single discount rate assumption, could discriminate against the
Administration reform proposal.

Many of the empirical assumptions were stated above. The depreciation
rates differ slightly from owner—occupied housing owing to different land—to—

value ratios and expected behavior of tenents. The depreciation rate for the
asset price is Set at 0.025 and for the rent stream is 0.0175. Also t

p

+ m is

0.045. The holding period is determined endogenously as that which minimizes
the rental price (Hendershott and Ling, 1984b).

B. The Administration Plan and Rental Housing
A comparison of the depreciable—real—estate provisions of current law and

the Administration proposal is given in Table 2. Whether the individual
changes would be beneficial or harmful to real estate is of interest. The

Administration plan lowers the assumed tax rate from 0.53 to 0.41. Most
industries (and households) benefit from tax cuts, Only if an industry is
currently negatively taxed (would be less profitable if it werent taxed at
all) ,

would a tax cut be harmful.
The proposed capital gains treatment is almost certainly more favorable

than that under current law. Consider land first. Fifty percent of the

lowerd regular rate (.5x.41 = .205) is marginally less than forty percent of
the current rate (.4x.53 =

.212).

Moreover, unless land increases in real

value, no tax would be paid. Thus capital gains on land are certain to be
taxed at a lower rate. Capital gains taxes on structures will also probably be

lower. Approximating dx as constant over time, the tax will be

—14—

TAXA =
cg

where

*
it

is

[

(l—)

N

*

N

(l+Tr—d) — (1+1r —dx) J

(5)

,

the general CPI appreciation rate. Compare this expression with

the tax liability under current luW as measured in equation (4) .

If

depreciation allowances were not accelerated [the first sum in (4) is zero and

dx = d] and real estate appreciates at the general inflation rate (it

then

= it

*

a significant tax liability exists under current law because the

depreciation basis is not indexed, but no liability would be incurred under the

Administration plan. If accelerated depreciation does exist (dx)d), a
liability will be incurred under the reform, but a far greater liability would
exist under current law owing to recapture at regular rates. Only if real—
estate inflation far exceeds general inflation would a greater capital gains,
tax exist under the reform than under current law.

Turning to the timing of deductions, the present value of tax
depreciation allowances under the Administration plan in a five percent
inflation world, using a 9 percent nominal after—tax discount rate, is the same

0.61 per dollar of property that the value is under current law. That is, with
five percent inflation, the Administration plan is as generous as current law.

Because other analysts apply a much higher discount rate, they find the

depreciation change to be negative for real estate. We have argued against use
of a higher discount rate for the near riskiess depreciation deductions and
believe the correct rate currently is just under 9 percent.

The altered treatment of CPIT is a slight negative; rather than being
written off over 10 years, these expenses would be capitalized under the

Administration plan and written off over 28 years. Again using a 9 percent
discount rate, the present value would fall from 0.036 per dollar of property
to 0.030.

—15—

Under current tax regulations, all investments of individuals and
partnerships, other than investments in real estate, are subject to 'at—risk"
limitations, i.e., a taxpayers's loss for any taxable year is limited to the

amount the taxpayer has invested or has at—risk in the investment. Generally,
the amount at—risk is the sum of the taxpayers' cash contributions to the
activity and amounts borrowed for which the taxpayer has personal liability for

repayment (recourse debt only). The amount at—risk is increased by the
taxpayer's share of taxable income and subsequent cash contributions and is
decreased by his share of tax losses and cash distributions.
The Administration plan would make income—producing real estate subject

to at—risk rules. Because most real—estate investments are highly leveraged
with nonrecourse mortgage debt and have generous depreciation allowances,

significant losses can be incurred in the initial years of the investment. If
interest rates (and loan—to—value ratios) are high enough, these losses will
cumulate to more than the investor's equity contributions, in the absence of
altered investor behavior, and some tax losses will not be deductible in the

year in which they are incurred.7
Current law limits investment interest expense to $10,000 plus net
investment income8, but most real estate related interest expense (net leased
property and land being the primary exceptions) is exempt from this limitation.
The Administration plan would decrease the maximum current deduction for
investment interest expense to $5,000 plus net investment income and would
include both consumer interest expense and interest expense on limited

partnerships in the interest limitation. The impact of including the latter
would be partially offset by the expansion of net investment income to include
the taxpayer's share of income from limited partnerships (and his distributive

share of income from Subchapter S corporations in which the taxpayer does not

actively participate in management). The plan would be phased—in beginning in

—16—

1986, with only 10 percent of newly limited investment interest initially

subject to the limitation. In each of the subsequent nine taxable years, the
percentage would be increased by 10 percentage points.

With a 12% mortgage interest rate and a 75% loan—to—value ratio, the

Administrations at risk and investment interest provisions would not bind on
investors and thus could not impact on rents. Even with an 85% loan—to—value
ratio, the provisions would not bind if interest rates declined by a percentage

point. Moreover, while the provisions would clearly bind in a higher inflation
and interest rate environment (in which case the depreciation and capital gains
provisions of the Administration plan would become even more attractive
relative to current law) ,

behavioral

responses by investors would virtually

eliminate any negative impact.

The most likely behavioral response of investors to a binding at—risk
provision would be to assume some personal liability for mortgage indebtedness,
either at purchase or subsequently as needed, to ensure full deductibility of

tax losses when they are incurred. The assumpt1on of personal liability for
losses beyond the actual equity does transfer some risk from the lender to the

investor. However, the lender would presumably be charging for this risk: an
85 percent loan costs more than a 75 percent loan. Thus, the increased risk of
the investor and the resultant higher required return on equity is roughly

balanced by a lower loan rate; equilibrium rents would not rise noticeably.
Because the investment interest limitation applies only to limited partnerships
(and passive interests in Subchapter S corporations) ,

the

likely response to

binding interest limitations would be a change in the ownership form to general
partnerships and sole proprietorships.

—17-.

III.

Results

The results are discussed in three parts. First, the equilibrium change
in rents is computed. This is the relevant statistic for inclusion in both the
tenure—choice and quantity—demanded (for those who rent) decisions. Second,
the likely impact of the reform on homeownership rates for households at the

five income levels are reported. Third, percentage changes in the rental price
for owner—occupied housing services are provided.

A. The Equilibrium Rent Level
The top part of Table 3 contains calculations of the impact on "rents' of
(1) all provisions of the Administration plan except the personal tax rate cut

and (2) the cut in the personal tax rate. The basic valuation model is varied

in two dimensions: the refinancing assumption and the discounting method. The
first calculation assumes zero refinancing; the others allow for Continuous
refinancing. More specifically, in the first variant the project is initially
financed with a 75%—25 year 11 percent amortizing loan. In the other
calculations, the loan is two—thirds of initial value and then stays at two—
thirds of value over time.

As for discounting, the first two calculations are based on a single
0.152 discount rate, calculated as the ten—year tax—exempt rate ——
our 0.11 interest rate ——

plus

0.7

times

a risk premium of 0.075. The remaining

calculations follow the dual—discount method; the exempt rate plus 0.01 is
used for the relatively certain tax depreciation and construction period
interest and property tax write—offs, and a higher 0.239 equity rate is applied

to the other cash flows. This equity rate is that which, in conjunction with
the 0.087 tax—exempt rate, gives the same present value of the cash flows under
current law as does the single 0.152 discount rate.

—18—

Note the difference the model changes make: going from zero refinancing
and a single discount rate to continuous refinancing and the dual rate lowers

the projected increase in residential rents from 12% to —6%. Taking the
continuous refinancing first attributes 15 of the 18 point decline to the dual

discount rate and only 3 to the refinancing; taking the dual discount rate
first would lay 12 of the points on the discount rate and 6 on the refinancing.

The next number in Table 3 is the estimated impact on residential rents
of the cut in the personal tax rate from 0.53 (a fifty percent Federal rate

plus a deductible six percent State and local rate) to 0.41. The result is a
15 percent increase in rents. This sharp increase in response to a tax cut
illustrates just how negatively taxed rental housing is under current law.

Because a major goal of tax reform is to improve economic efficiency by taxing
different sources of income and returns from capital assets more equally, one
would anticipate that negatively taxed activities would not fare well.

Results for the full impact of the plan, both with and without a one

percentage point decline in interest rates, are then reported. With the rate
decline, the increase in rents is 7 percent. This rise is modest, especially
in light of the fact that renters are scheduled to receive most of the personal

tax Cut contained in the Administration plan. For two of the three household
types, the average tax rate will fall by 0.021 or more at the $17,500 level-and

by larger amounts at higher income levels. That is, even if these households
spend 30 percent of their incomes on rent, they would be able to continue to
rent the same units (would spend .3 x .07 = .021 on rent) and still purchase

the same amount or more of other goods and services. For the third household
type (married, two earners, no dependents) ,

the tax cut is lower (the cut would

be about as great if for the other household for two—earner households with two
dependents).

—19—

The last nunther in Table 3 is a crude rent calculation for commercial

properties. These properties are treated less favorably under current law than
residential properties are because a different recapture provision causes most

investors to choose straight—line depreciation. Thus, a switch to a new tax
regime that treats residential and commercial properties symmetrically will

have a less negative impact on commercial properties than on residential. The
Administration plan should actually be slightly favorable to commercial real
estate (initial net operating incomes will be lower after enactment of the
reform than before).

B. Tenure Choice
Because the Administration plan both raises the zero bracket amount and
reduces nonhousing—related deductions, some housing deductions will be wasted.
This increases the average cost of obtaining services from owner—occupied
housing. However, the increase is generally less than the 7 percent computed
increase in rents, so the homeownership rate will tend to rise.
To deduce the expected change in homeownership, the equation estimated by

Hendershott and Shilling (l982b) is employed. This equation relates the odds
of owning to the average cost of housing services in the two tenure modes. The
resulting changes in homeownership rates for the three household types at the

five income levels are listed in Table 4. As can be seen, the rate generally
rises, but the increase is minimal at higher income levels (above $60,000)
Moreover, for single households the rate would decline slightly at incomes

above-about $30,000. A one or two percentage point increase in the aggregate
homeownership rate is likely.

—20—

C.

Owner—Occupied Housing

Table 5 contains percentage changes in the rental price for owner—
occupied housing services for the three household types at the five income

levels. Table 6 lists the percentage change in the after—tax cost of mortgage
and property tax payments. Each reports results for the current level of
interest rates and a one percentage point decline. Only the calculations based
upon the reasonable decline in rates are discussed; the other numbers are
reported for comparison purposes only. Each table also reports results for an
increase in the net—of—tax property tax rate (a constant rate but lost
deductibility) and a constant net—of—tax rate (a decline in property tax rates
to offset the loss of deductibility)

In the absence of affordability constraints, the rental price, after—tax

income and tastes determine a household's demand for housing services. As can
be seen in the top panel of Table 5, the rental price falls for low and middle

income joint filers even without a decline in property tax rates. For single
earners with two dependents, housing demand will rise at income levels up to
about $35,000; for two—earners with no dependents, the cut of f is about

$50,000. In contrast, the price will rise for virtually all single owning
households arid the percentage increase exceeds 10 percent for those with

incomes above about $55,000. This is because marginal tax rates are cut more
sharply for singles, especially at higher income levels.

Where affordability is a problem, after—tax mortgage and property tax

payments are a useful measure of "price'. The percentage changes of these,
shown in Table 6, have the same general pattern as the percentage changes in

rental prices in Table 5. The difference is a light1y greater increase for
high—income joint filers and a near doubling of the increase for singles at all

—21—

levels. The near doubling follows from the base upon which percentage
increases are computed being about half as large for the payment calculation as
for the rental price calculation.

The net—of—tax property tax rate is the price of obtaining municipally—

provided services (Tiebout, 1956). Should the price rise owing to a reduction
in federal deductibility, the demand for these services will decline and a call

for a cut in the property tax rate will arise. In the limit (a perfectly
elastic demand for municipal services) ,

the property tax rate will decline

sufficiently to offset the reduced deductibility. The second panel of Tables 5
and 6 present this limiting case. The expected result falls somewhere between
the lower—interest—rate portions of the top and bottom panels.

The net impact of the changes for owner—occupied housing is difficult to

discern. There are far fewer single owning households that joint filers, and
median household income is under $30,000. On the other hand, the median income
of owners, especially joint—filers is probably about $40,000. Moreover, higher
income households obviously spend more on housing than lower income households
so even if more households experience price declines than increases, the total

demand for housing by owners could decline. Overall, we expect no change in
the quantity of housing demanded by existing owners and a slight increase in
total owner demand owing to a small projected increase in the homeownership
rate.

—22—

IV. Summary

Our analysis of the impact of the Administration tax reform proposal

differs from that of most others in a number of important respects. First, two
general—equilibrium effects have largely been ignored in earlier studies:

(1)

the level of interest rates will decline by a percentage point in response to
both a decline in the demand for funds to finance real capital outlays and an
increase in the supply of funds and (2) the property tax rate on primary
residences will decline because the loss of the deductibility of property taxes
raises the price of municipally—supplied services and lowers the demand for

them. Second, the basic rental housing model is misspecified in two ways:

(1)

risky net operating income and near—riskiess tax depreciation cash flows are
discounted at the same rate and (2) refinancing to keep the loan—to—value ratio
near its optimal level is prohibited, thereby creating artificial gains from
trading.

Our results differ significantly from those of most studies. The
general—equilibrium effects on owner—occupied housing ——

the one point decline

in interest rates and the decline in property tax rates ——
negative direct effects ——

the

will

offset the

Cut in marginal tax rates and loss of

deductibility of property taxes ——

in

the aggregate. There will, however, be

distributional effects. Owner—occupied housing will generally be cheaper for
households with incomes below $40,000 ——

especially

below $25,000 ——

but

will

be more expensive for those with incomes above $60,000. This constitutes an
improvement in both efficiency and equity because under current law the price
of owner housing services is far lower for high income households than for low
income households. Flomeownership rates should increase by 2 to 3 percentage
points for households with incomes below $40,000 and 1 to 2 percentage points
in the aggregate.

—23—

A 7 percent increase in market rents (11 percent without the decline in

interest rates) is projected. Consideration of the individual components of
the Administration plan suggests that the only significant negative provision
is the cut in the personal tax rate from 0.53 (including a 6 percent state and

local rate deductible at the Federal level) to 0.41. Without this cut (and the
decline in interest rates which is largely attributable to the cut), market

rents would fall by 6 percent. Rents rise only because rental housing is a
negatively taxed asset in the sense that a tax cut lowers the supply of the

asset. Given that a major motivation of tax reform is to improve efficiency
and equity by taxing different sources of income and returns from assets more
equally, the 7 percent increase in rents (and the expected 2 percent decline in
"rents" on commercial property) is surprisingly low.

The special provisions of the tax plan ——

the elimination of tax—exempt

financing, of the deductibility of interest for second homes, and of the
special treatment of low—income housing —— have not been analyzed. These

provisions do not affect market rents generally, and much of the benefit from

the provisions is not even targeted to especially needy households. Part of
the benefits are captured by developers, builders, and lenders, and the
deductibility for second homes provides significant benefits only for

households with second homes valued above $100,000. Finally, even the
"targeted" programs are known to be poorly targeted (Gainer, 1985 and Olsen,
1982)

—24—

FOOTNOTES

1For our analysis of the first three proposals see Hendershott and Ling

(1984c); the Treasury plan was considered in Hendershott and Ling (1985).

2The interest sensitivity of foreign net saving to international interest rate

differentials. However, the tendency for foreign central banks to move their
interest rates with American rates, the large role the U.S. plays in world
capital markets, and differences in preferences and risks across national
boundaries all ensure that a significant decline will occur.

3Even with low supply price elasticities, long—run price changes are small

relative to long—run rent changes. Short—run price changes will also be small
if investors anticipate future rent increases, which they will almost certainly
do in light of the wide publicity given the most outlandish rent increase
numbers. On both of these points, see Fiendershott and Ling (l984a).

4Alternatively, we take into account the gains from optimally trading taxable

bonds [see Hendershott's application (1985) of Constantidines and Ingersolls
analysis (1984) to the determination of tax—exempt coupon].

5These calculations follow the methodology of Hendershott and Slemrod (1983).

6For example, under current law the marginal federal tax rate for the $17,500

AGI owner is 14 percent. With a 3 percent state and local rate, the total
marginal rate is equal to .14 + (l—.14) .03 =

.166.

For the $17,500 renter, the

total marginal rate (.19) is the federal marginal rate of 16 percent plus the
full 3 percent state and local rate because this household does not itemize.

—25—

7Disallowed losses for real estate investments would generally be carried
forward until the year of sale because the amount at risk during the operating

years will usually not otherwise increase; only when principal repayment of
debt exceeds tax depreciation will taxable income exceed cash distributions.
In the year of sale, loss carry forwards can be written off against ordinary
income to the extent that gains from the sale increase the at—risk basis, i.e.,

the capital gain (net selling price minus the adjusted basis) is greater than
sales proceeds or the selling price less the outstanding mortgage balance.

This will usually be the case because the rate of tax depreciation will

generally exceed the rate of mortgage principal amortization. Thus, tax
deductions would not be eliminated, but merely postponed to the year of sale.

8Net investment income is gross income less deductions directly connected with

the production of investment income. Interest is not included in investment
expenses for this purpose, and depreciation deduction is limited to the amount
that would have been allowed had the property been depreciated under the
straight—line method over its useful life.

—26—

REFERENCES

Brealey, R. and S. Myers, Principals of Corporate Finance, McGraw—Hill, 2nd
edition, 1984.

Constantinides, G.M., and J.E. Ingersoll, Jr., "Optimal Bond Trading with

Personal Taxes," Journal of Financial Economics, 13, September 1984, 299—335.

Downs, A., 'Impacts of the President's Proposed Tax Reforms Upon Real Estate,'

Urban Land, August1985, 7—14.

Follain, J.R. ,

"Federal Income Tax Policy Toward Existing Housing: Past,

Present and Future,' mimeo, July 1985.

Gainer, W.J., 'Mortgage Revenue Bonds: Their Costs Outweigh Their Benefits to
Homebuyers," Housing Finance Review, October 1984, 457—465.

Hendershott, P.H., 'Tax Reform and Financial Markets," NBER Working Paper,
September 1985.

Hendershott, P.H. and D.C. Ling, "Prospective Changes in Tax Law and the Value
of Depreciable Real Estate," Journal of the American Real Estate and Urban
Economics Association, Fall l984a.

_____

"Trading and the Tax Shelter Value of Depreciable Real Estate," National

Tax Journal, June 1984b.

—27--

"Tax Reform and Housing," NEER Working Paper No. 1524, November 1984c.

"The Treasury's Tax Reform Proposal and Housing,," Tax Notes, March 11,
1985, 1041—46.

Hendershott, P.H. and J.D. Shilling, "The Economics of Tenure Choice, 1955—79,"
in Sirn.•'ns (ed.) Research in Real Estate, Vol I, JAI Press, 1982a, 105—133.

"The Lnpacts on Capital Allocation of Some Aspects of the Economic
Recovery Tax .ct of 1981," Public Finance Quarterly, April 1982b, 242—273.

Hendershott, P."., and J. Slemrod, "Taxes and User Cost of Capital for Owner—

Occupied Housig," Journal of the American Real Estate and Urban Economics
Association, Winter 1983, 375—393.

National Association of Home Builders, "Summary Analysis of the Impacts of Tax
Reform Proposals on Housing Cost and Housing Activity," January 23, 1985a.

_____

"Impacts of the President's Tax Proposal on Housing," July l985b.

Maisel, S.J. and J.M. Quigley, "Tax Reform and Real Estate," Working Paper 85—
100, Center for Real Estate and Urban Economics, University of California,
Berkeley, July 1985.

Olsen, E.O., "Housing Programs and the Forgotten Taxpayer," Public Interest,
Winter 1982, 97—109.

Tiebout, C., "A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures," Journal of Political
Economy," October 1956, 416—424.

28—

Table 1

Tax Rates of Owners and Renters:
Three Different Household Types

17.5

Adjusted Gross Income (thousands)
27.5
40
70

130

Married; 1 Earner; 2 Dependents
Current Law
Renter Marginal
Owner Marginal
Tenure Choice

.190
.166
.146

.255
.189
.211

.309
.251
.279

.411
.364
.402

.483
.455
.476

.180
.180
.099

.185
.185
.135

.290
.190

.300
.300

.198

.300

.410
.410
.410

Current Law
Renter Marginal
Owner Marginal
Tenure Choice

.190
.166
.176

.255
.209
.223

.309
.251
.283

.411
.364
.400

.475

Administration Plan
Renter Marginal
Owner Marginal
Tenure Choice

.180
.180
.099

.185
.185
.135

.290
.290
.228

.300
.300
300

.410
.410
.410

Current Law
Renter Marginal
Owner Marginal
Tenure Choice

.230
.224
.214

.363
.325
.327

.405
.366
.396

.525
.525
.510

.530
.530

Administration Plan
Renter Marginal
-Owner Marginal
Tenure Choice

.180
.180
.132

.285
.285
.228

.390
.298
.278

.400
.400

Administration Plan
Renter Marginal
Owner Marginal
Tenure Choice
Married; 2 Earners; No Dependents

.483
.455

Single; No Dependents

.400

.530

.410
.410
.410

—29—

Table 2

Major Tax Provisions Affecting Rental Housing

Current Law

Administration Plan

Maximum Personal
Tax Rate
Federal

.50

.35

Total

.53

.41

Capital Gains
Land

Nominal Gains at
40% of Regular Rate

Nominal Gains at 50%
of Regular Rate or Real
Gains at Regular Rate

Structures

Nominal Gains at
40% of Regular Rate

Real Gains at
Regular Rate

Depreciation Tax
Deductions

175% 08 or SL
over 18 years,
10% in year 1

112% DB or SL over 28
years, indexed,
4% in year 1

Construction Period
Interest and Property
Taxes

Amortized over
10 ?ears

Capitalized

Limited Partners Subject
to Investment Interest
Rules

no

yes

All Investors Subject
to At—Risk Rules

no

yes

—30—

Table 3

Impact of Administration Plan on Rents"
Components of Plan

% Change in Rents

Administration Plan Excluding
Cut in Personal Tax Rate
Zero Refinancing,
Single Discount Rate

12

Continuous Refinancing,
Single Discount Rate

9

Continuous Refinancing,
Dual Discount Rate

—6

Cut in Personal Tax Rate

15

Full Administration Plan, Continuous
Refinancing, Dual Discount Rate

No Change in Interest Rates

11

One Percentage Point Decline
Residential Property

7

Commercial Propertya

—2

aDiffers from residential property only in that straight—line depreciation is
assumed under current law.

—31—

Table 4

Changes in Homeownership Rates
Induced by the Administration Plan
Household I

Type
Income
Level

HH1

HH2

17,500

.052

.040

.030

27,500

.029

.024

.009

40,000

.019

.026

—.003

70,000

.001

.002

—.018

130,000

.004

.005

—.017

HH1: married, one earner, two dependents.

HH2: married, two earners, zero dependents.

HH3: single, zero dependents.

HH3

—32—

Table

5

Percentage Change in the Marginal Costs of Obtaining
Housing Services from owner—Occupied Housing

Increase in Net—of—Tax Property Tax Rate

AGI

11% Interest Rate
HH1

17,500
27,500
40,000
70,000
130,000

HH2

2
8

4
1
11
12

11
12

HH3
6
9

12
21
20

10% Interest Rate
HH2
HH3
—6
—4
—2
2
2
—5
6
5
5
14
6
6
14

HH1
—6

Constant Net—of—Tax Property Tax Rate

AGI
17,500

27,500
40,000
70,000
130,000

11% Interest Rate
HH1
—1

10% Interest Rate

HF12

HFI3

HHI

FJH2

HH3

—l
2
—2

4

—7

—7

—3

5

—6
—l

—4
—8

—1

1

1

—
6
7
6

7

6

8
13
13

HH1: married, one earner, two dependents.
HH2: married, two earners, zero dependents.

HH3: single, zero dependents.

—

1
7

6

—33—

Table 6

Percentage Change in the After—Tax Cost
of Mortgage and Property Tax Payments

Increase in Net—of—Tax Property Tax Rate

UH1
17,500
27,500
40,000
70,000
130,000

11% Mortgage Rate

12% Mortgage Rate

AGI

1
3

HH2

HH3

1-IH1

HFJ2

HH3

1
5

8

10

—6
—4

1
4

16
37
33

4
8
9

—6
—1
—7
8
9

26
26

HH3

HH1

HH2

11113

5
5

—8
—6

—2
—2

10
22
21

—8
—4
—10

2
1

2

14
14

—1

11
15
16

15
16

9

Constant Net—of—Tax Property Tax Rate
AGI
HH1

17,500
27,500
40,000
70,000
130,000

—1

12% Mortgage Rate
HH2
—1
2

7

—4

9
7

9
7

11% Mortgage Rate

HUl: married, one earner, two dependents.
HH2; married, two earners, zero dependents.

HH3: single, zero dependents.

3

